9459 99898997 150878
decorative border ANNO PRIMO REGI∣NAE ELIZABETHE. ❧AT THE parliament be∣gonne at Westmynster, the xxiii. of Ianuary in the fyrste yeare of the reigne of oure So∣ueraigne Ladye, Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England, Fraunce and Ireland. Quene, defen∣doure of the Faithe. &c. And there proroged tyll the .xxv. of the same moneth, and then and there holden, kept, and continued vntill the dissolution of the same, beyng the eyght day of May, then nexte ensuynge, were enac∣ted as foloweth. Anno. 1.5.5.9. printer's device of John Cawood
The Table. AN act restoring to the Crowne the aun¦cient iurisdictyon, ouer the State Ecclesiasticall & Spirituall, and abolyshynge all forrayne power repugnaunt to the same. Capi. i. An act for the vniformitie of common Praier, & Seruyce in the Churche, and thadministration of the Sacramentes. Capi. ii. An acte of Recognition the Quenes highnes tytle to the imperial Crowne of this Realme. Capi. iii. An act for the restitution of the first Fruites & Tenthes, and ren∣tes reserued nomine decime, and of personages impropriate to the impe∣riall Crowne of this realme. Capi. iiii. . Capi. v. An act wherby certein offences be made treason. Capi. vi. An act for the explanacion of the Statute of seditious words and Rumors. Capi. vii. An acte to reuiue a Statute made in the .xxiii. yeare of the reigne of king Henry theight, touching the conueying of Horses, geldings, and Mares into Scotland. Capi. viii. An act touching Shoemakers and Curryors. Capi. ix. An act touching Tanners, & the selling of tanned Lether. Cap. x. An acte that the cariyng of Leather Tallowe, or rawe Hdes out of the Realme for Marchaundize shalbe felony. Capi. xi. An act limitinge the times for laieng on land Merchaundize frō beyond the Seas, and touching Customes for swete wines. Ca. xii. An act againste the deceitfull vsing of Linnen clothe. Ca. xiii. An acte for the shipping in Englishe Botomes. Ca. xiiii. An acte for the continuaunce of the makynge of Wollen clothe in diuers townes in the countie of Essex. Cap. xv. An acte that tymber shal not be felled to make coles for the bur∣ning of Iron. Ca. xvi. An act to contynue the act made againste rebellious assembles. Cap. xvii. An act for the preseruation of Spawn and frye of fishe. Ca. xvii. An act for the continuaunce of certaine Statutes. Cap. xix. An act of a Subsedy of Tonnage and Pondage. Capi. xx. An act of a Subsedye, and two fyftenes and Tenthes, graunted by the Temporaltie. Ca. xxi.
An Acte restoryng to the Crowne the auncient Iurisdiction ouer the state Ecclesiasticall and Spirituall, and abolyshyng all forreyne power repugnaunt to the same. MOSTE HVMBLYE beseche your moste crcellent Maiestie, youre faythfull and obedient subiectes, the Lordes Spirituall & Tem∣porall, and the Commons in this your present Parlia∣mēt assembled: That where in time of the raigne of your most dere Father of worthy memorye Kynge Henry the eyght: dyuerse good lawes and statutes were made and establysshed, aswell for the vtter extynguishement and puttynge away of all vsurped and forreyne powers and aucthorities out of this your Realme, and other your hyghnesse dominions and coun∣treys: as also for the restorynge and vnytynge to the imperyall Crowne of this Realme, the auncient iurisdictions, aucthori∣ties, superiorities, and prehemynences to the same of ryght be∣longynge & apperteynyng, by reason wherof, we your most hum∣ble & obedient subiectes, frō the .xxv. yere of the raigne of your sayd dere father, were continually kepte in good order, & were disburde∣ned of diuers great and intollerable charges and exactions before that tyme vnlawfully taken and exacted by such forreyne power & aucthoritie, as before that was vsurped, vntyll such tyme as al the sayde good lawes and statutes by one acte of Parliament made in the fyrst and second yeres of the raignes of the late kyng Phyllyppe and Quene Mary, your hyghnes syster entytled an Acte repealyng all statutes, articles and prouisions made agaynst the Sea Aposto∣lique of Rome, synce the .xx. yere of kyng Henry theyght. And al∣so for the stablyshement of all Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall posses∣sions and hereditamentes conueyed to the laytie, were all clearely repealed and made voyde, as by the same Acte of repeale more at large doth and may appeare. By reason of whiche Acte of repeale, your sayde humble subiectes were eftsones brought vnder an vsur∣ped forreyne power and aucthoritie, and yet doe remayne in that bondage to the intollerable charges of your louynge subiectes, yf
some redresse (by thaucthoritie of this your hyghe court of Parlia∣ment, with thassent of your hyghnesse) be not had and prouyded. MAY IT THERFORE please your hyghnesse for the repressyng of the sayd vsurped forreyne power, & the restoryng of the ryghtes, iurisdictions, and preheminences apperteynyng to Thimperiall Crowne of this your Realme, that it may be enacted by thauctho∣ritie of this present Parliament, that the sayd Act made in the said first and seconde yeres of the raignes of the sayd late kinge Phillip & Quene Mary, and all and euery braunche, clauses, and articles therin conteyned (other then such braunches, clauses, and senten∣ces, as hereafter shalbe excepted) may frō the last day of this Sessiō of parliament, by aucthoritie of this present parliament, be repea∣led, and shall from thenceforth be vtterly voyde and of none effecte. AND that also for the reuiuing of dyuers of the sayd good lawes and statutes, made in the tyme of your sayd dere father, it may also please your hyghnes, that one acte and Statute, made in the .xxiii. yere of the raigne of the sayde late kyng Henry the eyght, entituled: An acte that no person shalbe cyted out of the Diocesse where he or she dwelleth, except in certayne cases. And one other acte made in the .xxiiii. yere of the raigne of the sayde late kyng, entytuled: An acte that appeales in such cases as hath ben vsed to be pursued to the sea of Rome, shal not be from henceforth had ne vsed, but with∣in this Realme. And one other acte made in the .xxv. yere of the sayde late Kyng, concernyng restraynte of payment of annates and fyrst fruites of Archbysshoprykes, and Byshoprykes to the sea of Rome. And one other acte in the sayde .xxv. yere, entytuled: An acte concernynge the submyssyon of the cleargy to the kynges Ma∣iestie. And also one acte made in the sayde .xxv. yere, entytuled: An acte restrayning the payment of annates or fyrste fruites to the bysshop of Rome, and of the electyng and consecratynge of Arche∣bysshoppes and bysshoppes within this realme. And one other acte made in the sayd .xxv. yere, entytuled: An acte concernyng the ex∣oneration of the kinges subiectes from exactions and impositions heretofore payde to the sea of Rome, and for hauynge licences and dispensations within this realme, without suyng further for the same. And one other act made in the .xxvi. yere of the said late king entituled. An act for nominacion and consecration of Suffragans within this realme. And also one other act made in the .xxviii. yere of the raigne of the sayde late kyng, entituled: An act for the release of such as haue obteyned pretended licences and dispensations frō the Sea of Rome, and all and euery braunches, wordes, and senten∣ces in the sayde seuerall actes and statutes, conteyned by aucthori∣tie of this present parliament, frō and at al tymes after the last day of this Session of parliament, shalbe reuiued, & shal stand and be in
ful force and strength, to al intentes, constructions, and purposes. And that the braunches, sentences, and wordes of the sayd seueral actes, and euery of them, from thenceforth shal & may be iudged, de∣med, & taken to extend to your highnes, your heyres and successors as fully and largely as euer the same actes or any of thē did extend to the sayd late kyng Henry theyght your hyghnes father. AND THAT it may also please your hyghnes, that it may be en∣acted by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that so much of one acte or Statute made in the .xxxii. yere of the raigne of your sayd dere father kyng Henry the eyght entytuled: an Acte concer∣nyng precontractes of mariages, and touchyng degrees of consan∣guinitie, as in the tyme of the late kyng Edward the syxte, youre hyghnesse most dere brother, by one other act or Statute was not repealed. And also one acte made in the .xxxvii. yere of the raygne of the sayd late kyng Henry theyght, entytuled: an Acte, that Doc∣tours of the Ciuile lawe beyng maryed, may exercyse ecclesiastical iurisdiction, and all and euery braunches and articles in the sayde two actes last mentioned, and not repealed in the tyme of the sayd late kyng Edward the syxt, may from henceforth lykewyse stande and be reuyued, and remayne in theyr full force and strength, to al intentes and purposes, any thyng conteyned in the sayd acte of re∣peale before mentioned; or any other matter or cause to the contra¦ry notwithstandyng. AND that it may also please your hyghnes that it may be fur∣ther enacted by thaucthoritie aforesayd, that all other lawes and Statutes, and the braūches and clauses of any act or Statute re∣pealed & made voyde by the sayd acte of repeale, made in the tyme of the late kyng Phyllyp and Quene Mary, and not in this pre∣sent acte specially mentioned and reuyued, shall stande, remayne, and be repealed and voyde, in such lyke maner and fourme as they were before the makyng of this acte, any thyng herein conteyned to the contrary notwithstandyng. AND THAT IT may also please your hyghnes, yt it may be en∣acted by thauctorite aforesaid, yt one act & statute made in the first yere of the raigne of the late kynge Edwarde the syxte, your ma∣iesties most dre brother, entituled: an Acte against suche persons as shall vnreuerently speake against the Sacrament of the bodye and bloud of Christe, commonly called the Sacrament of the aul∣ter, and for the receauyng therof vnder bothe kyndes, and all and euery braunches, clauses, and sentences therin conteyned, shall & may lykewyse from the last day of this Session of parliament, be reuyued, and from thenceforth shall and may stand, remayne, & be in ful force, strength and effect, to al intentes, constructions, & pur∣poses, in such like maner & fourme, as the same was at any tyme
in the first yere of the raign of ye said late king Edward the sixt, and law, statute, or other matter to ye cōtrary in any wise notwtstāding. AND THAT also it may please your highnes yt it maye be fur∣ther establyshed & enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that one Act and Statute made in the first & second yeres of the sayd late kyng Phyllyp and Quene Mary, entituled: an Acte for the reuyuyng of three statutes made for the punishement of heresies, & also the said three statutes mentioned in the sayd act, & by the same acte reuy∣ued, and all & euery braunches, articles, clauses, and sentence con∣teyned in the sayd seueral actes or statutes & euery of them, shalbe from the last day of this Session of parliamēt, demed and remaine vtterly repealed, voyde, and of none effect, to all intentes & purpo∣ses, any thing in the sayd seuerall actes, or any of them conteyned, or any other matter or cause to the contrary notwithstandyng. AND to the intent that all vsurped & forrayne power & auctho∣ritie spiritual and temporal, may for euer be clearely extinguished and neuer to be vsed or obeyed wtin this Realme, or any other your maiesties dominions or countreys: May it please your highnes yt it may be further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesayd, yt no forrain prince, person, prelate, state, or potentate, spirituall or temporall, shall at any tyme after the last day of this Session of parliament, vse, enioy, or exercyse any maner of power, iurisdiction, superio∣ritie, aucthoritie, preheminence, or priuilege spirituall or ecclesi∣asticall within this realme, or within any other your maiesties do¦minions or countreys that now be or hereafter shalbe, but from thenceforth the same shalbe clearely abolyshed out of this realme, and all other your hyghnes dominions for euer, any statute, ordi∣naunce, custome, constitutions, or any other matter or cause what¦soeuer to the contrary in any wyse notwithstandyng. AND that also it may likewyse please your highnes, that it may be establyshed & enacted by thaucthoritie aforesayde, that such iu∣risdictions, priuileges, superiorities, and preheminences spiritual & ecclesiasticall, as by any spiritual or ecclesiastical power or auc∣thoritie hath heretofore ben, or may lawfully be exercysed or vsed, for the visitacion of the ecclesiasticall State and persons, and for reformation, order, and correction of the same, and of all maner errours, heresies, scismes, abuses, offēces, contemptes, and enormi∣ties, shall for euer by aucthoritie of this present parliament, bee vnited and annexed to the imperiall Crowne of this Realme. And that your hyghnes, your heyres & successours, kinges or quenes of this realme, shal haue ful power & aucthorite by vertue of this act by letters patentes, vnder the great seale of Englande, to assigne, name, & aucthorise, when and as often as your hygnesse, your hey∣res or successours shall thinke mete and conuenient, & for such and
so long tyme as shal please your hyghnes, your heires or successors such person or persōs beyng natural borne subiectes to your high∣nes, your heires, or successours, as your maiestie, your heires or suc∣cessours shal thinke mete to exercise, vse, occupy, and execute vnder your hyghnes, your heyres and successours, all maner of iurisdicti∣ons, priuileges, and preheminences in any wyse touching or con∣cerning any spirituall or ecclesiasticall iurisdiction within these your realmes of Englande and Irelande, or any other your hygh∣nes dominions or countreys, and to visite, reforme, redresse, order, correct and amend al such errours, heresies, scismes, abuses, offen∣ces, contemptes, and enormities whatsoeuer, which by any maner spirituall or ecclesiasticall power, aucthoritie, or iurisdiction, cā or may lawfully be reformed, ordred, redressed, corrected, restrayned or amended, to the pleasure of almyghty God, thencrease of vertue, & the conseruaciō of the peace & vnitie of this realme. And that such person or persons so to be named, assigned, aucthorised, and appoin¦ted by your hyghnes, your heyres or successours, after the sayd let∣ters patentes to hym or thē made & deliuered as is aforesayd, shall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this act & of the said letters patents vnder your hyghnes, your heyres or successours, to exercyse, vse, and execute all the premisses, accordyng to the tenour and effecte of the sayd letters patentes. Any matter or cause to the contrary in any wyse notwithstandyng. AND for the better obseruacion and maintenaunce of this act, may it please your hyghnes that it may be further enacted by the aucthoritie aforesayd, that al and euery Archebyshop, Byshop, and all and euery other ecclesiasticall person, and other ecclesiasticall officer and minister, of what estate, dignitie, preheminēce or degree soeuer he or they be or shalbe, and all and euery temporall Iudge, Iusticer, Mayre, and other lay or temporall offycer and minister, and euery other persone, hauynge your hyghnesse fee or wages within this Realme, or anye youre hyghnesse dominions, shall make, take, and receaue, a corporall othe vpon the Euangelist, be∣fore such person or personnes as shall please your hyghnesse, your heyres or successours, vnder the greate Seale of Englande, to as∣sygne and name, to accepte and take the same, accordynge to the tenoure and effecte hereafter folowyng. That is to say: I A. B. do vtterly testyfie & declare in my conscience, yt the Quenes hyghnesse is the onely Supreame gouernoure of this Realme, and of all other her hyghnesse domynyons and countreyes, aswell in all spirituall or ecclesiasticall thynges or causes: as temporall, & that no forrayne prynce, person, prelate, state, or potentate, hath or ought to haue any iurisdictiō, power, superioritie, preheminēce or aucthorite ecclesiastical or spiritual within this realme, & ther∣fore
I do vtterly remounce & forsake all forraine iurisdictions, po∣wers, superiorities, & aucthorities, and do promyse that frō hence forth I shall beare fayth & trewe allegiaunce to the Quenes high∣nes, her heyres and lawful successours, and to my power shal assist and defend all iurisdictions, priuileges, preheminences, & auctho∣rities graunted or belonging to the Quenes highnesse, her heyres and successours, or vnited and annexed to thimperiall Crowne of this realme, so helpe me God, and the contentes of this booke. AND that it may be also enacted, that yf any such archbyshop, byshop, or any other Ecclesiasticall officer or minister, or any of the sayd temporall iudges, iusticiaries, or other lay officer or minister, shall peremptoryly or obstinately refuse to take or receaue the sayd other: That then he so refusyng, shall forfeyt and lose onely duryng his lyfe, all & euery Ecclesiasticall and Spirituall promotion, be∣nefice & office, and euery temporall and lay promotion and office, which he hath soly at the tyme of such refusall made, and that the whole tytle, interrest, and incumbencye in euery such promotion, benefice, and other office, as agaynst such person only so refusing, duryng his lyfe, shall clearely cease, & be voyde, as though the par∣tie so refusyng were dead. And that also all and euery such person and persons so refusyng to take the sayd othe, shall immediatly af∣ter such refusall, be from thensforth duryng his lyfe disabled to re∣tayne or exercyse anye office, or other promotion, whiche he at the tyme of such refusall hath ioyntly or in common with anye other person or persons. And that al and euery person and persons that at any time hereafter shalbe preferred, promoted, or collated to any Archebysshopryke, or Bysshopryke, or to any other spirituall or ec∣clesiastical benefice, promotiō, dignitie, office, or ministery, or that shalbe by your hyghnesse, your heyres, or successours, preferred or promoted to any temporal or lay office, ministery, or seruice with∣in this realme, or in any your hyghnes dominiōs, before he or they shall take vpon him or them to receaue, vse, exercise, supplye, or oc∣cupy any such archebyshoprike, byshoprike, promotion, dignitie, office, ministery or seruice, shall likewise make, take, & receaue the said corporal othe before mētioned, vpō the euangelist, before such persons as haue or shall haue aucthoritie to admitte any such per∣sō to any such office, ministery, or seruice, or els before such persō or persons as by your highnes, your heyres or successours by cōmissiō vnder the great seale of England, shalbe named, assigned or appoin¦ted to minister the said oth. And yt it may likewise be further enac∣ted by the aucthoritie aforesayd, that if any such person or persons as at any tyme hereafter shalbe promoted, preferred, or collated to any such promotion spirituall or ecclesiasticall benefyce, offyce, or ministery, or that by your highnes, your heires or successors, shalbe
promoted or preferred to any temporall or laye office, ministery, or seruice, shall and do peremtorilye and obstinately refuse to take the same othe so to hym to be offred, that thē he or they so refusing, shal presently be iudged disabled in the law, to receaue, take, or haue the same promotion Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, the same temporal of∣syce, mynistery, or seruice wtin this realme, or any other your high∣nes dominions, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes. AND THAT it maye be further enacted by thaucthoritie afore∣sayde, that all and euery person and persons Temporall, suyng ly∣uery, or Oustre le mayne, out of the handes of your hyghnesse, your hey∣res, or successours, before his or theyr liuery or Oustre le maine sued forth and allowed, and euery Temporall person or persons, doyng anye homage to your hyghnesse, your heyres or successours, or that shall be receyued into seruice with your hyghnes, your heyres or succes∣sours, shall make, take, and receiue the sayde corporall othe before mentioned, before the Lorde Chauncellour of England, or the lord keper of the greate seale for the tyme beyng, or before such persone or persons as by your hyghnes, your heyres or successoures shal be named and appoynted to accepte or receaue the same. And that al∣so all and euery person and persons takyng orders, and all and eue∣ry other person and persons, which shalbe promoted or preferred to any degree of learnynge in anye vniuersitie wtin this your realme or dominions, before he shall receaue or take any such orders, or be preferred to any such degree of learnyng, shall make, take, and re∣seaue the sayde othe by this acte sette forthe and declared as is a∣foresayde, before hys or theyr Ordynary, Commissarye, Chauncel∣lour, or vicechauncellour, or theyr sufficient deputyes in the sayde vniuersitie. PROVIDED alwayes, & that it may be further enacted by thauc∣toritie aforesayd, that if any persō hauing any estate of inheritaūce in any temporall office or offices, shall hereafter obstinately and pe∣remptoryly refuse to accept and take the sayd othe as is aforesayd, and after at any tyme duryng his lyfe, shall wyllyngly requyre to take & receaue the said oth, and so do take & accept the same othe be∣fore anye person or personnes that shall haue lawfull aucthoritie to minister the same: That then euery such person immediately af∣ter he hath so receaued the same othe, shalbe vested, iudged, and de∣med in lyke estate and possession of the sayd offyce, as he was before the sayd refusall, & shall and may vse and exercise the sayd offyce, in such maner & fourme as he should or myght haue done before suche refusall, any thyng in this acte conteyned to the contrarye in anye wyse notwithstandyng. AND FOR THE MORE sure obseruation of this acte, and the vtter extinguyshement of al forraine & vsurped power & aucthorite
may it please your hyghnes that it may be further enacted by the aucthoritie aforesayd, that if any person or persons, dwelling or in∣habytyng within this your Realme, or in any other your hyghnes Realmes or dominions, of what estate, dignitie, or degree soeuer he or they be, after thend of .xxx. dayes next after the determinacion of this session of this present parliament, shal by wrytinge, printing, teaching, preaching, expresse wordes, dede or act, aduisedly, malici∣ously, & directly affirme, hold, stande with, set forth, maintayne, or defende thaucthoritie, preheminence, power, or iurisdiction Spi∣rituall or Ecclesiasticall of any forreyne Prynce, Prelate, Person, State, or Potentate, whatsoeuer heretofore claymed, vsed, or vsur∣ped within this Realme, or any dominion or countrey being with∣in or vnder the power, domynyon, or obeysaunce of your hyghnes, or shall aduysedly, maliciously, and directely put in vre or execute any thyng for thextollyng, aduauncement, settyng forth, mayn∣tenaunce or defence of any such pretended or vsurped iurisdiction, power, preheminence or aucthoritie, or any part therof: That then euery such person and persons so doyng and offending, theyr abbet∣tours, aydours, procurers, and counsaylours, beyng thereof law∣fully conuicted and attaynted accordyng to the due order & course of the commen lawes of his ealme, for this or theyr fyrst offence shall forfeyte and lose vnto your hyghnesse, your heyres and succes∣sours, all his and theyr goodes and cattelles, aswell reall as perso∣nall. And yf any suche person so conuicted or attaynted shall not haue or be worth of his proper goodes and cattelles to the value of xx. li. at the tyme of such his conuiction or atteyndour: that then euery such person so conuicted & atteynted, ouer & besydes the for∣feiture of all his said goodes & cattelles, shal haue and suffer impri∣sonmēt by the space of one whole yere without bayle or mainprise. And that also all and euery the benefyces, prebendes, and other Ec∣clesiasticall promocions and dignities, whatsoeuer of euery Spiri∣tuall person so offendyng and beyng atteynted shall immediatly af∣ter such atteyndour, be vtterly voyde to all intentes and purposes as though thincumbent therof were dead. And that the patron & donour of euery such benefice, prebend, spiritual promocion & dig∣nitie shall & may lawfully present vnto the same, or giue the same in suche maner and fourme as yf the sayde incumbent were deade. And yf any such offendour or offendours after suche conuiction or atteyndour do eftsones committe or do the sayde offences or any of them in maner and fourme aforesayde, and be therof duely conuic∣ted and atteynted as is aforesayd: That then euery such offendour and offendours shall for the same seconde offence incurre into the daungers, penalties, and forfeytures ordeyned and prouided by the Statute of prouision and Preminire, made in the .xvi. yere of the
reigne of Kynge Rycharde the seconde. And if anye suche offendour or offendoures, at anye tyme after the sayde seconde conuiction and attayndoure, doo the thirde tyme commytte and doo the sayd offen∣ces, or anye of them, in maner and fourme aforesayde, and be therof duelye conuicted and attaynted as is aforesayde: That then euerye such offence or offences shall be demed and adiudged highe treason, and that thoffendour and offendours therein, beynge thereof lawe∣fullye conuycted and attaynted, accordynge to the lawes of thys Realme, shall suffer paynes of deathe, and other penalties, forfey∣tures, and losses, as in cases of hyghe treason by the lawes of thys Realme. AND ALSO THAT IT MAY lykewyse please youre hygh∣nes, that it may be enacted by thauctoritie aforesaide, that no maner of person or persones, shalbe molested or impeached for any thoffen∣ces aforesaid, committed or perpretated only by preaching, teachyng or wordes, onles he or they be therof lawfullye endicted, within the space of one half yeare next after his or their offences so commytted And in case any person or persons shall fortune to be imprisoned for anye of the sayde offences commytted by preachyng, teachynge, or woordes onelye, and be not thereof indicted wythin the space of one halfe yeare nexte after hys or theyr such offence soo commytted and done: That then the sayde personne soo imprysoned shall be set at lybertye, and be no lenger deteyned in prison for anye suche cause or offence. PROVIDED ALVVAIES AND BE IT enacted by thauc∣thoritye aforesayde, that thys acte or anye thing therein conteyned shal not in any wise extend to repeale, any clause, matter, or sentence conteyned or specified, in the said Acte of Repeale, made in the sayde fyrst and seconde yeares of the raignes of the sayde late king Philip and Quene Mary, as doth in any wise touch or concerne any mater or case of preminire, or that doth make or ordeine any mater or cause to be within the case of preminire, but that the same, forsomuch only as toucheth or concerneth any case or matter of preminire shal stand and remayne in such force and effect as the same was before the ma¦kynge of this acte. Any thinge in thys acte, conteined to the contra∣tye in anye wyse notwithstandinge. PROVIDED ALSO AND BE IT enacted by thaucthorytye aforesayde, that thys acte or anye thynge therein contayned shall not in any wise extende or be preiudycial to any person or persōs for
any offence or offences committed or done, or hereafter to be commit¦ted or done, contrary to the tenour and effect of any acte or Statute now reuiued by this acte, before thend of xxx. daies next after thend of the session of this present parliament, any thing in this act contei¦ned, or any other matter or cause to the contrary notwithstandyng. And if it happen that any pere of this Realme shal fortune to be en∣dicted of, and for anye offence that is reuiued or made preminire or treason by this act, that then he so being indicted shal haue his trial by his peres, in such like maner and forme, as in other cases of trea¦son hath bene vsed. PROVIDED ALVVAIES and be it enacted as is aforesayde, that no maner of order, acte or determination, for any matter of re∣ligion, or cause Ecclesiasticall, had or made by thauctoritie of this present parliament, shalbe accepted, demed, interpretate or adiudged at any tyme hereafter, to be any errour, heresy, scisme, or scismaticall opinion: Any order, decree, sentence, constitution, or lawe, whatsoe∣uer the same be to the contrary notwithstanding. PROVIDED ALVVAIES AND BE it enacted by thauctho∣ritie aforesaid. That such person or persons to whome your highnes your heires or Successours, shall hereafter by letters patentes, vn∣der the great Seale of England, geue aucthority to haue or execute any iurisdiction, power or aucthoritie Spiritual, or to visit, reforme order, or corect any errours, heresyes, scysmes, abuses or enormities by vertue of this Act, shall not in any wise haue aucthority or power to order, determyne, or adiudge anye matter or cause to be heresye, but only suche as heretofore haue ben determined, ordred, or adiud∣ged to be heresy by thaucthority of the canonical Scryptures, or by the first four general Counsailes, or any of them, or by any other ge¦neral Counsaile wherin the same was declared heresy, by ye expresse and plaine wordes of the said canonical Scriptures, or such as here after shalbe ordred, iudged, or determyned to be heresy, by the hyghe Court of Parliament of this Realme, with thassent of the Cleargy in their conuocation. Any thyng in this act conteyned to the contra∣rye notwithstanding. AND BE IT FVRTHER enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaied, that no person or persons, shalbe hereafter endicted or arraigned for any the offences, made, ordeyned, reuiued, or adiudged by thys acte, onlesse ther be two sufficient witnesses or more, to testify and declare the said offences, wherof he shalbe indicted or arrained. And that the sayd witnesses, or so many of them as shalbe liuing, and within this Realme at the time of the arraygnemente of such person so indicted shalbe brought forth in person, face to face, before the party so array∣ned, and there shal testify and declare what they can say against the
partie so arraygned, yf he require the same. PROVIDED ALSO and be it further enacted by thaucthority aforesaid, that if any person or persons shal hereafter happen to geue any reliefe, ayd, or comfort, or in any wyse be aiding, helping, or com∣forting to the person or persons of any that shall hereafter happen to be an offendour in any mater or case of Preminire or treason reuiued or made by this acte: That then suche reliefe, ayde, or comforte giuen shall not be iudged or taken to be any offence, onlesse ther be two suf∣ficient witnesses at the least, that can and will openly testify and de∣clare that the person or persons that so gaue such reliefe, ayde, or com¦forte, had notice and knowledge of such offence, committed and done by the sayde offendour, at the tyme of such reliefe, ayde, or comforte so to him giuen or ministred: any thinge in this acte conteyned, or anye other matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstandinge. AND VVHERE ONE PRETENSID sentence hathe hereto∣fore hene giuen in the consistory in Powles before certaine Iudges Delegate, by the authoritie Legantine, of the late cardinal Poole, by re∣son of a forreyne vsurped power and aucthoritie agaynste Rycharde Chetwod Esquier, and Agnes his wife, by the name of Agnes Wod∣, at the sute of Charles Tyrrel gentleman, in a cause of matrimo∣ny solemnized betwene the said Richard and Agnes, as by the same pretensed sentence more playnly doth appeare. From which sentence the sayde Rychard and Agnes haue appealed to the courte of Rome, which appeale doth there remayne, and yet is not determined. Maye it therfore please your hyghnes that it may be enacted by the auctho∣rity aforesaid, that if sentence in the said appeale, shal happen to be gi∣uen at the sayde courte of Rome, for and in the behalfe of the said Ri∣chard and Agnes, for the reuersyng of the sayd pretensid sentence be∣fore the ende of thre score dayes next after the end of this Session of this present Parliament: That then the same shalbe iudged & taken to be good and effectuall in the lawe, and shal, and maye be vsed, ple∣ded and allowed in anye courte or place wythin thys Realme, anye thing in this acte, or in any other acte or statute, conteined to the con∣trary notwithstanding. And if no sentence shalbe giuen at the courte of Rome, in the said appeale for the reuersing of the said pretensid sen¦tence before thy ende of the sayde three score dayes, that then it shall and maye, be lawfull for the sayde Rycharde, and Agnes, and either of them at anye tyme herafter to commense, take, sue, and prosecute  said appeale from the saide pretensed sentence, and for the reuer¦sing of the saide pretensed sentence within this Realme, in suche lyke maner and forme as was vsed to be pursued or mighte haue ben pur∣sued within this realme, at any tyme since the .xxiiii. yere of the reigne of the sayde late kyng Henry the eyght, vpon sentences geuen in the
court or courtes of any Archbishop within this realme. And that such appeale as so hereafter shalbe taken or pursued by the sayde Richard Chetwod and Agnes, or either of them, and the sentence that herein or therevpon shal hereafter be geuen, shalbe iudged to be good and ¦fectuall in the lawe, to all intentes and purposes: anye lawe, custome vsage, canon, constitution or any other matter or cause to the contrary notwithstanding. PROVIDED ALSO AND BE IT enacted by thaucthorytye aforesayde, that wher there is the like appeale now depending in the sayd court of Rome, betwene one Robert Harcourt, Merchaunt of ye staple, and Elizabeth Harcourt, otherwise called Elizabeth Robins of the one partie: And Anthony Fydell Marchaunt Straunger, on thother partie, that the sayd Roberte, Elizabeth, and Anthonye, and euery of thē, shal and may for the prosecuting and trieng of their said appeale, haue and enioy the like remedy, benefitte, and aduantage,  like maner and fourme as the said Richard and Agnes, or any of  hath, may, or ought to haue and enioy, this act or anye thing  conteyned to the contrary in any wise notwithstandyng.
