e1063_13 99868421 169179
AN ORDINANCE FOR REVIVING the JURISDICTION OF THE County Palatine OF LANCASTER, and for holding there an ASSISES. blazon of the Commonwealth Tuesday, 28. February, 1653. ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, that this Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. HENRY SCOBELL Clerk of the Council. London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Prin∣ters to His Highness the Lord Protector, 1653.
blazon of the Commonwealth AN ORDINANCE For reviving the JURISDICTION of the County PALATINE of Lancaster, and for holding an ASSIZES there. BE it Declared and Ordain∣ed by His Highness the Lord Protector, by the advice and consent of His Council, That all Pri∣vileges and Iurisdicti∣ons belonging to the County Palatine of Lan∣caster and the Inhabitants thereof, be, and are hereby Revived and Continued, as fully and amply to all intents and purposes, as the same were at any time before the tenth day of October last. And that all Actions as well re∣al as personal, and all other Actions mixt or otherwise, Pleas, Precepts, Writs, Pro∣ces, Demurrers, Recognizances, Fines, Re∣coveries, and all other Proceedings, Matters and things, of what nature or quality soever, now depending in any Court within the said County Palatine, or there commenced or prose∣cuted since the said tenth day of October, shall be and stand revived, continued, and of full force and effect in the Law, to all intents, construc∣tions
and purposes. And that all Proces, Pleas, Demurrers and Proceedings in every such Action, Actions, Sutes, Bils or Plaints, which were there depending the said tenth day of October last, or commenced or prosecuted there at any time since, shall stand good and ef∣fectual, and be proceeded in according to the Lawes of the Nation, and the proceedings used within the said County Palatine of Lancaster. And be it hereby further Ordained, that Mat∣thew Hales one of the Iustices of the Court of Common-Pleas at Westminster, and Hugh Wynd∣ham Sergeant at Law, shall be Iustices of As∣sises and Gaol-delivery within the said County Palatine; and that the said Iustices, or either of them, shall and may act, do and perform all matters and things, as well concerning Crimi∣nal as Common pleas, and all other Pleas and Proces whatsoever, in such manner and form as any other Iustice or Iustices of Assises at Lancaster have usually acted, done and perform∣ed at any time heretofore. And the Commissi∣oner for keeping the Seal of the said County Palatine of Lancaster hereafter named, is hereby Authorised and appointed to issue forth to the said Iustices, for the execution of the premises, such Commission or Commissions as in such ca∣ses have been heretofore in the said County Pa∣latine used and accustomed. And that Thomas Fell Esq be, and is hereby made and appointed Commissioner for keeping of the Seal of the said County Palatine of Lancaster, and shall have all such powers as any Chancellor or Commissi∣oner for keeping the Seal of the said County Pa∣latine hath formerly lawfully used and exercised concerning the same, till further Order. Tuesday February: 8. 1653. ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.
