e1064_46 99869212 169246
blazon of the Commonwealth A DECLARATION Of His Highness the Lord Protector AND THE PARLAMENT Of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, & IRELAND, For a Day of Solemn FASTING & HUMILIATION in the three NATIONS. WHo is such a stranger in our Israel that hath not taken notice of the great things God hath brought to pass amongst us by his out-stretched arm? What nation is there who hath had God more nigh unto them, than the Lord our God hath been to us, in all things we have called unto him for? Ask of the daies that are past, which have been before us, in these la∣ter ages, whether there have been any such
things as those many blessings and signal de∣liverances vouchsafed to us from his own hand, in answer to the voice of tears and blood that have been powred forth. But in the mean while this is matter of great lamentation, whilst God, by a continual series of his loving kindnesses and providen∣ces, hath multiplied mercies and forgivenesses to us, we of these Nations, instead of an an∣swerable return of thankfulness and obedi∣ence, have, as the highest aggravation of our sin, multiplyed our provocations against him; In that general ignorance, unthankfulnes, and unfruitfulness, under all those dews of grace and Gospel-mercies. In not acknowledging fully to this very day our calamities to have come upon us from the hands of God alone, provoked by us, who useth what instruments he pleaseth to execute his indignation. In not bemoaning our selvs, as sons, and smiting upon our thighs with Ephraim, in the sense of our own iniquities, and of the patience & forbearing mercies of our heavenly Father. In that prophane, sensual, worldly, formal and Laodicean spirit generally amongst us, some hating the power of godliness, and despi∣sing the true professors thereof, for having the image of God upon them; and others, by being loose in their opinions and practices, have turn∣ed the grace of God into wantonness. In that great neglect and want of zeal and courage in Magistrates, and other officers & persons therein concerned, to suppress enor∣mities, in conscience to perform the duty in∣cumbent upon them to God and man. All which, with other the crying sins of these
three Nations, call aloud upon us, that as we are now united to be one Commonwealth under one Government, so, having been sinful and sufferers together, we would with one heart and lip be perswaded to unite in our humble and serious ad∣dresses and supplications to Almighty God, That the fruit of all our mercies might not be with Jesurun, to kick, or to be found fighters a∣gainst him, nor opposers of his will, as if we were preserved to commit yet more abominations. That we may wrestle and prevail with him for pardon and removal of our darkness, vanities, blasphemies & prophaness, with all that worldly mindedness, formality, and other abominations, which are yet found amongst us under the glori∣ous light of the Gospel. That as God hath been pleased to make choice of these Islands wherin to manifest many great and glorious things, so he would answerably make us a chosen generation, and a peculiar peo∣ple, that in thankfulness to him, and example to others, we might shew forth his praises, who hath separated us from other nations, and called us out of darkness into his light. That God would now speak with a strong hand to quiet the spirits of men that are apt to murmure, by causing them clearly to see where the true and spiritual interest of Christians lieth, and that in keeping close thereunto is wrapt up their safety, that so When he uttereth his voice, All flesh may be silent before him, and know that he is raised out of his holy habitation. That though he hath had just cause to be an∣gry with us for our murmurings, back-slidings, and other miquities, and hath therefore smitten us, yet that he would now heal us, and restore comfort to us and our Mourners. And especially that God would inable the Ru∣lers
of these Nations now in consultation about their peace, settlement & welfare, to proceed with faithfulness, zeal, wisdom and union, to fulfill the end of their being called together, and to be such, and do such things for the interest of Christ and his members, and for the good of all the People, as they ought, and as he hath promi∣sed Governours should be and do in subservi∣ency to those glorious ends; That so at last, through the goodness and mercy of our God, these three Nations, after so great and various revolutions, may be establisht together upon the sure foundations of Truth, Righteousness and Peace. It is therefore declared by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Parlament of the Com∣mon-wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, that for the ends and purposes aforesaid they doe ap∣point Wednesday, being the eleventh day of October next, for a day of solemn humiliation and seek∣ing the face of God, through the mediation of Christ, in all places within England and Scotland; and Wednesday the first day of November next, in all places in Ireland. And doe therefore hereby in∣cite and encourage all such whose hearts God shall perswade and make sensible of their duty, and of the Commonwealths present condition, that the respective daies aforesaid be set apart by them for the purposes aforesaid; whereof the Ministers and Preachers of the respective Pa∣rishes and Congregations are to take notice. For which end, It is Ordered that Copies of this Declaration be printed and sent into the se∣verall parts of the three Nations, that the same may be Published accordingly. Passed the Nineteenth of September, 1654. Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament. London, Printed by William du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness the Lord Protector, 1654.
