A3817B 45504696 171591
ARTICLES Concluded and agreed upon by the Society of the White-Writing and Printing paper Manufactory of Scotland, in a ge∣neral Meeting at Edinburgh the Nineteen day of August One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninty Five Years, in the Terms whereof Partners are to be assum∣ed. PRimo, That the Stock already advanced for carrying on the said White paper Manufa∣ctory, with what is yet to be Subscribed for, making up in whole five Thousand Pound starling; and that the same be divided into Fourteen Hundred Shares: And that in respect of the great Charges and other Contingencies, which the Founders and those who have already subscribed have been put to, those who shall hereafter subscribe are to make payment of four pound starling for each share, and that by and attour Fighteen shilings starling of Subscription Money, which by the first Articles was provided payable to Ni∣cholas
Dupin late Deput Governour of the Paper and Linnen Manufactories of Scotland, England, and Ireland, and Denis Ma∣nes Esquire, and is now assigned by them to the Joynt stock, in respect of an Liquid Sum obliged to be payed to them, and which they have accepted of in satisfaction for their said subscription Money. 2do. That all those who shall hereafter subscribe as Partners shall at the time of their respective subscriptions, pay in to Alex∣ander Clark present Thesaurer to the Company, One pound six shilling eight pence sterling, as the just equal third part of the fore∣said sum of Four pound sterling for each share, that they shall happen to subscribe for, together also with the foresaid sum of Eighteen shilling sterlings of Subscription Money for each share they shall happen to subscribe for, or to any other Thesaurer who shall hereafter be named by pluralitie of Votes of the Gene∣ral Meeting for receiving thereof, and the remaining two parts of the saids shares, to be payed to the said Alexander Clark or his Successors in Office, how soon and whensoever the same shall be judged necessary by the General Meeting, or a Committee of seven persons to be chosen out of their Number for that effect; and that upon twenty one days Advertisement, to be given by the Thesaurer for the time being, to the subscribers personally, or at their dwelling places, if they be Residenters in Scotland, and to the Agents Residenters in Edinburgh for such Englishmen, or Re∣sidenters in England as have already subscribed, or shall hereaf∣ter subscribe as Partners, and who shall be payed by the English Subscribers, and upon their paying in of the first Moety with the subscription Money as a foresaid, and subscribing the Articles here ingrossed, the said Alexander's Receipt thereof to be pro∣duced at an General Meeting at Edinburgh, shall give the subscri∣bers as full Interest in the said Manufactory effeiring to their shares, as if they had originally subscribed the same. 3tio. That albeit the first Moety and subscription Money a∣foresaid be payed in by the subscribers, yet if they shall hereafter
fail to pay in like manner the remaining part of their shares, they shall be subject and lyable to pay Three shilling sterling Monthly for each third part of the share whereof they shall happen to fail in making due payment being required as aforesaid: And in case they fail for the space of three Months thereafter to make payment of the saids remaining shares and penalty, then & in that case their respective shares is to be disposed of by the foresaid so∣ciety for the use of the Stock; and they are in all time thereafter to forfeit and amit any interest therein. 4to. That there shall be two Books prepared by Robert Hen∣derson our present Clark, or Secretary to the society, and his suc∣cessors in Office, who are to be chosen at the General Meeting of the Company, in which all the Actings are to be Recorded; one whereof is to be still retained by himself while he is in the Of∣fice at Edinburgh, and thereafter delivered up with the grounds and warrands thereof to his Successor in Office, and the other thereof to be delivered by him to any person whom those who Reside in England do intrust therewith, to the effect that from time to time the Partners in England, may be by him certiorat of the proceedings of the Company: And which Clerk and per∣son Intrusted by these in England are to be obliged not to remove these Books out of the Kingdom without warrand from the Com∣pany, under the penalty of One hundred pounds sterling, each. 5to. That no advantage shall be taken of survivancy, but that the share or shares of the party or parties Deceased shall fall and belong to their Heirs and Executors, and also that he or they shall have liberty to sell and dispose thereupon to any person or persons who will give most for the same; and their Assigneys shall bruik and enjoy the same priviledges and Emoluments as their Authors might have done, they always producing their assigna∣tions & dispositions thereto at the first or second General Meeting after the purchase, which are to be recorded in the Registers or Transser. Books of the Company. 6to. That at the first General Meeting every year there shall be chosen by plurality of Votes Thirteen persons of their own num∣ber,
who shall have power to nominate and choise and Preses or Chairman to the Meeting for the ensuing year out of the said Thir∣teen, whereof always the principal Agent for the English and Resi∣denters in England is to be one if he be present, & which Thirteen whereof seven is declared to be ane Quorum the Preses always be∣ing one of them by plurality of Votes are to order & determine in all their Meetings anent the Affaires relating to the Company, & to make all Contracts & Bargains relative thereto, & to give all neces∣sary orders to the Thesaurer for debursements, and which Thir∣teen are to pass under the name of the Common Council or Assist∣ants to the Company: As also the General Meeting is to make choice of Five persons out of the said Thirteen (the Preses or Chairman and the Agent for the Residenters in England being al∣ways two of them) as a Committee of Trade, and whereof any two with the Preses are to be an Quorum (the said Agent being likewayes advertised of the Meetting) and which Committee and their Quorum shall have power, and are Authorized, to keep correspondence betwixt the English Partners and them, anent the Patterns and sale of Paper, and to settle and agree upon the man∣ner of remitting the Money arising either from the product of the Joynt Stock or Subscriptions in England, to the Thesaurer of the Company that presently is or that shall happen to be at Edin∣burgh, for the time and which Committee are also to be warrant∣ed and impowered in case any of the Subscribers do not pay in their shares as a foresaid, to sell the same to any other person at the same price, as they were first suscribed for, such Purchasers and all other singular Successors being always subject to the whole Laws and Acts of the Company already made or to be made. 7mo. That the four general meettings of the Company be kept at Edinburgh, annually upon the dayes following viz. The first dyet upon the first Munday of November, the second upon the first Munday of February, the Thirdupon the first Munday of May, and the Fourth upon the First Munday of August, and that in case the foresaid Assistants find it necessary to have general meetings kept more frequently, or upon other dayes, that then the same
shall proceed and be holden Intimation thereof being given to all Parties concerned by affixing placads upon the Mercat Cross and Exchange of Edinburgh, and upon the Entry's to the Exchange at London, bearing the day upon which the meeting is to begin, and that Twenty dayes before the same, to the effect those Con∣cerned in the Scots white-writting-Paper Company may give timous Instructions to their Agent or Agents residing at Edin∣burgh there anent. 8vo, That the Thesaurer to the Company at present and in time coming shall be obliged to make their Accounts once every four Months anent what they have received in, what they have payed out, what debt is due to the company, by whom, & where Lodged, & upon what security, & what is in their hands of Money and effects. As also by advice of the plurality of the English Sub∣scribers ane Cash-keeper or Thesaurer in England, is to be appoin∣ted who may receive in the Effects of the Manufactorie and Pro∣duct thereof, and Money of the Several Subscribers there and be obliged to hold Count for, and remit the same to the Thesaur∣er of the said Office in Scotland once every three Months, and both of them are to give sufficient Security for that Effect. 9no. At all general Meetings of the Company each Party if present (or his Agent if absent) shall have on Vote for ilk five Shares he subscribes for but in Committies they are only to have one Vote what ever their Interest be, 10mo. The Books for receiving in of Subscribers are not to be closed untill the whole Fourteen Hundred shares be filled up without consent of the plurality of Votes at a general Meet∣ing. 11mo. That no Subscriber shall have liberty to subscribe for more than Twenty shares, without an Act of the general Meetting. 12mo. That the Milnes shall be Built and all Expences defrayed out of the Stock of the Company: As also the buying of Rags and all other materials necessary and the hyring of work men and mantenance of them and Prentices fit for the work, but it being already determin'd by such of the Company
who have already Subscribed, that there shall be two Milnes in∣stantly Built, whereof one at Yester and another near Edinburgh whereof the saids Nicholas Dupin, and Denis Manes, are to have the oversight, in respect of the subscription Money allowed to them by the former Articles, and liquid sums now promitted to be payed to them in lieu thereof, the said Nicholas Dupin and Denis Manes, are to attend the Building of the saids Milnes, and to oversee the buying of all materials fit for the same on their own proper Charges, the Work Men and Materials being all payed out of the joynt Stock as aforesaid, and to teach Prentices the Art of making the said Paper, and not to desert the work untill these Prentices be able to manage the same, and teach others so to doe, conform to an Contract past betwix the saids Nicholas Dupin, and Denis Manes on the one part, and an Committie of the said company authorized for that Effect on the other part 13tio. In case any difference arise anent the carrying on of the said work and managing of the Stock, the same is to be determined by plurality of Votes of all the whole Proprietors or their Agents who are present at the first generall Meeting there after. 14to. That it shall be in the power of the Proprietors or their Agents, by plurality of Votes to make such Laws for the Government of the said Paper Manufactorie as they shall think expedient at any Generall meeting, providing they be not repug∣nant to, or Inconsistent with the General Laws of this Kingdom. Lastly. That whoever shall subscribe and take Share in the said Manufactorie, or who shall Suceed there to buy any title whatsomever shall be subject and lyable to all the Rules of the Societie made or to be made.
Here followes a List of the Members who have al∣ready Subscribed to the above Articles. JOHN Marquis of Tweeddale Lord High Commissioner of Scotland George Lord Viscount of Tarbat. Sir James Stewart His Majestes Advocat. Sir George Campbel Knight, Alexander Clark Marchant. Andrew Barclay Writter. Andrew Johnston of Knock hill, Andrew Duffe Merchant, Archibald Scot Merchant' David Robertson Writter, Denis Manes Esquire. Francis Borie, George Bell. Merchant George Lawson Merchant. George Livings;ton Merchant. George Mosman Book Seller,
Herman Le Dru, Mr James Bailie Writter to His Majesties Signet James Hamilton Merchant, James Montgomery Merchant at Glasgow, James Stephans Mr. James Young Writter, Mr. John Buchan Advocat, Mr. John Dickson Secretary to the Lord Chancellor, Mr. John, Inglis Writter to His Majesties Signet, John Learmond Merchant. John Lethem Smith, Mr. John Meinʒeis Advocat, John Raitt Merchant, John Trotter Merchant. Laurence Wright Writter, Mrs. Mary Flood Nicholas Dupin, Esquire, Patrick Farmer Merchant Piter La Fite Robert Henderson, Thomas Butler Esquire Thomas Noake Merchant, Thomas Shelton Linnen Draper, Thomas Spence Writter, William Hume Master of the Gray Paper Mill at Ayton' Willam Spence Warden to His Majesties Mint,
