b3237 e563_6 99865262 165251
A BLOVDY FIGHT AT DVBLIN in IRELAND, BETWEEN The Marquesse of Ormond, and Col. Jones, and a List of the Officers and Souldiers killed and taken on both sides, with the manner of the fight, and the Lord Moon's revolting from the Parliament to the Prince, and joyning his horse with the said Marquesse; Together with Col. Trevor, Col. Yearmond, and divers of Sir Thomas Armstrong's horse, deserting of Col. Jones, and declaring for the King of Scots; & the uniting of the Irish Armies against the Parliament. July .6. depiction of battle at Dublin, Ireland LONDON, Printed for R. Williamson, and are to be sold at the Royall Exchange in Corn-hill. 1649
A GREAT FIGHT AT Dublin in Ireland, between the Marquesse of Ormond, and Col. Jones, with a List of the chief Officers killed and taken on both sides. THe Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin with 14000 Horse and Foot, have intrench∣ed themselves (in many places) within Sacre shot of the Walls, and by their strong alla∣rums keeps us in continuall action: the last night their Pioneers wrought exceeding hard, and raised an half Moon within musket shot of the North Port, where was placed about 200 musketiers, and four pieces of Ord∣nance; it was contrived very artificially and strong, with a running Trench from their frontier incampings: this mor∣ning
we sallyed out upon them, with a resolution to beat them off from the said Fort; but finding too much opposi∣tion retreated to our Redout, which was within Pistoll shot thereof; about 4 of the clock severall parties of horse and foot were drawn forth on both sides, who engaged each o∣ther, and after a sharp conflict disputed with great gallantry the enemy retreated, and having a Reserve ready at hand our men durst not embrace the pursuit, but returned Victors with 7 prisoners, 9 horses, and left dead and wounded upon the place about 15 with the losse of 9 men, which the ene∣my in the night time set off and buryed. In one of our former Sallies, Capt. Glyn with a party of 30 horse fell upon a desperate party of the Besiegers, and after a sharp dispute took prisoners Lieut. Colonell Dungan. Major Williams. Captain O Brian. Captain Talbot. Lieutenant Ogleby. Cornet Bembrick. And about 12 Troopers. killed Major Dungan, brother to the aforesaid Lieu. Col. Dungan. Captain Willkinson. Quartermaster Mackart. Corporall Pemerton. And about 7 men. Of Col. Jones party killed Quartermaster Smith, Quar∣termaster to his own troop. Corporal Reyner. And 3 troopers. wounded, Lieutenant Brabson. Cornet Jenkins. Corporall Armstrong. And 4 or 5 private men. We are seldome out of action, and our renowned Gover∣nour is infinitely tyred out, having not been in his bed these ten nights, and most part of the day is viewing the enemy, or repairing our Works and Fortifications, and planting
pieces round the Line: the Irish Officers have made choice of a great Episcopal Bishop to be their chief Engineer, who acts and studies very politikely both spiritually and tem∣porally. Our condition being dangerous, causeth fadnesse unto us, e∣very day the enemy being strong, and our men many of them perfidious, most dishonourable, betraying their trust, the Lord Moon with a gallant troop of horse, is gone to the enemy, who upon a salley forth, pretended to engage against them, but when he was within pistoll shot, faced about, and fell upon a party of our own horse, a troop of Sir Thomas Armstrongs run away also, and Col. Yeamonds troop moul∣ter away, and desert us extreamly; the enemy hath besieged what Garisons we have not slighted, Drogedan is in great danger of losing, many others will be lost, for we cannot stir from this City to help them without better store of Forces for their relief. Col. Trevor hath likewise deserted us, and is gone to the enemy, where he entred into protestation to the Marquesse, declaring, That he would use all the interest that possible he could, for the calling away of his Regiment, and that he was assured of their coming, with many othhrs also, the ene∣my continues drawing nearer this place, hindering all Mar∣ks, so that we are brought very low, every thing being ex∣traordinary dear, and the Inhabitants so taxed for support of the Souldiers, as that they will be undone. God in mercy look upon us, and help us. From bleeding Dublinthe fourth of July, 1649.
SIR, VPon mature deliberation of the present transaction of affairs, in reference to the proceedings between Prince and People, I thought requisite to illustre the demonstration thereof, to your publike view, by displaying Truth in its ∣spotted Colours under the Banner of Impartiality, and re∣presenting those things that are of greatest concernment, and said to be the main Object on which the Eyes of all Europe are now fixed upon, which by a serious glance, over these ensuing lines, the splendor thereof appears as followeth: The Parliament of Scotland seem to be exceedingly dis∣contented at the transaction of affairs in England, and at the present proceedings of their young King (as they say) and have sent a Message to the queen of Sweden, with a large Narative of what they did joyntly with the Parliament of England, where they fell off, how they detest their late pro∣ceedings, in reference to the executing of their late Sove∣raign Lord the King, how their young King is seduc'd by evill Councell, and from thence hath not given their Com∣missioners satisfaction necessary for his own and the King∣domes Weal, desiring her Majesty to send an Embassie unto him, to perswade him to a Condescension, and speedy A∣greement; but this seems a mystery to many, divers conceiing it to be one of Jockies new Riddles. For it is frequently said, that the Articles of Agreement are already concluded of, and that they begin to cast this Mist, only to obscure tho eye-sight of the English, until they have brought to maturity their design in hand, for the rai∣sing of 15000 Horse and Foot to joyn with the 5000 alrea∣dy i Arms, which they pretend to be for the safety of that kingdom against forraign Invasion. Only Gen. Lesley deies the Generalship, the Marq. of Argyle its conceived will be chosen Commander in chief.
His Excellency Generall Lesley being desired to deliver up the strong Castle of Edenburgh, returned answer, That he was resolved to keepe it for the succession of those who had entrusted him, meaning the late King of Great Brittain, Charles the first. The Parliament are very private in their debates, and (say some) are resolved to shake the foundation of Heresie. We hear; That the declared King of Scotland, accompa∣nied by the Prince of Orange, half way to Antwerp, was met by some eminent persons appointed for that purpose, who presented him from the Arch Duke, with a most sumptuous Caroach studded with massie silver, and fix gal∣lant Flanders horses of great value, such as a King of bare Scotland was never master of before, probably Genit's or of the Nerpolitan race, when he was come to Antwerp the Magistrates conducted him to the high street, call'd Mair and lodged him in a starely Pallace, he remain'd in Ant∣werp two dayes and two nights during which time he was welcommed with all imaginable expressions of honour and respect, and at the Castle, which he had the honour to be in∣vited to, he wes entertain'd as if the King of Spain had been, there himself, he went to see the Town and the rarieties of the Churches; which as anciently, so now exceeds all others in those Countries, if not in Christendome, at his departure, happy was he that could kisse his cloke, which by accident hung out of the Coach as he past away: Fryday morning he departed hence, having dined at Machlin he came to Bruxels that night, where he was, as all along, most largely welcom∣med, and royally entertained, and had been more, had not his comming been at a time when the Arch-Duke was so deep∣ly engaged in the relief of his dearest Mistris Cambray, which as some Letters come at this instant to this place say is to the great prejudice of the French, the certeinty where∣of expect by the next.
Lievtenant Collonel Hobson is come to Edenburgh, his businesse is variously spoken, some whisper that he desires passage for some to go for Ireland, others to make way for some farther overture from Parl of England, what ever it is he is looked upon with a jealous eye. From the Isle of Man our Intelligence saith, That Sir Lewis Dives, and many other English Gallants, have made great preparations in that Island against the Parliament of England, and are resolved for Ireland, to assist the Marquesse of Ormond, and strengthen the siege at Dublin; from whence it is said, that the Parliaments party is reduced to Dublin, Dredah, Dundale, Trim, and London-Derry, the first & last being besieged; by Ormonds coming up to Dublin he hath got the greatest part of five Counties from Col. Jones, which afforded him many thousand pounds contribution. We hear that Gen. Oneal is united with Ormond, and hath strengthned his Camp with 4000 Foot, the E. of Clanrickard and Col. Monro is expected there with another Brigade, by which means they will be both potent and powerfull, the Army amounting to above 20000 Horse and Foot. Chester 5. July, 1649. FINIS.
