b5970 e537_10 99864763 116995
A CORDJALL FOR THE CALENTVRE AND Those other diseases which distempers the Seamen. OR, A DECLARATION DISCOVER∣ING AND ADVISING HOW ENGLANDS SEA HONOƲR May be regained, and maintained as in the happy Raigne of Queene ELIZABETH, Of famous Memory. WITH The saving of Two Hundred and Fifteen Thousand One Hundred twenty two pounds a year, one year with the other. This Myrrour shewes you at how dear a Rate, Selfe-love sells publike danger to the State. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.
To that Conspicuous, and Right Trusty Pillar, which supports the South Aspect, of Londons Royall Exchange. The humble Petition, or Declaration, of Andrewes Burrell, Gentleman, sometimes a Servant; in Englands Navie. Sheweth, THat your Orator, being conscien∣tious, of the Nationall Cove∣nant, In March 1643. presen∣ted divers Parliament men, with papers intituled, Englands Out-Guard, surveyed, and lamented, &c. A complaint then, & now very seasonable; yet so distaist∣full, to some in the Committee of the Admiralty, that from that time to this day, your Orator hath been extreamly traduced, and hath not found, that freedom which is called, the Liberty of the
Subject, answerable to his affectionate desires, for the peace and Safety of Englands Common-wealth. The truth is, for speaking of the truth, your Orator hath been extreamly scandalized, by those which seeking them∣selves, delay (and indeed betray,) the Peace of Englands Common-wealth. However, after many cavaling meetings, before that superlative Authority, your Orator was forced to publish those expostulations that were agitated before them, in a short Remonstance, to the Honorable House of Commons; which being distasted, by the wise Officers of the Navie; occasioned the Commissioners of the Navie, to publish a learned Legend, in opposition to those truthes, which your Orator had presented, to the Honorable House of Commons. But since that time, to shew the fulnesse of their inte∣grity to the House, and their weak sence, of Englands rot∣ten Navy; The Officers of the Navy, not knowing which Built is most serviceable; That is, which Ships are nim∣blest, I say, since that time, the Officers of the Navie, have caused seven great Frigots to be built, for the Service of the Parliament; which Frigots are so heavie, in regard of the ordinary Built of Frigots. That they are indeed seven Spanish Ships; But before your Orators survey, The Officers of the Navie, never indeavoured to build, or send forth any nimble Ships, Pinnaces, or Frigots; But instead thereof, (at dear rates, for selfe-ends,) hyred Collyers, and some that were the worst of Gol∣lyers;This Service, though slighted, is very Remark∣able. yet now, they are so taken with a Spanish Fancy, That like fan∣tasticall Taylors, they indeavour, to change Englands sluggish Navie, into the Spanish Fashion; which in the times that are past, would have been a fault, of a Crimson Colour, the truth is, they have betrayed the Kingdom, by that new device.
For in Queen Elizabeths dayes, the best of the Span∣nish Frigos, were not to be compared with the worst Pinnace in Englands Royall Navie; And which is very considerable, The Officers of the Navie, misleading the Master Shipright of the Navie, have wilfully disa∣bled those Spannish Ships, that have been lately built, which mischiefe your Orator did foresee, and complained of it, in his Survey of Englands Navie, &c. before they be∣gan to build them. In the second Book, of Haklayths Book of voiages, Page 170. line 38. Captain Middleton, in a very good Saylor, That is in a nimble Pinnace, waited thre dayes upon a Spannish Armada. Anno. 1591: To discover their Forces, and to give the Lord Thomas Howard advice of their Approach; which service he per∣formed faithfully, but could not have effected it, if his Ship had not been nimbler, then all those Spanish Ships and Frigots. In the 171. page, lines 52, and 53. Captain Whiddon, in the Pilgrim, was hunted like a hare, by the same Armada; at the 15. line, of the next page, you have the number of the Hounds; In plain English, Captain Whiddon in the Pilgrim was hunted like a Hare by the same Armada; At the 15. line of the next page, you have the number of the hounds in plain English, Captain Whiddon in the Pilgrim was chaced, by the nimblest of fifty three Spanish Ships, and Frigots; But being nimbler then the nimblest of them, he escaped, and secured himself, by running from them. When the French besieged Dunkerk, the Off cers of the Navie, were offered for lesse then Five Thousand pounds; Seaven of the best Frigots, that were then be∣longing to Dunkerk; which if the Officers had accep∣ted (at that time) they had not only advanced, the Parliaments Service, in Treasure, and strength; but they had thereby, so disabled the Malignant party, that the contemptable Irish, could never have appeared in Englands Seas, formidable as now.
In the 13. line and 27. page, of the Legend which was published, by the Commissioners of the Navie, they to excuse their not buying of those Dunkerk Frigots, tell the Parliament, that they wanted mony; but in the eight page, and 10. pages of Mr. Greenes Declaration, he confesseth, that from August 1642. to the begining of 1647. They did spend, one Million, five Hundred Twenty five Thousand six Hundred and tenn pounds. And in the 12. page, that at the printing of his De∣claration, in 1647. The state was, (for the service of the Navie,) Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand pounds, in debt, or thereabouts, which together is, Three Hundred Fifty five Thousand, one Hundred Twenty pounds a year, one year with another,Before those sluggish Ships which are com∣plained of in this Pe∣tition, were sent to en∣counter the Nolan∣ders, Englands Navie thus maintained, and Englands Seas were better guarded for Thirty Thousand pounds a year. what ere they spent, they refused those Frigots, and since that time, have caused seven others to be built, which instead of Five Thousand, have cost Eng∣lands Common-wealth Thirty Thousand pounds, or more mony, and which is very remarkable. Those costly Frigots, which they have caused to be built, are so ill built, and so ill contrived, that they dare not keepe the severall wea∣thers, and cannot sayle so nimbly, as the contemptable Jrish; They have plowed with my Heifer, but they have not found out my Riddle. In a Manuscript, which your Orator dedicated to his Excellency, in February 1647. your Orators principle endeavour was, to demonstrate to his Excellency, the sluggish condition, of Englands rotten Navie; It being an undeniable Maxim, that if a Ship be not nimble, she cannot be serviceable. But the Ships of Englands Navie,
are not nimble, therefore the Ships of Englands Navie, are not serviceable. In the 19. page of their Legend, the Commissioners of the Navie, tell the Parliament, that no Prince in Christendom, hath so many brave Ships, as the King∣dom of England; yet after your Orator had complained of the sluggish condition, of Englands, despicable Navie; the Officers of the Navie, did delusively cause Seaven, great Frigots to be built, Carved, and Garnished with Gold.Englands Gold is wasted, but if there were no greater wast then that on the Fri∣gots, there would not be so little left for honest men to relieve themselves and those that do depend upon them. But slighting all their fair shewes, and specious pretences; they abuse Englands Common-wealth, by their counterfeit practices, and by many dangerous misinformations, telling the Parliament, all is well when in truth all is naught. Your Orator hath inquired with much diligence, but cannot here, that any one of the Parlia∣ments new Frigots, by chasing the inconsiderable Pyrates, hath incountred, and taken any one of them, which is ve∣ry seazeable, if those Officers which are in Authority, did understand the misery of the Ship-weights Art, as well as they know how by power, to defend the falla∣cies which your Orator doth complain of. There belongeth to Waterford and Wexford, (at this present) foureteen Sayle of able men of Warre, which have thriven so well of late in their wicked Designes; that the Relator told Thirty three Prizes, lying by the Walles in one Harbour, (as not valuable) besides all those that were otherwise trifled away, by this losse your Readers may perceive, how unable the present Go∣vernment is, with the expence of Three hundred Fifty five Thousand, one hundred twenty two pounds a year, to clear Englands Seas of Irelands Pyrates.
The first page of your Orators Remnstrance, did tell the Parliament, that the Guarding of the Seas, did cost Three hun∣dred and Fifty Thousand pounds in one year which Information was very of∣fensive to the Chairman of the Navie. But force that expostulation, his Worship hath decared that scandall to b pure truth and hath added five Thousand one Hundred twenty two pounds a year one with another, unto my Report; besides all the odd shillings and pence, &c.In the 19. page, of their Le∣gend, the Commissioners of the Navie, in Aprill 1646. tell the Parliament, That his Majesty, had then but half a dozen men of Warre, and that the most of them, were of so small Force, that they were not con∣siderable. Since which time, by Mr. Greenes Declaration; with a proportionable allow∣ance, for this present year 1648. There hath been one Million, threescore and five Thousand, three hundred sixty six pounds, spent to guard the Seas; that is, to reduce half a dozen inconsiderable Pyrates; but notwithstanding that vast and insupportable wast; those Pyrates are not reduced, neither are the Seas Guarded with strength equivolent, to halfe the charge; or necessa∣ry to the safety and honour of the Land; The present Government cannot reduce half a dozen inconsiderable Pyrates; They have suffered his Majesties inconsiderable half dozen, to increase to more then a whole dozen, they have suffered them, to increase to more then a whole do∣zen, of uncontroulable Pyrates, (some say to more then three dozen,) however, this is most certain, one of them about the midst of February last, did in one day take three small Ships, and one Pinnace; which together were worth, Nine Thousand pounds, (or more mony) and which hath no Redemption; when those Ships were lost, one of them indeavouring to defend themselves, lost their Master, with one of his Mates, and five of the com∣mon men.
In which conflict, besides the losse of those seaven, there were others wounded; wherefore being much weak∣ned, and wounded, the Ship to leeward, and not able to save her selfe by runing they were forced to yeald; in this place, your Orator humbly moves this Query, if the present Government, with the expence of ten hundred, threescore and five thousand three hundred sixty six pounds, cannot reduce halfe a dozen inconsiderable Pyrates; in three years space.That famous service which was performed by Queen Elizabeths Royall Navie, in the year 1588. did not cost Englands Common-wealth, threescore and tenn Thousand pounds. How will Englands Common-wealth be wasted, if the French, the Danes, the Dutch, or all of them, shall infest Englands Seas, or at once invade this distracted King∣dom, I say, if the present Govern∣ment, with that insupportable sum of Treasure, which hath been spent within these last three years, cannot subdue and anihilate halfe a dozen inconsiderable Pyrates; what strange confusion and extream beggery will those profuse wa∣sters bring upon this already too much impoverished Kingdom; if the neighboring Princes should invade this Island, with powerfull Armadoes, that is, with Fleetes of warlike Ships. By this discourse, your Readers may perceive, how vainly the Kingdoms Treasure, how carelesly Eng∣lands Common-wealth is wasted, it is shamefully wasted, and which is most considerable in the times when Eng∣lands Treasure was wasted as not valuable; even then, the honour of Englands Seas was lost, and shamefully lost; And which adds to this complaint the Kingdoms suffer∣ings, (as now,) are not only insupportable but endlesse; for though the Common-wealth hath payed an un∣known price of Treasure and blood, for a more then ne∣cessary Reformation; no Reformation is, or can be ex∣pected,
unlesse this or some other Pillar which hereafter may be famous, promote this or the like complaint to those Worthies, which unfainedly desire the Kingdomes Peace; For this is most certaine, some in authority do not see, and some in Authority will not see, and when those that are in Authority will be blind, what can be expected but confusion, and conclusively desolation. These great and growing mischeifs your Orator doth see, and therein doth perceive the perverse condition of Flesh and Blood; your Orator doth plainly see how des∣peratly the present powers do slight Petitions, tending to the peace and safety of this famous Kingdom.The Petitioner com∣plained first to the Lord high Admirall of Eng∣land, to the Lord Say, to the Earl of Warwicke, to the Earle of Essex, to severall members of the honorable house of Com∣mons, to the House of Commons, to Lieuten∣nant Gen. Crumwell, and to his Excelency Englands Victorious Generall, For these Rea∣sons, your Orator thinks it du∣ty in him, to complaine to thee O Pillar, and would have thy Readers know, that he is so confident of his experience in the misery of the Shipwrights Art, that he dares enter into any engagement, to make the greatest halfe of those old, slug∣gish rotten ships, which the Of∣ficers of the Navie call Englands Royall Navy saile as swiftly as the lest of the Parliaments new Friggots. Your Orator is likewise willing (because he knoweth how) to build a ship of the fourth ranck, that shall saile, about the nimblest of the Parliaments new Friggots. These services your Orator can, and is willing to vndertake, upon the striktest Obligations that can be invented. And if he faile to performe what he doth pro∣mise, your Orator shall most willingly, as deservedly, vndergoe the highest Censure that may in justice be in∣flicted upon him.
These are the reall thoughts and, earnest desires of your humble Orator, who by his owne Proposalls, ex∣pects no particular Emolument untill he hath performed the intended Services; And then cast himself at the feete of those Worthies, which shall effectually promote this humble Petition. But passing these thoughts, give your Orator leave once more to tell your Readers, the ships of Englands Navy are sluggish, and therefore unserviceable. Se the 12. page of a Iornall publisht by Iohn Denton Mini∣ster in the Admirall of the Silly Fleet, Anno. 1637. being the best service that any part of Englands Navy hath performed this 46. yeares. The Captains and Marriners are generally discouraged, and the Common Seamen so disheartned, and discontented for want of their thirds, and full allowance of wholsome dyet, the lumps of fat which grow in the shouldiers and codds of the Oxen, with many chines and choice peices of the bst Beefe and Porke, seruptitiously exposed to sale and trifled away in bribes, to the quantity of three Oxen in every Twenty six Oxen, (little more or lesse) besides all that which is stollen and fool'd away in pretended fees. By which extream abuses, the Seamen are not only shortned of their just allowance of Beefe and Porke, but they are deprived of their Brewis; which to many (e∣specially to those that are ancient) was as good as their Beefe, (especially in a long voyage.) When twenty shillings is due to each Seaman for his third, some shipps companies have received but tenne shillings, others not halfe so much, some not a pen∣ny for a pound. In Queen Elizabeths dayes every Seaman was allowed one pound of Beefe for every Beefe meale, and fat for his Brewis, but since this blessed reformation foure men are allowed but three pounds of beef and many times not so much.They are also much disheartned for want of due in∣couragment, when they performe extraordinary services. I say and will averre it, the Seamen are so discoura∣ged, that no good service can be expected or perfor¦med though the Shipps Pinnisses, and Friggots were as serviceable, as they ought to be. And these
these are the true causes why the Seamen revolt, and oppose the present Government. In the Remonstrance which your Orator did present unto the Honorable House of Com∣mons, in May 1646. your O∣rator did compaire Englands slugish Navy to Englands lazy horses, which in Englands peace∣full daies were wantonly fed in the Mews near Charing-cross. And heare without offence give me leave to aske you Rea∣ders, what good service they can expect from the best troop of horse now in England, if the ryders be unskilfull, cowards, or unwilling to serve. I say if the Ships, Pinnaces, and Frigots, which now spend three hundred fifty five thousand, one hundred twenty pounds a year; were as nimble as Art and In∣dustry can make them, if they were as nimble as they ought to be: There is so much discontent, wilfully, and perniciously, inforced upon the Seamen; that no good ser∣vice can be expected from them, untill the faults which your Orator hath complained off, be mended.This Declaration hath been extant in a Manuscript above six months, and doth now prove it selfe by the Seamens Re∣volting from the Par∣liament. Tis thus, and they that make it thus, in your Orators opinion, deserve to be understood, and re∣warded accordingly. Your Orator, doth wish that your Readers would seriously con∣sider these truthes, these great and serious complaints, whicvh at this time, are obscured by divers malignant Petitions, lately exhi∣bited
to the Honourable House of Commons; your Orator doth wish, that by your care and providence, you would occasion a Reformation, in Englands almost lost Navie; occasion it before it fall into a more contempta∣ble condition, before it fall into a lost condition past recovery. To stop this issue, which doth wast a great part of Englands life blood; and to recover Englands Sea ho∣nour, your Orator hath prepared a design, which hath in it a full Sea, and fayre Gayle of Honour and Re∣nown, for those that shall cherish and promote it, it is able to bear up and carry on, a reall Reformation, in Englands despicable Navie; by promoting it, your wel-affected friends may glad the hearts of all the honest Seamen in England, which at this time, are not Re∣volted from the Parliament; (I am afraid I may say, from the King and Parliament;) They will have the prayers of all the honest Land-men in England, they may recover Englands Sea-honour; they may support and highly advance their own Reputations, and they may save Englands Common-wealth two hundred and fifteen thousand, one hundred twenty two pounds every year. These Inducements, your humble Orator presents un∣to the view, and most serious consideration of all your wel-affected Merchants and Seamen; as most conside∣rable, and more then necessary.
Humbly desiring, That in regard this Petition con∣cernes not only the Trade of this Ho∣norable City by Sea; but the peace and safety of the whole Kingdom: This remarkable Pillar, according to the Trust reposed on it, will be plea∣sed to hold forth; and present unto all the wel-affected, this humble Petition or Declaration, intended principally for their good, and for the good of Englands Common wealth, timely moving them to consider, the many mischiefes which may suddenly fall upon this Renowned City, and the
whole Kingdom; If Englands Seas be no better Guarded, and the Re∣volted Ships by force, reduced to the present Government. And as in Duty bound, &c. How bould, how mad, how desperate is the Treason, That sligts all faithfull Councell, Truth and Reason. FINIS.
