B908 R229511 99895449 152819
God's Love to Man, AND Man's Duty towards God: MANIFESTED In several Discourses on the COVENANTS OF Works and Grace. Wherein divers Propositions are laid down, and sundry Cases resolved. By JOHN BARRET, Minister of the Gospel. LONDON, Printed for S. R. and are to be sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church-Yard, MDCLXXVIII.
TO THE READER. AS in the Apostles days, some were Ex∣ceeding Zealous about the Law, un∣derstanding neither what they said, nor whereof they Affirmed; There are some in our days, who have the Covenant of Grace and the New Covenant much in their mouths, while yet they understand little of it, yea, are under very great Mistakes about it. Perhaps (Reader) thou wilt wonder to see a New Treatise of this Subject, upon which there are so many Extant. Yet it were to be wished, that in some of them there were not Multa Corigenda, foul Errata's. And be∣sides, let who will Write of it, instead of put∣ting to it a Finis, he may conclude with a Nonnulla Desiderantur, there are some things yet behind. Indeed the Subject is exceeding Copious, and withal, a necessary Subject to be oft Incul∣cated. Without some knowledge of Gods Co∣venant, Men can neither understand God,
nor Jesus Christ, nor Themselves aright. Touching the Occasion of this present Dis∣course being in Company with a Worthy special Friend, I was Speaking my Thoughts, That most of the Prevailing Errors of our Times, were from Ignorance of the Covenant of Grace, or not being right in the Doctrine of it: Whereupon he willed me to apply my Thoughts to that Subject. When Considering further with my self the dangerous Tendency, and fad Consequences of some Mistakes about it, I was ready to say [I also will shew my Opinion.] Now to make way for my Intend∣ed Discourse on the Covenant of Grace. it was very Requisite to Premise something of Mans State under the Covenant of Works. Many Points relating to these Two Cove∣nants, I wittingly pass by, to Insist more larg∣ly on what I conceive very Needful at this Day, that might be an Antidote against Prevailing Errors, and a means of Establishing Souls in the present Truth. I conclude before-hand, some will account this Discourse a Dry Piece, to wit, Such as look only at the stirring of Affections. But woful Experience may Teach us, that it is as well a Christians Duty to see to the right Bal∣lasting of his Judgment; for want of which, we have seen many sadly Tossed to and fro.
The Scripture is Profitable for Doctrine, 2 Tim. 3.16. This is one end and use it serves for. And if the Doctrine herein laid down be Sound, and according to the Scriptures of Truth, I shall hope, it will not be Unprofit∣able. Further, I must expect, others will be Pre∣judiced, and take Distaste, meeting with some things here Cross to the Opinions, which they have Espoused. Yet I can say, the Discovery of Truth is my Endeavour and Design, (and not to lay open the Nakedness of any of a different Perswasion, further than it might serve that Way.) And sure I am, Truth ought to be dearer to us all, than our Credit, or World∣ly Concerns. Ʋpon a Review of the whole, I especially commend to thy serious Perusal, the Twelfth, and Thirteenth Proposition of the Covenant of Grace, beginning at Pag. 225. and ending at 297. shewing the Terms and Benefits of the Covenant of Grace, wherein every mans Grand concern lieth. Reader, if thou hast a mind to see, there I have Indeavoured to shew thee the things that belong unto thy Peace. Diog. Laert. in Socrate. l. 2. p. 111. As Aeschines said to his Master Socrates, , &c. I am poor, and have nothing else, but I give thee my self: And it took
with his Master. We have nothing to give to God worthy of his Acceptance; yet if (with the Believing Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8.5.) we would now give our selves to the Lord, it would be very Acceptable to Him, and every way Advantagious to our Selves. We should come better out of his Hands; Yea, He would be ours (our God, and Portion) if we are willing, and resolved to be His. Methinks, the Lord says to Sinners, as Jehu to Jehona∣dab, 2 Kings 10.15. Is thine heart right as my heart is with thy heart? If it be, then give me thy hand. O how glad should I be, if this Discourse might promote that Holy and happy League betwixt God and Souls! In∣deed, I am not without hope, but through the Blessing of God, it may be of Good use to some. And otherwise no Reasons should have moved, no Perswasions should have prevailed with me to yield to the Publishing of it. The Success (I know) depends wholly on His Blessing. , . I write with Calmness, and would be Sorry this should Raise the least Storm in any. Where then canst not Assent with Judgment, yet Dissent with Affection.
Let us follow the Truth in Love. If thou findest any Light and Warmth here, acknow∣ledge the same to come from the Father of Lights. Let Him have the Praise: And forget not to Pray for one, who is greatly Asha∣med, that he hath so little served God, and his Generation, who without a better Head, and a better Heart, is still like to do little Service, J. B.
Addenda & Corrigenda. PAge 3. Line ante penult. add. [There is par ratio, why this First Covenant should be so called, though it should not be directly intended in that place.] p. 9. l. 14. r. Exter∣nal. p. 11. l. 29. r. flowing. p. 12. l. 31. for but, r. be. p. 13. l. 10 blot out or. p. 14. l. 14. r. owed. p. 15. marg.  is put for , p. 18. l. 29. r. Law, p. 21. l. 10. r. had, p. 24. l. 7. r. he. l. 9. r. commonly use, p. 25. l. 6. r. as a moral, p. 33. l. 8. r. goods, p. 34 l. 10. r. Judge p. 41. l. 12. r. carried, p. 24. l. 4. r. in, and l. 31. r. Niti, p. 61. l. 2, r. so we. p. 73. marg. r. mod. div. p. 76. marg. r. quicquid mandat. Calv. p. 93. l. ult.  p. 137. l. 16. r. without, p. 152. l. 12. af∣ter grace that in marg. to some, &c. p. 162. l. 1. r. cur p. 164. l. 31. Cocceius, p. 174. l. 20. r. ac. l. 21. r. in eo quidni, p. 213. l. 11. blot out be, p. 232. l. 16. r. guileless, p. 233. l. 27. blot out the Law of, p. 235. l. 9. r. justifaction, p. 245. l. 13. r. by Faith, p. 247. l. 25. r. many, p. 253. l. 15. r. godly sorrow, p. 279. l. 18. for of, r. to, p. 282. l. 13. r. Hendiadis, p. 285. l. 25. for long, r. large, p. 300. l. 13. for now, r. nor, p. 306. l. 32. blot out the stop at Faithful, p. 307. l. 9. after Preach∣ed, r. so explicitely, p. 321. l. 7. r. Opponitur, l. 8. r. Externae, p. 322. l. 22. r. includeth, p. 326. l. 18. r. Incompossibilia, p. 424. l. 26. r. dispense, p. 429. l. 7. r. quatefaciendam, p. 405. l. 7. r. Maymony. One reference of good use is omitted. p. 385. l. 4. marg. scil. Mr. Baxt. of Infant Bapt. p. 98, 99. Other literal Mistakes, and false Pointings, which I hope will not much hinder the sence, the Ingenuous Reader will pass by.
OF THE COVENANT OF WORKS. Part I. Gen. 2.17. But of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely dye, or dying thou shalt dye. I Design (God assisting) to Discourse of the two Covenants betwixt God and Man. The Intro∣duction. The right opening and understand∣ing whereof might help to set and keep our Judgments right in many points of Divinity, and prevent our falling into many dangerous and pre∣vailing
errors. And as Luther said (as I remem∣ber) upon his understanding of the point of free Justification by Christ's righteousness, that there∣upon he thought himself apertis portis in ipsum paradisum intrâsse, to have strait way entered into Paradise: And ibi continuò alia mihi facies totius Scripturae apparuit, forthwith the whole Scripture appeared to him with a new face; so it would no doubt to many, could they attain to a right and true notion of the Covenants. Now I have made choice of this Text of Scrip∣ture, whereupon to ground my Discourse of the Covenant of works: As this was part of it; part of that first Covenant, God was pleased to make with Man in innocency. I confess the Covenant of Works made with Adam in innocency, is more darkly spoken of than the Covenant of Grace. And the Reason is obvious, because the first Covenant was soon broken, on man's part, that he can claim no priviledge or benefit by it. In this respect it is, as if it had never been. All man's hope of happiness depends wholly on that which is called the Covenant of Grace. Therefore the promissory part of that first Cove∣nant is not mentioned here, not spoken of expresly: but only implyed, and included in the threatning. The Text indeed runneth in the Form of a Law with a threatning. As we have no more expressed here; but, 1. A Precept, not to eat.— 2. The Sanction or penalty threatned, death in case man did eat, contrary to the charge, and pre∣cept God had given him.
Yet there is more included and implyed here: As, 1. A Promise: A promise of the continuance of Adam's life and happiness, upon Condition that he continued his Obedience. When it is said [If thou disobeyest thou shalt dye.] it fairly intimates thus much, Poena enim denun∣ciata inobedientiae non expectatur, ubi est obedientia. Coccei∣de soed. c. 2. Sect. 24. p. 29. [If thou wilt be Obedient in this thing, and whatsoever else I command thee, thou shalt surely live still, and be happy, thou shalt not dye.] 2. The Tenor of the first Covenant is included here, that it was [Do this and live, disobey and dye.] That the Stipulation, or Condition required of man in the first Covenant, was his perfect obedience to the will of God in all things, not only to the Law of Nature implanted in him, but also to any further Command of God's giving Forth. As we see in this positive Law, where the thing forbidden was lawful in it self, and only sinful be∣cause forbidden, and forbidden, to prove and try his obedience. As this was indeed a fit trial of it, by a Law to restrain him from that, whereunto he had a Natural inclination, as unto other fruits in Paradise (Gen. 3.6.) and which was indifferent, (within mans liberty to take and eat) before the giving of that Law. But I say the Condition of the first Covenant was obedience to the will of God in all things; therefore it is rightly called the Covenant of works. As Rom. 3.27. we read of a Law of works contra∣distinguished and opposed to the Law of Faith. The Tenor of it being [do this and live] implyed here in the threatning, If thou disobeyest in any thing, be
it but so much as in tasting of this fruit, (which here to try thy Obedience, I forbid thee to eat of) Thou shalt dye. As Grotius (de Satis. c. 3.) per unam Spe∣ciem peccati omne peccati genus indicatur, ut ex∣primit Lex eadem clarius explicata, Maledictus qui non manserit in omnibus praeceptis Legis, Deut. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. This [In the day thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt dye, meaneth as much as that [Cursed is he that continueth not obedient in all things. 3. That the Law of works, the Law given to Adam, was more than a penal, and praemiant Law, more than a Law with a promise, It is true Gods Law with its Sanction may be called his Covenant, before mans consent, as con∣taining the matter of it; but it is most properly a Covenant when it is consented unto, having then also the form of a Cove∣nant. and threatning annexed, that it was also a Covenant. I have this to say further, viz. that we cannot but suppose, that innocent Adam did fully consent to, and readily and thankfully accept of Gods Terms and proposals here [Obey and live, Disobey and dye.] When God had done so much for man in his Creation, making him a reasonable Creature; in, or after his own Image, able to yield perfect obedience, and when the said obedience was indisputably, indispensably his duty, whether God promised such a reward or not, to suppose now that man was not fully consen∣ting to the Terms offered, (which were most just and reasonable) for the continuation of his happiness, were to suppose that man was not what he was in∣deed, (i. e. reasonable, and innocent,) This were to suppose, that God did not make man upright or perfect, but rather perverse, and to suppose that man lay cross to his Maker, even before
he fell, which is (no doubt) prodigiously false. 4. One thing more included here, and to be in∣ferred, is, that this Covenant, and Compact, was not made with Adam alone, but with him, and his posterity together. Their want of perfect confor∣mity to Gods Will and Law, (the thing required, and insisted on in the Covenant of works) rendring his posterity guilty of death, even as if they had set their teeth in the forbidden fruit. The penalty threatned to Adam's breach of Covenant, we see inflicted on his posterity, that certainly they were involved in the Covenant with him, to be dealt withall upon the same Terms. Even Infants, who have not sinned after the similitude of Adam's Trans∣gression, yet through his disobedience (mediante cor∣ruptione, their nature by that means being cor∣rupted) are subjected to the same death, and punish∣ment. Though Corrinus takes it thus, Cens. Amat. Arm. c. 9. p. 138. death being threatned unto Adam that very day he sinned, therefore his posterity could not but partake of his punishment. As they must all of necessity dye in him, who were in his loins. Yet by his leave, this account he gives of the matter is utterly short of that account the holy Scripture giveth of it. The Apostle concludeth fur∣ther, Rom. 5.12. That by Adam's Sin, all the world of mankind became subject unto death; so as they are subject to it, not only to dye vertually in him; but formally to undergoe the Sentence of death in their own persons. Now hence I lay down this Doctrinal Con∣clusion.
Doct. That God was pleased to Covenant with man at first, when in the state of innocency, pro∣mising to give him eternal life, upon Condition of his obeying perfectly and constantly; withall threat∣ning death, if in the least point he should dis∣obey. And to help your understandings, and to lead you on to a clearer conception, and apprehension of the Nature of this first Covenant, I shall proceed by cer∣tain steps, laying down several propositions about it: humbly begging the Spirit of truth so to guide me, that I may not mislead you here. Sect. 1. PROP. I. God the maker of all things, created man a rational being, after his own Image, he being created to know, acknowledge, love, worship, obey, and enjoy his Maker. COncerning the Image of God wherein man was created, it is, questioned, 1. Wherein it did consist? Ans. 1. Not in the form and fashion of his body. Homo non est imago Dei ea parte, quâ bestiis similis est. Coccei. For God is a Spirit, and hath not any bodily shape, as the Audians, or Anthropomorphites of old dreamed. Therefore his Image most properly or primarily consists in something spiritual. It was a fond conceit of Osiander, that man was said to be created after Gods Image, because the Son of God
was to assume Man's Nature. But Christ was not the express Image of God in this respect. That Text Heb. 1.3. where he is called the ex∣press image of his Fathers person, Christus quum factus est homo, dicitur fa∣ctus esse nobis similis per omnia, dempto peccato. Illius igitur corpus ad imaginent nostri factum for ma∣tumque potius fuit, quam nostrum ad il∣lius, Zanch. doth certainly respect his Deity, not his humanity. His being in∣carnate. Christ's taking man's Na∣ture on him, was his being made like to us. Again, the Scripture affirmeth this of man before his fall, that he then had the Image of God, and had he continued in that first Estate of integrity, there had been no occa∣sion for the Son of God to be incarnate, to take man's Nature on him. 2. But the Image of God in man, consisted in those things, which advanced him above the Inferiour Creatures, representing some Divine perfection, which according to our way of conceiving of God is formally predicated of him, or properly attribu∣ted to him. Which is either, 1. Ratione substantiae hominis, & imprimis animae. The Natural Image of God in man. As God is a Spirit, and so the Soul. God is immortal, and so the Soul is immortal. Or, 2. Ratione dignitatis, & , Mr. Baxt. which a Learned man of our own calleth the Re∣lative Image of God. So man in that dominion which God gave him over the inferiour Creatures, (that were made for him) represented God, the Lord of all, being as a little God upon Earth. Thus Magistrates are called Gods. [I said ye are Gods.] Or, 3. Ratione donorum, seu qualitatum moralium, the moral Image of God. Those habits which repre∣sented God's wisdom, holiness, justice, goodness, and truth.
Now as the Moral Faculties (to wit) those which are the proper seat of moral Good or Evil) are the chief, Imago Dei in prin∣cipe animi facultate proculdubio principem locum obtinuit. Suf∣frag. Britan. de 3 & 4 Art. Thes. 1. p. 94. And as Moral Good is more Excellent than Natural, and Moral evil worse than Natural (as Christ, was subject to a world of evil of this last sort, and yet retained the Image of God, most fair, and unspotted, being free from the least touch of Moral evil:) Thus the Moral perfection of the faculties of the Soul, is man's highest perfection. And herein chiefly and eminently did God's Image in man consist. And nothing more opposite to the Image of God, than Moral pravity. As God hath more to doe in Natural Evils, than in Moral. He freely owneth his being the Author of Natural Evil, (is there any evil in the City, and the Lord hath not done it?) but it were blasphemy to make him the Author of Moral Evil, or Sin. The Image of God consists not only or chiefly in the Essence of the soul: nor only or chiefly in the powers and faculties of the soul (supposing there were any real distinction of the faculties from the Essence) which some make to be Speculum Trinitatis, the Glass of the Trinity. The Essence and Natural powers of the soul remain, now that the Image of God is defaced. Nor only, or chiefly in dominion over other Creatures (as some would have it) This would rather seem to be an Adjunct. (or however a less principal part of it) Gen. 1.26. Let us make man in our Image—and let them have dominion. And that it is a thing distinct, and separable too, from the Image of God, from what is principally intended by it, seemeth to follow from hence: that both Adam and Eve are said to have been created in the
Image of God, Gen. 1.27. They were created both a like in the Image of God: but they were not both alike in dominion, the Woman being made for the Man, is subject to him. Again, the Angels (surely) had the Image of God in as eminent, or an higher degree, than Man had; yet were not they made Lords over this lower world, (as man was, Psal. 8.6.) that we can any where find. The Angels were made after Gods Image, to whom the dominion over infe∣riour Creatures did not so properly belong, as unto men. Indeed the Image of God seemeth more properly to denote some inward frame and complexion of soul, rather than any such Eternal priviledge or prerogative, as Lordship over the Creatures. Therefore we take the Image of God, especially and eminently to consist in those spiritual Endow∣ments of Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness. That inward Rectitude of mans Soul, God made man upright, Eccl. 7.29. where (whatsoever Socinians say) we must understand, upright in respect of Mo∣ral rectitude; (as Moral pravity is opposed to it) [finding out many Inventions.] Now what is the Moral Rectitude of the Ʋnderstanding, but found Knowledge, and Wisdome? what is the moral recti∣tude of the will, but Righteousness, and Holiness? Thus upright was man, when he came first out of Gods hand, no errour in his understanding, no irregularity in his will, no disorder in his Affections. A sign of which we see, Gen. 2.25. They were both naked, the Man and his Wife, and were not ashamed. No uncomely motions to cause shame, such as they were sensible of after their fall, Gen. 37.10. Naked innocency was Glorious, but naked sin and turpi∣tude a thing most ignominious.
See what is meant by the Image of God, Eph. 4.24. That ye put on the new man, which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness: such as the Saints are by spiritual Renovation, such was man at first by Creation, viz. Righteous and Holy; so much also is hinted in the word [renewed] v. 23. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind: Imply∣ing that man had such a frame of Spirit once. He was created after God in Righteousness and Holi∣ness of truth, that Image of God which is in some measure, renewed or restored in the Saints; see also Col. 3.10. Those spiritual endowments, wherein a man comes nearest to God, that it appears God is his pattern, (as to be Righteous, Holy. Be ye holy, for I am holy, saith the Lord) these must needs be most properly Gods Image, this is to be made par∣takers of the Divine Nature, or of a God-like Na∣ture, (though Gods Essence, and Attributes are in∣communicable) to have those qualifications, which are the fairest representation of Gods perfections, which can be seen and found in any Creature. By the way, what a lustre is here put upon Holi∣ness, to commend it to us? Gods Image principally consists in this; would you be like God? Be holy, as he is holy. Though you cannot be as holy as he is, with an [as] of equallity; you may, and ought to be holy as he is holy, with an [as] of Similitude, and the more holy, the more God-like. No wonder, that the Saints are called the excellent ones in the Earth, Psa. 16.3. But what prodigious wickedness is it for any to scoff at Holiness? He that mocketh the poor, re∣proacheth his Maker: How much more he that scoffs at purity? What a Diabolical disposition is
that, which cannot but express an Antipathy, and Indignation against Holiness? surely they are very ill affected towards their Prince, that cannot indure to see his Picture, but will disgrace and throw dirt upon it. 2. Another Question here is, whether the Image of God in Adam was natural, or supernatural? Ans. Here the Sociniaus take away the subject of the Question, as we understand it; They under∣stand no more by the Image of God, than that domi∣nion man had over the Inferiour Creatures; denying, that Adam had any such thing as Original Righteous∣ness, holding that he was created in a middle state without any moral rectitude, or righteousness, which should more encline him to good, than evil. So some of the Popish Schoolmen would have man created, in paris Naturalibus, meaning without Grace, Holiness, or Righteousness; but the Scrip∣ture hath determined otherwise, God made man upright. And that Righteousness or uprightness concreated with (him, though if we take an Estimate of it, from what man is now since his fall, it is to be called supernatural, as being quite above Man's Nature now corrupted, by Sin, and not to be attained to by the power of Nature,) Man is restored to it only by supernatural grace; yet considering man in his pri∣mitive state, as he came first out of Gods hand, it was Natural to him; Not as following from his very Nature, Essence, or Faculties, Physico modo, nor as an essential part or property of man, naturally considered; nor only as perfecting, or adorning Man's Nature, as Bellarmine grants it may in this respect be termed Natural. But as not above the Condition
of Man's Nature at first, though it be above corrupt Nature; yet it was not supra naturam integram, above Man's Nature as at first. Nay it was condi∣tio Moralis Naturae illi debita. It was a moral en∣dowment or perfection some way due to man, con∣sidering the end for which he was made. Not due by way of Merit, but of condecency, or congruity to Gods wisdom and goodness (as some express it) As the Natural Faculties of understanding and will were due to him, if God would have any reasonable Service from him. And if God had not conferred on man at first this moral Rectitude of mind, and will, together with his being (without which man was not fitted to acknowledge, serve, obey, and honour his Creator) he must needs have missed of his End, for which he made man a reasonable crea∣ture, and not a bruit; so this work of his had not been very good. The Creation of man little to his praise, if he was, made to serve God, and not fur∣nished with sufficient abilities to serve him. Suppose man created at first without Original Righteousness, and do you not thereby impute folly to his Maker? Is not this to impeach the Wisdom and Holiness of God? Yea, how could the Psalmist so much admire what the Lord had done for man at first, making him a little lower than the Angels, Psal. 8.5. when if he was made without true wisdom and under∣standing, he was little better than the beasts that perish, Psal. 49.20. And let it be considered whe∣ther the want of holiness and righteousness in a Creature capable thereof, but not sinful; and conse∣quently whether to suppose man created without the same, be not to make God the Author of Sin. Vacuitas Justitiae Originalis malum quoddam est,
privatio Scil. summi boni. Num igitur panae vel culpae? Si paenae: cujus peccati? Si Culpae: cujus personae Thes. Salmur. de. stat. Adam. ante laps. Sect. 22. p. 195. vide etiam Sect 21. So let it be considered, whether to deny that man at first had Original righteousness, be not to suppose Natural concupiscence (which is now in every one contrary thereto) to be from God and Nature, understand pure Nature) and there∣fore good in it self, not sinful, carnal, inordinate, concupiscence, or that propension in men to things forbidden is natural indeed, speaking of Man's Na∣ture, as it is corrupted by the Fall; yet it was not natural speaking of Man's Nature, as it was at first before he fell. Though as he had a body, he was inclined to things of sense, yet the Sensitive appetite was in perfect subjection to the higher powers of his Soul had he attended to hold the same in subjection. It was his Sin to suffer the sensitive appetite to rebell and rule in him. But had there been any such thing as inordinate, concupiscence or Rebellion of the sensitive appetite against reason, in Man's pure Nature as it came from God, this sup∣posed, there would be a necessity of holding with the Papists, that the Motions of the same were not Sin, any more than hunger and thirst; otherwise we should make God the Author of Sin. Again, attend to this Argument, to prove that Adam was created with Original Righteousness. Ei∣ther Adam was created righteous, or unrighteous, or in a midle state betwixt righteous & unrighteous, one of these you must hold. But certainly he was not created unrighteous; for that were again to make God the Author of Sin. That would be to say, God made man unrighteous, contrary to plain Scripture,
and to the common sentence of all that are right in their senses, neither could he be in a state of Indiffe∣rency betwixt righteous and unrighteous; because man a reasonable creature was bound to be righte∣ous, as soon as ever he had a being. And the least deflection in this Nature from the Rule of righteous∣ness, would be unrighteousness in him. It is impossi∣ble to conceive that man should be in medio negatio∣nis here, neither righteous, nor unrighteous. And fur∣ther, if we suppose man set in such a state by God, still this foul and horrid consequence would follow, that God was no more the cause of Man's holiness and happiness had he stood, than of his sin and misery, when he fell: That he should no more have owned any praise and thanks to his Maker, had he chosen and persisted in the way of righteousness; than he can justly charge God with his sin and perdition. But thus I hope it sufficiently appears, that Adam had Original Righteousness concreated with him, and connatural to him. This Original Righte∣ousness was then Natural, as opposed to Super∣natural. It was not above the Condition of Man's Nature then, but requisite for the state, wherein he was, and the end for which he was made. Again, this Original righteousness in Adam was Natural in another respect, as opposed to what is meerly perso∣nal. (as Original Corruption is Natural.) It should have ben derived and conveyed with his Nature to his Posterity; had he kept it. Holiness and righte∣ousness is not Natural to the Saints, that have God's Image in some measure restored. It is supernatural to us now, that we cannot convey it to our Chil∣dren. But it was Natural to Adam, at first, and and so, that had he not lost it, it should have been pro∣pagated
to his posterity, as now the Corruption of his Nature is propagated. Ah! How is man changed from what he was at first? How are we sunk in our kind? Man was up∣right at first, but now miserably depraved, he that was little lower than the Angels by Creation, by his own degeneration is become like the beasts that pe∣rish. Of all our losses the loss of Gods Image; this, this is the greatest. A loss ever to be lamented. The Crown is fallen from our heads, woe unto us, that we have sinned. Sect. 2. PROP. II. The Great and Glorious God being Man's Crea∣tor, it follows by necessary and undeniable consequence, that he is the absolute proprie∣tor, owner, and disposer of this his Crea∣ture, Man's Soveraign Lord. IT is he that hath made us, and his we are, Psal. 100.3. As there is a twofold reading of the words. In the Margin it is  ipsi, vel ipsius; though in the Text it is  non. He is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end of all things. All things made by him, and for him, Prov. 16.4. The Lord hath made all things for himself, ad responsum suum, as some render it. All his Creatures are to be as Servants at his beck, ready to answer to his call to doe what∣ever he appointeth, or commandeth. We having received our beings from him, and moving, and having our beings still in him, therefore surely we
owe to him, Omne quod sumus, & omne quod possu∣mus, all we are, have, and can do, and ought ever to be at his dispose, and at his Command. An In∣dependant creature is a thing most abhorrent from reason, the greatest Monster that can be conceived, or thought of. Sect. 3. PROP. III. God having made Man a reasonable Creature, endued with his own Image (as was shewed before) not only capable of knowing, but of yielding Obedience to the Will and Law of his Maker, Moral Obedience immediately becomes due, from such a Creature to his Maker. AN Obligation to obey our Creator, is a Natu∣ral resultancy from our Condition, as we are Creatures. He that gave being to us, hath un∣doubted Authority to give Laws to us. He that said what we should Be, to him it certainly belong∣eth to say what we should Do. While Man is Gods Creature, 'tis impossible that he should not owe all possible Subje∣ction and Obedience unto God his Maker. Est ordo immuta∣bilis, ut creaturae Deo obtemperent. He must first cease to be a Creature, or God cease to be his rightfull and supream Governour, before this Ob∣ligation to obey God can cease. Though Creatures
may forfeit their beings, God can never forfeit, or pass away his Right in his creatures. It's impossi∣ble that God should leave the rational creature at liberty, to take his own swing, to live as without Law. It is impossible that God should resign up his right to any creature to rule (as in his stead) without being at all accountable to him; he cannot cease to govern the world: for thus he should deny himself, and give away his Glory to others. Now what should we think of such Divinity as this? Mar. of Mod. Div. p. 154. That Believers are not concerned with, nor obliged by the Law of God, as delivered by God Creator, but only as delivered and confirmed by Christ, or God in Christ, our Redeemer; That they are no more to look, at the Moral Law as in the hands of God-Creator, or as in the hands of Moses; but only as in the hands of Christ, to receive the ten Commandments only, as they are the Law of Christ. I cannot but look upon such Doctrine as very dangerous, tending to subvert the very foundation of true Piety and Religion. I take that to be very sound (Assemb. Confes. of Faith, c. 19. Sect. 5.) The Moral Law doth for ever bind all, as well justified persons, as others, to the obedience thereof; and that not only in regard of the matter contained in it, but also of the Authority of God the Creator, who gave it. Yet I grant, we are to receive the Law not only as delivered by the Creator, or as delivered by him immediately without a Redeemer; neither are we to receive it from Christ, the Redeemer only, as excluding the Authority of the Creator.
True it is, We are under no Law here, but what is the Law of Christ, as being (jure Redemp∣tionis) the Universal King. (As Learned Mr. Bax∣ter) The Law of Christ is, First, The Law of Nature-redeemed in his hand. Secondly, His pe∣culiar super-added remedying Law. The former is now part of the precepts of Christ, and bindeth us to perfection, necessitate praecepti; though not medii, in regard of the pardoning promise. Yet this does not take away all Authority from God, as if the Law was quite taken out of the Creator's hand, when it was put into the hand of Christ. We read Joh. 5.22. The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son. And yet in 1 Pet. 1.17. The Father judgeth without respect of persons, according to every mans work. Though he judgeth not executively, so as Christ does, who shall pronounce the Sentence in an audible manner; yet he judgeth Authoritatively, in, and with, and by Christ. The Father is not stripped of his right, and Authority of judging, by committing judgment to the Son. That is not the meaning of [The Fa∣ther judgeth no man:] but that he judgeth not him∣self alone without the Son, but with, and by the Son; so though the Law be in the hand of the Re∣deemer, yet it is not thereby quite taken out of the Creators hand; It is not the Son only, that rules and governs by his Love; but the Father in, and by him. And let it be considered, whether the damned are not so under the Law of God-Creator, that all their hatred of God, and blasphemy against him, is sin? And when Christ shall have delivered up the Kingdom to the Father, whether the Saints in Hea∣ven shall not be under the Law of God Creator? so
that if they should not continue to obey perfectly, they should sin. And whether never till men come into the other world, they come under this Law of their Creator, or were they not under it be∣fore? That the Law of God as Creator should not oblige all men, as they are his Creatures, is a wonderful strange Paradox to me. If Gods Com∣mands, as they are his Commands, do not consti∣tute and determine Man's duty, and lay a necessary tye upon man to Obedience, then God hath lost his Authority over man (this is plain) or man is advan∣ced above the condition of a creature. But do not the holy Angels obey the Commands of God, as the Commands of their Creator (Psal. 103.20.) and shall we think man is exempted from Obedience in that respect? Has man a priviledge here above the Angels in Heaven? And what will be their duty to Eternity, to love, praise, serve, and worship God, and observe his pleasure, as being their Crea∣tor; can this be a sin, and weakness in believers; we read John 5.23. That all men should honour the Son even as they honour the Father: But they that hold the Law of God binded them, not as it is Gods Law, but only as it is the Law of Christ, would seem to honour him, not as the Father, but above the Father. And of whom doth the Apostle James speak, Jam. 4.12. There is one Law-giver, who is able to save, and to destroy: Is it not the same with im, that said, Do not commit Adultery, that said, Do not kill, Jam. 2.11. The same with him that ave the Law in Mount Sinai, where if you under∣stand Christ, as God, you necessarily include the ather. If you understand Christ, as Mediator,
then you suppose the Law given in Mount Sinai, to be given from the hand of Christ, as Mediator. Now grant this, that the Laws and Commands of God are immediately constitutive of mans duty, or Obligatory, even because, or as they are the Laws and Commands of God, (and grant this you must, or you quite overthrow the course of Nature, utterly confound the order of beings, make the creature independant, and sui juris, Lord of it self, you deny Gods Dominion and Authority, and there∣by race the foundation of all Religion, and cannot glorifie him, as God, but rather deny him to be God.) But, I say, granting the commands of God, his Laws certainly binding to his creatures, even because they are his, and then (methinks) the dispute [whether the Law of God oblige, as given by Mo∣ses] may be waved, we should agree in this (sure) that the Law of God, howsoever, or by whomsoever, promulged, and declared, is binding to his crea∣tures. And therefore if the Decalogue, or ten Commandments given to Moses, and by him imme∣diately to the Jews, be declarative of the Commanding will of God, as a Copy and transcript of the Law o Nature, that standing Law of perpetual right, com∣prehending the duty which God requireth of man as man; it is for us, and all the men in the world, t look into it, to observe it, as well as it was for the Jews. It is the Duty of all men, who are Gods crea∣tures, and his subjects, to use all possible means o coming acquainted with the will of God their Sove¦raign Lord. And so far as the Writings of Mose and the Prophets, do reveal and declare the wi of God concerning us, what he requires of us and all men, as well as of the Iews; so far w
are concerned with what they wrote, as well as the Iews. And whatever the writer whom I have had here last to deal with, saith of the Law-binding belie∣vers, only in the hand of Christ; yet he clearly con∣futes and contradicts himself in several passages, cited with approbation out of many sound Divines. I shall take notice of two or three. Marrow p. 11. Per∣fect and perpetual Obedience was due from man unto God, though God hath made no promise to man (concurring with Dr. Reynolds) That Man being Gods Creature (N. B.) by the Law of Creation he owed all obedience and sub∣jection to God his Creator, which is all that I plead for. Again, he citeth Dr. Bolton, That the Moral Law was given of God to be a true and eternal Rule of righteousness for all men of all Nations, and at all times. p. 153. Again he citeth the same Author, p. 155. together with Mr. Perkins, saying, The ten Command∣ments being the substance of the Law of Nature Engraven in the heart of man in innocency; and the express Idaea or representation of Gods own Image, even a beam of his own holiness, they were to have been a Rule of life (N. B.) both to Adam and his posterity, though they had never been the Covenant of works. Now if by the Law of Creation man oweth all Obedience to God, and God hath given the Moral Law to be an Eternal rule of Righteousness, which should have been a rule to Adam and his posterity (as they were Gods Creatures) though there had never been a Covenant of works; what follows, but that the Moral Law is binding to believers, as
they are Creatures, and this is the standing Law of their Creator, though it is also further binding to us, as confirmed by Christ, and in the hand of Christ. And thus that distinction of a Threefold Law, viz. [The Law of Works, the Law of Faith, and the Law of Christ,] as he explains, and applyes it, may ap∣pear to be very weak and unprofitable; yea, unsafe; though he layes so great stress upon it, as to tell us, That so far forth as any man comes short of the true knowledge of this threefold Law, so far he comes short both of the true knowledge of God, and of himself. But, 1. One would think, that the Law of Faith (to speak properly) should be the Law of Christ; yet he distinguishes between the Law of Faith, and the Law of Christ. 2. The Apostle distinguisheth betwixt the Law of Works and of Faith, Rom. 3.27. but never betwixt the Law of Faith, and the Law of Christ. 3. I think the common distinction of a Covenant of works, and of Grace; or as others express it, The old original Law, and the new Remedying Law, much clearer, and to better purpose. 4. His opposing the Moral Law, as in the hand of God-Creator to the same Law as in the hand of Christ, and holding that believers are only bound by the Law, as delivered by Christ, is intollerable. It is granted, that we are not under the Law, only as delivered by the Creator, not under the Law of Nature, as meerly created, or as given at first to man in innocency, but he opposeth those as contra∣ries, which ought to be conjoyned. As if we could not be bound by the Law, both as it is the Law of
our Creator, and as it is the Law of our Redeemer; but are free from it in the former respect, if bound in the latter: This seems intollerable. For so it follows, 1. That Believers are not redeemed unto God by his blood (as Rev. 5.9.) but rather redeemed from him, not to owe that subjection to him, which they did before. 2. That through the redemption of Christ, they are advanced above the Condition of Creatures. For by the Law of Creation, as Creatures, they are bound to obey the Law of their Creator. But certainly Christians in being redeemed by Christ, do not cease to be creatures. I say you do not cease to be creatures, when you become Christians, nor does God lose the Right he had in you before, to require Obedience from you; but he hath now a further right in you. The old Obligation by your creation is not taken off, but still in force, when this new Obligation, by your Redemption is further added, and lay'd on you. 3. According to what this writer layes down, it is the priviledge of believers, not to have any after Sins pardoned, and remitted as to the guilt of ever∣lasting punishment; but only as to the prevention, or removal of some temporal chastisements. They are under no Law, but the Law of Christ; and Christ's Law threatens no other penalty than Fa∣therly chastisement. Pag. 154.19, 200. That [if need be] you shall be as sure of Temporal corre∣ction, as an Unbeliever of Eternal dam∣nation. And to be corrected if need be, is not so much a penalty, as a mercy. I am sure, the contra∣ry is sometimes threatned, as a sore Judgment, [Why should ye be smitten any more? I wi l not
punish your daughters when they commit Whoredome. Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone.] But how∣ever a believer must not conceit, p. 202. that till his Sin be pardoned, he is liable to be condemned for it. So the matter is brought to this Issue, that for the Sins which a man commits after he believes, he hath no need of pardon, nor can be (with under∣standing) pray for the pardon of his sins, not only in that more famous sence, that we use the word [pardon] in: But even in the lowest sence, wherein the word is ever used. He hath no need of pardon to free him from Condemnation, because no sin can make him liable to Condemnation. Again, he hath no need of pardon, to free him from Temporal chastisements; because it is not threatned, but when there is need for it; and when there is need for it, a sanctified cross hath more of mercy in it, than an unsanctified Comfort, where a person is not by any Law liable to any punishment, such a person (sure) has no need of pardon. But I should think that believers as they are crea∣tures, are bound to obey God in all things, and that Christ came not to take off the obligation to duty and obedience, but to take off the obligation to wrath and punishment. That their sins are properly sins, as against Gods Law, and deserve punishment, de∣serve hell in their own Nature, as well as the Sins of others. Only they have this relief by the new Covenaant, they shall not be condemned for them. Thus much of the third Propoposition, viz. Man being a reasonable Creature, he oweth Moral Obe∣dience to his Maker. Now it follows.
Sect. 4. PROP. IV. Therefore God rules and governs man after another manner, than inanimate things, and brutes, are governed. His Kingdom ruleth over all. Natural Agents are ruled by his power and providence. But man he ruleth also a moral Agent, by Precepts, Promises and Threatnings. ANd if the Lord had not designed in the Making of Man, thus to govern him, then might not one use the Psalmist expostulation (though in another sence) wherefore hast thou made all men in vain? wherefore hath he endowed us with a Faculty of discerning right and wrong, good and evil? And why hath he given us a capacity to look backwards to reflect on our wayes and actions, a power of setting up a Iudgment-seat, within our selves, to call our selves to account? And why hath he given us a capacity of looking forwards, to consider with our selves whether our present course tends, why hath God placed such a power as Conscience in men, Conscience, I say to check curb, and restrain us from Sin, to spur on and quicken us to duty, to accuse, or excuse, to Prophesie good or evil, to give Sentence for us or against us; and why hath God planted such affections in men, as Desire, Hope, Fear, all respecting some absent, remote, future good or evil! How is it, we can dread evil threatned, or have any hope of good promised, if it were not
the will of God, that we should be governed, not a Bruets, that are led on to things by a meer Natura instinct, without reason; but as rational Mora Agents, by such Moral means, as Laws, Promises Threatnings. And here again I cannot but enter my dissent, and declare my dislike of what that writer, with whom I had to do before, layes down so confidently, that a true believer is to obey; Marrow p. 209. yea, does obey, without fear of Hell, or hope of Heaven. And so far forth as they eschew evil, p. 172. 176, 177, 178. or do good, for fear of Hell, or hope of Heaven, their obedi∣ence is but slavish. Now I shall not say much here concerning the fear of punishment, because I shall have occasion to speak of that afterwards. And to prevent misunderstanding, I shall lay this down, That a true believer does not obey God meerly out of such self-respect, as for fear of punish∣ment, or hope of reward. No, he hath a true love to God, and a love to the Law of God. As the Apo∣stle saith, Rom. 7.22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. But as he hath a love to God, and obeyeth in love, so he hath, and ought to have a love to him∣self too. And although gracious Souls in some holy raptures, have the Love of God so far prevailing in them sometimes, that for the present they would seem quite to forget themselves, and to set aside all respect to their own Souls, as it was with holy Paul there, where (had it been possible) he could have wished himself accursed from Christ— Rom. 9. Yet it is not thus with them ordinarily, neither yet
may we say, that so far as Christians look, and aim at their own happiness, so far they degenerate and act like Slaves, not like themselves. All love of the reward is not a mercenary love: but when men only respect the reward. Now a Child of God hath a love to his work, as well as to his reward, Gods commands are not grievous to him; but indeed this is grievous to him, that he is no more conformed to Gods commands. And were it put to such an ones choice, he would not desire any liberty to transgress them, but would have more power to keep them. But what a gross mistake is this, be∣cause men are not only to obey for fear of punish∣ment, or only in hope of reward, to conclude thus, therefore they are not at all to regard either what God hath threatned, or promised. And if it were so, that men were not to obey with any respect to what God hath promised them. 1. How great a part of Scripture is given to us in vain, but all Scripture is profitable—to make the Man of God perfect, and to perfect the Godly man, that he may be thorowly furnished to every good work. Shall we think that God hath made so many promises in vain. That those great and precious promises in Scripture are but Cyphers, and stand for nothing? 2. Is it not horrible pride for men to think them∣selves more perfect than innocent Adam was, to conceit that they yield obedience unto God upon more pure and spiritual grounds and motives? This is evident, that the Law given to innocent Adam, was backed with a threatning, and a promise. And so it was his duty both to dread the threatning, and to have regard unto Gods promise.
3. I can boldly say, that to have no thoughts  our own everlasting happiness, not to look at tha is such a strange piece of self denial as the Lord  where allows; much less does he command, o commend. Is it not contrary to such Scriptures  these, Seek first the Kingdom of God, work out you own Salvation—Lay hold on eternal life? It is  carnal Self-love, and self-seeking, which is mens s and shame too. As what can be more absurd, an irrational, than for men to care for the body, b neglect their precious immortal Souls, to labou for the meat that perisheth, and not to be at any pain for that meat which indureth to everlasting life? T be wholly taken up with things present, things be low, that are but temporal, not regarding the thing above, which are eternal. 4. And if true Believers are supposed to be o such a strain, as to obey without eying the promise reward at all; then it follows they are better tha Moses, the man of God. For he had respect unt Recompence of the reward. Heb. 11.26. And ye you are to observe, he is their commended for so do¦ing. And this is made an expression, and effect o his Faith, v. 24, &c. Yea, this would seem to b an out-doing of the blessed Apostles. We run an strive to obtain a Crown incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25. we look at the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 8.14. . These are the marks we aim at. Yea which I even tremble to mention, this would mak Christians better than their Masters, would set th Servant above their Lord. Do we not read o Jesus Christ, that for the joy that was set before him he endured the Cross, Heb. 12.2.
5. How glorious a pretence soever men may have for their setting aside all respect to the promised re∣ward; yet it is really and indeed a sinful sleighting, and contempt of Gods Grace, Bounty, Goodness; so the Sadduces had their fair pretence, that God was to be loved for himself, which is a certain truth: but (mark it) this is not the whole truth. For God is also to be loved, served, for what he is, and would be to those that love him. We ought to love God, not only because he is infinitely worthy of love in himself (in regard of his own infinite ex∣cellencies, and perfections) but also because he is so loving, and gracious to, and such a bountiful rewar∣der of them that seek him, and love him. Where is the Mouth that dare deny, that God is even in this respect also to be loved, served, honoured of his creatures? 6. Though men will sometimes talk at randome, without weighing or considering what they say; yet the truth is, it is impossible that one right in his wits should not have a desire of his own everlasting happiness. And certainly it is very great rashness for any to make that a , a distinguishing sign of a true believer, which would rather prove one not a man, or reasonable. The Service which God requireth of us, is reasonable Service; but it is un∣reasonable, when God hath revealed and propoun∣ded to us inconceiveable, everlasting happiness, that we should not believe it; or that believing there is such happiness to be had, and obtained, we should not most earnest desire, and indefatigably pur∣sue and press after the attainment of it. And what can sound more strangely than this, that it is not a Christians duty, but rather his Infirmity by patient
continuance in well-doing to seek for Glory, Honour, Immortality, Eternal life? 7. What is the happiness of Heaven, but the most full and glorious enjoyment of God? That to obey in hopes of Heaven, is indeed to obey and serve God for himself. Are we to seek after the enjoyment of God in every Duty and Ordinance, as when we pray, hear, &c. Is his presence to be sought on earth, and not much more to be desired in Heaven? Much more I could say here, but I hope this may satisfie: All is not Gold (Sirs) that gli∣sters; nor all those Notions Gospel Doctrines, which many pretend to be so. What is here said, I hope may help (through Gods blessing) to deliver some poor doubting trembling Soul out of one great snare, that some, who mean well, yet being unwary lay before them. Certainly, I should tremble to think of making this the Touchstone to try my own, or your Faith, by, scil. [Doing what the Lord requires, without any hope of Heaven, or eying of the promised reward.] You may follow vertue (holiness) & virtutis amore, & mercedis amore, both from a love to vertue it self, and to the reward of vertue, so much I think is implyed in Rom. 6.22. Ye have your fruit unto holi∣ness, and the end everlasting life. And to follow after holiness, as that without which we cannot come to the enjoyment of God, and happiness, is to attend to the Scripture direction, Heb. 12.14. and therefore cannot but be safe. If holiness be the way to happiness, by Gods appointment, and hap∣piness the end of holiness; then certainly we ought to follow after holiness, not only for its own sake;
but also for the tendency it hath to true and ever∣lasting happiness. And though there be a truth in it, that vertue and goodness is a reward of it self, and to be loved for it self; yet it is not true, that where this is, a man desires no other reward, looks no further, Heb. 10.35. Cast not away your confi∣dence, which hath great recompence of reward. This Consideration should move us to continue in faith and holiness, that there is great recompence of re∣ward; That to quicken and encourage our selves, on in a way of holiness and obedience, by the thoughts of what the Lord hath graciously promised there∣unto, this is (you may clearly see) according to the Scripture; and the other way, wherein men pre∣end to do all out of pure love to God, without any egard to their own happiness, is a being religious nd holy above the Scriptures. But certainly they overshoot themselves, that pretend to an higher way, a more spiritual and excellent way, than that which is shown us in the Scriptures.
Sect. 5. PROP. V. It is evident and undeniable, that sundry  Gods Laws (comprised in that which  called the Law of Nature) are of Mora perpetual right, and equity, commandin what cannot but be mans duty, requirin such things, as have an unchangeable good∣ness and comliness in them. Forbiddin such things as have an unchangeable horri∣ness and odiousness in them. Some thing are good, and some things are evil in thei own Nature, and therefore are so perpetu∣ally, invariably, necessarily; that it is im∣possible that a righteous and holy God shoul not command the one, and prohibit, an condemn the other: Such precepts (as som well observe) depend on Gods righteou Nature, rather than on his Soveraign Wil THerefore upon the Question, whether God a any time hath dispensed with the Law o Nature, or with any purely Moral precept, I shoul incline to those that say (notwithstanding those In∣stances that are brought seemingly contrary) Th Law of Nature was not dispensed with, no chang in the Law; only their was a change in the matt or Object, and that immutatio materiae made b
God not as Legislator, but as Dominus, as Proprie∣tor, or Owner. That when God commanded Abra∣ham to Sacrifice his Son, he might do it from the absolute Dominion he hath over all mens lives; and if Abraham had Sacrificed him upon God's com∣mand, it had not been Murder. but the highest Act of Obedience. The Israelites taking away the Ae∣gyptians Gods; when God had altered the property of them, (as Lord and Judge proceeding against the Aegyptians in justice, as against Delinquents that had forfeited the same, and making over (by his free donation) the right and title to them to his peo∣ple; I say the Israelites possessing themselves of what was no longer the Aegyptians, but indeed their own, by Gods disposition and free gift) this cannot be accounted Theft. And may it not be thought, that according to an Equitable construction of the Law: Such Instances, or Cases as these, were no more prohibited, than works of Piety, Mercy, and Necessity are forbidden (in the Law) on the Sabbath ay (compare Exod. 20.10. with Matth. 12.5.7.) Thus the Matter, or Object, about which the Law was conversant, may be changed, when yet he Law it self, is not changed, but as obliging as ver. Again, some commands there are in the Morall Law, the very matter whereof is unalterable (the foundation never ceasing or changing) as some In∣ance in the Three first Commandments of the De∣alogue. Thus it is Man's duty for ever to fear, love, elieve, serve, honour God. Thus it cannot but e horrid wickedness, for any one to blaspheme, or ontemn God; to doubt of his truth, power, &c. ow this is of Immutable Equity, that what is Mo∣rally
good, and cannot be otherwise, should be com∣manded, and the reasonable creature bound to it that what is morally evil, and cannot but be evil should be forbidden. And to affirm that God may cease to command, or approve of what is so intrin∣secally, necessarily, everlastingly evil, is to set u his absolute Soveraignty in such wise, as to just out his infinite goodness, purity, and holiness; tha is, to set his glorious Attributes at variance on with another. But certainly the Judges, and Re∣ctor of all the world can do, and command nothing but that which is right. Plutarch had rather me should have said, Nullum esse Plutarchum, qua malum esse Plutarchum; That there was no suc man as Plutarch, than that Plutarch was a wicke man; and so he held it worse, De Deo male sentir quam Deum esse negare, to entertain any wicke opinion of God, than to deny God. This is (n doubt) a very monstrous conception of him, to ima∣gine that he should not will, and command vertu and holiness; or that he should not utterly disallow of vice and wickedness. 'Tis part of the Charg brought in against the wicked, Psal. 20.21. Tho thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as th self: But (sayes the holy one) I will reprove rhe for it, Well therefore let this be laid down, as a everlasting truth, that there are some things whic God can no more deny to be Man's duty, than h can deny himself. There are some precepts of u∣alterable force, and obligation, never to be repeale abrogated, or dispensed with. The Lord can n more dispense with mens acknowledging, loving reverenceing Him, that these should not be the duty, and the contrary sinful and damnable in the
own Nature, than he can deny his own Divine good∣ness, and infinite perfection; so he can no more ap∣prove of what is evil in it self, than he can do evil, or be evil; he can no more approve of mens lying and deceit, than he can lye, or deceive men Him∣self. He can no more approve of Atheism, Pro∣phaneness, Hypocrisie, Pride, Envy, Malice, Co∣vetousness, and the like; than he can change, or cease to be what he is, an holy God of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. Sect. 6. PROP. VI. To the unchangeable Law of Nature, God (our Soveraign Lord) may add what Posi∣tive Laws his Divine Wisdome judgeth meet, whereby to try his Creatures Obe∣dience. And there is no positive precept of His, given to Man, but Man is imme∣diately bound to obey it; even by the Law of Nature, which requires this in general, that we obey God in all things. THe Law of Nature (as we have heard) in spe∣cial enjoyns what is good, or forbids what evil in their own Natures. Positive Laws are conversant about things neither ood, nor evil in themselves, things of a middle ature; which yet become Good when commanded  God, and evil when forbidden. Because it is od to obey God in all things; but very evil and
sinful to disobey God in any thing. The goodness o God would never command any thing evil in it self. And what the Lord commandeth though indifferen before, yet being commanded (in regard of hi Soveraign Authority and Dominion) it becomes a necessary duty. As what he forbiddeth, though lawful enough before; yet being under a Divin prohibition, it becomes sinful. Of such purely posi¦tive precepts we find this one given to Man in th state of Innocency for the tryal of his Obedience Scil. this [of not eating of the tree of Knowledge o Good and Evil,] whether any more are to be found that were purely positive, and given to Man in tha state, I know not. And amongst all those Commands which ou Lord Jesus Christ hath laid on his followers in th Gospel; some Inquisitive men have been able t discover no more than two (to wit, concerning Bap∣tism and the Lords Supper) that are meerly positiv institutions. And these two appointed not only t try our Obedience; but for other high ends, an gracious purposes, to be Seals of the new and bette Covenant, and special helps and furtherances unt Christians (through Gods blessing upon the due u of them) as means of promoting both their Grac and Comfort, and a strong engagement on them t Duty and Obedience. So that they are not mee Arbitrary impositions, shewing only the will and Au¦thority of him that appointed them, but also pledg of his Grace and favour towards us; and are ou great priviledges: As the promise in the New C¦venant speaks forth the wonderful Grace of God,  doth his instituting and annexing these Seals,  strengthen our faith in what he hath there promised.
As for the Law of the Sabbath, there hath been enough written, to prove, that it is not a purely positive precept. When God hath given us all our time, to Question, whether a considerable part of it be not due to his special solemn Worship, and Ser∣vice, seems very unreasonable. Nay, it would seem to be but Occasional, viz. in regard of man's present state in this world, the necessities of the outward man, that call him to earthly employ∣ments, that he hath an allowance to follow these ecular employments, when if it were not for this, his whole time would be due to God's more imme∣diate Service; as the Saints in Heaven keep a perpe∣tual, everlasting Sabbath. Now what is noted here, may shew us the won∣derful goodness of God towards us in Gospel times, in freeing us from the Law of Ceremonies, from such a multitude of burdensome impositions as the Jews were under. How easie is the yoke of Christ, compared with the yoke which was upon the necks of the Jews? So we may see here the reasonableness of the Christian-Religion. The Lord requires no∣thing of us in the Gospel, but what is indeed good in t self, or at least good for us; imposeth nothing on us in the Gospel, meerly to shew his absolute Authority over us: Even the Positive Institutions of the Gospel are such as speak his gracious conde∣cension towards us. Again by the way, we may here reflect upon the Tyranicalness of the man of Sin. What a multitude of strange impositions hath he brought into the Chri∣tian Church, as envying Souls that liberty we have nder the Gospel.
Sect. 7. PROP. VII. God our supreme and absolute Lord and Go∣vernour, to manifest his Divine Good∣ness and benignity, together with his Sove∣raign Authority and Greatness, was please to his Law, given to Man at first, to ad and annex a gracious promise of Future lif and happiness. HEre (Gen. 2.17.) is implyed upon condition of his obedience, the promise of eterna life, whereof the Tree of life was a sign, Gen. 3.22. Ainsworth. To encourage men to yield free Obedience, Go bound himself by his free promise to reward it. Here take notice of Gods gracious Nature. H would not rule man with rigour, but made the yok of his Subjection as easie as man could possibly ex∣pect, or reasonably desire. Besides the strong En∣gagements that lye on the Creature to obey God the Lord was pleased to give man all encouragemen that might be. There is a Question, what life was promise unto Adam? Whether to live still in statuquo, to be continue upon earth in that happy state, wherein he wa created, or whether after some time he should no have been advanced, and translated to a more glo∣rious estate in Heaven?
Now some very worthy and Judicious Divines (I confess) are for the former, denying the latter. And others I know look upon the Decision of the Question (which way soever it be decided) as an unprofitable speculation; but I cannot so slight it, because if it appears to be an Heavenly happiness, that was promised, it further sets off the Grace of God towards man, which must needs have laid him under a greater obligation to obedience, and thank∣fulness; so it doth the more set forth and aggravate man's sin and ingratitude, whom such cords did not, could not bind. Besides that it may be of some ser∣vice against Socinians, who would have Adam sub∣ject to death by Creation, not by Sin. Now to the Question. 1. Those Divines that hold a life of happiness up∣on earth, only promised unto Adam, do grant the promise of life to be implyed in the threatning of death: Now if the threatning [dying thou shalt dye] did not only intend a privation of the life which Adam then enjoyed, but everlasting punishment in hell; Then it seems to follow, that the life here im∣plicitely promised is not to be understood only of the continuation of that life, which Adam lived in Paradice, but of everlasting life in Heaven. 2. That eternal life which the Scripture opposeth unto death (the wages of sin) Rom. 6.23. there is none that questioneth, but it is a life of happiness in Heaven. 3. Was not the Earthly Paradice a type of Hea∣ven, and the tree of life there, a type of Eternal life in Heaven (Rev. 2.7.) Had Adam the type of Hea∣ven, and was it not to teach him what to expect, to look after a life of happiness in Heaven? unless you
will say, Those were Types only since they were lost, not while they were, and might have bee enjoyed. 4. Was not innocent Adam as capable of Heaven happiness, as believers are now? And would it not be strange, that though he had kept his Integrity and innocency, yet he should never have enjoyed the chiefest Happiness and perfection, he was made for, was created capable of. 5. If Adam had continued innocent and obedient, may we not suppose, he should have had as many Children descending from him, as have sprung from him since the fall, who might have stood and been happy with him: Now whether seemeth more im∣probable, to suppose a translation of men up to Heaven (Successivè, & suo ordine) by degrees and in their order, as it should please God to tran∣slate them; or to suppose their continuance all toge∣ther upon earth, where if we should suppose all the Generations of men that have been since Adam al∣ready existent here together; Answ to Bi∣shop of Ro∣chest. Let∣ter. p. 86, 87. it is hard to conceive how the Earth should bear them all, though Dr. J. T. would hence conclude that Dissolution of Soul and Body should have been, if Adam had not sinned, which I can see no Reason to admit. Yet (as he says) the world would have been too litle to have enter∣tained those myriads of men, which must in all reason have been born from that blessing of [In∣crease and Multiply] which was given at the first Creation, and to have confined Mankind to the pleasures of this world in case he had not fallen, would have been a punishment of his innocency.
Another Question here, whether it was of Grace, or of Justice, for God to promise Adam life, and happiness (as he did) upon his continued Obe∣dience? Answ. Of strict Justice it could not be; because he might have promised less, yea, might have pro∣mised nothing at all de futuro, without any Injustice.  readily grant it inconsistent with Justice to punish, or afflict an innocent Creature eternally. Yet Ju∣stice does not require that the service, or obedience of a Creature be rewarded with everlasting, that is, infinite happiness. True it is, if Adam had tarried as he ought, doing well, he should have been ac∣cepted, continuing his Obedience, he might have expected the complacential Love of God his Creator towards him, so long as the Lord was pleased to continue him in being; that while he was innocent, God would look on him as such, not hold him guilty. but it sounds strangely to say, God cannot make a rational innocent Creature, and annihilate, or un∣make it again, if he pleaseth. To hold that he is bound to perpetuate the being and happiness of such a Creature, till (by some misdemeanour) it comes to forfeit its being and happiness; is to deny that God hath such power over his Creatures, as the Potter hath over the Clay, as Mr. Ball of the Covenant, p. 273. withdraw that voluntary Cove∣nant, and who doubteth not but that had the Crea∣ture kept his Innocency a Thousand years, God was free to have annihilated him. Indeed God cannot be injurious to his Creatures, because of his Essential Justice, which is instead of a Law to him, and is himself, neither can he be be∣holden or properly indebted to his Creature; because
of that infinite plenitude of perfection in himself,  which all the Creatures in the world, can make  Addition; as also because of his right and propri in his Dominion and Authority over his Creature Thus Innocent Adam could never by the most pe∣fect, unsinning Obedience have merited in a stri∣sence; that is, in the way of commutative Justic the continuation of his life and happiness. Whi he did only pay the debt, which was indispensib owing to his Maker, it is most unreasonable  think, he could this way oblige God to him, mak that God to whom all was due, his Debto Again, as (if Adam would merit) what he gave  God ought to have rationem indebiti, it must not  due before (which was otherwise, he could give  God no more than his own) so it should also ha rationem Lucri, be some way profitable unto him at whose hands he would merit. But who ha given to him, and it shall be recompenced to hi again, Rom. 11.35. Again, we may cast in this as Overplus, here wa no proportion betwixt the work and the promise reward, what proportion betwixt a finite Crea∣ture's giving up its self to the Service of its Make and God's giving back himself to be everlastingl enjoyed? What proportion betwixt a Creature obedience, continued for a time, while he was in  probation-state, and God's remunerating it wit happiness, Coccei de faed. p. 35. beyond time, even to Eter∣nity. Turpis Error est, promissiones de∣nisi proportione officii. It was congruou to the Divine goodness indeed to promise so muc to an innocent, and obedient Creature, it was  promise worthy of him that made it, though his Crea∣tures
Obedience could not be properly worthy of that which was promised. So I conclude it was not of strict Justice, or natu∣rall Equity, but of grace and bounty, that God promised to Man's finite Service, and Obedience already due, a future, everlasting, infinite re∣ward. Now if innocent Adam could not properly be said to merit the promised reward, though he had performed unsinning obedience, how absurd is it to talk of the Saints meriting ex condigno by their imperfect Obedience, Exod. 20.6. Shewing mercy to them that love me, and keep my Commandments. All that God doth for such, is of his mercy. Yet I do not deny, but that if Adam had obeyed per∣fectly, it had been rewardable at the Bar of Gods distributive, legal Justice; as the obedience of the Faithful is rewardable at the Bar of Grace; but nei∣ther in the way of commutative Justice. Sect. 8. PROP. VIII. Gods promising to man life and happiness, upon Condition of perfect Obedience [Do this and live] was his part of the Covenant with Adam. GOd in his Covenant holds forth the way how his Creatures might be sure of his favour, and attain to the Fruition of him. And thus God's Covenants are not like Mens Covenants (as one
notes) Homines enim de mutuis beneficiis: Deus  suis foedus facit. Men that Covenant one with ano∣ther, aim each at their own advantage; but God  Covenanting with his Creatures, does not expe any benefit, or advantage by them, but does it t shew how willing, and ready he is to communicat his benefits to them. Sect. 9. PROP. IX. Innocent Adam as he was bound, so he could not but accept of the Terms, or Condition, upon which God proposed, and promised th perpetuating of his happiness. And thus Man consenting to Gods terms, God and Man were formally and actually in Cove∣nant. A Mutual Engagement of parties, is all that is essential to a Covenant. This is the diffe∣rence betwixt a Promise, and a Covenant. A Promise is that which bindeth one party singly; A Covenant is that wherein both parties are mutually bound. To the Covenant betwixt God and Man, it was no way necessary, that Man should indent with God, or make his own Terms; No, he was bound to accept of such Terms as it should please his Lord and Maker to set down, and offer; whatsoever God required of him, would bind him immediately, as a Law, without his consent, or liking of it. And
before Man could have the liberty of making his own Terms with God, he must first satisfie and take off that Obligation on him, as a Creature to obey his Creator in all things, which Obligation a Crea∣ture can no way possibly take off, or be freed from, while he is a Creature. Thus in the Covenant betwixt God and Man, God is to propose the Terms, and Man is obliged to accept of them, as proposed by Him. In the first Covenant, the Covenant of Works, where the Condition was perfect Obedience; the Lord required no more, than what was due from Man, though God had not promised any further fa∣vour thereupon. Now the condescension being wholly on Gods part, in offering to enter into Covenant, and the benefit accrueing, or likely to accrew, being solely unto Man, it could not be just or reasonable, that Man should withhold or deny his consent. Thus Man at first was taken into Covenant with God, Faederatio con∣stat stipulatione & promissione. Man engaging to obey God in all things; and God engaging am∣ply to reward his Obedience, in an endless life, and felicity. We should not once doubt (as the Socinians) whether Adam was under any Law but this, [of not eating of the tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,] The Moral Law being written in his heart, and that in so fair a Character, that he needed not to have delivered it to him either by word, or in writing.
Sect. 10. PROP. X. Though the agreement and consent of both th parties was enough to constitute the Cove∣nant; yet for the further solemnity an ratification of it, the Lord was pleased t appoint a visible sign or signs, as a seal an∣nexed to it. AS Paradice and the tree of life, was to confirm the promise, that if Man obeyed, he should live and be happy; and some would have the tre of Knowledge to confirm the threatning, that if he sinned he should dye. The former to signifie the reward of Obedience, the latter to signifie the punish∣ment of disobedience. The one a Sacrament of life, the other of death. But this which is said concer∣ning the tree of Knowledge is more Questionable. Fuit Arbor haec non proprie Sacramen∣tum, Coccei de Foed. c. 2. Sect. 19. p. 20. neque vitae neque mortis, sed signum dominii & subjectionis, & materia ex∣plorationis. The Signs and Sacraments, God hath used to an∣nex unto his Covenant, have been such as repre∣sented the blessings promised in the Covenant. This is evident in the Covenant of Grace. And that Pradice was to signifie Heaven; the tree of life to signifie eternal life to Adam, seemeth very plain; Heaven being called by the name of Paradice in Scripture. And the tree of life so called (as some
good Expositors have noted) because it was to be a ymbole and Memorial to Adam as oft as he tasted, or eheld it, of his receiving his life and happiness rom God, that he had not these in: and of himself. His eating of this tree was to be an Acknowledge∣ment of his dependance upon God for life and hap∣iness, and, Se non propriâ virtute, sed Dei unius eneficio, vivere, & perpetuò victurum, si obe∣iret, &c. Here by the way, observe, God thought not acraments useless to man in innocency. Yet some mongst us think themselves above Sacraments, and Ordinances, those means and helps God hath ap∣pointed under the Covenant of Grace. Sect. 11. PROP. XI. Being agreed about the thing, there can be no great Reason why we should contend much about the Name. THis first Covenant is called Foedus Amicitiae, a league of Friendship, by way of contra∣istinction to the new Covenant, which is Foedus econciliationis inter inimicos; The first Covenant was made with Man in the state of Innocency, when God and Man were Good-friends. Again, it is called Foedus operum, the Covenant of works, sinless works, and obedience-every-way-perfect, being the Condition, the thing stipulated, and required in this Covenant.
Again, it is called Foedus Naturae, the Coven of Nature; as the following Covenant, Foedus G∣tiae, the Covenant of Grace. Yet there seems be some doubt, whether it be so rightly called  Covenant of Nature: Though the Law of Nat bound man to obey his Creator in all things, whi was the same that the Covenant of works bou him to, that we must say the preceptive part of t Covenant was natural; yet I dare not say, that t Promissory part of the Covenant was so, that G was bound to promise all he did upon Man's Ob∣dience, or bound to promise any thing at all; say, it was not juris Naturalis, that God shou make such a promise, I dare not say, that there w an intrinsecal, natural, necessary connexion betwi a Creature's Obedience, and everlasting life a happiness; so that God had not been just, if (su∣posing) Adam's Obedience continued a 1000 year he had not thereupon confirmed his Creature in state of endless happiness. If it had been injusti to have denyed such a reward to Man's Obedien so that Man might have concluded upon it from  common natural principle (as that God cann be unjust) then there was no need to have pr∣mised it, or to have entered into Covenant about it would God have made a Covenant to do that, which his Essential justice bound him to? If he was no bound in Justice, so to reward his Creature's Obe∣dience, then it was his free goodness (or Grace) t promise, and Covenant to do it. Now let it be considered, if it was thus of God Grace, and condescension to enter into the first Co∣venant with Man, if it was doing more than he was bound to, then I say, let it be considered, whe∣ther
it be fair for any to censure him, as if he had een over-rigorous, had he dealt with any according o the terms of that Covenant, or that God could ot have held men to it. Sect. 12. PROP. XII. God by Covenanting with Man, had a further right in him, a new title to his Service, and Obedience. First, he might have com∣manded man jure creationis, as he was his Creature, had this Covenant never been; Again, he may command him jure foederis, vel foederationis, upon Account of the Covenant betwixt him, and his Crea∣ture. THis new right was accumulative unto, not de∣structive, or exclusive of the Former right. Man's being obliged de novo to obey God, by what he Lord promised in the Covenant to do further for im; cannot take off, or cancel that Obligation on im from his Creation, from what God had done or him already. That I may say here (without contradicting the Apostle) The Law (i. e. the Law of Nature) which was in force (at least, in order of Nature) before he Covenant, the Covenant did not disanull it. My meaning is, Gods condescension in Covenanting with Man, did not derogate, or take off any thing
from his Authority as Law-giver, Gods Law  still binding as a Law, as the Law of our Maker otherwise it would follow, that Man being take  into Covenant with God, he could not properly  guilty of disobedience, no disobedience but is repugnancy against the Law, or will of a Superio whom we ought to obey. But in case the Law o God should lose its Authority and obliging force,  Man in Covenant with God, then a Man doing co∣trary to his Law, could only be charged with tre∣chery, falseness, breach of Covenant, or ingratit  (as one equal may have occasion sometimes to charg another, who hath no Authority to command, or ca the other to account.) Where there is no Law, the is no Transgression. But Adam's offence, his breach of Covenant, w properly disobedience, Rom. 5.19. That the Cov∣nant made with Adam, did not take from the for of the Law, which he was under, as a Creature; b indeed added this further aggravation to his sin, th it was not barely the transgression of Gods Law, b the violation of his Covenant: as it was an affron∣ing of Gods Soveraignty and justice, (a dreadf thing indeed) so it was a notorious flighting of God wonderful condescending love and goodness, shamef ingratitude, to be abhorred. But this is a principle which it concerns us all  be very clear in, that God in entring into Covena with Man, did not set aside his Authority, did no cease to be man's Soveraign; no verily, while M is his Creature, God cannot cease to be his rightf Governour, or the Law of God cease to bind M to obedience, even because it is the Law of  Maker.
Sect. 13. PROP. XIII. As a clear and certain evidence, that God in Covenanting with man, did not lay down his Soveraignty and Authority over him; He annexeth to his Law or Covenant the just threatning of a dreadful penalty, Death in case of disobedience. In the day thou eatest, (sinnest) dying thou shalt dye. AS God hath first of all jus praecipiendi, a right of Commanding. So if his Commandments are not in every thing obeyed; he hath thereupon jus puniendi, a right of punishing. Where due Obe∣dience is denyed to a Superior, much more where it is denyed unto him, who is the Supream, God over all, punishment is justly exacted, and righteously inflicted by him. Now there is a Question, when God threatned death to Adam, if he disobeyed, what kind of death it was, whether the same kind of death was threatned under the Covenant of works, as under the Cove∣nant of Grace? Ans. I suppose the same kind of death threatned under both Covenants. If the same kind of life and happiness was promised under the Covenant of Works, as is promised under the Covenant of Grace, we may in reason conclude the same kind of death, and punishment was threatned in both
Covenants. But the former would seem true as w heard before. Again, what think we? Do any suffer, as a judged to death by the Covenant of Works? If w suppose any sinners in the world proceeded against and punished, as Violaters of that Covenant, w read no where in Scripture of two different Hel prepared, one for those that are guilty of breaking the first; the other, for such as are guilty of break∣ing the succeeding Covenant. We find the sam Vengeance threatned to them that know not God and to them that obey not the Gospel, 2 Thess. 1. The Sinners of Sodome suffer the Vengeance of Ete∣nal fire, Jude v. 7. the same vengeance which  threatned to Sinners in Sion. I say the same punish∣ment for kind (i. e. Hell-Torments) though not th same degree of punishment; but if a different d∣gree of punishment should make a new kind of p∣nishment, it seemeth to follow, that, since of tho that sin against the Covenant of Grace, some  more hainously than others, more openly and desp∣rately than others contemn it, and therefore shall  thought worthy of much sorer punishment (He 10.29.) so there should be divers kinds of punish∣ments; for the breakers of the Covenant of Grace which I know none that will assert. Again, I suppose it will not be denyed, but beli∣vers are delivered by Christ's satisfaction from th condemnation of hell. As I suppose, it will not b affirmed; that Christ satisfyed for the penalty threa∣ned in the Covenant of Grace, properly as the threatned; but for that which was threatned an due to sinners under the Covenant of works. An so will it not follow, that the condemnation of He
was threatned, and due to sinners under the Cove∣nant of works. Only, one thing seemeth to make against this, viz. Supposing a temporal death or separation of Soul and Body, to be one thing included in the threatning here, [dying thou shalt dye] it would seem that the resurrection of the body is a proper fruit of Christ's death, and resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. And if there was to have been no resurrection of the body, had not Christ dyed and risen again, then it would follow, no such punishment could be threatned at first, as is now threatned to unbelievers, who are to be punished everlastingly both in Body and Soul. Ans. The fore-mentioned Text seems to speak of the resurrection unto life, the resurrection of those that are Christs, v. 23. Again, though Christ Mediator, be the cause of the resurrection of all (both just, and unjust) at the last day; yet it follows not, that there had been no resurrection, if Christ had not been given a Me∣diator; we know what he saith, Joh. 5.22.27. All udgment is now committed to the Son of Man, yet surely sinners should have been judged, though he had not been incarnate, had not been the Son of Man. Qui resurrectionem impiorum Christi merito attribuunt, ignorant hominem pro peccato & tempo∣ralem, & aeternam mortem in toto supposito perferen∣dam debere, Coccei de Foed. c. 2. Sect. 2. p. 46. Another Question, whether the truly righteous man is awed with the threatning. Ans. That the righteous ought to be awed with divine threatnings is very plain from hence, that righteous Adam was to make use of this threatning,
to keep him from sin. And the best of Saints whil upon earth, are short of innocent Adam, many de∣grees below him, being renewed and sanctified b in part, having but (as it were) a first draugh of Gods Image, which Adam had compleat; But, 1. Some will say, Believers have no need of th threatnings to keep them from sin. Ans. What are they greater than our Father Adam, more perfect than Adam was in the state  integrity. He had need of the threatning, and hi not attending to it so as he should have done, was cause of his, and our sin and ruine. Again, why are there so many threatnings in th Word, directed to believers in special, if they a not to be heeded, and if such have no need of them surely, the spirit of wisdom speaketh not in vai Therefore said the Wisdom of God, Luk. 11.4 what the written word sayes, that the wisdom of Go sayes; so God in his infinite wisdom, thought needful to awe his people with threatnings, an not only to feed them with promises. Then can be any other than folly for any to think, his threa∣nings needless, Rom. 8.13. If you live after the fle you shall dye. This is spoken to those, of whom h saith v. 15. Ye have not received the spirit of bonda again to fear, Heb. 10.38. The just shall live  Faith, , but if he draw back,  soul shall have no pleasure in him. Parallel to Ez. 18.2 Heb. 10.26, 27. If we sin wilfully after that  have received the Knowledge of the truth, &c. Not that these Texts will prove the Apostacy  Saints; but only that upon supposition of their t∣tal final Apostacy, they should perish even as other If you can suppose a Saint to fall away finally, I
suppose that Saint to fall into condemnation, and to perish everlastingly; and such threatnings are to caution them, as means appointed and blessed by God, to prevent their total Apostacy, and conse∣quently to prevent their Perdition too. And as one observes well, there is a threatning virtually con∣tained in every promise. As when it is said [Who∣soever endureth to the end shall be saved.] It implyeth that whosoever doth not endure, and hold out to the end, shall not be saved. But further some will say, Adam it's true might fall from the Condition of the Covenant of works, and so fall under the curse and threatning, but believers cannot fall from the con∣dition of the Covenant of Grace, that they need not fear the threatning, seeing they cannot fall un∣der it. Ans. That a Believers standing is surer than A∣dam's was, it is not because he is stronger in him∣self, for he is much weaker than Adam was; but because he hath those props and supports, which Adam had not in the state of his integrity. There is Gods immutable purpose and promise to uphold him, Christs undertaking, and interceeding for him, &c. But as the Lord hath promised, the Elect shall persevere; so he hath provided means in order to it, (as was hinted before;) so he keepeth his peo∣ple close to himself, not only by working love, but also by putting an holy fear in their hearts, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. This may be set forth by a comparison which Mr. Rutherford hath, thus, As a Child in his Fathers Arms threatned to be cast over a sharp rock into the Sea, may fear, and cry out for fear, and yet believe such is his Fathers
love and compassion, that he will not throw hi into the Sea, that the threatning is not intended t be executed; but to cause him to take faster hold and clasp his Arms about his Father's Neck. 2. But here some again will say, to be awed with threatning, is slavish; this is from a Spirit of Bondage and contrary to our acting out of love. Ans. We may see the contrary in Adam; H was to fear the threatning, yet was not of a slavis spirit, notwithstanding the threatning against dis obedience, yet he obey'd in love too, while in th state of Integrity. So the Apostle sayes, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constraineth us, and in the sam Chapter v. 11. Knowing therefore the terror of th Lord, we perswade men. To Act only from fear, i the property of a slavish spirit indeed; but so o the other hand, to cast off all fear is the property o a vain, secure, and wanton spirit. But observe, we do not think it enough for men to act in Religion only from fear; you never hear us say (as the Pa∣pists) that Attrition, as distinct and separate from contrition; that sorrow for sin meerly for fear of hell, without any sorrow for it, as an offence against God, (if accompanied with confession to a Priest) is enough for ones Salvation. If that Text of the Apostle John 1 Epist. 4.18. be objected. Ans. Love here is not perfect, as it will be in the world to come. 2. By Fear (which love is said to cast out) the Apostle meaneth not a reverential fear of God, which quickeneth unto duty, and helpeth to com∣pose the heart aright in duty; but a slavish fear. Or,
3. He meaneth not the Fear of God, and of his wrath or displeasure, but the fear of man, of man's frowns, of man's rage. Indeed this hath torment in it; and greatly disquieteth, and disanimateth men, in whom it prevaileth. Briefly to dispatch this point, are we allowed to ear any thing? If any thing in the world be to be eared, surely then Gods wrath is to be feared, oming into the state of the damned, to be for ever eprived of, shut out of God's presence, and laid nder his burning Indignation for ever, is a thing  be feared: not that believers should conclude posi∣ively, and absolutely of their falling into condem∣ation (for there is no condemnation to them that are n Christ Jesus) but upon supposition; thus, If I ve after the flesh, I shall dye. If I should draw back rom Christ, it would be to my own perdition. If I hould wickedly depart from God, forsake him, he would cast me off for ever. Pray Sirs think of it: Hath not God told us so much in his Word, and are we not bound to believe the truth of what he there eclares? And if we are bound to believe these hings to be true, are we not exceedingly to dread east they should be verified in us; how should we read that course and state which we are sure to erish in, unless the Word of God prove false! And thus to apply the threatnings of the Word, is a good way to prevent the evil threatned. Such an Application of Divine threatnings tends to pro∣mote an holy care, which is a necessary duty, rather than to beget slavish fear, that Soul-misery. They that quite cast off these reins, which the Lord hath laid on us, to curb, and keep under our Corruptions, I should ook for no other than that they would soon wax wanton, and kick against God.
One consideration more, I cannot pass by;  vine threatnings shew us what Sin deserves,  the greater sense we have of our danger by  the more we shall prize redemption by Christ. T more we understand the desert of sin, the more  shall come to know our Obligation unto God,  pardoning grace. They are clearly mistaken the∣fore, that would not have believers hear the thre∣nings of the Word. Surely they do not understa themselves, that think this is a way to damp th Child-like love, the Gospel requires, rather a d consideration of Gods threatnings against Sin a Sinners, would help to raise a believers love God, and Jesus Christ, and blow it into a great flame, Mary loved much, because she had m forgiven. And the more we see what sin deserv the better we shall know what it is to have forgiven, and the more we shall apprehend, w an Obligation lyeth on us, to love God t pardoneth our iniquities, and to love Je Christ, a dear Redeemer, upon whose acco they are forgiven.
Sect. 14. PROP. XIV. From the fore-going Proposition (to look no further) it evidently appears, the Cove∣nant betwixt God and Man was not inter pares, sed impares, not betwixt equals, or persons equally un-engaged to each other, and so that it was not a pure Covenant, but mixed, partaking also of the Nature of a Law. HEre was a Law with a threatning, as a Cove∣nant with a promise. And the matter being betwixt God and his Creature, betwixt the most absolute Soveraign, and his Subject, it could not be otherwise, unless the Majesty of Heaven and Earth would have laid aside his Crown and Scep∣ter, except he had given away his Supremacy, and ceased to be the Rector of the world.
Sect. 15. PROP. XV. This Covenant therefore which God made with Man at first, was the perfect, Adaequate Rule, both of all which God then required of Man, and of what Man might expect from God. It contained the Rule of Man's Obedience, and the ground of his hopes. THe Stipulation or condition required, was no less than the whole duty of Man, obedience to the will of God in all things. The promise of life (belonging to this Covenant) included in it all good, agreeable to Man's present state, and everlasting happiness, at the end of Man's probation-state. The death threatned upon Man's disobedience, we see explained in part, what it was in those evils, which sin hath brought upon the world of Mankind, manifold miseries, in this life we feel; we all naturally fear, and look for temporal death, (The living know that they shall dye.) And which is inconceivably more, sin subjected to all miserie Spiritual, and Eternal. Thus the first Covenant determined both of Man's duty, and of his Condition, as to felicity, or misery, as to life or death, according as he performed, on failed in his duty. If he was Obedient in all things, then he was sure of life and happiness, if he failed in any the least point of Obedience required, then he
could look for nothing, but to have the threatned penalty inflicted. Some find, as soon as Adam had sinned, he was afraid, and hid himself, Gen. 3.20. But whether the threatning of the first Covenant did properly belong to it, as a Covenant, or a Law, I leave to others to determine. Sect. 16. PROP. XVI. In this first Covenant there was neither need of, nor place for a Mediator. FIrst I say, there was no need of a Mediator here, at the making of this Covenant, God and Man were very good friends. Again, there was no place for a Mediator here. The condition required in this Covenant being per∣fect, personal obedience. If Adam obeyed not in his own person, this Covenant is broken, irreparably broken. And thus it becomes impossible that ever Man should attain to life and happiness by this Cove∣nant, if once he faileth in the least point of duty re∣quired of him, upon the least breach of Gods Law, he is immediately sentenced to death by the Tenor of this Covenant. And there is no thought of esca∣ping condemnation in this case, except it please the Lord (of his infinite grace and mercy) to come upon new terms with Man. There is a Question whether Christ be not a Me∣diator on the behalf of the Angels that have kept their station.
Some suppose Christ a Mediator to them, thoug not for reconciliation (that they acknowledge were needless, because there was never any breach be∣twixt God and them.) Yet for confirmation; bu there is no probability, that I can see in that opinion▪ It appears altogether improbable for the like reason to that now mentioned, upon which it will b granted, Christ is not to them a Mediator of recon∣ciliation; viz. they need not such a Mediator. Fo if after such a tryal as the Lord would please to make of the obedience of Angels and Men, they were to be confirmed in their happiness and obedience for the future, to make good the promissory part of the Covenant of works, then there was no need of a Mediator for confirmation either of Angels or Me under the Covenant of works. His Creatures con∣firmation in a state of happiness (upon their goo carriage in their probation-state) was Gods part o the Covenant, what he promised, and would have effected; no need of any to undertake for Gods par of the Covenant. That this was Gods part of the Covenant is clea The creature was not to expect confirmation in hap∣piness, without performing the condition on h part, that is, carrying obediently, and as a creatu ought to do in all respects towards its Maker in vi or in its state of probation. And this condition b ing performed, God would never have failed t perform the promise on his part; that is, to confir such a creature in patriâ. And to say otherwise, that a Mediator was necess∣ry for confirmation under the first Covenant, withou whom, Man, or Angel could not persist in Obe∣dience, is interpretatively to deny, that they we
created upright, and with sufficient Abilities to have kept upright; which is to suppose their fall was from a debility of Nature, from a want of some in∣ward principle and help necessary to their standing, and not from the ill use of the liberty of their own wills. And this consequently denies the goodness of God, which he vouchsafed to these his creatures in special; denies what he did for them, making them after his own Image, and casts the fault upon God, that they fell necessarily, not being created with ability to stand. Again, suppose Christ a Mediator for confirma∣tion, to undertake on the Creatures behalf, to help them to perform the condition; then it would seem strange, that Man was not confirmed. What? was Christ wanting, negligent, or unfaithful in his office? Surely no, therefore that Man was not confirmed, it seems sufficient to clear it, that Christ was not in∣tended of God to be a Mediator for confirmation to Angels, and Men, under the Covenant of works. Sect. 17. PROP. XVII. God was under no tye, or Bond, to make Man immutably holy. IT is very unjust, and unreasonable, for any to complain, that God did not set Man in such a state at first, from whence he could not fall. That Man was endued with such power at first whereby he might have stood, and had stood (had he not been
shamefully wanting to himself) this is, (no doub sufficient to vindicate the honour of his Make though he gave him not that special grace, fro which one cannot fall. It is too much for a creature to be immutable  its own Nature. To suppose such a thing of Man,  far as this property and perfection reacheth, is  make Man equal unto God. Therefore though Ma was created holy, yet was he mutable, his holine such as might be lost. Now when God made Man upright, and then p him upon the tryal, whether he would stand upright he did no injury to man at all, Quum Deus homine permisit sibi, injuriam non fecit homini, sed gloria suam asseruit sibi. Jun. Surely the Lord had do his part, enduing Man's soul with knowledge, right∣ousness, and holiness, engaging Man to himself b so many favours, as by so many strong Band which his goodness and bounty had laid on him promulging, and making known his Law, the R Man ought to live and walk by, backing the sam with a dreadful commination, to warn and deterre hi from sin, and with a very ample promise to exci and encourage him to obedience. Thus no mor means were wanting, or denyed to Man's preserv∣tion; what could Man reasonably have desired th God would do more for him; If now man misca∣rieth, the fault cannot be in his Maker, but in him∣self. Had he used that power, and those means give him, as he might, and ought, he had been for eve happy. God did not deny him any thing, which was congruous to his present state. I know not ho we can say that there was Gratiae substractio [nam, ut vellet constanter non peccare, Nulla
Adamus acceperat, Lapsus deser∣tionis, non de∣sertio lapsus causa fuit. ut autem posset non peccare si vellet vel nullâ indiguit, cum peccandiratio in volendo sita sit, vel eâ non substract à potuit peccare. Thes. Salmur. de laps. Ada. Sect. 25. p. 203.] God did not take from Man any ability to perform obedience, given him in his Creation; but only gave not in (as he was not bound) a new supply of further grace. Certainly, it was no hard or unjust thing, that God should try his Creatures obedience, who stood obliged to him by such wonderful tyes and engage∣ments: and if God would try Man's obedience, Man is supposed not to be in a state of Impeccability: It would not have become the Divine Wisdom to give Man a Law purely for trial whether he would obey, if it was impossible for him to disobey. Thus indeed while Man was Viator, in a proba∣tion state, we must grant, he had a power to obey God in all things, and it was also possible for him to disobey. Yet observe this, there was no evil inclination, no propensity to sin in Man before, as is found in him now since his fall. That pronity, which is now in us all, to what is forbidden, is certainly sinful: that should we suppose any inordinate concupiscence natural to Man at his first Creation, it would infer, that he came sinful out of Gods hand. This would be to impute folly to our Maker, and make God the Author of Sin. In the regenerate there is a lusting of the Flesh against the Spirit; but in Adam there was no such lustings, and contrary inclinations (while he kept his innocency & integrity) But his na∣tural inclinations were in an absolute subjection to
right Reason, and the Rule which God his Creato had given him. As Aquinas sayes well, the Act o the concupiscible faculty is only so far to be ac∣counted natural, as it is subject to right reason, whe it rebels and transgresses the bounds of reason, the it is contra naturam, and Vulnus naturae. So thi was not in Man before he sinned. That natural in clination in Man to eat of the fruits in Paradise was Physically or Naturally Good, morally indifferent, neither good nor evil. It was in his Natur as convenient to it, being to live on the fruits of the Earth. But when God by a special positive La had restrained Man's Natural liberty, forbiddin him to eat of such a fruit, what might have bee desired Naturally, and innocently before, canno be desired now without sin; because Man is boun to subject all his desires to the Divine Will an Law. That he had a natural power of eating th forbidden fruit, was no way culpable, or sinful but that he exerted this power against God Law. Now though a good account may be given, wh Man was not created immutably good, he being a first in Statu viatoris, non comprehensoris, a pr∣bationer for Heaven. And therefore his obedien being to be tryed; (though he had power to peform sinless obedience, yet it was also possible for hi to disobey) yet it will not follow, as (Corvin would have it) that glorified Saints, who are con∣prehensors, because they are fully confirmed in good cannot properly be said to obey, or to be under an Law. [Ʋt verò liberum arbitrium tollatur ab eo, clex praescribitur, etiam fieri non potest, quia ubi ill non est legi locus non est, Quare etiam sequitur, i
qui jam in bono sunt confirmati, proprie Legem ferri non posse, neque item eos Deo obedire propriè dici posse, &c. Corvin. Censur. Anat. c. 6 Sect. 1. p. 101.] This is strange Divinity sure; though it would seem needless that such as are confirmed in a state of appiness and perfection, should be under any Law eerly for tryal. (It would be Actum agere, to give them such a Law, which the wisdom of God would not do.) Yet it will not follow, hat therefore they are law∣less. Ergo, inquam, is non vult qui non potest non velle; tu ergo, ne vis quidem tibi esse bene, quia non potes velle tibi esse Male. Nam quae voluntatis eadem est obedientiae ratio, &c. Camero Defens. c. 12. p. 205. And if they cannot e said properly to obey,  why are we directed to ray, that the will of God ay be done on earth, as  is in Heaven? why are ey made patterns of obedience to us? But sup∣ose that Angel, who was sent Acts 12. to deliver Peter out of Prison, had refused (Jonahs like) to go, when God sent him; would it not have been proper isobedience? And what reason can be given, but hat his going upon Gods errand was an Act of Obe∣ience? And this further, Jesus Christ who was anointed ith the oyle of gladness above his fellows, to whom od gave not the Spirit by measure, was certainly s much confirmed in Good, as any Saint or Angel  Heaven can be; yet who can have a face to deny, at he truly obeyed? Obedientia non est necessitatis, d libertatis. says Corvinus. We say though obe∣ence cannot be both free and forced, yet it may be ee and necessary too. It may be in some respect cessary, and yet most free. Saints and Angels in eaven cannot but love God, they see so much ex∣cellency
and amiableness in him, for which they m love him to eternity; and yet they love him m freely. As on the contrary, the Devils sin necesarily, can do no other, through that insuperab Malice and Wickedness which acteth them, y they sin freely. According to Corvinus his way reasoning, the weak, imperfect, obedience of blievers, should be more perfect obedience, and mo worthy to be called obedience, than that of Ange and Spirits of just men made perfect; which sounde strangely. As if that obedience was not most p∣fect, that had most of the will in it. But I for my self. Sect. 18. PROP. XVIII. God (as he was not bound to prevent Ma fall) had holy, wise, and good ends permitting him to fall. THus he takes occasion of manifesting his putive justice, holiness, and hatred of sin; as a of displaying his rich, and free grace, his wond∣ful mercy and compassion towards sinners, up Man's breach of the first Covenant. He bringing a new and better Covenant, God hath concluded under sin, that he might have mercy upon all.  the Creation he shew'd his power, in bringing sothing. Yea, a world of Beings out of nothing; here manifests his wonderful goodness, in bringing g out of evil; yea, the greatest good out of the great evil.
Sect. 19. PROP. XIX. The Sin of our first Parents in eating of the forbidden fruit, how light a matter soever it may seem to many; yet was indeed exceed∣ing hainous, full of dreadful Aggra∣vations. THe blasphemy of Pope Julius the third is ever to be abhorred, who said, since God was so angry with our first Parents, Szeged Spec. Pontif. 75. propter po∣mum, for an Apple, he had more cause (being his Vicar) to be angry propter pavonem for a Peacock. But that Man brake with God for so small a matter, Quo levius Man∣datum eo gra∣vius peccatum. it made the sin so much the greater; and the easier it was for him to have obeyed Gods command, the more inexcusable was his disobe∣dience. That he had more power than ever Man had since, to have resisted the temptation, his sin and transgression appears hereby to have been the more wilful. So the dignity of his state makes his sinful fall the more shameful. As the wonderful fa∣vours God had heaped on him, added the odious stain of ingratitude to his sin of disobedience. And what a causeless Jealousie and base distrust of God was here, even of that God, who had been so good and kind towards him; that he despised Gods coun∣sel, trusting to his own inventions, and shifting for
himself. And what horrible pride, Heaven-dari Ambition, in affecting to be as God? wherein a∣peared his wretched discontent at the good con∣tion God had set him in, over-looking that glor and honour the Lord had crowned him with, an envying at the Divine perfection of his Maker, wha a notorious contempt was here? a contempt of h Soveraignty and Authority, slighting the prohibiti given him, a contempt of Gods power and justice slighting the commination; a contempt of Go bounty and goodness, slighting the promised life an happiness. And as Samuel said, Disobedience is  the Sin of witchcraft, and as the iniquity of Idolatry was there not Atheism, Infidellity, Blasphemy, Idlatry here; in believing, yielding to the Devil, pr∣ferring his lying suggestions before the Word  God? Besides sensuallity, indulging his appeti contrary to Gods command; yea, Murder, an the greatest cruelty towards his posterity, doing wha in him lay, to ruine and undoe them for ever. These with many other sins, were contained  the first Transgression. One more I must not let pass un-named, viz. tha it was a direct breach of Covenant. Breach  Covenant with God, horrid perfidiousness, n meerly the breach and transgression of Gods Law but also the violation of his Covenant, and so shameful requital of Gods gracious condescentio Had it been an enemy or a stranger, that had ca∣ried it thus, there had been less of wonder & strang∣ness in it; but that a friend, and a confederate shoul deal so treacherously with God, may not Heave and Earth be astonished at this?
This (I say) was a direct breach of Covenant with God, an irreparable breach of that Covenant. An utter renouncing of it. As it was a breach of that Law, God had given to be the Test of Man's obedience (& perfect obedience was the condition of the first Covenant) so it was as an open profession of disobedience, It was the transgression of that pre∣cept which God had given for the trial of Man's obedience, and so was an ab∣solute denial of subjection, & renoun∣cing of obedience; as the observance of it had been an open profession of sub∣mission and due obedience. Ball of Meditation. p. 213.214. and declared renouncing of his Covenant. I know it is a great Question, how our first Pa∣rents could so strangely overshoot themselves? But that they did so, is plain, and out of Question. Some Question whether the sin of pride, or incredu∣lity was first in the fall of our first Parents? But me∣thinks we must conceive them something declined from God, and their duty, before they could be guilty of either that pride, or incredulity. So it would seem that incogitancy, and not retaining God in their thoughts, as they ought to have done, was the first step to their ruine. That through incogitancy, they came to be seduced by the Serpent, drawn into error, and incredulity, and so to an inordinate ap∣petite after the forbidden fruit, and next to eat, which was the compleating Act of their sin. What need then have we all to look well about us, watch and pray, that we enter not into Tempta∣tion. Give not the water a little passage, least it prove as a breach of the Sea, that cannot be repaired, that fire which at first one might stamp out with his foot, that spark which might be put out with a wet finger, being let alone, doth
soon become a devouring flame, consuming all before it. Sect. 20. PROP. XX. This is the direct and dreadful consequence, the sad and woful effect of Man's sin and breach of Covenant, that thence forward he can lay no claim to the promise, but im∣mediately falleth under the curse and threat∣ning annexed to it. THe condition of the Covenant of works being nothing less than perfect obedience, one sin∣violates it on mans part, as well as a Thousand. Thus by one Act of disobedience man quite for∣feited all his right and title to all good and happi∣ness, which he had in present possession, or hoped for in regard of Gods promise, by one act of dis∣obedience he brought himself under the curse. That according to the Tenor of this Covenant, after once he had sinned, he could no more expect any goo at Gods hands for ever. And thus by sin man ruined himself, cast himself out of Gods favour, of a friend made himself an enemy, became subject to Divine wrath and vengeance, to all the miseries of this life, to death spiritual, and temporal, and eternal. Here I may speak something to the Question, How far the Covenant of works is abrogated? Ans. Here I fear not to assert, that we are all still bound to what the Covenant required; that is,
to obey perfectly, though we are not bound up to it; that is, so bound up as to fall under the Sentence of Death unavoidably, and to have no hope of hap∣piness, if we do not obey perfectly. I say we are ot thus bound up to it; because there is a new Co∣venant set on foot. But that in some sence it is still n force, we must all grant, as roundly and confi∣dently as some assert the repealing, and nulling of it. 1. As concerning the preceptive part, what God required of Man in that Covenant; it was no other than the Law of his Creation. As we are Men, as we are reasonable creatures, it is our indispensible duty to obey God in all things. I say by the Law of Creation we are bound to obey God in all things; and that Law continues to oblige us, so long as we are creatures. Some tell us believers are freed not only from the condemning, Mar. of Mal. die. p. 148. but from the com∣manding power of the Covenant of works. Now I would ask such, Is it not every Man's duty still to obey God in all things? If so, then by what Law? Doth the Law of Faith insist upon perfect obedience? Or is not this the demand of the Law of works? Though we are not bound to keep the Law of God in all things necessitate medii, as the condition of life, yet we are bound necessitate prae∣cepti, so that we sin whensoever we transgress it in any thing: And either believers are under the com∣manding power of the Law, requiring perfect Obe∣dience, (though Christ hath power again, accor∣ding to his superadded Law of Grace, to suspend and take off the Penalty) or they do not sin, in not yielding perfect obedience, and so need no pardon.
Where there is no Law, there is no transgression and where is no transgression, there needeth no pa¦don. So Christ should not have procured pardo for the sins of believers, but rather this privi¦ledge of exemption from the strict Obligation of th Law, that what are sins in others, are no sins in be¦lievers. If it be said, the Law requiring perfect obedience is still in force, but only as it is in th hand of Christ. I answer, it did not cease to b Gods Law, in becoming the Law of Christ. But thus you must say, the preseptive part of th Covenant of works (being the Law of Man's Cre∣ation) is still in force. It being eternally th bounden duty of a Creature to obey its Maker in all things. 2. As to the minatory part as it threatned deat to every sin, determined and declared the punish¦ment due to sin and sinners. (And a threatning as  threatning, doth no more, doth not necessarily predict the event) we must say this is still in force or deny that sin now deserves legally what Go threatned unto Adam. It is a very gross mistak for any to think that the sins of believers do no deserve hell and wrath. The reatus simplex, a du¦ness of punishment to sin, is ever inseperable fro sin. And so by the Old Original Law, that punish¦ment is due to the person of the sinner. Only he¦steps in a Remediant Law, a Law of Grace, tha sayes, if thou art a true believer, if thou art o that truly repents, the punishment is not to be i¦flicted upon thee; for Christ hath satisfyed, and h satisfaction God hath accepted for thee; But I pra mark it, if the old Original Law be not in force,  charge guilt upon us, we have no need of a discharg
in, and from the Gospel, what need of a discharge from that, which no Law can charge us with? so we must say, a believer hath no sins to be pardoned. For a pardon does necessarily and essentially import a dissolving of the Obligation to punishment. Now there can be no Obligation to punishment, where the penal Law is no more in force: And where there can be no Obligation to punishment, there cannot be properly any dissolving of that Obligation; and so properly there can be no pardon. Thus you see to what issue the matter is brought, if we should deny the old Law in force, as threatning death to every sin, scil. consequently we deny that there can be such a thing as pardon. 3. As to the promissory part of the Covenant of works, or Law of Innocency, that cannot be said to be abrogated, but only ceaseth, cessante capacitate subditi, since the fall Man is no capable subject. For a Man to be a sinner, and yet to be capable of claiming life and happiness by the Law of Innocency, is indeed a plain contradiction. Such a Law, or Covenant, when once the condition becomes natu∣rally impossible (as learned Mr. Baxter somewhere noteth) transit in Sententiam, it ceaseth to promise in this case, and instead of that, passeth Sentence upon men. Yet cannot sinners blame God, that righteousness and life come not this way, as if the failure was in his promise. No, it is in themselves, their not answering the condition; when Christ (a capable subject) came, the Law of innocency justi∣fied him, and so it would justifie us, supposing we were, and did all, which the Law requireth. So much seemeth to be implyed in that speech of our Saviour to one that desired to justifie himself, (saying,
what shall I do to inherit Eternal life, whereupon, Christ to give him enough, referreth him to the Law, [This do, (obey perfectly) and thou shalt live.] Luk. 10.25.28. not that any man ever did, o ever can attain to life and happiness by the works of the Law. Certainly, the Romanists are quite mi∣staken in the scope of our Saviour's speech here, who cry out, Hear, O ye Lutherans, the Lord Christ saith not, Crede & vives: sed, fac hoc, Not [believe, and live] but [do this, and live.] Daring wretches, that to stablish their own prou Opinions, would have Jesus Christ to contradict himself. Rather the design of our Saviour's speech was to convince a man of his own inability, to save himself. And yet this seemeth to be implyed in it, that if there was any one in the world, Lex non falso sa∣lutem promittit suis cultoribus, si quis plene obser∣vet quicquid. Mandat. Coelo. every way such as the Law of God requireth to be, suppose such an one as is failing and deficien in nothing, and then [Do this, and live] would entitle him to life and happiness, such an one should attain to happiness without Christ, or pardoning grace, in as much as he had no need of a pardon. But seeing it is naturally impossible, that sinners (and we are a sinners) should ever attain to the condition of the Covenant of works, which is full conformity and perfect Obedience to Gods will, therefore that pro∣mise is indeed ceased as to us. But to think that Man's sin could abrogate the Covenant, that God had made, is very unreasona∣ble. As if a man could satisfie and discharge a Bond by forfeiture. As if a subject by breaking the Law, could make himself lawless. He may thereby de∣prive
himself of the benefit & protection of the Law, it's true, but cannot exempt himself from the Duty of Subjection to it. Again, to think that God would abro∣gate it, and take Man's failing in his duty, as a ground of excusing him from his duty, is as unreasonable. Then might one not have said, Noli ergo imperare, now give up the Government of the world. Again, to think that Christ would give himself, and improve his interest for the abrogation of it, would be an unworthy reflection on him. As if in his office and undertaking, as Mediator, he had not carried equally, indifferently consulting the Interests of both parties, with the like real tenderness. As if he had not been as true to his Father's honour, in preserving his right in, and authority over his creatures, as to his peoples safety; but did too partially incline to us, though the offending party. It was enough for the securing of the salvation, and happiness of his redeemed ones, that he pro∣cured a new Law of Grace written in his own blood, [That all that believe in him should be justified, and saved,] notwithstanding the old Original Law con∣tinued still in force. Nay, I tell you Christians, this does advance and set forth the free Grace of God, and exalt the praise and merits of your Redeemer; that for his sake, your sincere, though weak, imperfect obe∣dience is accepted, from whom yet perfect Obe∣dience is is as due to God, as from any; and that for his sake your sins are pardoned, which are as pro∣perly sins, and as truly deserve hell and wrath as the sins of any. Thus I say, there is no reason to think, the first Original Law is made void by the after remediant
Law. For both may stand in force together; as that strict Law given to the Common-wealth of the Jews, for putting Transgressors to death; to which was superadded this Law of Grace, that in such and such cases the Law-giver, the Rector did admit of a Commutation, that upon offering a Beast in Sacrifice, the Transgressor's life should be spared (though for∣feited by the Law) Lev. 5.17, 18. So this Original Law, whosoever stands indebted to another, shall satisfie his Creditor, or be liable to an arrest, and to be cast into Prison, remains in force; notwith∣standing we suppose such a relieving Law as this made afterwards, That if any person in Debt, shall serve in the Wars, &c. while they are so im∣ployed for the publick, they shall be protected from any arrest. These instances may help to clear the Question I am upon, especially the former. Many think, that because the Law of works serves not to the same use and end, for which it was given to Man in the state of Integrity, there∣fore it must needs be abrogated, that we are no more obliged by it. Not considering that the rea∣son why righteousness and life cannot come by the Law, is not any weakness in the Law, but our weakness and incapacity to fulfil it. The Law of Ceremonies indeed cannot justifie, because of its weakness. (For it is not possible, that the blood of Bulls and Goats, should take away sins, Heb. 10.4.) But the Law of righteousness, which I am speaking of, were it not for Man's weakness, would justifie. Therefore that we cannot be justifyed by the Law of works now, let us not lay the fault on the Law, but on our selves.
Truely, I cannot but wonder at some, that would have this a Question of great difficulty, but of little moment whether the Law of works, given to Adam, continue in force to all Mankind; methinks it is of very great moment, so that if we suppose the abro∣gation of it, we give the Antinomian no little Ad∣vantage. And methinks it is very plain, that it must continue to bind Man (obedience to God in all things being no more than he is for ever obliged to, as he is a creature) though for non-performance of such obedience as that Law requires, God is not bound to Man by that Law. I conclude therefore the Law of works is still in force, that none of us can say, If we obey God sin∣cerely, we pay him all we owe, he requires no more; we cannot say that our sins do not legally deserve Eternal death; but only that though the Law of God looks upon us as sinners, and condemns our sins, as well as the first sin of Adam, yet this we may plead against the Execution of the sentence, and condemnation of the Law. There is also a new Law of Grace, an Act of General Indempnity and Obli∣vion which Christ hath procured, which God hath passed, that frees us from the curse and penalty of our sins, if we repent, believe, obey the Gospel, i.e. if we lay hold on the Grace offered to us, with an unfeigned desire and resolution to live and be, as this Grace that bringeth Salvation teacheth us.
Sect. 21. PROP. XXI. When God threatned man, [that in the day sinned, or disobeyed, he should surely dy or dying he should dye,] this will not pro the full execution of the threatning,  immediately to attend Man's first tra∣gression; but that Death, and all miseri included in it, were immediately due Law. THat he should be punishable. Illud [morie non significat. Actum moriendi sed debitu As we must not understand the prohibition [T shalt not eat] as a prediction or declaration, touching matter of event. But the meaning  thou mayest not eat, it shall not be lawful for the so neither are we to understand the threatning, [ the day thou eatest, dying, thou shalt dye] as a p∣diction of what should immediately come to pa Nec enim statim mortuus Adamus  sed statim tamen reus mortis factus, Whittak. de Peccat. Orig. p. 39.  morte dignissimus. When Solomon thre∣ned Shimei, 1 Kings 2.37. [on the d thou goest out, thou shalt surely dye] the meani is, thy life shall be accounted forfeited. Though I grant, as soon as Man had sinned,  became mortal, and began to dye, yet the threatni as a threatning, does not foretell certain matter
event; but only declare what punishment was due. And suppose the Death threatned here, was to have been immediately inflicted, as soon as our first Pa∣rents had sinned, then there had been no natural ge∣neration. Then the guilt and punishment had no way reached his Posterity; because so he should have had no posterity. Here you may observe a great difference between  threatning and a promise; he who hath a promise made to him, may lay claim to the thing promised; e hath a right by vertue of the promise. Men ometimes sue upon a promise, and Justice gives hem the thing in kind, or value, the promise being proved; one is bound to do, as he promiseth, not lwayes to do as he threatneth. There may be eason to relax the punishment, that was threatned. Rector that hath power in his Laws to set down nd determine what punishment shall be due to the Transgressors; he hath also power above the Law  some cases to respite, or take off the punishment; therwise there could be no such thing as Pardon. No Rector can be said to pardon an offender, but when he remits the punishment legally due. Yet I grant, it becomes not the Wisdom of a Go∣ernour to relax his Laws (supposing them good nd Just) to remit the penalty lightly, or without ood consideration; for so the Law would soon lose s Authority; Men would be imboldened to trans∣ress, the end of Government would not be carried n. It is a clear case, that God the righteous Go∣ernour of the world, would not remit the penalty without a most valuable consideration; as Christ must ye in our stead.
And one thing further must be granted, that some∣times threatnings do not only declare meritum paen in peccante, & jus puniendi in comminante, a dese of punishment in him that offends, and a right ∣punishing in him that commandeth and threatneth but also the irrevocable decree, & purpose of the Re∣ctor to inflict the said punishment. Thus God threa∣ned Eli & his house, Ahab & his house; thus the sin  blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is threatned; an so all that continue finally impenitent and unbelie∣ing are threatned: Such threatnings are not a me Sanction of the precept, but a signification, or Reve∣lation of Gods purpose, shewing not only what  justly may, but what peremptorily he will inflict. Sect. 22. PROP. XXII. The Penalty threatned in the Covenant works, was neither fully executed (f then all Mankind had been utter ruined) nor absolutely remitted (f then none were liable to Death a Condemnation by that Covenant.) b relaxed. THe Penalty taken off in some part from Man general; whence it is, that sinners, such  are under the Covenant of works, have some lin∣ments (as it were) of God's Image, some remai∣der, or remembrances of it still, and some comme∣mercies.
And the penalty more fully taken off from believers. And that upon most wise, and eighty Reasons, the satisfaction of Christ being a ufficient Motive, and the manifestation of Gods ich and free Grace, a glorious end of his so oing. Now whether the Reprival of sinners be a fruit f Christ's satisfaction, and whether they owe all heir common mercies to Christ's Mediatory under∣aking, I will not take upon me to determine; But at any of the Sons and Daughters of Adam are ardoned and discharged, that believers are justi∣ed and saved, this must needs be ascribed unto Jesus Christ, the second Adam, and his meritorious sa∣sfaction. Sect. 23. PROP. XXIII. or, Adam's breach of Covenant was not only to his Personal prejudice; but so mischie∣vous to all his posterity, that descend from him by Natural Generation, that it subjects them all to a state of sin and wrath. HAd he kept his Integrity he should have begot∣ten Children, not in a state of sin, but in a te of innocency: The Image of God, that Ori∣nal righteousness which was concreated with him, ould have been conveyed and derived from him his Children, together with other blessed privi∣ges appertaining to that state. But when Adam
by his sin, had deprived himself of Original rig∣teousness, he could not derive that to us, of whi he had deprived himself. Nemo dat quod non habe he could not communicate that to us, which he hi self had lost. I find some of great Name that deny the Cov∣nant was made with Adam and his posterity, t better to deny Original sin, [Though the Doctri of Original corruption (as I conceive) will  found to hold true, abstracted from the consider∣tion of that Covenant made with Adam. And learned pen hath noted this, that many bring t Doctrine of Original sin into doubt by laying a upon Covenant Relation, and de∣ing, Dr. J. T. Ans. to Bishop of Roch. p. 106. or over-looking the Natu proofs.] If there had been such Covenant (sayes one) it had be but equity that to all the persons interested, should have been communicated, and cauti given to all who were to suffer, and abiliti given them to prevent the evil; for else it is no Covenant with them, but a Decree concerni them. And it is impossible that there should be Covenant made between two, when one of t parties knows nothing of it. But it is neither impossible, nor unequal to ∣volve and include Children in Covenant with th Parents, when they understand nothing of it. Th are parts and appendices of the Parents, and at the Parents dispose, before they know how to disp of themselves. And who questioneth but in tak a Lease one may by Covenant bind not only hi self, but his Children after him to certain Ter which yet the Child knoweth nothing of? And d
ot that Covenant which Moses made betwixt the Lord, and the Children of Israel, Deut. 29. take n their little ones, v. 10, 11, 12. Yea, the Children hat were to be born of them, v. 15. who were in∣entionally in Covenant, though not actually; ea, the very Law, and light of Nature teacheth en to Covenant for their Children, when they do ut engage them to their duty, and may probably by at means, procure them some considerable benefit nd advantage. As to that plea, [It would not be equal, if the posterity had not caution given what they might suffer by the breach of the Covenant, and ability given to prevent the evil] that this is a meer flou∣ish, a sound of words without any strength of Rea∣on, is thus demonstrated, viz. This would make s much against Gods decree concerning Adam's osterity, as against the Covenant with him, and his osterity. Now it is granted on all hands (and this learned writer will not deny) that the Posterity of Adam ave lost and suffered much by the fall. And may ot one argue against Gods proceedings herein, just s he does against the Covenant with Adam and his osterity; saying, It had been but equal that cau∣tion should have been given to all who were to suffer, and abilities given to them to prevent the evil. But that you may understand what Man's con∣ition is by Nature, through the fall of our first arents. 1. Take notice, that Adam by his fall lost his riginal rectitude, and became universally de∣raved in the whole Man; see the blindness of his
mind, together with crookedness of will, and di∣order of affections, Gen. 3.8. When they hear the voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden the cool of the day, Adam and his wife hid the selves from the presence of the Lord God, amo the trees of the Garden. And if they had not thoug of God, till they heard of him, where was Cons∣ence? In a dead sleep sure. And was not their unde∣standing now darkned, darkned with a witnes when they thought to hide themselves from Go presence among the trees? But whether can a cre∣ture flee from his presence? Again, how strange were their wills perverted, and affections disordere who now exceedingly dread, and cannot endure  presence of God; whereas, before they had sinne he was accounted the chiefest good, they could n but have delighted in his presence before, as the highest happiness. And what was Adam's fall but a turning fr God to the Creature, preferring the lust of the ey the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life bef God and happiness; preferring a false seeming g before the chiefest good. V. Thes. Salmur. de Statu. hom. laps. Sect. 19, 20. p. 208. Thus  changed his ultimate end: And have changed his ultimate end, he w wholly changed as to his Mora there being no more of moral go∣ness in any means or end, that a Man propounds himself, than there is of respect and subordi∣tion to the ultimate and highest end. And therefo when Man turned from God the chiefest good, a false good, being led away with his sensitive app∣tite, (through his own incogitancy, and the tem∣ter's subtilty) thereupon he became animalis ho
wholly carnal; I say, thus he became a vain, sensual, carnal man. Hence came that woful disorder into his Soul. All things turned upside down with him. The sensitive appetite, (which was the lower fa∣culty, inferior to the will, and understanding, and to be ruled) came to rule in Man, the other powers loving and liking to have it so. Thus the nearest end of the lowest faculty (as things of sence) the things of the flesh, the having and enjoying of those things, became the last and highest end of the supe∣rior faculties. What horrible confusion was here brought into Man's Nature by sin? That if you look upon him in a Moral consideration, he was no longer such a Creature as God made him, but quite another thing; though he had the same Na∣tural faculties after his fall as before, yet the moral qualities of those faculties were not the same, but directly contrary. God made man upright, with an appetite in perfect subjection to right reason, with a clear understanding of the chiefest good, with a will sweetly closing with that good; but when through inadvertency (as I said before) he fell from God to a false good, all these faculties were immediately corrupted, and depraved, the rectitude of them quite lost. If any one should say here, but as Adam when he fell, turned from God to the Creature, and to a false good; might he not of himself turn from that false good unto God again? Ans. No, not of himself, when he hath lost that rectitude of Soul, which is absolutely necessary to ones chusing God, and taking him for his last end and chiefest good; nor is the case alike: It is easie for one to fall, or cast himself down from an high
pinacle, not so easie for him to rise again, when b that fall he hath broke all his bones As it is observed, Thes. Salm. ubi supr. Sect. 33. p. 211. Haec rerum qu corrumpi possunt naturalis est Cond tio, ut facile corrumpi, corruptae i integrum restitui vix unquam possint: This is th Natural condition of things which may be corrup∣ted, that they may easily be corrupted, but bein once corrupted, can scarce ever be restored to thei perfection again. But of this in another place. 2. Adam by his fall having lost his Origina righteousness, and his whole Nature being corrup∣ted, he begat Children like himself, destitute  Original righteousness, and so indisposed to all tru goodness, but prone to all which is evil. That the corruption of Nature is propagate unto all, that naturally descend from him, is ver evident. Adam had lost Gods Image, and wa corrupted, and sinfully enclined, when he is sai to have begotten a Son in his own Image, Gen. 5.3 observe, the Scripture opposeth the Image of Ada to the Image of God, Eph. 4.22.24. to the Imag of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. what is Adam Image, but the flesh, Joh. 3.6. the Old man, Col. 3.9 All men naturally bear the Image of Old Ada Does not that prove corruption natural, and propo∣gated to them? Again, how plain is that of our Saviour, Joh. 3.6 That which is born of the flesh is flesh. By this a∣gument he there proves the necessity of regenera∣tion, of a new birth, without which there is no e∣tering into the Kingdom of God. For that which i born of the flesh is flesh, as Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an anclean? The answer is, no
one. No man can do this. So Rom. 5.19. By one Man's disobedience many were made (constituted) sinners. [Many] Some would have the Apostle speak thus, cautelously, because that all simply and absolutely were not made sinners by Adam. Eve was a sinner, yet not made so by Adam's means; she was first in the transgression. Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was made Man; yet was not a sinner. But admitting these two special exceptions, the  here, these [many] are as much as all, v. 12. The All here meant indeed, were many, and the many here spoken of were all. But the word [many] seems to be used here, because it was to come in again in the other part of the comparison. [made sin∣ners]  constituted sinful, to understand this of their being only used as sinners, is a private interpretation, and not according to the Analogy of Faith. How strange a passage is that one hath, Dr. J. T. Ans. to Bishop of Roch. Letter, p. 11. I was troubled with an Ob∣jection lately, for it being pro∣pounded to me; why it is to be believed that the sin of Adam could spoil the Na∣ture of Man, and yet the Nature of Devils could not be spoiled by their sin, which was worse, I could not tell what to say, and therefore held my peace. But methinks one need not study much for an answer to it. The Devils were not the root and fountain of other Spirits. God did not say to them, as to our first Parents [Encrease and Multiply.] But Man being to propagate his kind, it seemeth not so unaccountable, (once supposing our first Father to have sinned away Gods Image, that his
Nature is destitute Original righteousnes and tainted with a co∣trary principle, Natura enim humana (quae in primis parentibus tot a erat) per peccatum tota corrupta est—unde non nisi corruptos, injustos, & mortales silios generare potuit. Meth. Confes. Edit. a De Soto. fol. 4.2. habi disposition, or inclin∣tion) that he should b get Children in li manner viciously enclined. It is natural for cre∣tures to beget their like. Haec est Naturae Lex,  sui quaeque res similem gignat, homo hominem, vit sus vitiosum, Leprosus leprosum. (plac. de Imp pri. pec. p. 160.) And, as is the Root, so the Branches; as t Spring, so the Streams. You would not expe∣pure and wholesome streams, to flow from a corr fountain. Obj. If all descending from Adam be corrupte how was Christ Jesus clear from Native corru∣tion? was he not conceived, and born of a Daug∣ter of Adam? Ans. All that descend from Adam by Natur Generation (the Virgin Mary not excepted) deri Natural corruption from Adam. But Christ dscended not from Adam by Natural Generation, b Generation and conception was miraculous. H came into the world, not by vertue of that prim∣tive benediction [Increase and Multiply] but  make good that special promise [The seed of t Woman shall break the Serpents head.] He was tha seed of the Woman conceived by the power of th Holy Ghost in the womb of a Virgin; and so th Holy One indeed, Luk. 1.35, This very much co∣firms the truth of the point I am upon, scil. the pr∣pagation of Natural corruption to all that natural
descend from Adam, that Jesus Christ to free him from the said pollution, must not come into the world by Natural Generation, but by a most mira∣culous conception. Obj. But you will not deny, but Adam after his Fall was restored by Repentance, and renewed by Grace. Ans. Grant him to be renewed, sanctifyed, yet it was but in part, that he had Gods Image restored in him. And this, of Gods wonderful special Grace, and therefore it was not a quality that was naturally to descend. When he begat a Son, he did this, as a man, not as one renewed and created again. He begat a Son after his own Image, that is, sinful like himself; not after Gods Image, which in man's lapsed state, is purely supernatural. Obj. But you cannot tell how this Natural cor∣ruption is conveyed from the Parent to the Child. Ans. Nor do we know how the bones do grow in the womb (Eccl. 11.5.) of her that is with Child. But we must not deny that which is plain, because we cannot understand that which is difficult. We have seen plain Scripture for the derivation of cor∣ruption from Adam to us all. Obj. But may not the Scripture mean, we are made sinners by imitation of Adam, rather than by the propagation of corruption from him? May we not understand it thus, that we are corrupted by his evil Example? Ans. No, That were not to interpret but to per∣vert the Scripture. That which is born of the flesh is flesh. Does not this speak plainly of Natural Generation, and nothing of imitation. So Psal. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me. Certainly, David is here confessing his own sin. Not the sin of his Parents, but that which he had cause to be ashamed of, and humbled for, as his own Sin, not anothers. So that Text [by the Disobedience of one many were made sinful] If it meant by imitation only, then it should have been said, that we were made sinful by the Serpent, by Satan, or by the Woman, Eve, rather than by Adam; or why is the speech limited to the disobedience of one, when the world is full of pernicious examples; great multitudes there are, that draw others to sin by their evil Examples. And multitudes that are drawn to sin this way, who never read or heard of Adam. And those that have heard of his sin, have also heard of his punishment; that should rather deterre them from sin. And plain experience shews, that not his particular example, which is so remote; but nearer examples have the most malignant influence upon men. And that Children in the most religious families, where are the best precepts, and examples both, do bewray corruption of Nature, as soon as ever they can put forth any Acts of reason. Oh what strangers are they in Israel, yea, strangers in the world, yea, strangers to their own hearts, that see not the first rise of sin and wickedness that is in the world since the Fall, to be from an evil inclination within men, and not from an observation and imitation of others. And I know not well, what can be replyed to that, if we are made sinful by the disobedience of one A∣dam, only by imitation, then may we not be said (by a parity of reason) to be made righteous by the Faith of one Abraham, we walking in the steps of his Faith?
3. The next thing I would clear to you is, That this Natural inherent pravity, or Original corrup∣tion is sinful. It makes us really guilty before God, obnoxious to his wrath and curse for ever. I pur∣posely wave speaking of the guilt of Adam's first transgression, the imputation of it to his posterity immediately, and antecedently, or irrespectively to this corruption of Nature, propagated from him, leaving it to the sober consideration and discussion of the Godly-learned. But though we hold Adam's sin propagated, Non peccatum personae, sed peccatum Naturae; not his personal sin, not the transient action; but the sin of the Nature of Man, the corrupting of his Nature; for so it was an inherent, permanent, Evil quality: this alone sufficeth to condemn any one in the world. In regard of this inherent pravity and corruption, which is in every one from his very birth, yea, from his very quickning in the womb; we all deserve death and condemnation, deserve to be dealt withal and punished, after the same manner, as if we had done what our first Parents did. Now this is very plain and evident from Scrip∣ture, Eph. 2.3. and were by Nature Children of wrath, even as others. Nothing but sin could sub∣ject us to Gods wrath, to which yet we are all ob∣noxious by Nature, one as well as another. And if obnoxious to Gods wrath by Nature, then sinful by Nature. So that there is sin and guilt in our very Nature, before ever we come to the practice and commission of sin. Again, what an undeniable proof is that, Rom. 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by Sin; and so death passed upon all men, ,
which whether you will read it relatively in quo i whom, or causally, eo quod, because or in as muc as all have sinned, I shall be content. These thing are plain however. 1. That death came into the world by sin. 2. That all on whom death passeth, have sin. 3. That many on whom death passeth, (as infants) have not actual sin. 4. Therefore it follows that they have sin derived from Adam with their very Natures. That Origi∣nal corruption hath the true Nature of sin; otherwise according to the Apostles arguing, Infants should not be subject to death. But here we are told by no mean writer, that Man was created Mortal, Ʋn. Necess. p. 371. and i Adam had not sinned he should have been immortal by Grace, i. e. by the use of the tree of Life. Yet elsewhere the same hand layes down this assertion contrary to the former, Dissolution of the Soul and Body should have been, Ans. to the Bi∣shop of Roch. Letter. p. 86. if Adam had not sinned] which if so, how then should he have been immortal by grace, i. e. by the use of the tree of life? what he adds there by way of proof; For the world would have been too little to have entertained those Myriads of Men, which must in all reason have been born from that blessing of [Increase and Multiply] hath no strength at all, but lean on this weak and false prop; that without the dissolution of Soul and Body, Man could not have been translated from Earth to Heaven. Take this away, and what he saith comes to nothing.
But though Adam was not immortal, as the Saints are after the resurrection; yet neither was he Mortal as we all now are. Thes. Salm. de Stat. Ada. ante Laps. Sect. 32. p. 197. Tam naturalis erat Adamo facultas non moriendi, quam non peccandi. To say, that he was created Mor∣tal, is to deny that immortality was any part of Gods Image, wherein Man was created. Again, death was threatned only in case of disobedience, as we see here, Gen. 2.17. Does not that imply, he should not have dyed, if he had not sinned. As the Apostle telleth us, death entred by sin, and passeth upon none but Sinners; Infants dye as well as others, and therefore they are sinners. And yet further to evince it, take this Argument; Either Infants that dye in infancy, and are saved, are saved by Christ, or not; now surely there are none that have the face of Christians, can have a face to say, any in the world are saved without Christ; for there is salvation in no other. There∣fore I hope we may take this for granted, all Infants that are saved, are saved by Christ. And if saved by Christ, then Christ dyed for them. If Christ dyed for them, then they were really guilty; truly, properly sinners in themselves; otherwise they are none of them saved by Christ. Yea, indeed if Infants, or any in the world were innocent and guiltless before God; such would have no need of a Saviour, no need of pardoning Grace and Mercy; such must go to Heaven another way, not by the satisfaction and redemption of Christ. He had dyed in vain so far, had he dyed to purchase Gods favour for those, who no way merited his displeasure. Justice it self would not
condemn, but clear all that can plead  guilty. Methinks, though the Remonstrants would hav natural corruption meerly penal, not sinful; y they (of all others) should grant this Argument, wh would have the death of Christ intended for all and every one alike, to make the remedy provided Christ, the second Adam, adequate unto our mal∣dy and misery, that came by the first Adam. No what need that Christ's death should be intend for Infants, to reconcile them to God, if they we not obnoxious in themselves to his wrath? Obj. But sayes Corvinus, If the Law does n require that a Man be born wit out sin, Cens. Anat. Arm. c. 8. Sect. 7. p. 121. if it requires not Orig nal Righteousness, a man sinne not in that he is born without i therefore the want of it cannot properly be call sin. Ans. Though it is true (as Rivet sayes) veta∣tur futura, In Exod. 20. p. 314. non praeterita aut praese tia? quae jam in actu sunt; yet fac mala arguuntur à Lege, improbant & damnantur. And so this, prava dispositio, &c rentia Justitiae damnantur a Lege. It is contra to the Law, and condemned by it. The Law pr∣perly forbids things to come, but reproves, disallow of things present, contrary to it. As this Nati inherent corruption (including an indisposition, a averseness from what is truly good, and pron ness to evil) must needs be contrary to the La That which is the cause of all actual sin, mu needs be  sinful sin indeed.
Again, was not Man obliged by the Law of his Creation to be, and continue as holy, good and perfect, as God made him? In this respect may we not be born guilty Creatures, Rei debendi, licet on agendi, we are guilty before God, if our Na∣ures (as well as Actions) be not perfectly conformed o Gods will, and Law. Obj. But sayes Corvinus, after the fall, obedi∣ence is required by a new Covenant, wherefore Man is considered as fallen, not as upright still. Ans. I have shewed before, the new Law of Grace doth not hinder the old Original Law (which equires perfect Obedience and exact conformity to he will of God in all things) from being still in orce; otherwise we do not sin in not obeying per∣ectly, and have no cause to be humbled, and to ue to God for pardon and forgiveness upon that ccount. Obj. This corruption of Nature in Infants is not eirs, by an Act of their wills. Ans. Though it be not à voluntate, yet it is in oluntate. Are sinful habits no sins, because they re not sinful Acts? It comes not by the Child's ill, it's true, for it comes by Nature, is conveyed aturally. The Child born sinful, because descended om sinful Parents: Yet this corruption is princi∣ally and eminently seated in the will, and from the ill it acts, and shews it self as soon as the will an act. The sin of Infants is not in Action, but in is evil disposition. We must say this of Children, en unborn, or newly come into the world, that ey do not actually will the committing of this or at sin, it is from natural impediments, the lett
and hinderance is a natural incapacity; otherwis there is that pravity of will even Natural to them which would break forth into all manner of Sin ( God withheld his restraining hand) the Natur Impediments of Action being but removed. A is not this enough to make them Objects of God wrath, and worthy of Death? How can an infinite holy God but loath, and abhor such vile Creatures whom he seeth (even by Nature) so wickedly e∣clined, if he look upon them, as in themselves, an not in and through his Son Jesus Christ? as Crea∣tures that have evil qualities by kind, are the mor offensive to us, because those qualities are Natur to them. As Wolves for their ravenous disposition Toads and Serpents for their poysonous quality before such quality or disposition be put forth int act. What I have delivered concerning Natural cor∣ruption, and the sinfulness of it, it is no other Do∣ctrine, than is laid down in the 39 Articles, Art. 9 as also in the Articles of Religion agreed upon a Dublin in Ireland, 1615. Sect. 23. Original  standeth not in the imitation of Adam, (as th Pelagians dream) but is the fault and corruptio of the Nature of every person, that naturally i ingendred and propagated from Adam: where by it cometh to pass, that Man is deprived  Original righteousness, and by Nature is be unto sin, and therefore in every person born int the world, it deserveth Gods wrath and dam∣nation. What could be spoken more plain for the prop gation of corruption to every one naturally de scended from Adam, and that this corruption i
properly Malum culpae non paenae, that it is not a eer languor, or frailty of Nature, but a pravity d fault, a moral defect; and so that it layes eve∣y person born into the world, under Guilt, ob∣xious to wrath and condemnation. How strange it that any should subscribe, and declare their un∣igned Assent to so plain truths, and yet afterwards ny them? Sect. 24. PROP. XXIV. e Condition of Man by the Fall, being such as hath been described, viz. being both under the Guilt, and power of Sin, it is twice impossible (as I may say) that ever he should be saved by himself, or by the Covenant of Works, and equally impossible, that he should not be cast, and condemned by this Covenant. THe Covenant of Works promised life only upon perfect conformity to the Law, and will of d, threatning death to any sin: Now when once n had broken Gods Law, and lost Gods Image,  had his Nature vitiated and corrupted, he could more lay claim to life and happiness, but im∣diately was laid under the Sentence of Death,  did lye open to Gods wrath. ow if the penalty threatned, and incurred, nflicted on the Sinner, this giveth him enough,
this sets him fast for ever. Intollerable torment and endless miseries become his portion to Eternit▪ If he would think of making satisfaction for wh is past, he cannot. He can never suffer any thi equivalent to everlasting death. And if he cou yet he should not be saved by the old Covena without some new Agreement, wherein it shou please God to admit of a satisfaction. Satis¦ction is not given to the Law, (as one note but to the Law-giver, as above Law, who  accept of the solutio tantidem, vel aequivale aliàs indebiti. But there is no provision in t Covenant of Works, how a Man may escape a avoid the penalty, after once he is a sinner. N¦ther is there any more possibility of his clai¦ing and having right, and title to happiness  the promise in that Covenant; the conditi whereof we neither have fulfilled, nor can ▪ And in these respects (as I said) it is utte impossible that ever sinful Men and Wom should attain to life by this Covenant. Ala we are all Children of wrath by Nature and  of death, dead in Law, under the Sentence death. And dead in trespasses and sins, in anoth sence, sin reigneth, as death reigns; all Men N¦turally are under the power of it. Naturally  are without strength, no more than a dead m can raise himself, are we able of our selves to h our selves out of a sinful state, which leadeth death Eternal.
Application. I Shall now conclude this Discourse concerning Man's estate under the Covenant of Works (both s it was before, and since the Fall) with a few pra∣ctical Inferences. 1. What cause is here to admire divine conde∣ension! That ever God should vouchsafe to ter into Covenant with his own Creature, hom he might command at pleasure. What an onour was it unto Abraham, to be called the riend of God? So it was an honour (sure) to dam, to be taken into a League of Friendship ith God; Lord what is man that thou shouldst so gard him? 2. What cause is here to blush at Man's Ingrati∣de, and most unworthy dealing with his Maker? os. 6.7. But they like Men, or like Adam, have ansgressed the Covenant, they have dealt trea∣erously? Oh Adam's treacherous dealing, A∣m's perfidiousness, breach of Covenant with God, that indeed which all his posterity had need to  told of, have cause with sad hearts to remember d to be ashamed of. 3. What cause to tremble with astonishment, hen we speak, or hear, or think of Man's Apo∣acy from God, and of the woful, dreadful effects,
and consequences of it. The Crown is fallen fro our heads, and wo to us, for we have sinned. Th Man who was created for the special Service a fruition of God, now hath his back turned up God; neither fit to serve, nor to enjoy him. M that at his first Creation was a Favourite of Go since, by his fall and degeneration, is become an  my of God. 4. O what need now that we look to it, th we get our Tenure changed! That we get out of t first, into the second Adam, without a change state, and a change of Nature, we are miserable ever. O better we had never been born, than  to be born again. As we are Adam's Off-spring,  inherit nothing but corruption, can lay claim to  thing but hell and wrath. And wo to us now, God deal with us according to the tenure of  Covenant of Works. Perhaps you will say, O but we are under  Gospel Covenant, which is unquestionably a C∣nant of Grace. I grant you are so externally; but as to y Eternal state, you will be never the better, if y refuse to come up to the terms of this better ∣venant; that is, if you don't in a reall sence your sinful and undone Condition without Ch now heartily give up your selves to him, to taught and guided, to be ruled and governed, well as to be saved by him; or which is all one you are not really willing to be saved by the L Jesus Christ in his own way. I tell you, if you do not come up to the term the Covenant of Grace, you do in vain exp
you cannot have any saving benefit by it; no, in that case it leaveth you to the condemnation of the Covenant of Works; I say, it leaveth you where it found you. The wrath of God still abideth on you; yea, this will increase it, that to the breach of the Cove∣nant of Works, you add this great provoking sin, of slighting and contemning what the Lord is plea∣sed to offer in the Covenant of Grace. This is the Condemnation; verily you will find it so, you that neglect and slight that great Salvation, offered in the Gospel. 5. O what cause to pitty poor Children, who are so miserable in themselves without Gods free mercy in Jesus Christ! Since our first father hath sinned, and brake Covenant with God, his blood was tainted, his whole race and off-spring corrupted. This corruption though it came first from Adam, yet immediate Parents are the next cause of the de∣rivation of it. How should this turn our Bowels towards our poor Children? Are they Children of wrath by Nature, and should they not be our Beno∣nis? Oh how should our hearts ake for them! and how should we pour out our prayers, and tears daily before the Lord for them? O that Ishmael might live in thy sight! should not tender Mothers travail in birth again, till they may see Christ formed in their Children. And how should Parents fear entailing a new Curse upon their posterity! There is a curse in the house of the Swearer, a curse in the house of the Thief, and the unjust person, the fraudulent dealer; many take care for nothing but only to lay up riches for their Children: O but take heed that you do not
lay up a curse with those riches. That woul spoil all. Again, how should Parents fear corrupting thei Children more and more by a bad example; thoug corruption comes not into the world meerly by imi∣tation, yet evil examples do very much encreas wickedness in the world. Aetas parentum pejor avi tulit Nos nequiores, &c. Hor. Lastly, though our Children are by Nature in sinful miserable estate; yet there is a remedy pro∣vided in Christ, and set forth in the Gospel; an how should we fear depriving our Infants of that O∣dinance they are capable of, even in infancy! In∣fants circumcision under the Law pointed at the co∣ruption of the Naturul birth; so doth Infant Bap¦tism under the Gospel. They that deny thi Ordinance to Infants, would make Christ less fa∣vourable to the Children of Believers under th Gospel, than he was to the Children of his peop of Old. Though we do not suppose Grace necess∣rily tied to the outward Ordinance, as if whosoeve did partake of the one, must necessarily partake  the other; nor think, as the Papists, that Origina sin hath the Nature of sin, only before, not afte Baptism; yet surely, we ought to prize any e∣pression of Gods Favour towards our poor Chil∣dren; and as we would not seem to slight his mercy we should fear to deny Children this Ordinance which the Lord alloweth them, which they are ca∣pable of; yea, which is the only Ordinance, an outward means that Infants are capable of. And a we should fear to deprive Children of this Gospe Ordinance, so how should we fear to deprive the of the Gospel it self! Rejecting Christ and th
Gospel, was that which brought wrath, to the utter∣most, on the Jews; should we sin away the Gospel, then we deprive poor posterity of the means of Grace and Salvation, and set them in such a state s is described there, Eph. 2.12. to have no hope n the world; Ah Sirs, the despising of Gospel-Grace, may bring uttermost wrath upon us and urs. The End of the First Part.
OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE. Part II. 2 Sam. 23.5. Although my House be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting Cove∣nant ordered in all things and sure, for this is all my Salvation and all my desire, al∣though he make it not to grow. I Come now (according to my promise) to give you an account of my Appre∣hensions, Introdu∣ction. concerning the Covenant of Grace. An excellent subject, yet attended with difficulties. Some things I confess would discou∣rage me from adventuring on it, and particularly
the variety of apprehensions, and the multitude o controversies concerning it. But that the noblenes and necessity of the Doctrine of the Covenant o Grace, together with the great danger of Men mistaking, and the dreadful consequence of many mistakes (too common about it) do on the othe hand press and engage me to it. Indeed I cannot expect to find you all concurring in the same apprehensions with me; yet sure I am in the main we must agree, and hold together here, or the error will be very gross and dangerous. As for any points more disputable (I am not o an imposing spirit) I shall not desire your assent o giving Sentence with me, beyond the merits of the cause, and strength of the proof you shall see pro∣duced. Touching what hath been delivered con∣cerning the Covenant of Works; (that first Covenant God made with Man) this is the sum, viz. That God having made Man, had a right to rule and com∣mand him; and might only have enforced his com∣mands with threatning of severest penalties. Yet to shew forth his infinite Goodness, as well as his Soveraign Greatness, to his Laws he annexed a free and large promise of endless life and happiness. Now Man being created a reasonable and innocent creature, could not but consent to the terms God propounded. Thus God promised life and happi∣ness to Man upon condition of perfect obedience, and Man engaged to obey God in all things. Adam notwithstanding soon transgressed God's Command, violated his Covenant, utterly disabled himself from performing that obedience the first Covenant required, and so deprived himself of all right and title to that happiness there promised.
Lastly, Adam, being the root of Mankind, and having by his sinful fall corrupted his Nature, and begetting Children like himself, unclean, fleshly, corrupt, and guilty before God, it became utterly impossible that any of his posterity should attain to happiness by the Covenant of Works. Thus in discoursing of the Covenant of Works I have shewed you. 1. What was Man's estate by Creation, viz. holy and happy. 2. What it was by the Fall, viz. Sinful and miserable. Now 3. I am coming to shew, what it may be by Grace, in and through Jesus Christ. This is declared and made known in the Cove∣nant of Grace. Thus the Covenant of Grace is our last and best refuge. It is like a plank after a Shipwrack, or like a fair haven in a storm. Sinners, who are exposed to all wo and wrath by the breach of the Covenant of Works, may find shelter; yet in and under the Covenant of Grace. Sinners, whom a deluge of miseries doth threaten to overwhelm, may yet be safe and happy, getting into this Ark. The Gospel holds forth a pardon to sinners sen∣tenced and condemned by the Law. If we look into the Covenant of Works, there we shall only see matter of terrour and ground of despair: but coming to the Covenant of Grace, here we may find opened a Door of hope. Hither must we come, here must we rest, as ever we would be happy, of which we should every one say as holy David here, This is all my salvation, and all my desire.
These are the last words of David, Verse 1. viz. That David spake as being divinely inspired. The last words of a dying man are oft worthy o a speciall remark: how much more are the last words of a dying Prophet to be regarded! When persons are ready to faint away, then they would call for their strong waters, or make use o the best Cordial they had. Gods gracious promise and Covenant was the choicest Cordial to this holy man of God; he desired no other. Here he had strong consolation, whether his troubles arose from within, or from without; still he could fetch in re∣lief and comfort from this Covenant. Although my house be not so with God] q. d. Though I and mine are not so as we should be, so exact and even in our walking before God, so stedfast in his Cove∣nant; yet he abideth faithful, though I am too inconstant. He hath made with me an everlasting Covenant. Though I cannot but see sad disorders both in my self and others, both at home and abroad, yet his Covenant is well ordered in all things. Though I am subject to change, though my outward condition be oft changing, though I be at great uncertainty in respect of any worldly prosperity; yet God's Covenant with me that is sure, and there are sure mercies (Isa. 55.3.) con∣tained in it. I can be satisfied with that provision the Lord hath made for me in this his Covenant, however things go with me and mine here in the world. Though my house here should not grow and flourish; yet I can chear up my heart with the thoughts and hopes of those better things, God hath promised in his Covenant. O this is all my Salvation, and all my desire. This by way of Preface.
Now in speaking of the Covenant of Grace, the saving Covenant, the everlasting Covenant, the better to open the nature, tenor, and use of it, I shall take the same liberty I did before, in setting forth the Covenant of works, viz. lay down such ropositions, as seem to be especially needful, and hat as plainly and distinctly as the Lord shall enable ne, to clear your apprehensions concerning this veighty and excellent subject. Sect. 1. PROP. I. There are but two wayes to be thought of, how Man should come to the enjoyment of God and happiness; that is, either, 1. By a perfect conformity to the will and Law of God, by unsinning Obedience; Or, 2. Supposing Man once guilty of sin, then in this case by pardoning Grace and Mercy. Or thus, There are but two wayes to Heaven, viz. Either by the Covenant of Works, or by the Covenant of Grace. NOw since it is utterly impossible to attain to happiness in the way, or upon the terms of e Covenant of Works. [Do this, and live] can fford no benefit, hope, or comfort to those who nnot obey perfectly, who are already faln short of e glory of God. Since all are concluded under
sin, the whole world become guilty before Go whosoever are saved, must be saved in the way, a upon the terms of the Covenant of Grace, by Go free pardoning Grace. Certainly, it is a most senseless, irrational co∣ceit, as absurd a fiction as ever wild fancy frame to imagine that any Creature, that is a sinner, a therefore can only lay claim to hell, as his portio (who if he were condemned to everlasting tormen had but his just deserts.) that such a Creature shou ever properly, and in a strict sence, merit any thi of God for himself, much less satisfie and supererr∣gate for others. Even Bellarmine himself bei Judge. Mereri simul aeternam vitam & mort aeternam repugnantiam includit: Et proinde qui ta esset, deberet vivere in aeternum, & non vivere  aeternum; mori in aeternum & non mori in aeternu l. 5. de just. c. 12. It implyeth a contradiction, that one should bo deserve eternal death, and also deserve everlast life. And therefore the Papists have no way to sa themselves here; but by flying to that false disti∣ction of sins, that some are mortal, some venial.  if there were any such peccadillo's against God,  either deserved pardon, or did not deserve death what deserves pardon, does not deserve to  punished. Mereri, & non mereri poenam, includit repu∣nantiam. What deserves no punishment, must be counte no fault. So likewise Christ needed not to die for those sin which do not deserve death. Then why does the ∣postle say, 1 Joh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Chri clenseth us from all sin?
Sect. 2. PROP. II. When the Covenant, by which alone is Salva∣tion, is called the Covenant of Grace, you are to understand, it is so , by way of Eminency. NOt as if there was no grace in the first Cove∣nant made with Man. I have shewed before hat it was of Grace, That God (to whom all possi∣ble obedience was immediately due from his Crea∣ure; of Grace) that He was pleased to engage and promise to do any thing for Man, for the future; nd yet further of Grace, that he promised to do so uch. But this new Covenant deserves especially to e called the Covenant of Grace, in regard of a more ignal Discovery of Gods rich and free Grace in this, han was in the former, that was first made with Adam; was it not a Testimony of Gods wonderful Grace to provide and appoint Jesus Christ his Son, o be surety and Mediator of this Covenant? so as it not an high expression of his Grace, that God hould come to so low terms with Man, in this Co∣venant; requiring no more than Man's sincere and earty service and obedience, and promising to ccept, and graciously reward the same, though eak and imperfect? That the Lord should accept f this, when perfect sinless obedience was eternally  due debt from Man, as he was a Creature; was  not of Grace? Again, the benefits and blessings
held forth and promised in this Covenant, are the not such as do aloud proclaim his Grace? Th pardon of sin, a fundamental blessing 'tis impossibl it should be otherwise, than of Grace. In that th Lord is a God that pardoneth iniquity, transgressio and sin, it proclaimeth and speaks out fully, tha he is gracious, and merciful, Exo. 34.6, 7. A does it not speak out Gods abundant Grace, that  this Covenant there are greater priviledges he forth in and by Jesus Christ; than innocent Ada could have claimed by the first Covenant, Scil. ∣fluences of Grace promised (whereby the faithful  perform and persevere in the performance of wh this Covenant requires) and some new addition degrees of glory. Happiness was not so sure  innocent Adam under the first Covenant, he bo might and did fall from it. They that are in Chri have a firmer title by the Covenant of Grace, (whe perseverance is one thing promised) and ha ground to expect some higher degree of happ∣ness. And is not this wonderful Grace indeed,  only to recover Man fallen out of a state of mi∣ry, but further to raise him to an higher hap∣piness.
Heb. 9.15. Mediator of the New Testament. Sect. 3. PROP. III. The Covenant of Grace is sometimes called, and partakes of the Nature of a Te∣stament. THis Covenant (in both administrations of it, scil. under the Mosaical, and under the Gos∣pel administration) is called a Testament. So Heb. 9.15, 16. As it was dispensed before Christ's coming, is called the first Testament Ʋnless with Mr. A. we must take the first Testa∣ment to mean or intend that Political Covenant made with the Jews, meerly as it was political. Vid. Discourse of the 2 Co∣venants, Cha. 4. p. 73, &c.: (not the first Covenant: for the Covenant of works made with Adam, was doubtless before it.) As it s dispensed since, it is called the New Testament. Now this seems to be one considerable difference betwixt the Covenant of Grace, and that of Works. The Covenant of Grace is called a Testament, as he Covenant of works was not. The Covenant of Grace is the Lord Christ's last Will and Testament, oncerning his Children and Heirs; what God equireth in this Covenant, is in Christ's hand to ork in those, who are given him of the Father; nd what God hath promised here, is also in Christ's
hand to give. Christ is the Author and finisher o faith, wherever it is, and the Donor of the Crown of life, promised to the faithful, Joh. 10.28. Rev. 2.18. Nam sit quod vis, Christum, qua∣tenus servus, damnatus, &c. jus testa∣menti faciendi non habuisse; annon erit Christus testator quatenus , annon testamentum morien∣do condidisse dicetur, cum infinito illius mortis precio & efficacia, destructa morte, salutem, & vitam nobis pe∣pererit, nobis{que} omnibus transmiserit , Guisard. apud Lud. Tena in Hebr. p. 823. a. The Covenant of Grace. I say, hath the Na∣ture of a Testament where Christ is the Testator; Believers the Heirs or Lega∣taries; the Goods Legacies, or Por∣tions bequeathed; the enjoyment of God the chieft good, perfect happiness (our highest end) togethe with all things conducing thereunto. A testamen is confirmed by the death of the Testator; so this b the death of Christ. It is the Testament in his bloo It was confirmed of old by the blood of Christ  types and sacrifices, Heb. 9.18, 20. and since b the blood of Christ actually shed. The blood of Chri his death hath sealed and ratified this Testament. That it is both a Covenant, and a Testament several respects, Cum varia & diversa sit, hujus dispensationis ratio, annon variis & diversis nominibus insignienda? Gui∣sard. apud Lud. Tena. p. 816. a. A forma conventionis inter Deum, & homines factae, Foedus, a modo sanctio∣nis, Testamentum, ib. seems plain enoug Tota dispositio te∣mentariam habet r∣tionem, &c. Ames Coron. Art. 5. c. 2. p. (mihi) 296. T whole disposition ( frame of it) hath  Nature of a Te∣ment, as simply consider'd (sayes Ames. whether  be taken in the whole, or according to its parts;  if the benefits bequeathed be compared one w
another, then one is a condition to another; and in this respect it is propounded ad modum foederis, after the manner of a Covenant. Or take it thus, In respect of God, as he propoundeth it, and men are bound to accept it, as propounded by him; thus it hath the Nature of a Covenant. Though, in respect of Christ, as that which God promiseth, and Man engageth to here, was all purchased by Christ for the Elect, and by him bequeathed unto all those that come to par∣take of the saving benefits and blessings of the Cove∣nant, so it is a Testament. Now here I might propound this Question, to be consider'd, whether the promise of the first subjective discriminating Grace, or of working of the condi∣tion, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. belong to the Cove∣nant of Grace, as a Covenant, or as a Testament. It seems not to be formally included in the conditional Covenant of grace, nor properly to belong to it as such, but rather as a Testament; but of that after∣wards. I confess one of great note, straineth this term too far. Making a Testament and a Covenant opposites in this respect, that a Covenant hath conditions, but a Testament is an Instrument of meer bounty, citra ullam conditionem, without any condi∣tion; yet Nihilominus testamento non repug∣nant conditiones pacti, quia potest testator imponere conditiones, quibus deficientibus, haeres non possit adire haereditatem. Tena in Heb. 8. diff. 4. Sect. 1. p. 310. b. (pace tanti viri) may one not bequeath a Legacy in his Will & Testa∣ment, not to be enjoyed, but upon a certain con∣dition. (As for Example, I give A. B. so much, provided he Marry C. otherwise not.) Again, Heb. 9.15. we read, Christ is the Mediator of the
New Testament; that by means of Death—they which [are called] might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. This Text which speaks ex∣pressely of the New Testament, doth not exclude, but include a condition. Who are they that receive the Eternal inheritance, bequeathed in Christ's Will and Testament? They that are called, sayes the Text; where doubtless we are to understand effe∣ctually called, so called, as that they come into Christ upon the Gospel-call. And upon this account I should not restrain the consideration of it, as a Testament to the Elect on∣ly, (as Dr. Ames before cited, seems to do.) But supposing it a Will with a Condition, it is of the same extent with the Covenant; being both one and the same. And so Expositors need not perplex them∣selves (as some of them seem to do) to reconcile Moses (Exo. 24.8.) with the Apostle (Heb. 9.20.) For thus they are fairly agreed, Moses enim loquitur de pacto, sed non quovis, nisi dandae haereditatis—Paulus vero de testamento, non quovis, sed conditio∣nato, quod eo ipso est pactum: Ergo sine ulla impro∣prietate à pacto ad testamentum transivit Paulus in hac materia, quia simul utrius{que} rationem habebat. Tena in Hebr. c. 9. Diffic. 12. Sect. 3. p. 412. b.) Moses speaketh of a Covenant, not of any kind, but of giving an inheritance—Paul speaketh of a Testament, not of any kind, but conditionate, which in that respect is a Covenant; therefore without any impropriety, Paul in this matter passeth from the word Covenant, to the word Testament; because it had the reason (or form) of both.
But that the Covenant of Grace is properly a Covenant, and hath Conditions (though no such conditions as make it ever the less of Grace.) I que∣stion not to clear and prove hereafter, the Lord per∣mitting. At present take notice only, that when the Cove∣nant of Grace is called a Testament, the reason is not, because it is absolute, unconditional; for so it is not; but because it is firm, unalterable. Con∣firmed now by the Testator's death. Though it be but a Man's Testament; yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto, Gal. 3.15. Now the New Testament is confirmed, by the Death of Christ the Testator, that there is no adding to it, no disannulling any part of it, Neither as to matter, nor form; that this shall be changed any more to the end of the world; no third dispensation to be looked for, whatever some fancy. Here then we may all see what our portion is like to be. The first Adam threw himself out of a very fair estate indeed, undid himself and his posterity; our first Father breaking, he left only a stock of cor∣ruption to his Off-spring, that as we descend from Adam, we are Children of wrath, and have the curse, due to sinners, entailed on us. That we are ill provided for, if not adopted into Christ's family, if not of the Houshold of Faith. There are none rich towards God, but they that are heirs of him, who is the heir of all things; what has Christ done for thee? Has he remembred thee in his last Will and Testament? Art thou one of those, to whom he bequeathed himself, his body, and blood, and all his saving benefits? say not here, how should I know that? say not, who shall ascend into Heaven
to inform me? the word is nigh thee. Hast tho not a Coppy of of Christ's Will and Testament in th hand? this blessed Book may resolve thee. A thou one of those that hear his voice? follow him Art thou led by the spirit of Christ? art thou one  those, that are given him of the Father? how sha that be known? thus; if thou hast given up thy se to him. Art thou conformed to Christ? crucifie with Christ and the like? 1 Joh. 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe. Sect. 4. PROP. IV. The Covenant of Grace is sometimes called  Law, and hath the force of a Law. IT is called the Law of faith, Rom. 3.27. It is the Law of life, and the Law of liberty. The will of God at any time made known to his Creatures is immediately obliging; whatsoever God revealeth to us, we are immediately bound to be∣lieve; whatever God requires of us, we are imme∣diately bound to obey. As in the Covenant of Grace there is something that God requireth, (and not only what God promiseth,) it must needs have the Nature of a Law. Since the old Original Law of works given to Man at first, is broken, and all Mankind laid under a curse, under the Sentence of Death by that Law,
it hath pleased the Lord (of his infinite mercy and ompassion towards poor perishing Creatures) to ake and set forth a new Law, a remediant Law, a Law of grace, holding forth remission and salva∣on to rebel-sinners, upon their humble submission, nd hearty return to God; yet withall, threatning eath without remedy; yea, and much sorer con∣emnation to sinners that hear of this Law of grace, nd come not in upon it. The Gospel hath the rdinary Sanction of a Law, it is backt with a reatning. Yea, it thundreth out the most dread∣l Anathema, denounceth the greatest wo to those at have the Gospel published and made known, d yet obey not the Gospel. Ah sirs, this is the ndemnation. Gospel-condemnation will be found ore intollerable than Law-condemnation. The ospel doth not only promise, but it commandeth, reatneth, and condemneth. That I cannot but onder any should question, whether the Gospel ave the Nature of a Law. I would fain know hat is essential, and proper to a Law, that doth t agree to the Gospel. I say, the Gospel is a Law, [Believe, and thou alt be saved] is properly a Law; as well as [Do is, and live.] Do this, and live, was the old Original aw, first given to Man, and the matter or con∣nts of the first Covenant God made with Adam. Do this, and live] i. e. obey perfectly, and so ou shalt live by thy own righteousness. This was e old Original Law. Now [Believe and thou alt be sayed] this is the new Law of Grace, which od hath given to Man, as a Remedying Law, ince the violation of the former) and this is the atter, and summe of the Covenant of Grace. As
when men accept, and consent to the terms of  Gospel, whether in heart, or in profession, it becom a formal actual Covenant. Though it binds a Law, at least in order of Nature, before men a bound by it as a Covenant. [Believe, and thou sh be saved.] i. e. come up to Gospel-terms, and thou thou art a sinner, and deservest to dye, yet thy  shall be pardoned, and thou shalt live, for the righ∣ousness of another; thou shalt be saved by Je Christ, who is a believers righteousness. Here I have given you a brief account of the  Law. And that it hath the proper binding f and power of a Law, to me seems the easiest th in the world to make out. Thus, all that hear of terms of the new Covenant, be they heathen, they strangers to the Covenant, yet are immediat bound to come up to these terms, and immediat punishable upon this very account, if they do  come up to these terms. This is plain as can  Mar. 16.15, 16. Go ye into all the world,  preach the Gospel to every Creature—and he  believeth not shall be damned. In this Text it is ∣dent, the Law of faith hath the sanction of a thre∣ning, as well as of a promise. And wheresoever Gospel is preached, all are bound to believe and according to the Gospel upon pain of damna So 2 Thess. 1.8. The Lord will take vengeance them that obey not the Gospel] that implieth a ∣manding power in the Gospel, sure where the no command, there can be neither obedience, disobedience. If the Gospel ought to be obey then it hath the force of a Law. If it be a sin,  to obey the Gospel, then the Gospel hath the Nat of a Law; for where no Law, there no transgre
gain, [taking vengeance] on them that obey not e Gospel, implies most strongly, that it hath the rce of a Law; would the Lord, the righteous Lord ke vengeance for no Law broken? would he punish r no crime? Then how should he judge the world righteousness? That is therefore a very gross mistake of him, that lds the Gospel "a Doctrine teaching, A. E. not a Precept binding. Do we not read the ain contrary, 1 Joh. 3.23. This is his Command∣nt, that we should believe on the name of his Son sus Christ: What? is his Commandment no ding Precept? How strange is it, that this should t grate upon, & offend any Christians ears? certain∣ to distinguish here betwixt a Doctrine teaching, d a precept binding, is as groundless as that Popish stinction of Commands and Counsels, on which y build their monstrously absurd Doctrine of rks of Super-errogation. But sayes the same writer, "No Man is bound o believe absolutely, but conditionally, viz. if he will have any benefit by Christ. As a man is bound within the time limitted in the pardon, to sue it ut under the Broad Seal; which if he neglect to do, he breaketh no Law of the Kings, but only eprives himself of the benefit of the pardon, and of the Kings favour therein. Answer. I will not say, that all are absolutely and to believe in Christ; that is, whether they er heard of Christ, or no; for the negative unbe∣ of those that never heard of Christ, is not their , but their misery. But upon supposition that n have once heard of Christ, and the Gospel, n it immediately becomes their duty to believe.
And they are most severely threatned, if they  obey the Gospel-commands, and continue in  belief. But to say we are bound to believe only con∣tionally, that is, (as he explains it) if we wo have any benefit by Christ; is to say, we are  bound to believe in obedience to Gods Comman but only out of self-love, with respect to  selves, and the benefit that comes by it. As if should say, we ought to believe in point of pruden as that which is good for us; otherwise there is  tye upon Conscience. He that believeth not—the wrath of God abid on him, Joh. 3.36. That is, as he sayes, mincing It doth not come upon him, but he remaineth un∣wrath, which faith would have freed him fro Yet v. 18. we read, he that believeth is condemn already, because he hath not believed in the Na of the only begotten Son of God.] That unbelie a sin; and properly a cause of condemnation; y more certainly a cause of condemnation than o sins; other sins are damnable, this is damning. Tho wrath came upon men at first by the breach of first Covenant; yet a further degree of wrath co upon men by the breach of the new Covenant, by sinning against this new Law of Grace. Well Sirs, be clear in this; that the Gospel, new Covenant hath the Nature of a Law, is a vine Law, immediately, and indispensibly oblig all to whom it is made known. By the very La Nature, of our Creation, we all stand eternally liged both to believe and obey God, & in revel & in revelandis, whensoever God reveals his  and will to any of his Creatures, that this he requ
f them, and on these terms he will be gracious to hem, this revelation of the will of God doth neces∣rily inferr the creatures obligation to observe it. nd before a Man can be bound by any act of his wn, he is under a previous obligation, naturally nd necessarily resulting from his very being and re∣tion to God, as a creature, to attend to the will and leasure of God, to act and order himself accor∣ingly. And how much more that man is bound to ccept of, and submit to such a Law as this, intended nd provided for the remedy and recovery of a poor st creature: a Law of Grace, wherein Gods free race and infinite mercy shineth forth so illustriously, s it is apter to be taken notice of, than his Sove∣aignty and authority. Yet you must know God oth not stand here to Man's courtesie, or need his oncurrence or consent, to make his word of force, nd obligatory. Nothing can be more certain, than that God in co∣enanting with men, doth not forgoe or pass away is authority or right of commanding. They that under pretence of advancing God's free grace, dethrone his Soveraignty; they that level or essen his authority to set up his clemency and mercy, eal not fairly with him; they have very low houghts; short, inadequate, and unworthy appre∣ensions of him. For my part I know no stronger Argument against Antinomianism, than this; that it denies that subje∣ction to God, which is naturally, necessarily Man's duty, as he is a creature, from which he can never possibly be discharged, while he is a creature; or that t would deprive God of his authority over his crea∣tures. They that would have a believer free from the
obligation to obey God in all things, let them ask him the Kingdom also. But attend to this I beseech you; what the Go requires, God requires; and what God requires, creatures are bound to observe and perform. A∣though Ministers use to pray and beseech you to reconciled, entreat you to come in to the Lord Je Christ; yet we have authority also in the name God, to charge and command you. Now G commandeth every one of you to repent, and this his Commandment, that ye believe, that ye rece Christ Jesus the Lord, that ye kiss the Son. A slight and despise him at your peril, reject him your peril. [Believe, and be saved] bindeth ev one to whom it is published, as a Law; even s as are not under the bond of the Covenant. And y more especially, who have given your consent, least by an outward profession. You are bound believe, not only by vertue of a divine Command,  also as being under the bond of the covenant. O w a crying sin is your unbelief! As it is a breach o divine Law, it must needs be damnable in its o Nature; and further as it is a breach of such a L of Grace, a breach of the new Covenant, that ho forth the only way wherein you can be saved, so is the damning sin indeed; not only damnable in  own Nature, but certainly damning in the eve Sinners that are condemned by the Law of Work yet may be discharged from that condemnation  hearkning to, and obeying the Gospel, Rom. 8. But if condemned by the Gospel, how should su escape?
Gen. 17.4. Behold my Covenant is with thee. Sect. 5. PROP. V. The Covenant of Grace is betwixt God and Man, not betwixt God and Christ. NOte, I am not speaking of that which Divines call the Covenant of Redemption, or Media∣ory Covenant. Though, whether that can be any ing, but the eternal decree of God, concerning Man's redemption and Salvation by Jesus Christ, in which eternal decree, the will of the Son must needs e supposed in the will of the Father, both having e and the same essence, and will: (not only a like∣ess and agreement, but an identity or oneness of ill) let the Godly-learned consider. And whether ose Scriptures that seem to hold forth a Covenant, r agreement betwixt the Father and the Son, are not  be taken as speaking after the manner of men; here there could no way possibly be any the least istrust on either side; where there was not the least eed of engaging one another for the further satisfa∣ion of either party, there would seem to be no oc∣sion for formal entring into covenant. What ground e have to conceive a formal Covenanting betwixt e Father and the Son, where we cannot conceive w the proper end of covenanting could have place; Whether the promises in Scripture that run as made Christ, might not be recorded as that voice came
from Heaven, Joh. 12.30. for his peoples sakes,  one compares them: These are things I would le to them that are able, to weigh and determine. Yet I make no question of it, but those that h a Covenant of Redemption betwixt the Father a the Son from all eternity, and others that see not h that can be so well maintained, but think it is a si decree, in which decree the will of all the three Pe∣sons, Father, Son, and Spirit, is included; do ho ever both agree in the thing aimed at, though the expressions vary. And they that think it is me properly a decree from eternity, than a Covena from eternity; yet will say, in this decree the w and manner of our redemption and salvation is surely, firmly ordered, determined, and provid for, as if it had been by way of Covenant, and  most solemn mutual engagement of both parties.  both come to one in the end. But of this, (whether Covenant or Decree fre eternity,) Reader, since the wri∣ting of these notes, I am taught by one, whose judg∣ment I cannot but highly value, and reverence, that Besides the eternal de∣cree of God, there is a Lex Mediatoria (a Law of Mediatorship) that Christ is under as man, wherby God made Mediatory Acts his duty, and promised him his reward, of w the certain Salvation of the Elect was much. And this L was also a Covenant modlly. And of this I suppose those ∣verend and Learned men, that compiled the larger Catechi must be understood to speak, when they say it [was made  Christ as the second Adam.] which they call the Covenant Grace, taking in that other Covenant made with man (when faith and repentance are conditions) as being founded thereupon▪ I am not enq ring; but when I speak of  Covenant of Grace, I me that which stands in dire opposition, and contra-dist∣ction to the Covenant works. And though I kno
many very reverend, eminently learned, holy and worthy men conceive otherwise, yet many cogent Arguments enforce me to conclude this Covenant made betwixt God and Man, not betwixt God and Christ. For, 1. Christ is the surety and Mediator of this Cove∣ant, Heb. 7.22. and 12.24. And therefore not he party whom God here covenanteth with. For f so, he should be a surety for himself, and Media∣or on behalf of himself. As for Moses he was not roperly a Mediator, but improperly, a type of Christ, he true Mediator. Christ as a Mediator comes be∣wixt the two parties Covenanting. Upon his un∣ertaking, upon account of Christ's satisfying, or ndertaking to satisfie for our breach of the first ovenant made with Man, the Lord was pleased to nter into or make another Covenant with us. This ovenant indeed was confirmed in Christ. But I annot see how it can be said to be confirmed with Christ. It was , onfirmed, ratified of God with respect unto Christ, ooking at Christ, as some. Some argue that the Covenant was made with Christ, because he is made the surety and Mediator f it; but I would argue on the contrary. Because e is the Mediator of the Covenant, therefore he  not properly a party wich whom it is made. What place is left for Man in this Covenant if Christ e both principal, and surety? Or can the same erson be both principal and surety in the same ond? 2. If this Covenant was made with Christ, then  was made with him, either as God, or as Man, r as God and Man, or Mediator. But it was not
made with Christ, as God: For so he makes o party with the Father. Consider him as God, a so the Father cannot be one party, and the Son an∣ther; but are both of them to be looked on as o and the same party. Nor was this Covenant ma with Christ, as Man; none will say th Christ as Man was under the Covenant of wor not under the Covenant of grace. Was the Cov∣nant [Believe, and thou shalt be saved] made to  Man Christ? Or that which is sometimes called th new Covenant [I will give you a new heart, t away the stony heart, forgive your iniquiti was the Man Christ taken into this Covenant? Nor was the Covenant made with him as God  Man, or Mediator; but rather was procured  him, so that in this respect, it is his Testam His Testament, not made to him, but made or pr∣cured by him. The New Testament in his bloo Indeed if we consider Christ as Mediator, so he properly no party: if we consider him as a pa in this Covenant, so he and his Father are one part and Man the other. 3. The very terms and tenor of the Covenant Grace (hinted at even now) do plainly shew w whom it is made. [Believe, and thou shalt be save] which is expressed in other words and phrases und the Old Testament, as Isa. 55.3. Incline your  and come to me; hear, and your souls shall live.  not this the Covenant that succeeded the Coven of works [Do this, and live.] If the Covenant  Grace be made with Christ, then it follows wh God requireth in the Covenant of Grace, is requir of Christ. That he must believe, and must repe and turn to God.
4. The benefits and blessings promised in the Covenant of Grace, are such as are proper to us men, us sinners, and are promised unto Us; not unto Christ. Will any say, that pardon, and free ustification was ever promised of God to Jesus Christ? were it not blasphemy to say, that Christ had any sin to be pardoned? And though he was ac∣quitted, and justified before God, yet not of free Grace; but he fully satisfied the highest demands of ustice, before he received his discharge. 5. If the Covenant of Grace be betwixt God nd Christ, not betwixt God and Man, then no Man pon earth can be charged with breach of Covenant ere, or condemned, and punish'd, as a violater of e new Covenant. Object. 1. We read Gal. 3.16. the promises were made to Christ, that Christ was the seed. Answ. There we are to understand Christ mysti∣al, not Christ personal. As Beza in his larger otes, they that think Paul disputes here of the erson of Christ, are in an errour, when rather he eats of two people, i. e. Jews and Gentiles, rought into one masse, or body of the seed of Abraham. Object. 2. Tit. 1.2. we read of eternal life, pro∣ised before the world began; But there was none efore the world began, to whom this could be pro∣ised, but Jesus Christ our Mediator. Answ. 1. Some read , not before e world began, but before ancient times. Eter∣al life was promised long agoe, Calvin. See Ball of Covenant, p. 40. à ltis retro seculis, for many ages ast.
2. Otherwise by [promised] we are to under∣stand appointed, or decreed; purposed it was, b not promised before the world began. 3. How incongruous is it to say, Christ was M∣diator from Eternity, before the world began? I true, as God he is from Eternity, but not as M∣diator. 4. If we could understand it no otherwise, th that Eternal life was promised before the world ∣gan; yet it will not follow, that this was promi to Christ Mediator: Dr. Kellet, Tri∣can. p. 258. As one, W may I not say, it is an holy Tria gisme of the Father, Son, and H Ghost, sweetly consenting and concording in  way of Man's Salvation before Man had a being somewhat like that, Let us make man in our  Image, Gen. 1.26. Object. 2. God promiseth to give Jesus Ch for a Covenant, Isaiah 42.6. and 49. of Isaiah therefore the Covenant of Grace was made w him. Answer. It follows not, but rather the contra if Christ was promised of God, as the great bles of the Covenant, it implies the Covenant was m not with Jesus Christ, but with them to wh he was so promised; the Covenant of Grace i Covenant concerning Christ, a Covenant of hi shewing how, or upon what terms we may be terested in him, and made partakers of his sa benefits. How then can it be a Covenant of  with him? The promises are Yea, and Amen, him, 2 Cor. 1.20. not to him. Or if when  promised for a Covenant, we understand for a ∣diator of the Covenant, that implyeth still the ∣venant
was not properly made with him, but be∣twixt God and those who have him for their Me∣diator. Object. 4. But fallen Man was unworthy, and unmeet to enter into Covenant with God. Answ. I do most freely grant it, I heartily yield this; yet without any prejudice to the Position I have laid down, methinks it is evident, this sets it off as a covenant of Grace indeed; that it is a cove∣ant with fallen Man. O wonderful free Grace! that the Lord should make another covenant with Man after Man's violation of that covenant, made with him at first; it was not so wonderful gra∣cious condescension, that God vouchsafed at first to take an innocent creature into covenant with him∣self, as that after Man hath proved false to God; yet the Lord should please to treat with him again, and enter into another covenant with him. That God should make a covenant with fallen men, with sin∣ful creatures. Methinks no more need to be said, to prove it a Covenant of Grace. And certainly what∣ever covenant was made with Christ (as made with him) was not a covenant of Grace, but rather of Justice; and whatever we find promised to him, was but a just reward of his obedience and satisfa∣ction. A reward not of Grace, but of Merit. But that God should any more covenant with poor sinful creatures, as David sayes [Although my house be not so with God, yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant.] O this we can never enough admire! And verily I cannot foresee any inconvenience, or ill consequence like to attend this assertion, that the covenant of Grace is made be∣twixt God, and Men; (still supposing Christ to be
the Mediator of it) but rather that it doth further advance, and set forth the free grace of God, an lay a stronger obligation upon Men, than that opi∣nion doth, which it opposeth. Rom. 10.9. If thou shalt confess, &c. Sect. 6. PROP. VI. The Covenant of Grace, having the true Na∣ture of a Covenant, is not without Con∣dition. MAny (I know) deny the Covenant of grace to to have any condition, yea, make this a mai point of difference betwixt the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace, that (as they hold) the covenant of works was conditional, whereas the Covenant of Grace is absolute. Yea, they will not stick to say, that if you suppose the Covenant of Grace conditional, you turn it into a Covenant of Works. Yet many who deny the Term [condition] will readily yield the thing. Yea, all that have not their judgments wofully corrupted, that have not drunk in the very dreggs of Antinomianism, must grant the thing, however they take offence without cause at the term, condition. Certainly, all that have not suckt in desperate principle of Errour, must yield,
and assert the necessity of faith, repentance, and sin∣cere obedience, as without which there is no Salvati∣on; which indeed is all we mean, when we say they are conditions of the Covenant, and of salvation therein promised. Some call them qualifications disposing the sub∣ject, as I grant they are: but when we are speaking of the Covenant, and what it requires, we cannot use any more apt and proper term, than the word condition. And what is the condition of a Cove∣nant, but that, without which the benefit promised cannot be expected, and upon which it may. When another promiseth this or that to you, not simply and absolutely, but upon Terms, upon such or such a Condition, this you know is a Conditional promise. And that upon which the performance of the promise is suspended, is the condition of the promise. Now the Lord promiseth life and salvation to us, but if we believe, if we unfeignedly repent and turn to him, if we resolve and set upon a course of sincere and new obedience: and if we will not come up to these terms, he tells us plainly, there is no salvation for us, but we shall dye in our sins. Now is it not plain, that these are conditions of the Covenant, and of the promised salvation, without which men can have no interest, right, or ti∣tle to what is so promised, Undoubtedly they are Conditions, whether men call them so, or no. I am very confident, that many are prejudiced a∣gainst the term condition, upon a meer mistake. As they think, the word either aimeth at the setting up of the power of Nature, or the merits of mens
works, or both: when there is no such thing. A I hope sufficiently to clear it to you, before I hav done with this Subject, that this Covenants cond∣tions are neither meritorious of salvation, nor to b performed by the power of Nature, or of a ma own free will. Certainly, the Covenant of Gra knows, or admits of no such condition, as will  stand with the honour of free Grace, But the hono of Gods free grace is not onely secured, but pr∣claimed here, 1. That he would goe so low, th he is pleased to accept of sincere obedience, whe he might have exacted perfect obedience from  his creatures. 2. That he hath promised, and do work the condition in his people. 3. That he ha made so large and ample promise to, and doth so gl∣riously reward his own grace, and workings in h people. These things premised to prevent unjust prejudic I come to the proof of the proposition, that th Covenant of Grace hath some condition, or it is pro∣perly no covenant. A Covenant is mutuus contra∣ctus per sponsionem & stipulationem; It is a mutual engagement of parties, including a promise on th one part, and a stipulation, or condition to be per∣formed or required on the other part, on which the promise is suspended, And this is the difference be∣twixt a simple promise, and a Covenant; A promis bindeth one party, to wit, him that makes it: a Co∣venant bindeth both parties. Thus all Covenant doe necessarily imply, and include a condition. It is a very weak and frivolous exception, to say we confound the Covenant of works, and the Cove∣nant of Grace, if we make this conditional. Pray observe this, the Covenant of Grace ha∣ving
a condition, it follows that it hath the Nature f a covenant, hath that which is proper, and es∣ential to a Covenant: but it will by no means ollow, that it is of the same kind with the Cove∣ant of works, unless the condition were the ame I grant indeed sometimes the word [covenant]  used for an absolute promise, where there is no sti∣ulation: but then I say it is used improperly. As in Genesis 9.9. to ver. the 14. That which is there ermed a Covenant (probably to shew its firmness nd stability,) yet in strictness of speech is no more han an absolute promise. Now if men will compare he Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Noah, ot onely in regard of firmness, sureness, but of bsoluteness too, as equally, with condition; then hey must say, that to speak properly, there is but ne Covenant made with man, viz. the Covenant of Works; but as for that, we call the Covenant of Grace, it is properly no more, than an absolute romise, properly no Covenant. But if the Covenant of Works, and the Cove∣ant of Grace are distinct Species, they must necessa∣ily each of them partake of the nature of the genus, hat is, have what is essential to a Covenant in gene∣al, as this is essential, even a promise with a stipula∣ion or condition; in this they must both agree, or they annot both be Covenants, But then the difference f the conditions required in these two Covenants, hat is the thing, which makes the distinction be∣wixt these Covenants. I hope now you will be able to go along with me ere, that to deny the Covenant of Grace hath any ondition is to deny that it is a Covenant. I hope
Sirs, you will not deny, that there is any Cove of Grace, to deny conditions. 2. What is a Condition in a Covenant, but  upon which the promise is suspended, which be put, we may lay claim to what is promised,  without which we cannot claim what is promis Now is it not the Covenant of Grace that  forth and promiseth salvation; and it is not the p∣mise of salvation so suspended upon faith, repe∣ance, and sincere obedience, that all who have th same now mentioned may certainly expect salv on, may lay claim to it, (not indeed as a thing t merited by them, but onely merited by Christ  them, and graciously promised of God to the Such, and none but such (I speak of adult perso can hope to be saved. And is not that a conditio the promise, and of the Salvation promised,  if we have it, then salvation is ours by promise: if we have it not, it is none of ours, we can cl no such thing; One would think that one Text al were sufficient to decide this controversie, as g a controversie as it is, Rom. 10.9. If thou shalt  fess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe  thy heart, thou shalt be saved. Those with wh we have to doe in this controversie, will gr hope, that it is onely the Covenant of Grace wh holds forth salvation, that is, happiness as att∣able to man fallen. Now we see here, as evide may be, salvation held forth conditionally in  Scripture, [If thou believest with thy heart, &c.] therefore the Covenant of Grace holds forth sa tion conditionally. 3. I may argue otherwise from this clear tr which I hope they would be ashamed to deny,
That we are saved by Faith. Now if we are saved  Faith, we are saved by it, either as that unto which (though not for which) God hath promised salvation, d thus it's apparently made a condition, upon hich the promise of salvation is suspended: or e we are saved by faith, without respect to Gods acious Covenant and promise, which if so; then ith should save of it self, by some intrinsick me∣, or Vertue of its own; which I hope they that ny conditions in the Covenant, would not dare  assert. So 4. If faith, repentance, and sincere obedience, be t conditions required in the Covenant of Grace, I ould sain know, by what Law or Covenant they e required, is it the Covenant of Works; or of race, that saith, whosoever believeth shall be saved?  it the Covenant of Works, or of Grace, that th repent that your sins may be blotted out. If is be the Tenour of the Law, and Covenant of orks, Then the Law, and Covenant of Works veth Life: But if this be the Tenor of the Cove∣nt of Grace, if men will grant that, then it is ident, that the Covenant of Grace is not abso∣te, but conditionall. 5. Suppose the Covenant of Grace absolute, with∣nt condition, and then how is it possible for any an, or woman in the world to know, they have an terest in the Covenant, and the blessings thereof thout extraordinary divine revelation? So there uld be no such duty, as the Apostle Peter exhorts ristians unto, to make their calling and Election, d Salvation sure. If there be no conditions in the venant, then all would seem to have an equall re, or no share at all in it. If it be said, God
did not intend it for the benefit of all alike yet  withstanding, it is impossible that those to whom  doth intend the benefits and blessings of the Co nant, should know any such thing (since they are n expressed by name) if there be no conditions,  qualifications deciphering the persons to whom the special blessings do belong. Christians, take he of entertaining this opinion, as you would not su vert the true ground of spiritual peace, and con∣lation. This opinion is very prejudiciall to all sou solid, Scripture-hope, and joy. 6. We have proved before that the Covenant  Grace, doth partake of the Nature of a Law; the fore there must needs be something required. If were all promise, it could not be a Law. We so times read of Gods commanding the Covenant Psal. 111.9. He hath commaded his covenant  ever. Surely he doth not speak this of the Covenant of Works; for that is not the everlasting covenant the Scriptures speak of, As one observes. The is mention made of a covenant promised, Deut. 7.1 and there is mention also of a covenant command (Deut. 4.13.) not to imply two Covenants,  two parts of the same Covenant, and pray tell  what is the Bond of the covenant, if it layes no upon man? we read, Ezek. 20.37. of the Bond the Covenant; And surely (as one sayes) there is condition in that Bond. In Psal. 25.10. to keep Gods Covenant, and  Testimonies, are made all one. Covenant  Testimonies are Synonyma's, meaning Legem  re sancitam. The Ark was called the Ark of  covenant, because there was kept the book of  covenant, Gods Law, which by Covenant the
were bound to observe. [All the paths of the Lord re mercy and truth, unto such as keep his covenant nd his Testimonies. This text cannot speak of the ovenant of Works, sure. 1. Because there are one, that keep that Covenant. 2. Because  mercy belongs to that Covenant. No mercy s to be expected, upon the Terms of that Cove∣ant. Again, Psal. 103.18. To keep his covenant, and to remember his commandments to do them, are put to∣gether, the latter as exegetical of the former. And er. 17. the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting o everlasting upon such as keep his covenant. The covenant of works cannot be intended here, The Psalmist speaks of a covenant of mercy; which is yet a covenant requiring duty. There are com∣mands, as well as promises belonging to the cove∣nant of grace. Commands to be observed on our part, as well as Promises to be performed on Gods part. We must remember and consider, God is a God, that enters into covenant with us; and we are his Creatures, we that are taken into covenant. And how can it seem strange that a God in covenant requires duty and subjection of his creatures. But this will be further cleared when we come to shew, what the new covenant conditions are. 7. Seventhly. If the covenant of Grace hath no condition, then none could be said either to keep it or to break it. Then none could be guilty of trans∣gressing, or forsaking it. There is no thinking, that any man should keep the covenant of works. And if the covenant of Grace have no condition; then there is nothing in this covenant for men to keep. If the covenant be absolute, there can be no break∣ing
of it on mans part. If there are no conditio required, there are none to be observed. If m are bound to nothing in this covenant, then thou they doe nothing, they cannot be said to fail in ¦thing, to transgress and break this covenant.  yet men are sometimes charged, Deut. 29.25. Isa. .5. Psal. 78.10.37. pray think a little seriously this; If you say the Covenant is absolute, then cannot be broken on mans part; then if it be b¦ken, it should be broken by God himself. But it  horrid blasphemy to charge the Lord, that is fai¦full, with breach of covenant. The objections th are usually made against conditions in the Coven of Grace, have been answered already in what premised. To say. that a condition here would ¦rogate, from the perfection and fullness of Christ merit, or from the freeness of God's Grace in ¦stowing Covenant-blessings, hath no shew of re¦son, unless some meritorious condition was plead for. Those texts, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. wh some urge; I shall speak to, under the ninth prop¦sition. Well. I hope you have seen it cleared, and und¦niably proved, that the Covenant of Grace ha its Conditions. Now would you bring this tru home to your hearts, and consciences; Sirs, wh can you say for your selves, to evidence your rig and Title to the blessings promised? Are you tru believers, or not? Are you sound converts, or not Are you upright walkers, or not? Such you mu be, otherwise you cannot escape the condemnatio threatned, incurred by the breach of the Covena of Works, or enjoy the salvation held forth, and pro∣mised in the Covenant of Grace.
I may expect, that this Doctrine will not be pleasing to some. They have been called Legall Preachers, and Duty-mongers, &c. that have held, nd maintained the Covenant of Grace to be condi∣ional. But I have been wont still to suspect those ayes and opinions, which a carnal corrupt heart na∣rally complieth with. It is too probable, that uch are false wayes. How pleasing is it to flesh and ood, to tell sinners of an absolute Covenant, where od hath promised to doe all, requiring nothing of hem. Christ died to save sinners, & if you are sinners, er is no more to be said or done, but he died to save u; would not such doctrine please the vilest & most aceless wretches. As I remember a ranting Antino∣ian, that preached such Doctrine as this, about ambridge, That Fornicators, adulterers, effeminate, ieves, covetous, drunkards, &c. are the onely ieces cut out for heaven, Though certainly, it was treme blockishness, or something worse than block∣hness, not to take notice, that when the Apostle yes, 1 Cor. 6.11. [such were some of you] he im∣ediately addes, but ye are washed, but ye are san∣tified. If this were the message, Gods ministers ad to deliver, were we to tell the drunkard, the un∣ean wretch, the covetous, and unjust person, go∣g on to satisfie their lusts, that the promise of par∣on and salvation was theirs, as much as any ones; hat Christ and heaven did belong to them, as much  to any other; that their Right and Title, is as good  any ones; this could not but be welcome news o them. And if this were Gospel light, I wonder ow it is possible that Sinners should hate the light. ndeed I connot conceive how one that loves his usts, should not love such preaching. But alas
what is it, but to sow pillows under mens arm-hole This is to strengthen the hands of the wicked, th he should not return from his wicked way, by pr mising him life. This is to prophesie peace, but so  the false prophets were wont to doe. This is  smooth way indeed, but such as leadeth into th broad way. Take heed of it. This is not buildi souls towards heaven, but rather to hell, to lay foundation for security and presumption. I would fear to lay principles of despair or presumption either. As I durst not but encourage the greate Sinner amongst you to leave your sins; but say,  the Apostle, Act. 3.19. Repent, and be converte that your sins may be blotted out: So I durst not  courage any of you to live in sin, as if ye might co∣tinue in sin, and yet hope that Gods aboundi Grace would extend it self to you in the pard of your sins. No, if ye live after the flesh ye sh dye: but if through the Spirit, ye mortifie the dee of the body ye shall live, Rom. 8.13. Mark 1.15. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel. Sect. 7. PROP. VII. The Condition of the Covenant of Grace is  performed by God or by Christ for us;  by us; (the Lord enabling us.) SOme that will not hear of the Covenant of Gra having any Condition, yet that they may not
thought enemies to faith, repentance, new obedi∣ence, would fain salve the matter thus, Mr. Patient, Dist. of Cove∣nants, p. 30, 31. It is a Covenant without all condition required in the creature, but what God himself performeth. Now though I freely grant no man would perform the condition of the Covenant of Grace, without special grace and help from God; yet to say, It is without all condition, but what God him∣self performeth, is a rash, unsound assertion. For, First, It is self-contradiction. It is to say the Co∣venant is absolute, and not absolute; without all condition, and not without all condition required in the creature. Secondly, It is indeed blasphemous to say that God doth believe in us, repent in us, obey in us. He giveth the grace & ability, but it is man that performeth the Act. He giveth his people that special help, whereby they come to believe, repent, obey. But it is one thing for God to enable us to perform the condition, and another to perform it himself. It is below the Majesty of God to perform the condition for us; as it is above us, quite above our strength, to perform it without him. Thirdly, If there be no condition required in the creature, but what God performeth, then the Co∣venant should run thus, I the Lord do promise re∣mission and salvation unto you, upon this condition that I give you an heart to believe and repent, upon condition that I perform this in, and for you. Thus God should require the condition of him∣self not of us. Which is most absurd. Fourthly, Thus men should not deserve to suffer for non-performance of the condition; it being that
which God is to perform, and otherwise not re∣quired in, or of the creature. If the Covena lieth wholly on Gods part, then how are men puni able for not keeping Covenant? This is eviden that such as have the Gospel preached to them, a do not come up to the Terms of the new Covenan (do not believe, and repent,) they not onely d prive themselves of the life and happiness there pro∣mised, but also incurre the penalty threatned. No will God punish any for unbelief, when faith w not required of them; or not required, till th Lord performed it in them? If that position I a disproving, were true, the Gospel should new threaten condemnation for unbelief. Where Go performeth this for any, that they believe, they a freed from condemnation upon that account; and  for others, who have not this performed in them, is not required of them, God requiring no mo than he performeth. By this time I hope you a sensible, that it a dangerous assertion, to say,  requireth nothing in the Covenant of Grace, but  he performeth. And so it is as false to say, that the condition of  Covenant is performed by Christ. It is enough for us (says one) to belie that Christ hath repented for us, Saltmarsh. b∣lieved for us. But it is not required of Christ, but of us sinne to repent, and believe. Jesus Christ was made ∣der the Law, and kept it to a tittle, fulfilled  righteousness, he performed the condition of t  Covenant. The Covenant of Works, whi  brake, Christ fulfil'd. But he was not un the Gospel, nor was he concerned to perform the co dition
of the Covenant of Grace, but onely to see that his people the heirs of salvation do per∣form it. To advise souls that doubt of their Gospel sinceri∣ty, to see it in Christ (as Mr. Saltmarsh does) to see it in Christ, who hath obeyed perfectly, is miserably to confound the conditions of the two Covenants, which ought to be most carefully distinguished. And it implieth thus much, as if such were troubled about what doth not at all concern them. Why should any trouble themselves about the condition of the Cove∣nant of Grace, to find it in themselves, if Christ hath performed the same for them? As if souls should disquiet themselves, that they cannot see how they can satisfie Gods justice for their sins, when Christ hath done that, and it is not expected from them. If Christ hath performed the condition of the Cove∣nant of Grace for us, then it belongeth not to us to perform it. It is done already to our hand. And we should not presume to take Christs work out of his hand. And if Christ fulfilled the conditions of both Co∣venants for us, then it followeth, that even as he made us without us, so he saveth us without us; con∣trary to Phil. 2.12. So likewise it followeth, that all for whom Christ hath satisfied (whether they were all mankind, or all the Elect) are immediately justified, actually discharged from all sin, and con∣demnation, immediately interested in the benefits and blessings of the Covenant of Grace, in a state of sal∣vation, as soon as ever they are in being; there be∣ing nothing required to their interest in the same, but what Christ hath done for them. So it follows, that such were never children of wrath, but alwaies
in a state of reconciliation with God, contrary t Eph. 2.3. And so again, that we are not justified b faith: but before faith, and without it, contrary t Rom. 5.1. And then, what should hinder, but that me may be justified and saved, who never do believe contrary to Mark 16.16. He that believeth not sh be damned. But that the condition of the covenant Grace is not performed by Christ, but by us, appea from that Proposition cleared and proved before That the Covenant of Grace is not betwixt God an Christ, but betwixt God and us, or betwixt Chr and us. Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except, &c. Sect. 8. PROP. VIII. Though we are to perform the condition of th Covenant of Grace, yet we should never per∣form it of our selves, without the help o special Grace. THis appears, 1. From the consideration of mans natur condition: what we all are without Grace. Nat rally we are without strength, Rom. 5.6. under th power of Satan, Luk. 11.21, 22. blinded and le by him, 2 Cor. 4.4. Eph. 2.2. unable to disce spiritual things aright, 1 Cor. 2.14. Our minds a
wills at enmity against God, so ill disposed, that they cannot subject to, cannot but rebel against the Law of God, Rom. 8.7. and we all found dead in trespasses and sins, Eph. 2.1, 5. Col. 2.13. Hillary wrote to St. Augustine of many in France, who thought, In naturâ licèt vitiatâ, residuam esse talem facultatem, quae suo conatu possit medicum quae∣rere, i.e. incipere. A likely thing, that dead souls should seek to the Physitian of themselves; or that they should come upon a bare external call. Suade∣la non sufficit, sed opus est medelâ. They have too slight thoughts of the corruption of mans nature, who see not special grace of absolute necessity to con∣version. That corruption which hath depraved all a mans faculties, which renders man an enemy to God, and his own souls truest good, where this ill constitution of soul is become natural, it must needs be a mighty work indeed to subdue this corruption, to turn the soul from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. 2. From the Scripture expressions used, to set forth the first inward discriminating grace, that with∣out which there is no believing, no repenting, or obeying aright. The Father's drawing, Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day. Hereupon says our Amesius. It would seem to be of no less power this drawing men to Christ, In Coron. Art. 4. c. 8. Sect. 5. (mihi) p. 252. than rai∣sing them from the dead: otherwise Christ should attribute the lesser work to his Father, and the greater to himself. Sure it is, the Fathers drawing must denote some inward efficacious work, not meer Moral sua∣sion.
For all that are drawn of the Father (in th sense of this Text) they come to Christ, (see ver. 45.) but all that have morall suasion do not come. Those carnal Jews, Christ was preaching unto there, ha moral suasion; yet did not come, not being draw of the Father. And is it not as plain, that the Fa∣thers drawing determineth mans will, is not deter∣mined by it? Otherwise he should not so proper∣ly be said to draw men, as to be drawn: he should not lead, but follow. It is giving a new heart, Ezek. 36.26. Does Go give a new heart to all? Surely no. Therefore thi intended something more, than any common help af∣forded to all. All have not a new heart given them. If no more were included in it, than moral suasion then Ministers might be said to give men a new heart, when they perswade them to get their hearts renewed. But that an inward efficacious heart-changing work is intended in that expression may appear from Deut. 29.2. Yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive] when as he had given them (besides their natural faculties) his word, miracles, abundance of means, fitted to work on them objectively, morally. And certainly Gods putting his Law in our inward parts, and writing it in our hearts, Ezek. 36.27. is more than bare re∣vealing it, more than offering it to our understanding. Besides the illumination of the understanding, it must needs include a renewing of the will. And there is no obeying God aright, till he give us this heart to obey. No believing in Christ, till the Lord give us an heart to believe. Thus Faith is the gift of God. Ministers may preach the necessity of faith, may perswade to it, but cannot give it.
It is Gods taking away the heart of stone, and giving an heart of flesh, Ezek. 36.26. The stony heart of man would never yield of it self, or relent of it self. It is called regeneration, Joh. 3.3. A being born again, born from above, born of God. And no believing till we are born of God, Joh. 1. v. 12, 13. We must be spiritually alive otherwise we cannot act spiritually. No believing without re∣generation, therefore no believing without special grace. Will any say, that regeneration is no more than moral suasion? or that it is common to all? Is this their gratia sufficiens, which they would have given to all? Then if all have regene∣ration, if all are born of God, it follows, all are the children of God, and all are believers; for so are all that are born of God. Methinks this i plain, All are not born of God; but it is of his special grace that any are thus born again. Yet no believing without being born of God: and so no believing without special grace. Not that we are to suppose any intervall, or di∣stance of time betwixt the Act of Gods Grace, irra∣diating the understanding, and renewing, rectifying the will, and the enlightned and rectified mind and wills act of closing with Christ: but that Gods Act is first in order. His drawing in order of nature be∣fore mans coming. Again, It is , and, , Eph. 1.19.  exceeding greatness of his power, the ener  the might of his power, which he puts forth, en∣abling souls to believe. Now were it not neeless, that he should put forth this extraordinary,  natural
power, if men could believe of them selves, without any special grace, or help from him? So it is called a new creation, quickning or re∣surrection from the dead, Anast. Sinait. d. rect. fid. dog. l. 1. Eph. 2.5,  Neque enim ab alio aliquo potes recr ari, praeterquam ab eo qui initio te crea∣vit. To create, quicken, raise from the dead, these are special works of divine almighty power. 3. To some, which implies, that they have it not of themselves: but must have it from Him. Promisit enim quod ipse factu∣rus fuerat, non quod homines; quia etsi faciant homines bona, ipse facit, ut illi faciant quae praecepit; non illt faciunt ut pse faciat, quod promisit, Aug. From the promise God hath made of giving Grace. When the Lord pro∣miseth to circumcise their heart, to love him, Deu 30.6. doth not this imply that a natural uncircumci∣sed heart cannot love him (the uncircumcised heart cannot love God, as the uncircumcised ear cannot hearken to him, Jer. 6.10.) And that no man can circumcise his own heart, no can any creature so prepare, and dispose the heart o another to love God? But that this must be the work of the Lord God. [The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, &c.] So Ezek. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh. The Lord needed not to have made such promises, if sinne could do the work of themselves. 4 If men may believe, and repent of them∣selves, Frustran. & stultè ab alio peti∣mus, qod vel jam habemus, vel quod sic in nostra positum est po∣testate, ut ab alio dannum, seu fa∣ciendum non expecte mus. D. Ward. (Grat. Diserim.) p. 343. without the spe∣cial help of Divine grace then what need they to pray to God for Grace what need they pray for that, which is in their
own power already? As S. August. noteth of the Pelagians, Destruunt etiam orationes quas facit Ecclesia, sive pro infidelibus, & doctrinae Dei resi∣stentibus, ut convertantur ad Deum: sive pro fide∣libus, &c. de haeres. c. 88. I cannot understand how they can heartily pray for grace for themselves or others, that assert the liberty of mans will, in opposition to the special de∣termining grace of God. How shall they pray to the Lord to turn them, (as Jer. 31.18.) to change their hearts, to order their steps in his word, to encline their hearts to keep his Laws, who hold that all God does is to set mans will in aequilibrio, in an equal poize, not that he ever determineth mans will so by his grace, but leaveth it free to determine it self? And if we must hold, that God giveth to all men that are alike in their carriage, like grace, in com∣mon; not to one more, to another less; then how can I pray or hope, that he should do that for me, which he will not do for every one in the world, of the like condition and capacity with me? Yea, why should men pray at all? If this be the inflexible rule of his dealings with the children of men, there would seem to be no more ground for prayer here, than that we should pray that the ordinances of heaven, and Gods Covenant with day and night might conti∣nue to the end of the world, that sun and moon might still keep their course, or on the other hand pray for an alteration of the most settled course of na∣ture. Thus all our prayers for grace should signifie no more, than such a declaration as this, Lord, thou hast given man freedom of will to choose, or re∣fuse
life and happiness, and such means and m∣tives thou hast vouchsafed and given, the bett to direct him in his choice. Now this is all that or any one can expect at thy hands, that th wouldst assist my natural faculties in that genera way, as thou dost assist the faculties of all me notwithstanding which general help there is n one of many, but chooseth death and misery befo everlasting life and happiness; yet I crave  more, and look for no more, but that comm help thou wouldst not deny to any one in  circumstances, and let it be left to my own will,  take what course it pleaseth. Now is this to pr for converting grace, or rather is it not to declar we have no need of it, or no ground to pray for in yet, This is the Result of that opinion, which se up the Liberty of mans will, or power of nat against the special grace of God; which wheth it be not very horrid, let those that know wh prayer is, and what their own hearts are, how co∣rupt and ill inclined, and that know what grace  consider seriously of it, take advice, and speak the minds. 5. Take away special Grace, deny that, an you must say, believers are no way bound to prai God in special, above other men. How are the obliged to praise God above others, for whom  does no more, than he doth for others? But does n this sound very harshly, that they that believe, a are saved, are no more beholden to the Grace God, than such are, who reject Christ and the Go∣pel, and so dye and perish? yet so it must be, God give but the same help to those, which the
other had. Nec dici potest Petrum ideo accepisse majus bene∣ficium quam Judas, quod habeat gratiam adjuvan∣tem per modum concursus, quam Judas non habet. Nam praeterquam quod Petrus sua acceptatione se∣se a Juda antecedenter discrevit ad gratiae adju∣vantis cooperationem; haec ipsa gratia adjuvans aeque parata est ex eorum hypo∣thesi Judae atque Petro, ac proinde hac ex parte ae∣quale est beneficium cum ex aequo utrisque paretur, & offeratur, Dr. Ward [Grat. Discrim.] p. 328, 329. Yea, for as much as many that are now amned did once enjoy more f the means of salvation, ore common helps, more f that they call sufficient race, than some that are ved; if there be not some ecial grace vouchsafed to ese, which the other had ot, they should be less obli∣ed unto God, which one ould tremble to think of. That some do believe, when thers believe not, if you ny special grace, you must y, it is not because God did more for the one, than r the other: but because by the free act of their wn will, the one did improve that grace and help ouchfafed to men in common, which the other sort eglected, would not improve. Thus indeed the ill of man is made the direct, true, and proper use of his first conversion and coming unto Christ; nd the divine grace and help no more than barely an ntecedent, or a faint causa sine quâ non, That hich being put, yet it was altogether uncertain, hether the happy effect would follow; which had en in vain, and utterly lost, but that the free ill of such thought good to determine the matter n its side. Thus a man should owe the praise of s own conversion, not so much to Gods Grace as  his own free will; his willing to accept of, and prove that same exciting grace, which others had  common with him, and rejected, or resisted.
Thus a man maketh himself to differ, even in th main, that highest point of difference, true savi grace. Surely common grace (which they supp vouchsafed to all upon equal terms) this can make the difference: therefore it must be either Go special Grace, or mans free will. If you deny thes mer of these, you give the praise of that to the∣ter. What a graceless opinion is that (Sirs) wh tendeth to make men so ungratefull to Gods grac Once we find the Pharisee brought in, as givi thanks to God, that he was not as the Publican.  if they that are converted, had not stood o as well as others, but for some special grace vou safed to them, which was denied to others that sta out, they cannot (with understanding and serio∣ness) give thanks to God for making that differen which not his grace, but their own free will make. Though some may say, They owe this to G that he hath given them such liberty of will. A noble, Seraph. Love p. 117. and ingenious writer speaks of Jew, that thought men owed more God, than the very Angels do;  this reason, that whereas God without any go work of theirs, Was not that a blasphe∣mous saying of Seneca, ni∣gro carbone not andum, (E∣pist. 53) Est aliquid quo sapiens antecedat Deum; ille naturae beneficio, non suo sapiens est. but p out of his goodness confe on them that blest conditi they enjoy; by giving  a free will, by the goodn of which he may glorifie  maker, when by abusing 'tis in his power to dishonour him, he allows  that highest satisfaction, and priviledge of coope∣ting to his own felicity. Thus the Jew.
But here I digress a little, only in him we may e our own hearts naturally, we are proud, loth  be beholden, would sacrifice to our own nets. But that which I was saying, is, that it is not ough for men to acknowledge themselves indebted nto God, for giving them such power and freedom f will; though it is true, thus it appears to be iginally from God, that any do accept of Grace dered. (Pelagius that was all for setting up the ower of Nature, yet ad frangendam invidiam, and  beguile others, would call it grace.) But grant at the power is from God At vero inquies, habuit a Deo id posse. At vero inquam, habuit a Deo posse & in malum ferri, idque ex vestra senientia, nempe, . Er∣go non aliter erit a Deo quod voluntas fertur in bonum, quam quod in malum, Camer. Defens. cap. 20. p. 277. et if that be all that God oth in converting a sinner,  give him this natural ower, and some common ace besides; and so does ave it to a mans own will  strike the concluding eak, it followeth, God is ut the remote cause of a ans conversion; and mans ill the immediate cause; yea, the onely cause of e difference, that one man is converted, when thers remains unconverted, to whom God vouch∣fed equal means and help. This is an opinion erefore, that robbeth God of the praise due to his ame, to give undue praise to man. Of the Co∣venant. p. 24. s Mr. Ball sayes well, "That man  believeth, this he oweth unto God, and  that not simply alone, but comparatively  in respect of others, who believe not. 6. If faith were of our selves, if we should be∣eve without any special Grace, then have we some∣thing
of our own, whereof to glory. But we h nothing of our own to glory of. Boasting is ∣terly excluded by the Law of faith, Rom. 3.27. 1 C 4.7. The good use of common Grace (which  most abuse) is a consid∣ble something Quod ergo minus est, vo∣luntas accepit a Deo; ni∣mirum, ut poneretur in indifferenti quadam me∣dietate, ut crederet, vel non crederet; quod autem majus est, ipsumque even∣tum specificat, sibi ex se praestitit voluntas ipsa, nempe, ut actu crederet. Suffrag. Britan. de 3. & 4. art. thes. 3. p. 140.. And here something which the ad∣saries of special grace  deny, that men receive. Th will grant men receive  posse credere; but Tò cred (which is a great deal mo that we use that power  common grace better th others, this we do not ∣ceive, but have it of our selves, our free will.  yet the Apostle tells us, God worketh in us, Tò , to will, as well as to do. Now I come to answer some objections again special grace; and its efficiency in the work of sinners conversion. Object. 1. Does not this overthrow the nature mans will? The will is free, and cannot be forced. Answ. The will is not compelled, but enclin and determined by grace. Mans will (considered in his lapsed estate) is  morally free, not free from a vicious sinfull incl∣tion. All that do not denye original sin, must gr this. Now hence it follows that without a spec work of Grace, turning and changing the natural be and inclination of the will, a man cannot break  his sins, give up himself to obey God, to be  and governed by Jesus Christ. That a man left himself would do nothing but sin, would never le
the trade of sinning, Gen. 6.5. Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart being onely evil continual∣ly. Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, &c. Now it is the work of divine grace to enlighten the mind, and renew the will, to heal it of that cor∣rupt inclination, to take off that strong propension of the soul to sin, and its prejudice, perverseness, and obstinacy against God and Jesus Christ. And as this is taken off, the soul is coming on towards God, of unwilling is made willing to believe, repent, obey. And the more that the former sinfull inclina∣tion, and perverse disposition is taken off, the more willing and free is the soul unto these gracious Acts. Now if you can but distinguish betwixt the na∣tural power, or faculty of the will, and the moral vicious habits and inclinations of the will, you will see clearly that Grace doth not overthrow the nature of the will or of its Acts: but onely is contrary to that evil inclination brought in by the fall. They that suppose Gods Grace goeth thus far with all, as o set their wills in an equal inclination, to good as to evil, they will not deny (sure) but that with∣out this grace, mans will was only enclined and de∣termined unto evil. Now if when mans will was wholly, and onely enclined unto evil, the Grace of God could work thus far on it, as to bring it to an equilibrium, to an indifferency or hovering betwixt two (whereas it was only one way bent before) I say, if Grace could thus far turn the bent of the will without overthrowing the nature of the will, and intrenching on its Liberty, let any man give us a reason, why the grace of God may not goe one step further with the will, so as to encline and deter∣mine
it to good, (that the prevailing bent of th will should be that way) still without infringing  Liberty. I cannot see any danger, or inconvenience in gra∣ing [that men have a natural power to believe a obey] rightly explained. That when God co∣mandeth us to believe, repent, &c. he doth  command what is naturally impossible, what we ha no more power to do, than to cause the sun a moon to stand still, or to remove mountains with  word. No, God hath given man those faculties,  powers of understanding and will, which are a to obey, and receive his Commands, if they we not hindered by an evil disposition, and inclinatio at first contracted by the fall, and further increas strengthened and rooted, by the abuse of them  the practice of sin, but though men have the natur powers, or faculties, for want of a right constituti of them, they would never produce any graci Acts of themselves. A meer natural power is  enough here, where there is no moral power,  true disposition and inclination to that which is tr spiritually good. And there is no such dispositi or inclination without Grace. Now as men ha a Natural power to believe and obey, but no true ∣clination thereunto without Grace, so we may  on the other hand, men have a natural power to rep Christ and his commands, where special grace vouchsafed Note, that the Anti-Arminians grant both resistibilitatem connat natural power of resisting (inseparable from the will, as it is a  faculty) & resistibilitatem adnaam, which is more than a powe resisting, even a proneness to resist, arising from the depravation of will; yea, and actualem resistentiam, some actual resistance, a from that vicious adnate power or proneness to resist; they only  actualem resistentiam vincentem, to be consistent with converting gr Vid. Dr. Ward. ubi supra. p. 270, 271, 199, 303, 306., but they are otherwise inclined, th
see that in Christ and the Gospel, and have their wills so far rectified by grace, that they would not for a thousand worlds reject him. The prevailing bent of their wills now is fully, heartily, thorowly to close with, and cleave to him. But by this which hath been said, I hope it is not hard to understand, how God by his special grace enclineth and determineth mans will after such a manner, that the will does also determine it self. That his people become willing in the day of his power, Psal. 110.3. As Mr. Ball solidly and judici∣ously. Repentance is the Gift of God, Of the Cove∣nant, p. 344. but the Act of Man. God is the cause of willing, efficient, but not formal; the cause external and effective: but not vitally effi∣cient &c. plainly thus, It is man that repenteth, believeth by the help of Gods Grace. And grace oes so move and encline the will to believe and re∣pent, as doth admirably agree with the nature of the will, According to that speech of one of the An∣ients, Gratiâ Dei humanum non aufertur, sed sana∣ur arbitrium: non adimitur, sed corrigitur, non vacuatur sed adjuvatur. Certainly, the will ne∣er Acts more freely, than when made free by Grace. I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart. Draw me, and we e will run after thee. Yet take this along with you, that as the influx of divine grace, is very sweet in the souls conversion, So it is very powerful nd efficatious. As it doth not oppose the wills act∣ing freely, So neither doth it leave the will at un∣ertainty. Turn thou me and I shall be turned; for thou rt the Lord my God, Jer. 31.18. Necessariò pec∣at homo ante gratiam, neque tamen haec peccandi ne
cessitas pugnat cum Naturali voluntatis libertate, ∣potius cum eadem pugnabit bene volendi necessitas ∣gratiam? (Testard. d. Nat. & grat. Sect. 25 p. 211, 212.) As a Learned man observes.  is so ordained of God (as general Law of Nature That betwixt the object appointed, Amyrald in Thes. Salm. par. 2. de fide p. 101. Sect. 40. to certain fac∣ties, and the faculties the∣selves rightly constituted there should be such a ce∣tain proportion Which I see Arminius sometimes grants, Orat. de Aut. & fine Theol. Sequetur intellectus di∣latationem ampliatio vo∣luntatis—ex nativa intel∣lectus & voluntatis con∣venientia, acingenita u∣trique analogia. &c., answer ableness and consent, th if they be fitly applyed  one another, it cannot be b there should hence proce a suitable operation. Th (there is as he says) inter intellectum ac veritatem is luctabilis analogia, such an unavoidable proport and sutableness betwixt the understanding and tru that the understanding rightly disposed, cannot b assent to truth demonstrated. And there is no  agreement inter bonm & appetitum, that the rat∣nal appetite rightly constituted cannot but cleave good clearly apprehended, and duly presented to certainly it must be granted that the understand cannot assent to that which is false, sub ratione  as false; nor can the will choose that which is e sub ratione mali, as evil. As I told you before,  incogitancy or inadvertency was the first step to  fall, want of a due application of the object to  faculty. Thus on the other hand serious consid∣tion is the first step to recovery. Spiritual thi spiritually discerned would produce spiritual affe
ns, and put upon gracious endeavours. It is true, that there is no proportion or agreeableness betwixt  carnal mind and spiritual things. But it is as na∣tural for the soul prepared by divine grace, freely o close with Christ offered, and to submit to his Laws (as desirous in all things to be governed by im;) as it is natural to carnal unregenerate men to n freely, who are only that way inclined, Though grant there is a contrary corrupt inclination still re∣maining in the regenerate, who are renewed and sanctified but in part, yet the prevailing bent and in∣lination of the soul is towards God and Christ. But Object. 2. Where is the iustice of God, in re∣uiring faith of men, and condemning men for un∣elief, if it be so, that they have no power to be∣ieve without special grace? Answ. 1. I should fear advancing and honouring ne Attribute of Gods in such a way, as would ne∣essarily deny, or dishonour any other of his Attri∣utes. As it is sinfull to set up and advance grace fter such a manner, as is inconsistent with Gods oliness, or justice. This would be but to reproach ur maker. But certainly Gods justice is to be leared, without the clouding or ecclipsing, with∣ut the denying or diminishing of his Grace. or. 2ly. Is not God just in requiring perfect obedi∣nce of fallen man? And are not sinners obnoxious o punishment for every sin, and act of disobedi∣nce? Now Arminius will grant ou, Resp. ad. 9. quest. f. 176. that a man cannot keep the Law f God perfectly, secundum rigorem, ut onely secundum . Cor∣vinus
I think stretcheth the Lawyers saying too  Lex aut ad obedientiam, obligat, aut  poenam, Censur. Anat. Arm. c. 8. Sect. 7. p. 122. that one is not obliged by  same Law both to punishment, and obedience. Which must be taken wi restriction, in reference to the same act. For a La may oblige to punishment for past disobedience, a yet oblige to obedience for future, too; yet sayes b when therefore man lay under the curse,  was no further obliged to obedience, ibid. becaus God would no longer be served by him. F that God will be served of his creature, it is  favour. But as Mr. Ball sayes. It is altogeth undecent, Ball of the Cove∣nant, p. 289. especially to the w∣dom and righteousness of Go that that which provokes the ex∣cution, should procure the abrogation of his Law That that should supplant and undermine the Law for the alone preventing whereof, the Law w before established. The truth is, it cannot but  the creatures duty to serve God, and obey him  all that he is pleased to command. It is but rig and just that God should require this of all, even  sinful creatures. The creatures guilt is no fair pl against Gods right. It is against all reason that ma disobedience should discharge him from a tye to ob∣dience, that his transgressing Gods commands show void Gods right of commanding. Shall the cre∣tures running into rebellion, deprive God of  Soveraign Authority, justle him out of his Thron As Corceius reasoneth well, d. foed. c. 4. Sect. 71. p. 76. si  lato praemio & introducto reatu p∣cessaret obligatio, then it would see that man from the beginning could be bound by
Law, but what he voluntarily would accept of. For f by a mans choosing to undergo the guilt and pun∣shment, rather than to perform obedience, the ob∣ligation be disolved, it would seem the Obligation was rather arbitrarily taken on him, as in a free con∣tract betwixt a servant and his master: not that he was naturally, necessarily bound to obey God, from his very being; as he was his Creature. And be∣sides it would follow (as the forementioned Author also notes) that there should be no actual sin, but onely the first sin of Adam. Thirdly, To come closer to the objection, I would not say simply, that a man hath no power to believe, but no will to believe, without special grace, posse cre∣dere naturae est hominum; velle credere gratiae est fideli∣um. Or thus, we must distinguish of power (as was inted in the Answer to the former objection) power s either Physical, i.e. Natural; or Ethical, moral. That in Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, may be well explained by that, John 5.40. ye will not come o me, ye cannot come, because ye will not: ye will not come, without special grace draw and encline you to it: But if mens wills were to it, they should not be kept off for want of power. Did ever any thing hinder any soul's coming unto Christ that was truly willing to come. But (you will say) sinners cannot will to come to Christ, but I would ask you again, why can they not will to come to him? If they have Christ held forth, and hear the Gospel inviting sinners to him; what is it but a wicked perverse disposition, and in∣clination of will, that keepeth them from him, as
Mr. Of the Cove∣nant, p. 244. Ball sayes well He that refuse to come, refuseth not through inab∣lity, as unable, though willing and desirous to i∣brace it, but willingly preferring some base inferi good before it. And again, That man be∣lieveth, p. 245. this he oweth unto God, and th not simply alone, but comparatively in respe of others who believe not: but that man ref∣seth the promises of mercy, this is of himself, n of simple or Natural infirmity which might pre∣cure pity, but of his own perverseness and low to some inferior good, &c. (you may see more i him to this purpose, p. 343. Object. 3. Do you not make God as one th mocketh, in the tenders of his grace, offering mercy to sinners on such terms, and conditions, as they cannot attain to without special grace which i vouchsafed but to a few of many. Answ. No. God do's not mock sinners but is a serious as may be, telling them on what terms he wi be gracious to them. That if they will come i they shall find mercy; otherwise not. Thus the Covenant of Grace holdeth forth a pos∣bility of Salvation to sinners, condemned by th Law and Covenant of works, and is there no grac in this? Again, here the Lord requires less, than i strict justice he might require, less than the law o works, (which all men naturally are under) doth ex∣act. And is there no grace in that? And what he requires, he hath absolute promised to work in some. And is wont to work i his people by the calls, invitations, promises, &c.  his word and Gospel. His grace and spirit concur∣ring, and is there no grace herein.
But let God be true, and every man a liar. Is He not beforehand with sinners? Did he mock the world, when he gave his Son to be the Saviour of ll, and every one that would believe in him? Does e mock men, in calling, and perswading them to Christ in the Gospel? should any one of them be re∣ected, if they came? yea, does he not ordinarily concurre with the word and outward means, in some sort to prepare men for converting grace? And can it be proved, that ever he deserted any one in the way to conversion, till provoked by their neglect of him, and rejecting of his grace offered? As one of the Antients, Qui & priusquam deseratur, neminem deserit, & multos desertores sepe convertit. Does he not complain of sinners, Because when he called they refused, Prov. 1.24. Now what an unjust, and unworthy thing is it, for any to charge God, as if he dealt not cordially with us in the offers of his grace, when he denys special grace to none, but such as have first neglected to improve common grace. And certainly, men may as soon perswade be∣lievers out of their senses, to conceit the Sun is a dark spot, that snow is black, and fire cold, and honey bitter, As that God in the Covenant of Grace doth meerly pretend and make show of grace and mercy to sinners: but that in very deed he only mocks them. O that sinners would try, whether God is not seri∣ous. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for be will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7. As I live saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, Ezek. 33.11. O sinners will you trie, whe∣ther
the Lord be not serious, O that you could b perswaded to try! you would never repent of th repentance, Turn to the Lord and you would the resolve, (by the help of his grace) never to tu away from him more. If now you will say, Alas, we cannot turn.  must tell you from God, then you cannot live. A it is as if a malefactor taken and reprehended shoul say, I cannot leave this course of mine, I canno leave my trade of thieving, robbing. A moral can∣not, that is indeed a will-not. It is very true, tha the  velle, the moral power is not vouchsafed to al God doth not work in every one [to will] yet h vouchsafeth means for the removall of impotency natural; So they that have Gospel-calls, have  posse si velint. They might come if they would. A the hindrance is in themselves, in their perver wills. As Mr. Ball (p. 343.) The invitation is no so hard, that a man cannot fulfill it, if he would but such as if man would, he could not but exe∣cute. Now will you say God is not serious, whe he calleth you? But one day it will appear, tha you only were guilty in this respect, that yo would not be perswaded seriously to attend to God most serious offers, indeed sinners will not be seri∣ous, but tempt Christ, mock God most shamefully and yet think to excuse themselves by charging Go foolishly, as if he mocked them, and dealt not truly and sincerely with them. But seeing the reason why men do not turn t God, is not that the thing required is unreasonable (what can be more reasonable, than that a sinner wh deservs to be for ever damned should judge and con∣demn himself, acknowledge and turn from his ini∣quities,
and most heartily and gladly lay hold on, and embrace Mercy and a Pardon offered, prising it a∣bove any thing in the World.) Since it is thus, God does not require any unreasonable thing of men, but the true direct and proper cause of their standing off, is the unreasonable wickedness and per∣versness of their own wills: It is evident that men are in all the fault, that they do not turn to God, and that their Destruction is of themselves. And though God takes hold of some by his Grace, and Spirit (as the Angel took hold of Lot, who o∣therwise had perished in Sodom) thus the Lord by his special Grace prevents some (whom he hath Elected unto Life) that they should not run upon Eternal Ruine, with the generality of the World; yet this is a most free Dispensation of his rich Grace. And had the Lord done no more for these chosen Ves∣sels, than for the basest Potsheards of the Earth, yet they could not justly have blamed him, as any way behind-hand with them: Had he left all Man∣kind to perish in their Sins, God had been Righte∣ous and the whole World without Excuse. One thing more, They Argue thus, what is it, but to Mock men, for the Lord to Invite and Call on them to come, who (he knows) will not come without Special Grace, which yet he gives not to the far greater part of men Invited. They might as well Argue thus against Divine Presci∣ence: Num, obsecro te, non novit certo qui parituri, qui Minus? Deus igitur etiam vestro judicio fue∣rit Hypocrita qui vocat quos scit non parituros. Non potuit Deus hanc contumaciam emollire, & penitus abolere? Deus igitur vo∣is quidem arbitris, Tyrannus. Camero. Defens. c. 16. p. 273. If God certainly fore∣sees who will not come in up∣on the Gospel-Call, why does
he once Invite them? Are not all Gospel Calls vain to such, as he knows will never hearken them, and worse than in vain (because the Agg∣vation of their Sin and Condemnation?) Will th say, that those gracious Calls will further cle Gods Justice in the Condemnation of such ungra∣ful, sinful wretches as despised them, that thus the will be left the more without Excuse? So we  say the same. Object. 4. Do you not evidently make God Respecter of Persons, if he gives that special Gra to some, which he denies to others every  equal to the former. Answ. I think that it is a good a necessary Distinction here to Disti∣guish between a Benefactor and Judge, Vid. Cameron. Defens. c. 15. p. 227, 228, 229, 230. or Rector. Consider God Rector, and Judge, and so he is  respecter of persons, he gives one Law to all, la down the same Rule for all; he commandeth all m every where to Repent. And according to the sa Law he Judgeth, 1 Pet. 1.17. VVho without ∣spect of persons Judgeth. God is an Impartial Jud In matters of Judgment it is a fault to respect Pe∣sons, and this cannot be charged upon God,  dispenseth both gracious Rewards, and just Punis∣ments, according to those certain, known Rules la down in his VVord; he giveth Reward unto  Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and the that fear his Name, small and great, Rev. 11.1 So in that Text, Acts 10.34. God is no respect of persons, but in every Nation he that feareth hi and worketh Righteousness is accepted of hi He that Believeth (of what Rank or Condition so∣ver)
shall be saved. On the other hand, he that Be∣lieveth not (be he who he will, how High or Rich, or Great soever) shall be Damned; God will Judge righteous Judgment, and render to every one according to his work. Tribulation and Auguish upon every Soul of man that doth evil, that obeyeth unrighteousness, Rom. 2.5, 6, 9. But then secondly, Consider God in those special Acts of Grace and Bounty wherein he is not to be looked on as Judge, but as a Free-Doner, or Bene∣factor only: And who can say, that here he may not respect some, more than others? As a Benefa∣ctor may dispense his Favours where he pleaseth. May not God do what he will with his own? In∣deed what is any mans by promise, he will not lien, or take away. He hath promised Pardon and Salvation to every true Believer, and will be as good as his word. Every true Believer shall have them; and none but such may expect them. But s for the working of Faith, and giving of the Con∣dition to which Heaven and Happiness is promised, e hath not so bound up himself. But it is certain, e does that for some, which he denies to do for o∣thers, their Equals, or Betters. Here he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, see Rom. 9.11.13, 14, 15, 16. Mat. 11.25, 6. Object. 5. What is that special Graces you tell as of you know not what. Answ. 1. I have proved undeniably that there is such a thing. Now because we have not an Accu∣ate Knowledg of it, shall we there∣ore not acknowledg it? Motum hunc senti∣unt pii, modum ig∣norant. Camero. Defens. p. 90. Gods ways we read, Rom. 11. ult.) are past nding out. As the ways of his
Judgments, so the wayes of his Grace, Thou va man, that wouldest know, how the new Cre∣ture, the babe of Grace, is first formed in the hear or thou wilt not believe it to be a work  grace, but the meer product of a liberum Arbi¦um, the pure conception, and motion of a mans o mind and will; Let me ask thee dost thou know wh is the way of the Spirit, or how the bones doe gr in the womb of her that is with child; so neithe knowest thou this wonderfull work of God. Secondly, Though we cannot define it, yet that i is a supernatural working, but congruous and sui¦able to the nature and faculties of the rational cre¦ture, we are not to doubt. It is a sweet drawing,  a powerful and most surely, and prevalent persw¦ding of the soul to Christ. It is divine teaching that is, teaching to purpose, Gods giving an he to perceive; every one thus taught of God, cann but learn, That divine light which strikes the u¦derstanding, and breaks in upon the soul in the wo of conversion, it necessarily, infallibly, irresistably produceth a new apprehension of things, where the soul was blind before, now it sees clearly: It w in a state of darkness before, but is now light in th Lord. This illumination of the mind is the found∣tion-work of the souls renovation and sanctificatio Powerfull and thorow conviction the beginning  conversion. All sides are agreed that the Lord can a does oft shine in upon the understanding with th clear manifestation of the truth, and of the chief good, and of the onely and necessary means cond¦cing to the enjoyment of it, that the understandi is necessarily captivated by it, cannot but give i
full Assent. That to believe the contrary were to believe a lye and falsity under the Notion of a lye, and falsity, which is impossible. Now this may give us to understand the way and method of Gods grace so far as it is necessary for us to know it, scil. that he drawes with the bands of a man, deales with man as a reasonable creature, worketh upon the will by the understanding first en∣lightned. And thus we may see how the word com∣mands, calls, exhortations, promises of the word, are means of conversion, That the demonstration of the spirit is the improveing of Scripture Arguments driving them to an head; b.e. , utego quidem certe illum locum accipio, Came∣ro Defens. p. 90. the urging and fastening of saving Truths on the mind, applying them so close and home, as no creature can do. And we must needs think, there is a great difference betwixt the discovery of truth by the meer light of natural Reason; and the eviden∣cing of it by the demonstration of the Spirit, as there is a difference of seeing things by the dim light of a candle and of seeing them in the clear light of the Sun: Though there is a common illumination of the Spirit, yet there is also a special illumination. It is true the common illumination leaves men but almost perswaded to be Christians; but the special illuminati∣on causeth thorow sound conversion. As the mind and understanding is never thus spiritually enlightned, but the heart is touched, the will rectified. As the soul at first was corrupted by the understanding, so by the way of the understanding it is renewed. Thus I hope you have seen this last Proposition of the necessity of special grace cleared. I cannot pass
from this point, without hining what special use  to be made of it. First, It should make Christians very humble an very thankful. O sirs, it would become the best  you all to have very low thoughts of your selves, be exceeding high thoughts of God, and his free, an powerfull distinguishing grace. For my own part: I can say, ever since I came  understand any thing to purpose in Religion, an Christiany, I could not but have a suspition, th those opinions were not right, that tend to set up th power of man, and lessen the grace of God in th work of his conversion, and Salvation. And when first met with that of Grevinch's I make my self to differ, Quis se discernit? in promptu ca usa est. E∣go me ipsum discerno. I cou not entertain it but with abho∣rence, As still it seems to me  very impudent, arrogant and graceless speech What he adds does not at all qualifie it, I think. Quum enim Deo, ad prae determinationi divinae resi ere possem, non restiti tamen, at qui in enim quid in li at mihi tanquam de meo gloriam? Quod enim potui D quidem miserentis est, quod autem volui, quum poss nolle, id meae potestatis est. He should have said nu virtuis. q. d. That I have a power to be good, th is of God: but that I am better than another this i of my self He would onely acknowledge, that God gav him the power, but that he had a will to use it a righ this he had of himself and might glory of it, as his ow Such men may seem to give the first fruits to God but clearly rob him of his Tenths. The first frui under the Law might be one of sixty. The Tithe must be one of Ten. They devide unhandsomly,
and take the greater share to themselves, and what is most Praise-worthy, giving God the Lesser share; whereas indeed the whole work of Conversion is his, the will of man never inclining to God, till inclined by his Grace. O Christians! be very sensible of the strength of Natural Corruption, and of the Freeness, and Pow∣er of Gods renewing Grace. Indeed a right sense of the one would help you to a clear discerning of the other, and a due Apprehension of both would tend to make you more humble and thankful. As the state of Jerusalem is described, Ezek. 16.3. &c. Such is thy Estate by Nature, so Poor, Miserable, and Helpless wert thou, O Christian, thy Birth and thy Nativity as that of the cursed Canaanites, thy Father as an Amorite, thy Mother as an Hittite, and thou all polluted in thy own Blood: Yet when it was thus, the Lord passed by thee, and looked with Compassion on thee, and said to thee, When thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, he said unto thee, When thou wast in thy blood, Live: He passed by thee and behold thy Time was the time of Love, and he spread his Skirt over thee, and covered thy Na∣kedness: Yea, he sware unto thee, and entered in∣to a Covenant with thee, and thou becamest his. Art thou Implanted into Christ? When thou wast a wild Olive-Tree, didst thou Ingraft thy self into the good Olive-Tree? Certainly, this is every whit as strange, as for an evil Tree to bring forth good Fruit. Boast not, Christian, thou bearest not the Root, but the Root thee. Art thou a Child of God? Quis credat parieti si se dicat parturire radium, quem suscepit per fenestram? Aut si glorientur nubes, quod imbres genuerint, quis non irrideat? Bernard in Cant. Ser. 13. It
was his Spirit and Power that Regenerated and hi Grace that Adopted thee. How hadst thou thy Ne Birth; certainly not of the will of the flesh, nor  the will of man, but thou wast Born of God, Jo 1.13. Born of the Spirit, John 3.5. Art thou new Creature? Who made thee so? Surely tho wilt not say, or think, that thou art thine own Cre∣ture: If a man of his own will, without the spe∣cial Grace of God did Convert and change himse then should he be his own Creature. But the Ap∣stle hath taught us otherwise, Ephes. 2.10. We  Gods Workmanship, Created in Christ Jesus. T make a new Creature is the Work of God, not  any meer Creature. And to think what a chang Divine Grace hath made in you that are Renewe what a difference from your selves, from what yo were before, and what a difference from others it should not puff you up with any high Thoughts  your selves, but lift you up in praise and thankf∣ness to God. I admire free and special Grace, th hath made such a difference betwixt you and othe where it found none. This is the Lords doing, a ought to be Marvellous in our eyes. Secondly, You that are under the Influence Gods special Grace, let it appear more in your live you should carry it as a peculiar People indeed. Wh singular thing do you? What do you more th others? If the Lord hath done that for thee, whi he doth for few in the world, does but for a few comparison; he expects that thou shouldst do m for him. Thou shouldst carry it so as few in the w do. O that you would not think it enough wi your Tongues to own, and plead for special Grac but that your Lives might be a good proof of i
Christians, Experimental Philosophy takes with ma∣ny now of late: O that more were for Experimental Divinity, Experimental Christianity! And so for this Point of special Grace, I wish that you and I could give the world Experiments upon it, clearly to con∣vince them, that there must be such a thing indeed. O! let others see the Grace of God among us. As was seen there, Acts 11.23. Let the world see that in you, (Christians) which corrupt Nature, which Flesh and Blood would never produce. If you have known and felt the Influence of special Grace, I beseech you, let it appear, that you have not re∣ceived this Grace in vain. Let it appear in your more singular Piety, exemplary Strictness, Holi∣ness, Humility, Self-denial, Mortification, Con∣tempt of the world, extraordinary Fruitfulness in good Works. Thirdly, They that are yet short of Grace may see, whither they are to go for it: Faith and Re∣pentance, (those better things that accompany Sal∣vation) are not of our selves: No, they are the Gifts of God, and of his special Grace. Sinner, How is it? Art thou convinced of the Necessity of Faith, Repentance, Holiness, without which thou canst have no true Hope of Future Hap∣piness? And dost thou see thy self short of these; and so still under Condemnation, being Sentenced by the Law and Covenant of Works, and not co∣ming up to the Terms of the Gospel and Covenant of Grace (the only way to get freed from Condemna∣tion?) And art thou sensible, not only of thy com∣ing short of what the Covenant of Grace requires; but of thy own Insufficiency to attain to it, as of thy self? Dost thou see a wretched Indisposition,
and Aversness to thy Duty, a Cross and Crooked perverse Inclination to what would Ruine thee? Yet do not dispaire, there is hope in Israel concern∣ing this thing. And if thou art sensible of thy own wretchedness, and canst be perswaded to apply thy self to God, the God of al Grace, there is hope concerning thee: That God who hath been oft found of them that seek him not, if now thou wouldst seek and sue to him, it may be hoped, he would not deny to be found of thee, see Isaiah 65.1. Mat. 25.27. He that had but one Talent is blamed and condemned, that he went not with it to the Ex∣changer, that is, says one, to the Promiser, wh might have furnished him with a Forreign supply Seek to God in the use of means: None will deny but it is in thy power, to use the means, where God is wont to work Grace. It's good being in th way as Jesus, passeth by. That Grace which is n in thy power to command, yet thou hast encourag∣ment to Beg; in as much as it is promised to some and for any thing thou knowest, to thee among th rest; and this brings me to another Proposition.
Ezek. 36.26. A new Heart also will I give you, &c. Sect. 9. PROP. IX. God hath Promised to some that Grace, where∣by they shall perform the Condition of the Covenant. THat which some, not only School-men, but other sound Divines of our own, call the irst Grace, who have taught me to call it so some∣imes, meaning thereby the first Inward-Special-Discriminating Grace. Though I see the Term is  allowed by others. As a Learned man noteth,  There is before it, 1. The first Universal Grace, which gave the world a Saviour. 2. The Funda∣mental Grace of Impetration by Christ. 3. The Grace of the New Covenant, or Testament made. 4. Common applying Grace, Preaching, &c. with Divine concurse. 5. Inward common Grace, an effect of the former, (of which see Suffrage ritan. de 3. & 4. Art. de anteced. ad conv. Sect. p. 100.) which I do not deny. But see Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. Ezek 36.6, 7. Concerning which Scriptures, it is true, there th been much Dispute. 1. Some would have Jer. 31.33, (which is ci∣d Heb. 8.10.) to be the only proper Gospel-Covenant,
or New Covenant. And so make thi a special Note of difference betwixt the Covena of Works, Marrow of Mod. div. p. 118. & 119. and the New Covenan that In the second Covenant God i on both sides. In the Covenant of Grace not  Condition to be performed on ma part. No, there is no more for him to do, b only to know and believe, that Christ hath d all for him. This is downright Antinomianism: And obser he plainly contradicts himself: First, saying, [In  Covenant of Grace there is no condition to be perf∣med on mans part.] And then presently unsaying  again, [No, there is no more for him to do, b only to Know and Believe, that Christ hath done  for him.] Where he seemeth to grant Faith to required of man, only he giveth an unsound D∣scription of it. But does not Gods taking away the stony heart,  giving a new heart, imply his giving Faith and  pentance? And his causing some to walk in his S∣tutes, imply his enabling them to yield sincere O∣dience? And what Laws are meant, which the L doth promise to write in the Heart? Are they  the same Laws, which were written in Table Stone? And to what end doth God promise to this for some, but that he might be their God,  they be his People? Thereby shewing what is quired of those, who would have him for t God, and would be his People. Certainly, th is no Condition required of us in the Covena Grace, which is not here implied; where this also Expressed, that God himself hath underta
for some, to vouchsafe that Grace to them, where∣by they shall certainly perform the said Conditi∣ons. As Dr. Preston, of the New Covenant, p. 389. speaking of Repentance, he saith, It is part of the Covenant both on Gods part, and on ours. The condition required of us in the Covenant, is Doing f this, the Action. But the Ability whereby we perform that which is required, is part of the Co∣enant on Gods part. Therefore if any ask, Quest. Whether these Scriptures do not contain he substance of the Covenant of Grace? Answ. Yea, as Gen. 2.17. containeth the Co∣enant of Works, where some part of it is expres∣ed, and the rest included and implied. Or as Isa. 8.6, 7. containeth a true Fast, that is, under∣anding what was taken for granted. Or as Faith  defined in John 8.24. and 11.27. where it is set rth as an Assent to this Proposition, [that Jesus is e Christ, he that should come, &c.] Supposing what was taken for granted, and expressing what as then most questioned. The truth is, the Jews were a self-confident peo∣le generally; confident of their own Ability to eep the Law (not understanding the extent of the aw) as they were confident of their own Righte∣asness, if they kept the Letter of the Law. They ere not come to see, and say, as Isa. 45.24. Sure∣ in the Lord have I righteousness and strength. If ey were but Righteous according to the Letter f the Law, they thought that enough. They nerally rested in outward circumcision. They ought it enough to offer the Ritual Sacrifices, not
regarding to offer unto God that more pleasing Spi∣ritual Sacrifice of an humble, broken, obedient hea And thus they brake the Covenant, which yet th gloried in. Therefore the Lord declares, that  days should come, when there should be a clea Discovery of the Nature, true intent and meani of his Covenant, that he was not a Jew, who  one outwardly, nor was that Circumcision, whi was outward in the Flesh, &c. (as Rom. 2.28, 2) And shews here that there should be more abund Grace given out, where they should perform w the Lord required in his Covenant, that as they  the Law written in Tables of Stone before, so th should have it written in their Hearts. And this called a New Covenant here, as the Command  Love one another is called a New Commandme though it was given of old; being now more  striously set forth and commended to us, by the ∣stance of Christs Love to us. So had the L promised before of old to Circumcise their Hea Deut. 30.6. which is the same in sence with th promise of Writing his Law in their hearts: B though it was promised of old, yet it is here sp∣ken of, as a New Covenant; because it was to  Communicated to more, and in a larger Meas under the Gospel. As it might well seem New,  like being never seen before. But is it not fairly Implyed here, that they th would have God for their God indeed, must ha new Hearts, must be new Creatures, must wa in his Statutes, must lead new Lives? which b cause none would attain to of themselves, and y God will have a people in the world, therefore  undertakes to prepare them for himself, and to wo
that in them, which else-where he plainly requireth of them. And therefore we must conclude, it is a Wresting of these Scriptures, for any hence to Ar∣gue, that the Covenant of Grace is absolute, which evidently supposes Conditions. And by the like Reasoning one may conclude, that Justification, and Remission of sins is promised absolutely, from Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and will not re∣member thy sins. Here Pardon of sin is promised, and no condition expressed; yet they are very great∣ly mistaken, who have hereupon ranked this among absolute Promises. 'Tis a most free and gracious promise, yet not an absolute promise. There is a condition always understood, which other Scriptures clearly express. Surely, we may not exclude Christs satisfaction, and say that God pardoneth sinners without any respect at all had to that, because there is not any mention of it here; neither may we exclude Faith, Repentance from being Conditions of Pardon, because not expressed here. I hope these things considered it will appear, that Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. will not prove the Covenant of Grace absolute. 2. Some, yea and those men of singular worth and eminency, will not allow this of God's giving a new heart, &c. to be so much as a promise; be∣cause quoad nos without any determinate object: none can claim by it, or plead interest in it till such time as it be fulfilled. Yet methinks it is sufficient, that it is a signification, or declaration of Gods pur∣pose to bestow such grace upon the Elect, that his truth and faithfullness are engaged to bestow it on them, though the Lord only knoweth who they are.
When the Lord promised unto Abraham, to b his God, and the God of his seed, was not here a pro∣mise to the seed of Abraham, when yet God ha the determining of the object? The Lord had se down which of his seed they were, that should have him for their God. As Abraham had other sons be∣sides Isaac; yet God restrained the promise to hi seed by Isaac, Rom. 9.7. As afterwards it was re∣strained to the posterity of Jacob, was not Esau Ia∣cobs brother? And yet that the purpose of God ac∣cording to Election might stand, it was said; [Iac have I loved, but Esau have I hated,] Rom. 9 11, 12, 13. So when God promised, Gen. 13.15. to giv the land of Canaan to the seed of Abraham, yet sti he had the determining of it, unto which of his see he would give it. They were of Abrahams see whose carcases fell in the wilderness. Again, when God promised unto David, that  would set up his seed after him, 2 Sam. 7.12. shal we say, this was no promise to his seed, because th individual person was not directly determined, be cause it was not said expressely whether the eldest, or the youngest, or which of his sons it was, tha should succeed David in the throne? Again, though the elect unregenerate cannot lay claim to the promise under consideration, as intend∣ed in it, any more than others; yet certainly Jesus Christ may claim for them. As, if a friend hath pro∣mised to settle an estate upon your child, though the child may not be in a capacity to plead the promise, yet you can plead it for him. Again, when that which some call the first grace is given unto any one according to that word [I will write my Law in their hearts] may we not th
claim an interest in the same, for continuance in grace and perseverance? And should we not look upon it as a promise now? And if it be acknow∣ledged a promise, when it is fulfilled, it seems some∣thing strange, it should not be so before. Promises are promises before they are made good and accom∣lished, And not because they are accomplished. Methinks this is plain, that [I will write my Laws in their hearts] is more than a bare declaration of Gods work, what his work is about the conditions of the Covenant of grace, what God can do. I say more than a declaration, that without his Grace those con∣ditions cannot be performed. Is it not clearly a re∣velation of his gracious purpose, and pleasure, sig∣nifying not onely what he alone can do. but more directly what he will do for some [I will] doth more directly refer to the purpose, than to the power of God. Now though as this is a discovery of Gods purpose, so far it agrees with a prophecy or pre∣iction; yet as it is a discovery of Gods purpose of working grace, of bestowing good upon some of his Creatures; in this respect it is more than simply  prediction, it hath the nature of a promise. 3. Some are troubled to know whither to re∣duce the promise of this first, special, inward, discri∣minating grace. Here methinks it were very strange, should we wholly exclude such promises from having any rela∣tion to, or connexion with the Covenant of Grace, which do so clearly evidence it to be a Covenant of Grace indeed. What a wonderfull expression of his grace is this, that God engageth to work the condi∣tions in his people! He did never undertake thus for  under the Covenant of Works.
Now First, Supposing that Covenant betw God the Father and his Son Christ, God-man,  Mediatour; and it is clearly reducible to that Co∣venant. Many Divines suppose (and I shall not op∣pose) a foederal transaction betwixt the Father  the Son, called the Covenant of Redemption, where in God the Father is conceived to have given a ce∣tain number of Elect ones to Christ the Son, to  brought on infallibly to grace here, and glory her∣after; upon condition, and in consideration, th he would redeem and satisfie for them: on the othe hand, Christ is supposed to accept of these term being willing to make his Soul an offering for  that he might see his seed and bring many sons  glory. According to this hypothesis, the promise  the first grace should refer to Gods engagement a promise to his Son Christ. And though it be an d∣solute promise in respect of these, in whom the fir grace is wrought; (no condition being required i the Elect unregenerate, to interest them in it) yet i respect of Christ it was conditional; he being  give himself a ransome for them, and so to purchas grace and glory for them. 2ly. Others distinguish betwixt an absolute Cove∣nant, and the conditional Covenant. The absolu Covenant they make to be this in Jer. 31. Heb. 8.  which we are now speaking. The conditional C∣venant, the proper Gospel-Covenant, [Believe  thou shalt be saved] But though we may grant it a absolute promise, it cannot be a Covenant if abs∣lute. 3. Of Attrib. the se∣cond part. p. 86. Dr. Preston distinguisheth betwi a single Covenant and a double Cove∣nant.
A single Covenant, such as God makes with visible Church-members, viz. If you will believe, repent, walk in my wayes, you shall be saved: where if men break the condition, God is free, he is bound no further. But then there is a double Co∣venant, into which the Elect are taken, which is to this effect, If you will believe, and repent, you shall be saved; and that this my Covenant may not be made void, and of none affect to you, I will give you an heart to repent, &c. And this he holdeth is the everlasting Covenant that cannot be broken, which hath sure mercies for all those who are included in it. But Mr. Rutherford would rather have it called the Covenant by a Metonymie [This is the Covenant that I will make] that is, these are choise effects, fruits and blessings of the Covenant, which I shall by my effectual and mighty Grace work in them. Rutherf. of the Covenant, p. 347. Again, 4. Mr. Rutherford distinguisheth (but more darkly) of the Covenant, considering it, in abstra∣cto, vel in concreto. 1. In the Abstract, as holding forth the way of saving sinners, that is, if they be∣lieve: Containing only the will of precept. 2. In the concrete, as the Lord carries on the Covenant commensurably to his decree of Election. So the Lord promiseth to the Elect, not onely forgiveness and life, provided they believe; but also a new heart and grace to believe. Thus including his will of pur∣pose. And the same Writer again distinguisheth, and sayes, the Covenant may be taken two wayes, either 1. As declared, Rutherf. of the Covenant, p. 340.343. ac∣cording to the approving will of God:
Or 2. as fulfilled, according to Gods Decree of ∣lection, and will of purpose. Thus I have give others thoughts of it: or, 5. Why may we not say that the promise  working grace in some, belongeth to the Covena of Grace, considered as a Testament, rather than  a Covenant? Amas. Coron. p. 296. So Burroughs Gospel-wor∣ship p. 270. Tota dispositio (s deris scil.) testamentariam h rationem, &c. Here all is promised, not only pardon, and S vation upon Repenting, Believing, but the Co∣dition, an Heart to repent, and heart to believe and perseverance in the same is likewise promis Though considered formally as a Covenaut, it speak only on this wise: If you Believe, Repent, y shall be saved; yet as a Testament, it hath this su ther to say. And as for such as are given to Chri of the Father, you shall have his Grace and Spiri to turn your hearts against your sins, and incli then towards the Lord Jesus. 6. Add, that these absolute promises are a pr∣per means to bring men within the Bond of the Co∣venant, and lead men a good step towards the ob∣taining of what the Covenant of Grace promiseth Here is set forth the spiritual Excellency of th Blessings promised in the Covenant of Grace, a the way how they may be attained and come by What is here promised absolutely, would m way for all that good and happiness, which is prom∣sed upon such conditions. As they that look no after this Grace promised, they that care not though they miss and fall short of this; care not to frustra to themselves the Covenant of Grace, to all its  ving intents and purposes. Miss of this Grace,
nd you miss of all subsequent Benefits and Bles∣sings, which depend on it. 4. The last thing I shall speak to, concerning these Promises, is, what use may be made thereof, though no Unregenerate person can possibly say that e is there intended. Now to the Question. Quest. What use can Unregenerate men make of hese Promises, who know not that they are intend∣ed in them? Answ. I shall premise two or three things, and then shew of what use they are, 1. The promise of a new Heart, &c. is an ab∣solute promise. I have told you so again and again, and will now spend a little time to clear it. When God promiseth to give a new heart, he promiseth this absolutely. This must either be promised ab∣solutely, or not at all. Gratia prima, quae preveni∣s, item{que} operans dici solet, omnimoda est gratuita.— Omnes actus, & dispositiones nostras praevenit & an∣it,—ut pote quae ex Deo tantum, non etiam ex nobis endet. Alting. Elenet. p. 800. Or else we must old with the Semi-Pelagians, Initium â nobis, in∣rementum â Deo, If there be no true spiritual good in a man, till the Lord works it, how can we possibly imagine any condition required to his giving this Grace, except we would have Gods own Act, the condition of his further Actings. Non de nostrae voluntatis potestate, sed de sua prae∣distinatione promisit, promisit enim quod Ipse factu∣s fuerat, non quod Homines. Quia etsi faciunt omines bona quae pertinent ad colendum Deum, ipse it ut illi faciant quae praecepit, non illi faciunt ut se faciat quod promisit. Aug. de praedest. Apud Bedam ad Rom. 4. f. 20. H.
Certainly, here the preparation of the heart  of the Lord. The heart of stone would never pre∣pare it self for Mollifying Grace. They that would make the promise conditionall thus, I will tak away the stony heart, if you do not put a Bar, woul make just nothing of it. As if God should say,  take away the stony heart, if you do not put a ston heart in my way; I'le do it, when it is done to  hands. The work shall be properly yours; yet will have the praise. Do not they wrong our gra∣cious God, who would put such a sence on his gra∣cious Promise, as if he promised no more, than  take away the heart of stone, and give a new heart if we put no Bar; Alas, it is plain, he must give  new heart, before we shall cease putting the Bar a stony, and rebellious heart in his way. And what sence is this, I'le write my Law in your heart, if you have it in your heart to keep my Law If you have a will to obey, I'le give you a will  obey. I'le Circumcise your heart to love me,  you put not the Bar of an Uncircumcised heart  my way. That is as if Divine Grace only made such willing, as it first found not unwilling. As our Divines, who were present at the Syn∣of Dort, Promissiones Dei aliae sunt de fine, alia mediis ad finem; promissiones de fine, v. 9. de sal sunt conditionatae [crede, & salvaberis] Esto fide ad mortem (seu persevera) & dabo tibi coron vitae.] Cum autem nemo par sit conditionibus pr standis, Deus quo{que} promissiones fecit liberrimas & absolutas de dandis ipsis conditionibus; quas ipse  nobis efficit, ut per ipsas, tanquam per media, possi ad finem pertingere. Deut. 30.6. That is, The pro∣mises
of God are some of them con∣rning the end, Suffrag. Britan. de▪ 5. Art. thes. he∣terodox. 1. pag. 222.223. some concerning the ans (necessary in order) to the d. Promises of the end, as of sal∣ation are conditional. Believe and u shalt be saved. Be thou faithful unto death (or ersevere) and I will give thee a crown of life. But hen none is able to perform the condition, God al∣hath made most free and absolute promises of giving e conditions themselves, which he worketh in us, hat by them, as by the means, we might attain to e end, Deut. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circum∣se thine heart, &c. Object. But none have ground to hope that God ould work Grace in them, who will not attend on e means of Grace, and will not seek and sue to im for Grace. Then are not these Conditions? Answ. I confess, attendance on the Word and rayer, &c. are necessary, which Natural men must be called unto: Being 1. Part of the Crea∣ures Duty. Some of that Homage all men owe  God. 2. The ordinary way and method, where∣ God works upon the souls of his Elect. And pon the former account, to neglect the means ap∣ears to be a Contempt of God: As upon the latter t apppears to be a tempting of him. And yet that these are not conditions of Gods estowing the first Grace is very evident, For, 1. f this was Conditio cum quâ, God should never eny his Grace to them that attend on the Outward eans, use Prayer, &c. 2. If it was Conditio sine uâ non, he should never vouchsafe Converting Grace to any, who do not wait on the means. Now oth these are false. Sometimes God is found even
of them that seek him not. Though this must  be acknowledged the ordinary Method and wa wherein Gods Grace is bestowed; that they th come to the Means, &c. are not so far from  Kingdom of God, as others, who are Despisers  the Word, and neglect Prayer, &c. Yet som times the Lord goes out of his ordinary way, as  see in the Apostle Pauls conversion. The Lord  with him, when he was Runing away from hi or rather running furiously upon him. 2. God having absolutely promised this Gra it shall certainly be conferred on all those, who  intended in the Promise. Otherwise God sho change his mind, or his word should fail. There  no saying here, that men may put a Bar. If G should fail of performing what he hath absolute promised; then where were his Power, or Tru or Immutability? And therefore I cannot but wonder, that  should deny the special Grace of God determi mans will in Conversion. Mark the consequence it. If when the Lord hath done all, which  cerneth him to do, to convert a sinner, it still  pends upon the sinners free will to determine  business, Quod hic converta∣tur, ille non, est ex libertate volunta∣tis. Jo. Arnold. whether to turn to G or not; and it may be, that t Persons have equal preve Grace, and the one turns to C and the other does not, wil not follow, that God promiseth to do more, that can perform? Which I hope they would drea say, and abhor as blasphemous. And yet I can see no way in the world to av the Consequence, admitting their Doctri
Positis omnibus operationibus gratiae, Vid. Suffrag. Bri∣tan. de 3. & 4. Art. Thes. Heterodox. 3. p. 139. quibus Deus in conversione nostrâ uti posset, manet tamen conversio ita in nostrâ potestate liberâ, ut pos∣simus non converti, hoc est nos met ipsos convertere, aut non convertere. Joan. Arnold. apud pelt. har. Were it thus indeed, that when God hath done all he can to convert a sinner; hath done as much for me, or thee, this way, as ever he doeth, or can do for any; yet he must ask our leave to make his Grace Efficacious and Converting, and if we please, all he can do this way, shall be to no purpose, the work shall not be done; I dread to say what would ollow hereupon. How could he either promise, or predict this concerning any, that they should urn to him? This way which many are so taken with, most certainly leadeth to one of these strange conclusions. Either, 1. That men may have a new heart given hem, and Gods Law written there, and yet not turn o God, or be in a state of Grace; Or, 2. That otwithstanding God hath promised concerning some hat he would give them a new heart, and put his aw in their inward parts; yet it might so fall out nd happen, that not one in the world should ever ave this new heart given, or the Law of God In∣raven in him. And whereas they will not allow the new heart romised to the Elect, as a Fruit of Electing love, ut rather make it a ground of Election, make lection to depend on it; how Inconsistant is their Method with Gods Method, with the Scripture-Method? John 6.37. All that the Father giveth me ll come unto me. John 10.26. Ye believe not,
because ye are not of my sheep. My sheep hear my Voice and follow me. Observe hence, The sheep of Christ are they, that are given him of the Father. And they tha are given him of the Father are his sheep. These are Reciprocal terms. Again, all that are the sheep of Christ, that are given to Christ, shall come t him, shall believe in him. Again, these only d come to him, none but these come on to Faith in him Again, men are not given to Christ, or his sheep by coming to him, or because they believe in him But because they are his sheep, given to him of the Father, therefore they shall come, therefore the shall hear his Voice, and follow him. Neque ov dicuntur, quam Deus previdit credituros, nam & her oratio nimium dilata esset, vos non creditis, q Deus non previdit vos credituros, nam contra, De praevidit non credituros, quia non sunt credituri. 3. Therefore the Elect are the Persons direct and fully intended in this promise of Gods giving new heart, and it is sure to be fulfilled and ma good to them. 4. Yet they can no more lay claim to this pro∣mise, as made for them, than others may do, wh they are Unregenerate. And the reason is plain, be∣cause while they are Ʋnregenerate, they cann know that they are of the number of Gods Elect. These things premised, I shall briefly declare  use of these absolute promises, in these followin Conclnsions. 1. They are of use to all alike for Convictio As implying mans Insufficiency to perform his d here of himself, in regard of his moral, inseper indisposedness, and aversness thereunto. No  tural
man can amend his own heart, or make it new. Was the Law in our hand, there had been no need for God to promise, that he would give a new heart. 2. These promises are of like use to all for dire∣ction. As shewing, whither, and to whom we must go for Grace, when sensible of our desperate corrupt estate hy Nature. Our only way is to re∣pair to the God of all grace. As Ephraim did, Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. Tanta est ejus misericordia, ut sit primus in Conversione, & adjutorio nostro, juxta illud. Thren. 5.21. Est ta∣en ultimus in desertione, &c. Tena in Heb. p. 640. b. 3. They are of like use to all for general Encou∣agement. They hold forth the same general En∣couragement to others, as to the Elect unregene∣rate, They are so proposed, that as none are ex∣pressed, none are expressably excluded. As no un∣regenerate person can positively conclude, that the Lord hath this Grace in store for Him, intended for Him in particular; so none have ground utterly to despaire, unless they were sure, it could not be. The promise of giving, or working Grace is so contrived and proposed, that it leaveth men without excuse, who do not seriously, and in good earnest seek to God for it, There is no laying the blame on Gods Decree, that the Lord never intended to give you Grace, and therefore it would have been but in vain, for you to have applied your selves to him. Certainly, here is enough to stop your mouths. 1. That God hath Commanded you to use the means for the obtaining of Grace. As one observes: to Gods bare Command is a sufficient encouragement
to him that obeyeth it, to hope, that it shall not be in vain. Especially when God denieth no man the grace to believe, but those that by abuse of former helps do (sensu Evangelico) deserve that denial. 2. That God hath promised to give his saving, sanctifying Grace to some. This is some more en∣couragement to seek special and saving Grace in the use and improvement of Common, Preparatory Grace. God has promised absolutely to bestow his Grace on some; and you were never told the contrary, but that he might have this Blessing in store for you. And therefore it is manifest, if you look not out, if you cry not to God for it, you will be most justly condemned for your gross negligence and careless∣ness, yea, for a plain contempt of his Grace, in not putting forth your selves to the utmost of your power, to obtain it. As you are Creatures, it is your duty to attend to the Will of God revealed, and to carry it sutably thereunto. And here, in the case before us, should we not take notice of the least gracious Hints, he gives us, and improve them to the furthest? This is plain, men are not put to a stand in world∣ly matters, they will not demur upon it, whether they shall Labour in their Callings, or no; because they know not, whether God hath Decreed to Bles and prosper them. Why then do any frame suc an Objection against themselves, to take them o from looking out for saving Grace, which is of in∣conceivably greater concernment to us to look after, than any thing in the world besides. And, as an able Pen expresseth it: Though God
have not flatly engaged himself to Unbelievers, Mr. Baxt. Di∣rect. for getting peace. p. 62. so as to give them a certainty of hearing their Prayers, and giving them true Grace, on the improvement of their Naturals; yet he hath not only appointed this and other means to get Grace, but also given them half promises, or strong pro∣babilities of speeding.— For as he appointeth not any vain means to man, so no man can name that man, who did improve his Naturals to the utmost, and sought God in Prayer so far as a Na∣tural man may do, who yet missed of Grace, and was rejected. This is the true mean (says he) between Pelagianism, and Antinomianism in this point. And any of you, that begin to feel sin a burden, and are sadly perplexed in spirit, seeing your selves born down with the strength and prevalency of your Corruptions, and Temptations together; yet be not utterly discouraged. Consider what Grace the Lord hath promised, he would vouchsafe to some, without any thing in them foregoing, as a condi∣tion, or meet qualification. And is there not ground of hope concerning thee, if now thou hast a heart to look out after his Grace? Certainly, there are many exceeding hot in their pursuit after worldly things, and yet lose their La∣bour quite, have their designs frustrated, and miss of their expectations. But can you tell of any one Soul, that hath sincerely, and in good earnest sought for Grace, and yet been disappointed? Many seek it remisly, and heartlesly, and miss of it; but the more diligent and earnest we are here, the more ground to hope, we shall obtain it.
Now to close this Discourse. You have heard of our Misery by the Breach of the Covenant of works; of our Insufficiency of our selves to perform the condition of the Covenant of Grace, from whence alone is our remedy: Now let your want, and need of Grace, engage you to a serious and diligent at∣tendance on the means of Grace, and quicken you in good earnest to apply your selves to the Throne of Grace for it. Object. But if the promise of work∣ing the first Grace be absolute, Friendly De∣bate. p. 45. it's more than needs, nay, than is good: For we ought to have no respect to these things, but to the Freeness of the Promise. Answ. This which I call you to, is no more than needeth, in other respects; though it is not any thing an Unregenerate man can do, that will give him a Title to the Promise, neither is there any Me∣rit of Congruity in this. Yet it is the Duty of men Unregenerate, which they are all tied and bound to, though God is not tied and bound to them upon it, so much as by promise. But there is more hopes of your Conversion, if you are in the way, where∣in God is oft pleased to meet with sinners, and to bring them home to himself. More hopes, He will be found of those that seek, than of those that do not seek him. Though God worketh Grace, without any Merit in, or any Condition required of, the Crea∣ture; yet not without means. Therefore they that use the means, are nearer to the obtaining of Grace, than those that neglect the means.
Heb. 12.2. Jesus the Authour and Finisher of Faith. Sect. 10. PROP. X. That Grace whereby the Elect performeth the Condition of the Covenant, was purchased by Christ for them. THey that go the high Arminian way, hold that Christ Died for all, and every one alike; that is, that by his Death he Impetrated Remission and Salvation for all men, if they Believe: Not that he purchased that Grace for any, whereby they shall certainly Believe. And so with them, [Fieri potest at impetratio sarta tecta maneat, suisque numeris perfecta constet, etiamsi increduli omnes manentes nulli forte essent, qui fructum ejus impetrarionis ob∣incredulitatem suam propriam perceperent. v. Pelt. Hac. p. 131. Notwithstanding all that Christ hath procured by his Death, it might so fall out yet, that not one in the world should be saved. Now these, howsoever they may seem to enlarge the extent of Christs death, yet they really enervate the merit, and weaken the efficacy of his death. If this be all that Christ impetrated by his death, that God might salvâ justitiâ, with safety to his justice, and honour, make a new Covenant with fallen man, come upon new terms with him, and save him, if he believeth, and sincerely obeyeth; I say if this was all, then Christ might attain his end in dying, and the
death of Christ might have its full effect, and yet not one soul saved by it. Now what a faint cause  salvation must that needs be, which being put, ye it doth not follow, that any one in the world sha certainly be saved? yet thus it must be, if the death of Christ, extendeth not further, than to make th a truth, that [whosoever believeth, shall be saved] without purchasing for any the grace whereby they shall believe. And as much as they think, that their way tend∣eth most to the honour of Christ our Saviour, yet i truth it tendeth to his great dishonour. For so they would make Christ a Saviour, Nomine non re, a t∣tular Saviour, purchasing a Salvation for all, without any full and certain intention of applying it to any. To say that he would be a Saviour as well, though not one should be saved by his death; is not this to mock Christ, as they mocked him who put on him a scarlet Robe, and put a reed in his hand, and said, Hail King of the Jews? And thus they that believe and are saved, should not owe one jot more to the me∣rit of his death, than they who perish, and are dam∣ned; now is not this a wrong to Christ? If Christ in dying, had not an eye to the salvation of one more than of another: but had respect to all alike, impetrated for all alike; if he merited no more for the Elect than he did for Reprobates; then the one are no more bound to him, for his Love in dying, tha the other. Which I wonder how a true believer should hear with patience, and without abhor∣rency. Though I confess, they that go the middle way, do not (that I can find) so rob Christs death of its vertue and efficacy, or deny its proper causal in∣fluence
into our salvation, holding, that Christ dyed for all so far, as to procure a conditional pardon for them; and this Law of Grace, that whosoever be∣lieveth shall be saved: but withall, that in dying he had a further aim, a special eye of respect towards the Elect, to procure their certain performing of the condition, and so their salvation infallibly. That he died not onely that men might be salvable, Sed ut reapse & certissimé semen ex sanguine videret, that those who were given him of the Father, might be certainly redeemed, actu∣ally saved by him Christus Mori∣endo genuit. Me∣diâ morte suâ no∣bis contulit vitam gratiae, Joh. 12.24. Now while so much is granted us, we will freely grant, that the death of Christ is a satisfaction a∣bundantly sufficient for all the sinners in the world: here needeth no other satisfaction to be added, to make it availe to the redemption and salvation of more. God is so well pleased with the Sacrifice of his Son, that for his sake he is ready to be reconciled unto any that come to God by him. And no sin∣ner perisheth for this cause, that the satisfaction of Christ was insufficient, or not of so large extent, as o reach him: but through his own default, falling short of what is required to our having Actual benefit by Christs Satisfaction. The blood of Christ s sufficient to cleanse every one of us from all our ins: onely they deprive themselves of the saving benefit of his death, they render it ineffectual as to themselves, who trample it under foot. The most Soveraign remedy does the Patient no good, not be∣ing applyed and made use of. But notwithstanding, sinners dye, not because here is no remedy for them, no possibility of Sal∣vation,
but because they doe not apply themselv to the Physitian, nor seek to be saved in that w wherein alone they can be saved; yet Christ died  alike for the salvation of all. Christ laid down  life for his sheep, with another manner of inte on, than he laid down his life for the world. He  so the Saviour of his body the Church, as he is  the Saviour of the world. That he laid down his life for his sheep, not one to purchase remission, and salvation for them co∣tionally (scil.) if they believe: but to procure ∣mission, and salvation for them most certainly  infallibly, and so to procure the working of the ∣dition of salvation in them, to me seemeth plain  clear, from plentifull testimony of Scriptu Isa. 53.10. When thou shalt make his soul an offer for sin, he shall see his seed. As sure as Christ  made an offering for sin, so sure it is, that he shall  his seed, as a fruit of his death, This is contrary  what some teach, that Christ might have his de in dying, and his death attain its end, and have  full effect, though what Christ did impetrate sho not come to be applyed to any soul in the work▪ Now if it were so, how should Christ see his see▪ And no doubt, but Christ merited so much, th his labour should not be in vain, nor his strength  spent for nought, and in vain: but that Israel sho be gathered by him, gathered to him, and that  should be for a light for the Gentiles, and for sal∣tion to the ends of the earth, Isa. 49.4, 5, 6.  he saith, Joh. 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from th earth will draw all men unto me; where by lifting  from the earth, we are to understand, not his Asce∣sion, but his Crucifixion (as is evident from ver. 3
o the drawing of sinners unto Christ, even of all at are drawn is made a fruit, and consequent of his ath. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might deem us from all iniquity, and purifie unto himself  peculiar people, zealous of good works. He died, t onely that all who turn from iniquity, might e redeemed from wrath to come, but also to re∣eem his people from iniquity, and so from wrath  come. Therefor his Name was called Jesus, be∣use he was to save his people from their sins. He as to destroy the works of the devil: and did spoil rincipalities and powers, triumphing over them  his cross, when his heel was bruised, (when he ffered in his humanity the lowest part of him,) en he brake the Serpents head. He died, not onely to purchase happiness for his eople in the end, but also to procure holiness for em, as the way and means, necessarily conducing to t end. He gave himself (as we hear before)  Purifie to himself a peculiar people, Zealous, c. He is made unto us Sanctification, as well as ighteousness, 1 Cor. 1.31. He gave himself for e Church, that he might Sanctifie it, Ephes. 5.5, 26. We owe it unto Christ that any of us are anctified, as well as that we are justified. Christ ed his Blood, for his people to wash in, and be an. As from his side pierced, there came forth ood and Water, John 19.34. This shadows t the Virtue and Efficacy of his Death, his shed∣ng of his most pure, and precious Blood, being t only for the Expiating of Guilt and purifying  the Conscience; but also for cleansing the heart, phes. 1.4. Elected in Christ to be holy. That seem∣eth
to intimate, that it is only in and through Ch that any come to be Sanctified. And though  are not Elected for Christ, yet we are renewed  sanctified, and so may be said to be Elected  Holiness through and for him. That God ne intended to bestow saving, sanctifying Grace on a of us, but upon the account of Christ, see 2 T 1.9. The holy calling is given in Christ Jesus, a Grace given in Christ Jesus, see Tit. 3.56. Ch is the Author both of Salvation begun, and of S∣vation perfected, consummate. All Spiritual b∣sings are in, and from Christ. Blessed with  Spiritual blessings in Christ. Ephes. 1.3. Is  Faith a Spiritual blessing? Is not  pentance a Spiritual blessing? then they are de only through Christ. He is the Author and Fin∣er of Faith, Heb. 12.2. He is the procurer of  That Faith is given to any, it is given on the be of Christ, or for Christ, Phil. 1.. So Repentance is from Christ; . fr Christ, as a Saviour: Repentance is aswel f him, as Remission of sins, Acts 5.31. By him  are brought into a state of Grace, Rom. 5.2. A when he led Captivity Captive, he received G for men, yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lo God might dwell among them, Psal 68.19. (to wh the Apostle Peter seemeth to allude, Acts 2.33. And we read of Christs sending the Spirit, John .26. The Comforter, whom I will send unto y from the Father. And John 14.26. He is sent  Christs Name. And may we pray for the Spirit in Christs Na may we pray for Grace, ask Faith in Christs Na▪ If so, would not it imply, it was purchased by Chri for some?
Whatsoever we ask, we should ask in the Name f Christ, we must ask in his Name, if we would receive, John 14.13. and Chap. 16.23. Now what  it to ask in the Name of Christ, if it be not to ead, insist, and depend on the Worthiness, and erit of Christ, with allowance from him, for the taining of what we want, and desire? When e ask in his Name, we eye him in his Mediatory ndertaking. As he is the Son of God, and very od, equal with his Father, so we pray to him, d he properly answers Prayer. But as he is Me∣atour, so we put up our Prayers not to him, but  God through him; I say we pray to him as God. We do not pray in his Name: as Mediator, we ray not to him, but pray in his Name. Now if we ay pray for Grace in the Name of Christ Media∣r, that Argues it is a thing merited by him. Object. It was purchased, but conditionally; that , if men resist not Gods Call, and thus put a Bar  his Grace. Answ. Will any say so? That is to say, Christ th purchased the Grace for men, whereby they all believe, upon condition they shall be dispo∣d to believe of themselves. They that do not re∣t Gods Call, obey it: And they that obey Gods  all to believe, do believe. Thus if Christ should ve purchased Faith for us only Conditionally, if e do not resist Gods Call; the meaning were, and it ould come to no more but this, he th purchased Grace for us, Vid. Thes. Sal∣mur. par. 4. p. 142. sect. 14. where∣ we should come to Believe, if we elieve. Again, may we suppose, that Christ Inter∣deth on the behalf of any? as Psal. 2.8. Ask of
me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine  heritance. John 17.17. Sanctifie them through  truth. Ver. 19, 20. For their sakes I sanctifie  self, that they also might be sanctified through  Truth. Neither pray I for these alone, but for th also which shall believe on me through their w Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee (Pete that thy faith fail not. Now if these are things  which Christ intercedeth, they are things Meri by him. Christs Intercession is like an Advoca pleading, who hath Law and Right on his side,  like a Beggars craving, Heb. 9.24. Is not  Appearance in Heaven a continual real Plea for his people? How? As a presenting to his ∣thers view and remembrance, what he had done  suffered upon Earth, for the Redemption and Sa∣vation of his People. Has not his Blood a Voi Yea, a louder Voice than the blood of Abel;  it speaketh better things, Heb. 12.24. If Chri Intercession be nothing else, but a pleading of  Merits, then what he Intercedeth for, he Meri Those Divines that are for Christs Interceding  Heaven by an Express and open Representation his will to the Father: Yet make his Death  ground of his Intercession. That Christ ferve and immoveably willeth and desireth this and  of the Father, for the sake, and Virtue of  Death, and Sacrifice. So that if he Intercede  the Conversion of any, he Merited their con∣sion; if he Intercede for the sanctification of  and for their Confirmation in Grace to the end, th their Faith may not fail, he Merited so much for the. And so no doubt, that Jesus Christ, the Etern and only begotten Son of God, who was One
Essence, and Equal in Power and Glory with the ather, that he should take Mans nature on him, nd give his Life a Ransome for many; even he who was worth Ten Thousand Worlds of such as we are, hat he out of his Zeal for the Honour of God, to ear and satisfie his Justice, and to make way for the lorious Manifestation of his Grace and Mercy, and lso out of Love and Compassion towards poor pe∣ishing Creatures, (such Love as was stronger than Death;) I say, that he upon such principles and onsiderations, should so willingly Die for sinners, nd bear the wrath of God, which sin deserved, to ake way for sinners Reconciliation unto God, and heir Eternal salvation: This was such a worthy ndertaking, and so highly well pleasing unto God, s deserved indeed, that his Labour and Sufferings should not be in vain, as to the Actual Redemption nd certain Salvation of some. Nor is it to be ima∣ined, that Christ would lay down his Life meerly o make men salvable, but that he had good assu∣ance, that it should be to the certain salvation of any, that his Blood should not be as Water spilt pon the ground. Can we think that he would ave Died upon such Terms, as it should be pos∣ble for men to be saved by him; and yet contin∣ent and doubtful, whether any one in the world hould be saved? It is not a meer possibility of Re∣emption, but Actual redemption, that the Saints n Heaven praise and extol him for, Rev. 5.9.12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, nd Honour, and Glory: For thou wast slain, and ast redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation. And if Christ did not (in dying for them) intend
their certain Actual Redemption, he only intend a lesser kindness, to wit, what was extended to th that perish, in common with them: but the  greater kindness happens to them besides his Inte∣tion, which they might probably enough have  sed of, for any thing that Christ did peculiarly  them; and which the other might as well have go away withal. Hence says one, Methinks an Arminian  hardly bear a part with the Redeemed in that T∣umphant Song, while he thinks in his heart,  is no more beholden to the Lamb  his Redemption, Lyford sensûs Exerc. p. 278, 279. than Cain, or J∣das, and the Damned crue. One thing more I pray take not of. He that could satisfie for others, could as w Merit for others. It was as much, to satisfie  our sins, as to merit and purchase saving Grace  us: It was as easie for the Lord Jesus Christ to p∣chase that Grace for the Elect, whereby they shou Infallibly be brought on to Faith, and so to Sal∣tion; as to purchase Remission and Salvation  men, upon condition that they believe. And m thinks, it was necessary to make him a comple and perfect Saviour, that he should do the One,  well as the other. And they would seem not  consult the Honour of our Redeemer so much a they ought, that make his Death a Satisfacti for sin, but deny it to be Meritorious of Grace.  was a Meritorious satisfaction. As it was satisf∣ctory for sin; so it was Meritorious of that savi Grace, without which his people could have ha no benefit by his Death, as a satisfaction. As  was satisfactory, it was to Exempt and Delive
us from the great evil and misery, we were Ob∣noxious unto; as it was Meritorious, it procured that Good and Happiness, we want. Thus Christs Death was not only to redeem us from the Curse due to sin, but to redeem us unto God. His Blood was not only to pay our Debts, but to purchase a new Stock, and a surer Estate for his People, than that we had lost. Since the writing of these Notes, I met with one, J. H. Middle Way of Elect. and Redempt. p. 29. quite of ano∣ther perswasion, who holdeth that the Merit, or purchase of Christs Death, or the Price he laid down for our Redemp∣tion, was not offered to the Father, to procure of him, that he should give Faith, and Repentance to any; but that he should give Remission to those that repent, &c. For which he Argues modestly thus, 1. The holding otherwise makes Christs Redemption a double thing. Answ. And so the Scripture seems to make it. Teaching in some places, that he gave himself a Ransome for All, for the whole World, and tasted Death for every man: And in other places, that he laid down his Life for his Sheep, for those whom the Father had given him, that he gave himself for the Church. 2. It goes quite against the hair to reason, that Christ should procure the be∣nefit upon condition, and not otherwise; and yet that he should procure also the performance. To what purpose do we make such a labour about, as this? Answ. It is no more against the hair, then that Christ should have the Elect especially in his Eyes; or then it is against the hair, that he should deliver them from wrath to come, by sa∣ving them from their sins. It was no Labour about, when Christ died with a special intention of redeem∣ing
the Elect effectually, and of being the Autho of certain Actual Salvation to them, to take in, and intend the necessary means leading thereunto 3. Then there is nothing in mans salvation but  purchase, and we shall be beholden to Christ fo all, and to God for nothing. Answ. We a never the less beholden to God, for that he ga his son Jesus Christ to be our Saviour, and to do a this for us. Surely, the Father is to be acknow∣ledged, and praised for all that Christ has done i order to our salvation, see John 6.38.39.40. an Chap. 17.4. Christ came into the world, to do  Fathers will, and finish the work, that his Fathe gave him to do. And are we not beholden to Go for the pardon of sin? which this Writer grants,  have been purchased by Christs Death for tho that Repent, and Believe. And Heaven, I hope, is Gods Gift, notwithstanding Christs purchase 4. The Death and Redemption of Christ is fo All, for every man, &c. Answ. What w said in answer to his first Reason, will take off wha he says here. There was a general, and lesser be¦nefit extended to the world by Christs Death, agai there was a special and greater benefit intended to th Elect by it. The latter contains the former, no vice versâ: In regard of the former, he is the Sa∣viour of the World, in regard of the latter, th Saviour of his Body only. p. 30. Gods sending his Son is one thing, and his sending his Spirit  other. Answ. Yet the sending of his Son wa to make way for sending of his Spirit. And th Spirit is sent in Christs Name, with what it impli∣eth, I have shewn before. Ibid. Let it be tr on the one hand that Christ by his Redemption,
hath indeed procured no more for Paul and Peter, than for Judas and the Reprobate. Answ. But that is scarce true, when Paul says, Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me. I cannot think, he meant no more, than so as he loved and gave himself for all the Reprobates in the world. This would not keep up the Honour of his Redemp∣tion to the height, as he there pretends. Pag. 31. It is true, we come in the Name of Christ, to ask his Spirit and Grace; that is, we ask it through Christs Merits. A fair concessi∣on, (which one would think was no less than giving away his cause: But he distinguisheth here.) There is the Merits of his Person, as well as the Merits of his Death. Answ. That there was any Merit in his Death, it was from the Worthiness of his Per∣son. But why could not Christ have procured our Reconciliation to God, and Salvation, by the Me∣rits of his Person, as well as the effectual Vocati∣on? And thus would not this Writer make Christs Death and Oblation, as he insinuates, that others make some part of his Mediatorship, more than needs. Pag. 33, 34. I must offer moreover, If Christ had purchased Faith and Repentance for some, which all have not, the Reprobate might here have some∣thing to say, &c. Answ. No more to say, than a∣gainst Gods Decree of Election, which yet he maintains. Will he allow the Reprobate to say, That the reason why he repented not, as the Elect did, is because God had decreed to give Repen∣tance to one of them, and not to the other. Ac∣cording to his Reasoning here, in regard of Gods decree of Election (which he holds with us) Christs Purchase and Redemption should as well be a
mock to the Reprobate. But as God hath intended and promised, and Christ hath purchased Faith and Repentance for the Elect, so that they come certain∣ly to believe and repent; they owe it unto Gods Grace, and Christs purchase. And as for others that fall short of Grace here, and so of Salvation hereafter, it is through their own fault. God, and Christ have done enough to leave them all without Excuse. Other things I pass by, being spoken to before. Now this Proposition, that Christ is the purcha∣ser of Grace, may be of good use. As (1.) This speaks encouragement to poor destres∣sed souls, who have a deep sense both of their own weakness and unworthiness. Though thou art ne∣ver so unworthy of Grace, yet Jesus Christ is wor∣thy, for whose sake it may be freely Imparted to thee. Grant, that thou art unworthy, that he should own thee; yet surely he hath deserved to have a people in the world, that should own him indeed, believe on him and submit to him. He is worthy to have a people to serve and Honour him. And he hath taught us to pray, [Thy Kingdom come,] though we are unworthy to be Translated into his Kingdom. He is worthy to be our Ruler, though we are unworthy to be acknowledged by him, as his Loyal Subjects. He that hath Fought for us, Died for us, is worthy to be our Head, though we are unworthy to be his Members. Well, here is Encouragement for such as begin to enquire after him, only they fear, they should have no part in him, sear that they shall be rejected of him: Ra∣ther if thou canst not be satisfied without Christ and his Grace, it is a sign, the Lord hath begun with
thee, to bring thee over to himself. It is to be ho∣ped thou art part of Christs purchase, which he will not lose. Converts are the Travel of his soul. And he is abundantly satisfied, to see this Fruit of his sorrows. When souls become willing to bow to his Scepter. It is the day of Christs Power, Psal. 110.3. It is the day of Christs glorious Con∣quest, and Triumph; it is as a Coronation day to Christ, Cant. 3.11. The day of the gladness of his Heart. Let the thoughts of thy former unworthy carriage and disposition be humble, but not discou∣rage thee. Remember, that he hath received Gists for men, yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God may dwell among them. He hath sub∣dued many a rebellious Creature by his Grace, and made them Loyal Subjects. And if now thou art lamenting after him, it is to be hoped, he is at work with thee. Object. But they are so very few in comparison, that ever attain to an Interest in Christ, and saving Grace, that I know not how to hope, it should be ever so well with me. Answ. If they were never so few, yet while there are any, and so long as the thing is possible, thou art to seek it above all things in the world: And if thou must die and perish, yet thou shouldst resolve to die and perish in pursuit after Christ, and Grace. If any place of Profit or Honour be to be dis∣posed of, many will presently put in for it, will make Friends, and employ their Wit and Interest to obtain it; many will seek, though but one can go away with it: But here all that seek Christ and Grace aright, are in the way to find him. (2.) You that are partaking of Christs purchase,
that have received some Grace of his Fulness; re∣member where you had it, and be, 1. Humble. 2. Thankful. 3. Watchful. 1. Be Humble, you may not say, my hand hath got me this wealth: Now I live, saith the Apostle, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. 2. Be Thankful, O how thankful should you be for Christ, and how thankful to him? What praise is due to him, who hath loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and sanctified us? 3. Be Watchful, to preserve Grace. Remem∣ber what it cost: As David said of the water of the Well of Bethlehem, Is it not the blood of the men, that went in Jeopardy of their Lives? O precious Faith, which cost the precious Blood of Christ, to purchase it! when you are careless of maintaining and preserving Grace received, would not this Ar∣gue, that you have very low thoughts of the pur∣chase of Christs Blood? Did he not think it too much, to shed his Blood, to procure Grace and Peace for thee: And dost thou think any pains too much to preserve thine? Does not that deserve to be cherished with our Prayers and Tears, which cost the Blood of Christ, to procure it for us?
Ezek. 36.32. Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord God, be it known unto you. Sect. 11. PROP. XI. There is nothing required in the Covenant of Grace, or that the People of God can per∣form, which can Merit at Gods Hand, but what the Lord promiseth upon such or such condition, is as much of Grace, as if it were bestowed without any Condition. INdeed a Learned man observes, that according to Distributive-Governing-Justice, so Adam might have been said to Merit, doing all that could equally be required of him; that is, keeping the Law of Innocency. Yea, understanding Merit, or worthiness, as nothing else but a Moral aptitude for the reward; the Fathers are not to be condem∣ned, that speak of [the Merit of good Works] mean∣ing only according to the Distributive, Governing, Paternal Justice of God in the Law of Grace. But according to the terms of Commutative Justice (which giveth one thing for another, as in Buying and Selling) no Creature can possibly Merit at Gods hand, (vid. Mr. Baxt, Christian Directory, p. 129. sect. 3.1.2, 4. And Preface to Mr. Allain's Dis∣course,
&c. p. 10, 11.) Merit in this last sence would utterly exclude, and deny Gods Benignity, and Mercy. As Beza in Luke 17.10. Sed & ipse Leg is contextus omnem merendi dignitatem excludi Nihil nisi prorsus gratuitam benignitatem promitten ipsam observantibus: Cum ipsum quoque legale pa∣ctum non aliunde quam à mera Dei benignitate pro∣ficiscatur. But further to cut off occasion from our Adversa∣ries here. We grant the Obedience which the Faith∣ful perform by the help of Gods Grace, is not to be reckoned among their sins. For coming from  right principle, and being directed to a right end,  hath what is Essential to an Action Morrally-good; though not coming up to that degree of perfection, which the Law in its Rigour doth require, it is not perfectly good. But this Imperfection is but gra∣dual, and not such as specifieth in an evil action, for the kind of it. Again, The faithful are worthy, , Rev. 3.4. God accounts them worthy, in his righteous Judg∣ment, accounts them worthy of his Kingdom. But how worthy? Surely not in such a sence as would Derogate and take off from his Free-Grace, and Christs Merits. They are not worthy absolutely, considered strictly in themselves: But worthy for Christs sake, and worthy comparatively. Of the two, the Saints are more worthy than sinners. They are rewardable, being in that state, and capacity, to which the reward is graciously promised. And as there is some conveniency betwixt the Seed, and the Fruit, or Crop; betwixt holding out in the Conflict, and wearing the Triumphal Crown; be∣twixt running out the Race, and bearing away
the Prize; betwixt the Means, and the End; so betwixt the Obedience of the Faithful, and promi∣sed Happiness. We may grant, they have Digni∣tatem non-repugnantiae, & dignitatem condecentiae. (As Mr. Fenner.) They are not contrarily Affected, and Enclined, but in some measure disposed and made meet for Heaven. Though they have not Dig∣itatem equivalentiae: They can do no service pro∣portionable to such a reward, Rom. 8.17. So they are not worthy in strict Justice, without any thing of Grace or Favour shewn them; only it is worthy of God to reward them, not according to their slen∣der service, but according to his own Bounty and Munificence. Note, 1. It is of special Grace, Vid. Maldonat in John 15.16. col∣lat. cum Gerhard. Har. c. 177. p. 1025. a pr. that any do perform the Conditi∣on. And therefore the Creature cannot thus Merit any thing at Gods hand; but rather the contra∣ry, upon this account God merits the greatest Love, and highest praises from such of his Creatures. In∣deed they are hereby most deeply indebted to him, Deo autem nunquid dicimus, redde mihi quia dedi tibi? Quid dedimus Deo, quando totum quod sumus, & quod habemus boni, ab illo habe∣mus? Nihil ergo ei dedi∣mus. Aug. Cùm duo sint ad se invicem relata, meri∣tum & debitum, profecto meritum est solius Dei, de∣bitum vero Hominis est: li∣cet adversarii haec inver∣tant, Doceant{que} debitum esse Dei meritum vero Ho∣minis. Rolloc. as they cannot but acknowledg to Eternity, Ephes. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves; it is the Gift of God. Nonne hoc modo & li∣herum Arbitrium, & bonae intentiones, & preparationes fictitiae & meritae, & satis∣factiones conticescant oppor∣tet. Calo.
This Faith upon which Salvation is promised,  the Gift of his Grace, Phil. 1.29. ; there∣fore Salvation, cannot but be of Grace too. When the Condition is of Grace; the benefit promised  not but be of Grace. How should that Merit  us, which is the free Gift of God, which he ( special Grace) was pleased to bestow on us? 2. (As we have heard also) Christ hath purcha∣sed saving sanctifying Grace for all those, who a tain to it as well as Salvation thereupon. And hence it follows, that there is no proper Merit  in Christ. We are to thank Christ, both that  have Faith (any of us) and that Salvation is sun to them that believe. And one says well: How far is the performance of the con∣dition from Meriting the thing pro∣mised, Great. prapit. p. 198. when Christ Died for th end, that God might justifie and save them th perform it. Be thou faithful unto death, say Christ, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. An how impossible is it, that our being faithful un death should Merit the Crown of Life from Christ, since it was he that purchased our Faith and Perse∣verance? Surely Christ is before-hand with us here; nor can we come ever even with him. How absurd is it to say, that Christ hath Merite this for us, that our works should Merit? The instead of being saved by Christ, we should rather be our own Saviours. So we might say, to the works of our own hands, (dipt in Christs Blood) ye are our Saviours. And what needed Christ to have Merited Heaven for us, if we were to merit it by our own works? see Gal. 2. ult. It is called the Purchased possession, in regard of what Christ
hath done; not that we could purchase it by any ing, we can do. And if it was purchased by Christ r the Faithful, then surely there is no need, that ey should purchase it anew. If they must merit eaven, this would deny Christs having merited it r them: I say, this were a denial of the merit of Christ, or a denial of Gods Justice in not giving eaven to them, when it was purchased for them, ccept they will purchase it over again. Or else ey must think, that God is behind-hand with em, if Christ hath Merited Heaven for them, and ey merit Heaven themselves; one Heaven should t be enough. What enemies are they to the race of God, how hard would they make him,  take a double price for the same Possession? Yea, the Opinion of mens merits would make esus Christ the Redeemer indebted to his redeemed es. O prodigious absurdity. Is it not plain that  hath power to give eternal life, that he gives ernal life, Joh. 17.2. And would it not be a strange ingling of heaven and earth, (horrible confusion)  a believer to come to Christ, and demand of him, rd give me the life and happiness, which I have rited at thy thy hands? Rather is it not he, that erited for his people, and so hath it put into his ds to give them? Object. But if salvation was purchased by Christ,  believers, will it not follow, that it is not of eace? Answ. No: it is given for no merits of theirs; ough for the merits of Christ. Indeed it is of stice to Christ, because he hath merited salvation  believers: but of grace to them, because they uld no way merit it. But if one supposeth any
merit in them; he therein denyeth, and directly  poseth that of the Apostle Paul, That they are sa by grace. If of grace, then not of their own  rit; If of their own merit, then not of grace. 3. How utterly impossible it is, and there incredible, that the most eminent Saint should  heaven, who must (with Iacob,) acknowledge  self less than the least of mercies, and for the ve least of his sins deserving no less than hell? Tho his sins are pardoned, that he is not bound over  hell and condemnation; yet the reatus simplex  maineth, that we must say of such a pardoned sin∣ner; if God should deal with him according to  deserts, he could look for nothing but hell. If a believing, repenting sinner, if the most hum mortified sinner in the world should merit forgi life and happiness; then their must be more g ness, necessarily supposed in his faith, repentance obedience, than there is evil in his sins: But there more evil in one sin, than there is good in them perfect obedience of any creature. And if the was more good in a Saints obedience, than evil his sins; then what need had such of the satisfacting of Christ; Then Christ dyed in vain for them w might have satisfied for themselves. Again, while the sins of a believer do in the own Nature deserve hell, if he could merit hea on the other hand by his obedience, then it would  low, that the same person, at the same time sho deserve both to be pardoned, and to be condemne should both deserve heaven and hell, so the penite should be saved, but the sinner damned. 4. How impossible is it that the condition of
Covenant of Grace should be meritorious, when this ever necessarily included, indispensible required, is part of the condition, that we do utterly renounce ur own righteousness, disclaim all self-merit, elf-worthiness, that we see our misery and despe∣ate lost estate without the free grace of God in Christ, that we freely acknowledg our iniquity, and deservings at Gods hand, and put no confidence  the flesh. Yea we should be ashamed, and con∣ounded in our selves, even when the Lord is pacifi∣d towards us. And Jesus Christ hath told us: Eve∣y one that exalteth himself, shall be abased, and he hat humbleth himself, Theologi Reformati me∣ritò vocem meriti re∣pudiant, quia sonat aliquid superbum. Le Blank Theses. Quomodo fides justificet, Sect. 57. p. 22. shall be xalted. And hath taught us, when we have done what is com∣anded, to say, (i. e. to believe d acknowledg seriously) that e are unprofitable servants, nd deserve not so much as hanks from our Lord and master. Luk. 17.9, 10. And could men doe all, the Co∣enant of Grace requires, Si quis devotus, si quis solicitus, si quis spiritu fervens, cave∣at sibi ne suis fidat maritis, ne suis in nitatur operibus, alioqui nec hujus∣cemodi quidem a∣nimum intrat gra∣tia. Bernard. In Annum Dom. ser. 3. the Co∣enant of Grace requires, that is epent of sins past, turn from sin, d set upon a strict course of obe∣ience for time to come, &c. nd onely fail in this one point of saclaiming self-righteousness, and elf-merit, to abide by the merit d righteousness of Christ alone, procure their acceptation with God, and salvation; I say, could men do all, that e Covenant of Grace requires, besides this: but  stead of denying, and going out of themselves, ould relye and depend on their own righteousness
as meritorious of the favour of God, &c. they wo find this but a smoother and cleanlier way to hell  know not how better to express it, than in the wo of a late Writer. As Works every way per and meritorious (supposing their were any  would in themselves hinder pardon by Chr death, being essentially (in their own Natures)  consistent; so a mans conceiting his works me∣rious, is by Gods Law of Grace, excluded  any interest in this propitiation, for he hath  it a part of the Condition, that men be sensible their unworthiness and undone estate with Christ and pardon. Thus let men go never so  do never so much, yet an opinion of merit were nough to spoil all they doe, and enough to de them utterly of all saving benefit by the Cove of Grace, they not coming up to the condition o To stand upon our own worthiness, is to fall  Grace, Gal. 5.4. 5. To hold the best works of the most grace souls meritorious, is to deny the Covenant of Gr A Covenant of Grace it cannot be, if it requ and insists upon meritorious works. Grace and  are  inconsistent. Though Grace will  well enough with Christs merit, yet not with  merit of Saints (as I shewd before.) If Salvation by meritorious Works of our own, then not of G If it be of Grace, then not by Meritorious w of our own. And to talk of meriting Ratione  ti: Si opera merentur vitam Aeternam ex pacto & ordi∣natione Dei; non merentur eam inerinsecasua dignita∣te. Alting. Elenct. p. 801. By virtue of Gods  venant and Promise, W is it, but clearly to sub the thing they would word blish? What is it but to
upon their own Swords, to contradict, and confute themselves? That good works are not meritorious of deaven and Happiness of themselves, but only the Lord hath promised Life and Happiness in that way, (let them talk what they will,) this is a plain roof, that they merit not at all by way of Condig∣ity, or in respect of Commutative Justice; but  is of Gods free Grace to promise such a reward, ndeserved. Indeed the Popish Doctors Hobble miserably in heir Disputes about the Merit of mens works. ome of them teaching, that good works Merit by irtue of Christs Merits; others, by virtue of Gods romise, and compact. Some holding that they me∣it ex justitia, of strict Justice; others, that they erit ex gratitudine, as if God was bound, at least  a way of Gratitude to reward them so. Direct∣ contrary to Luke 17.9, 10. But no wonder that hese Babel-builders have their Language thus con∣onfounded. I know the word [Merit] hath sometimes been ed very improperly to signifie no more, than sim∣ly to obtain. As in the speech of Cain, [mine Ini∣ity is greater, (according to the Vulg. Lat.) am ut veniam merear. See more in Bishop Mortons Appeal for Protestants, l. 2. c. 2. sect. 3, 4. & Antidot. contra me∣rita. c. 3. sect. 3.] When thing is more abhorrent from eason; than that sin, any sin ould deserve, or merit forgive∣ss. What? Both deserve par∣on, and deserve punishment? what n be a plainer contradiction? Doth the same ountain send forth sweet water and bitter, salt wa∣r and fresh? Ʋse. Get a clear apprehension of this certain
truth, that there is no merit in what the best of m can do. There is a vast difference betwixt the co∣dition of Salvation, and the Meritorious cause  Salvation. ANd yet sometimes Antinomians,  are so much against Conditions, seem to befrie Popish Merits, saying, That Christ giveth perfe∣ction to our works, and we fulfil the Law in Chri and our works are perfect, and free from sin,  Christs Actions were. Yea, Eaton hath this sense less saying, Justification is meritorious of all th Favour and Blessings of God. But let us learn to distinguish betwixt a Condi∣onal and a Meritorious cause. We are Justified  Saved by Faith, saved in the way of Repentance, O∣bedience. We are not saved without them (Christ is the Author of Salvation only to those that believe in him, and obey him) that these are necessary Con∣ditions. Yet we are not saved for Faith, or for  Repentance, Obedience, for any worth or dese in them, but only for the merit of Christ: The are necessary Conditions of salvation therefore but no Meritorious cause. An Error here, is  Error in the foundation of Salvation. It was th Jews overthrow, their seeking to establish their  Righteousness. As it is enough to ruin any in th world, To build off from Christ, the only Founda∣tion, is Ruinous work, such foolish building won undo any man. There is salvation in no other  Christ. No hopes, that ever we should get to He ven, if we come not unto Christ: No coming  Christ, if we go not out of our selves.
Ezek. 18.25. Here now, O House of Israel, is not my Way equal? Sect. 12. PROP. XII. The Condition of the Covenant of Grace not be∣ing required properly to Merit, and purchase the Blessings promised; it follows, that it is only required to make Way, and qualifie us for our Enjoying and partaking of them. NOw after man had broke with God, one would be apt to conclude, that God would never take him into a new League, unless it was upon some higher, and harder terms; as it is usual a∣mong men. Yet it is quite otherwise in the Co∣venant of Grace. God condescends to as low terms as it is possible for any man reasonably to desire. As if the Lord should treat sinners thus: Poor Crea∣tures you have destroyed your selves; but in me is your help. You are a company of Rebels, that deserve to die, yet I am ready to pardon, and to be reconciled to you, in and through my dear Son, (who in tender compassion towards you, willing∣ly interposed betwixt you and Justice, and died to satisfie for, and save as many of you as should own him for their Redeemer, and return to their Allegeance to me.) Now here I offer to be at peace with you; only I must secure the Honour of my Free-grace, and my Sons Merits, as I must also keep up the Reputation of my just Authority,
Holiness, hatred of sin. (As I cannot but hate sin, though I am willing to be Reconciled to sin∣ners.) And I must have you at some better pass, not to sin wilfully, as those that neither fear to offend God, nor regard at all how they wrong their own souls. Now, what say ye? Are you ready heartily to acknowledg your sin and wretch∣edness, to accept of a gracious pardon, and Sal∣vation offered, standing no longer in your own Justification, but utterly renouncing your own Righteousness? And do you resolve to be subject to my Authority, to obey my Commands for time to come, unfeignedly grieving and being truly humbled for your coming short, and failing in any part of that duty you owe to me your Creator, Redeemer, Owner, Governour? That is, in short, are you really willing to give up your selves to me, to be Guided and Governed by me, and saved in my own way? Then I here, faithfully engage, upon the word of the ever Living God, the Faithful God that keepeth Covenant, that I will be your God, your Portion, your Exceeding great Reward. I will be, and do all that can be desired, to make you for ever Happy. Now is not this a fair proposal? Is it not won∣derful, that the Great God should ever make such a gracious offer to sinful, provoking Creatures? Sup∣pose an Earthly Prince offering a Pardon, and pro∣mising his Princely grace and favour to a company of condemned Traitors, and Rebels, if they would seriously confess their guilt, acknowledge and accept of his Princely grace and clemency, and promise Loyalty and subjection for time to come; Would
you not say these were very fair, easie and equitable terms? And that in wisdom and honour he could require no less? And what doth the Lord require more of us? O sinner! thou that hast been a rebel∣lious wretch, what doth the Lord require of thee, but only to acknowledge thine Iniquity, to accept of Christ the only Saviour, and give up thy self to be governed by him, heartily bewailing and mourning for it; when at any time thou hast forgotten him, and that Love, Duty, Service, and Thankfulness, which thou for ever owest unto him? And is it not wonderful Grace, that on these terms the Lord is ready to receive thee? Doth he promise, that [If the wicked turn from his wickedness, and walk in Gods Statutes, he shall surely live;] his sins shall not be mentioned unto him, (as Ezek. 33.14, 15, 16.) And will any deny this to be a gracious promise, because conditional? Is it not plain, that what the Lord calleth for here, is of Right, and a due Debt from us? But that he promiseth to receive sinners opon their return; this is not of Debt, but of Gods abundant Mercy, and Free-grace. And how should he in Honour go lower than he doth, or in Faithfulness to the Interest of the souls of his people? These three things therefore make up the Condi∣tion of the Covenant of Grace. 1. Repentance towards God, without this no Re∣mission or Salvation: Except ye repent, ye shall sure∣ly perish. But on the contrary, If the wicked turn, he shall surely live, he shall not dye, Ezek. 18.21. 2. Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. If ye believe not, ye shall dye in your sins, Joh. 8.24. But, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved, Act. 16.31.
3. A resolution to perform sincere, and new obe∣dience, 2 Thes. 1.8. The Lord Jesus shall be re∣vealed from heaven, to take vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel (that yield not evangelical obedi∣ence:) But he is the Author of Eternal salvation  them that obey him. Under these three, (Repentance, Faith, and sin∣cere Obedience) is included whatsoever the Cove∣nant of Grace requireth, and where one of these is, there are the other. They are inseparable: and where one is named, the other are understood. As what goeth under the name of faith working by love, Gal. 5.6. is called a new creature, Gal. 6.15. and keeping the commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7.19. Under the old Testament the condition of the Covenant of Grace is ordinarily expressed by turn∣ing to God, (Ezek. 33.11. Seeking him (Amos 5.4. Prov. 8.17.) walking uprightly, (Gen. 17.1. Psal. 84.11. keeping his commandments, (Psal. 103.18.) In the New Testament it is more ordinarily ex∣pressed by faith, faith in Jesus Christ, Mar. 16.16. Joh. 3.36. &c. Not but that all that were saved before Christ came in the flesh, were saved by him (who was th Lamb slain from the beginning of the world,  some take that in Rev. 13.8.) not but that it was for his sake, that any were accepted of God, and save before: see Ast. 15.11. but after his coming in the flesh, then a more explicite faith in Christ, was re∣quired of all that would have salvation by Christ And therefore the Gospel was written (as the Eva gelist John sayes of the writing of his Gospel, Chap. 20.31. that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ the son of God, and that believing we might have lif
through his Name. Not that [believing Iesus to be the Christ, the Son of God] was the onely thing re∣quired, or all that was necessary to our having life through his Name: But this added to what was be∣fore required in order to Salvation: Before his coming there was no pointing at him, so as John Baptist did, Joh. 1.29.36. Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world. But Christ be∣ing come, he could say, If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins; and he saveth those that come unto God [by him] others he will not save. Therefore he saith, Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee, the true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent. So Ioh. 3.36. He that believeth on the Son hath everlast∣ing life, he that believeth not, shall not see life. So ob∣serve what the Covenant of grace requireth for the honour of Christ as Redeemer, and of Free-grace. I am not ignorant, how some have argued, an ex∣plicit knowledge and belief of Christs death and sa∣tisfaction, not to have been absolutely necessary to the salvation of those, that lived before Christs coming And yet methinks, it is plain, that the faithfull, that lived and died before Christs coming in the flesh, as they had some means of attaining to the knowledge of a Redeemer, so they had some knowledge of a Redeemer, though it was more general and confused, not so clear and distinct, as what Christians now have: But the doctrine of mans Redemption was preached to Adam immediatly after his fall [The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head] And Iob could speak of his Redeemer, Iob 29.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. And faithfull Abraham, Christ testifieth of him, Ioh. 8.56. Your
Father Abraham rejoyced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad. And Iacob invocates the Angel of the Covenant, Gen. 48.15, 16. God before whom my fathers, Abraham, and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day: [The Angel which redeemed me from all evil] bless the lads. This Angel was his Redeemer, (And so the Messiah is called, Isa. 59.20.) Again, the same Patriarch, when he lay a dying, breaks forth into this sweet note, Gen. 49.18. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord: which the two Chaldee Pharaphrasts explain thus, (as Ainsworth noteth) our father Iacob said, I ex∣pect not the salvation of Gideon son of Ioash, which is a temporal salvation; nor the salvation of Sam∣son son of Manoah, but the salvation of Christ the son of David, who shall come to bring to himself the sons of Israel, whose salvation my soul desi∣reth. The Patriarks that dyed in the faith, saw something in the promise, which they did not live to see fulfilled, Heb. 11.13. Though it was a far off, yet by faith they saw it, and dyed in the Faith, and confident expectation of it, as Iacob that said, I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord. As Christ told his disciples, that many Prophets, and righteous men, and Kings have desired to see the things that ye see, and have not seen them, Mat. 13.17. Luk. 10.24. So he sayes, that the Scriptures of the old Testa∣ment testified of him, Ioh. 5.39. and ver. 46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me, Luke 24.44, &c. And to him gave all the Prophets witness, Act. 3.18.20, 22. & 10.43. Luk. 1.69, 70, 72, Act. 7.52. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. As the Sacrifices under the Law pointed at Christ the Lamb of God, the true Sacrifice, that takes away the
sins of the world. So it was foretold, that he should make his soul an offering for sin, and bear the iniquity of his people, Isa. 53.10, 11, 12. And Dan. 9.26. After sixty two weeks shall Messiah be cut off. Thus it was revealed, that he should be put to Death; yea, and that he should rise again, Psal. 16.9. Thou wilt not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. And Psal. 110.1. Setteth forth his glorious Exalta∣tion, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot∣stool. Now when so much of him was revealed be∣fore, methinks it is strange, if the Faithful then should know nothing of him. VVas the Spirit of the Lord so straightned then, as not at all to own and bless his own means here? But though I confess, it is not in me to determine, how much Knowledge of, and Faith in the Messiah was necessary then; and though I grant the gene∣rallity of the Faithful then might know very little, (if any thing at all) of the way and manner of the Messiahs procuring Redemption and Salvation; of which the Prophets themselves were put to enquire, and search diligently, 1 Pet. 1.10. Yet methinks, this is very clear. That Pardoning Grace was not a thing unknown to them, but plainly declared, that they might know, Salvation was not of Works, but of Grace. As the Lord had proclaimed his Name to be The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, forgiving Ini∣quity, and Trangression, and Sin; and that will by no means clear, . Mundando non mun∣dabit, h. c. neminem per se pro mun∣do & Innocente habet, sed quos mun∣dat & Justificat, mundat ex solâ
suâ gratiâ. (F. co.) Omnes egent Dei misericordi (Menock.) apud M. Pol. in Synops. Exod. 34. 5, 6, 7. so Psal. 130.3.4. If thou (Lord) shouldst mark iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand? But there i forgiveness with thee, that thou mayst be feared Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked for sake his way, and re∣turn to the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and will abundantly pardon. That the Faithful of old had a sense of their need of pardoning Grace, is evident. As David describeth Blessedness, Psal. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he, whose Transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is no guile. (i. e.) No guile allowed, but la∣mented and abhorred. So this was plainly taught, that the true Israelite, the guiltless person, the up∣right man could not attain to Blessedness, but by the way of pardoning Grace. So they that offered the Sacrifices of Righteousness, might not trust in their own services and sacrifices, but in the Lord, Psal. 4.5. And David (a man after Gods own heart) acknowledgeth Gods Forgiving-mercy, Psal. 103.3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities. And Solomon prayeth for them that should return to God with all their beart— that he would forgive, 2 Chron. 6.38.39. And Hezekiah, that the good Lord would pardon every one that prepareth his heart to seek God, 2 Chron. 30.18, 19. And thus far the condition of the Covenant of Grace was all one under both Testaments, to secure the Honour of Free-grace. (And they are utterly unworthy of any Grace and Favour from God, that will not acknowledg it.) O! How is Gods Free∣grace, and Infinite mercy magnified in the Pardon
and Salvation of a sinful Creature? Free-grace is he Attribute that God delights to Honour, and oth Honour especially in a sinners Salvation. And e will have this right done unto it, by all, that would attain to Salvation; he will have them see nd acknowledge, that if ever they be saved, it must e by Gods Infinite Free-grace. Quod & si nos puerili animositate gratis sal∣vari nolumus, merito non salvamur. Exclu∣dit miseriae dissimulatio miserationem: Nec dig∣natio locum habet, ubi fuerit praesumptio digni∣tatis. Bernard. In De∣dic. Eccl. Ser. 5. (I am speaking of the Adult.) As ever any of us would be sa∣ved, we must be sensible of our own unworthiness (as Jacob, that acknowledged himself less than the least of mercies, Gen. 32.10.) We must re∣nounce our own Righteous∣ness, (as Job 9.20. If I justifie my self, my own mouth shall condemn me. As the Church confesseth in Isa. 64.6. We are all as an un∣lean thing, and our righteousness as filthy rags.) There was never any Saint, or truly Righteous person in the world, accepted, and saved for any herent Righteousness found in him: But only of Gods Free-grace, through the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, eyed, and accepted of God for him. And we read of the Jews, Rom. 9.31, 32 which fol∣lowed after the Law of Righteousness, that they tained not to the Law of Righteousness: Because hey sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law. This therefore is essential to the condition of the Covenant of Grace, that we acknowledge all that God doth for us, according to this Covenant, or all that he here promiseth to do, to be of Grace, of Free-grace. And if men could do all, that the Co∣venant
requireth besides this, and then rest in th same, as a satisfaction to God for their sins, and  compensation for his Favours, as making him  mends; this were to turn the Covenant of Grace i a Covenant of Works. This you are to note, (and I pray you observe it The condition of the Covenant of Grace, is not  satisfie for our breach of the Covenant of VVor but to Interest us in Christs satisfaction. It be so agreed betwixt, or decreed by God the Father and his Son Christ, that none shall be pardoned a saved upon account of his Satisfaction, but  such as come up to the Tearms of the Covenant  Grace. And truly the Design of the Covenant of Gra is so clear for advancing Christ, and Free-grace  that after many deliberate thoughts, I am afraid  give any more to Faith it self, in the business of  sinners Justification and Salvation, than our sobe Divines give to Repentance, and other Grace Upon serious thoughts, I dare not contend for a Causality, or Efficiency in Faith it self; no not  the least and lowest Degree. If in any respect  is to be preferred to other Graces, it is in th (to use the phrase of a Learned Divine) that  is the sinners Self-denying acknowledgment of  sin and misery, and inability to help himself. N that Faith could of it self procure our Pardon a Justification: But only God hath promised to the that believe, an Interest in Christ, and his Righte∣ousness. How doth Faith Interest us in Christ a his Righteousness for Justification, and Salvation Certainly, not by any Intrinsick virtue of its ow but by virtue of Gods gracious promise. The Papist
would have Faith to Justifie, as it is a Grace dispo∣g ad justitium, and as a part of our Inherent Righ∣ousness: Justificatio sine dubio motus quidam est peccato ad justitiam, says Bellarmine. So he un∣standeth that of being Justified freely by his race, Rom. 3.24. Per gratiam, idest, per justi∣on ab illo donatam, & infusam. But if we ad∣it of their notion of Justification (more proper∣ Justification) then we should be Justified natu∣rally and necessarily upon the Working, or (to use e common word) Infusing of a principle of Grace,  Righteous habits. As it followeth also, that we  only be said to be justified in part, till such time  our Inherent Righteousness be perfect. And squently that in part we are all Unjustified; and  all should be liable to Condemnation still. Others speak of the Tò credere, the condition of  Covenant of Grace, Justifying, God taking d accepting of it, as if it were a perfect fulfilling  the Law. Thus Faith by Acceptilation is suppo∣ to stand in the place, and stead of Perfect, Ex∣ Legal Righteousness and Obedience. And I sess the Expression of Faith being counted for righteousness, Rom. 4.3, 5. would seem to coun∣ance such an Opinion, at first blush. But we st not put such a sence on this Text, and expres∣ of Scripture, as would overthrow other Scrip∣s. We read 1 Cor. 1.30. That Christ is made  God unto us Righteousness. VVhere Bellarmine ts, Non esset absurdum, si quis diceret nobis im∣ri, Christi justitiam & merita, cum nobis do∣ur & applicentur, ac si nos ipsi Deo satisfecisse∣ Though it be a giving up his cause. But they  place Faith in the room of perfect Obedience,
teaching that by Gods gracious Acceptilation  one is reputed for the other. they wrest the Scrip∣ture, and deny the gracious Imputation of Chr Righteousness to them that believe. So far as I am able to apprehend, that which  swereth to the Righteousness, and Obedience,  quired in the Covenant of Works, is the Righ∣ousness and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ alone, ( is called, The Lord our Righteousness, who is  of God unto us Righteousness, our Pro-le Righteousness, as one.) As also we are said to made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. .21.) That as man should have been Justified,  for ever Happy by the Covenant of Works, for  own Righteousness inherent in him, and wro by him, had he obeyed perfectly: So that  man is Justified, and saved now, it is not for  imperfect Inherent righteousness of his own,  for the Righteousness of Christ alone. his comple and full satisfaction to Gods Law and Justice.  now if you ask, How the Righteousness, and ∣tisfaction of Christ becomes ours, to Justification and salvation? Or how it cometh to be imputed  the Justifying of some, when it is not imputed others? The answer is, because the Lord hath  down in the Covenant of Grace upon what tear or in what way the Righteousness of Christ  become ours to Justification, and salvation; and  come up to those terms, others not. And so the expression of faith being accoun or imputed unto righteousness] must either be an pallage, (as Beza, &c.) meaning that righteous is imputed to them that believe, Rom. 4.11. or  must be put there for the object of faith, Christ
prehended and received by faith, or else the words ay be understood thus, that faith is that, which in e eye of the new Law passeth for righteousness, sub∣dinate to Christs righteousness. Being all (sum∣arily) which is required of a man himself, that he ay be just in the eye of the new law of Grace, or e Gospel, or that he may have a right and title to e righteousness, which consists in the remission of  through Christ, (see Mr. Allens Discourse, p. 48. 9, 50.) But the words cannot possibly be intended y the Apostle, to exclude Christs Righteousness im∣uted to them that believe, for that would make him contradictory to himself. And so I conclude, that faith is not instead of per∣ect Legal righteousness: but the righteousness of Christ, which is imputed to us, (made ours) when e believe, come up to Covenant-terms. So we ead in Rom. 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believeth, and Chap. 8..4. what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own son in the keness of sinfull flesh, , and a sin-offer∣ing; or a sacrifice for sin, (as it should have been ranslated, and I wonder Beza should oppose it, when  his note upon Heb. 10.6. he is contrary to himself nd readeth , sacrifice for sin. (But God ending his own Son, to be a sacrifice for sin, thus e) condemned sin in the flesh; That the righteous∣ness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk ot after the flesh, but after the Spirit. As if he ad said, The Law and justice are no Losers by us, who are in Christ Jesus. Though our obedience be perfect and short of the Rule; yet Christs satis∣faction is full and perfect, which by Gods gracious
promise and Covenant, is freely made over to  that believe. But thus you have heard how the design of the ∣venant of Grace is to advance Gods free grace, and  merits of Jesus Christ, and accordingly it is a main sential part of the condition of the Covenant, that  acknowledge free grace the moving, & Christs t teousness the meritorious procuring cause of all  good, and blessedness proposed, and promised in  Covenant. As they are altogether unmeet to  take of such benefits, as will not acknowledge fr whom they receive, and how they come by them. Now to apply this, before I proceed to that  of the condition, which is a recognizing of Go Authority, and swearing fealty to him. Let me ask, what spirit you are of? Have y high thoughts of your selves, and would you  something in your selves? or have you learnt to d∣ny your selves, and to have admiring thoughts  Christ, and free Grace? Luk. 18.9. &c. The our Saviour put forth a parable to certain that tr∣ed in themselves that they were righteous. Two  went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharise the other a Publican. The Pharisee stood and pra∣ed thus, God I thank thee, that I am not as oth men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even this Publican. I fast twice in the week, &c.  he trusted in this, thought this enough to comm him to Gods acceptance, and to procure his salva on. He looked no further. The poor Publican stood afar off, and would not lift up so much as  eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying God be mercifull to me a sinner. He saw himself lost undone creature, unless it would please th
Lord to shew forth his wonderfull free mercy. He d a deep sense of his own wretchedness, and un∣orthiness. Now saith our Saviour, ver. 14. I tell ou, this man went away justified, rather than the her. For every one that exalteth himself shall be based, and he that humbleth himself shall be exal∣ed. Now Sirs, how is it? Are we for exalting our elves, or for exalting Christ, and grace? It is true, aturally we are all for establishing, and setting up ur own righteousness; and are loth to own our overty and wretchedness, to be so great, as indeed is; are loth to think of being so much beholden to s Christ, and free Grace, as indeed we must be, if  we be saved. But know this, it is as certainly ning for men to trust in their own righteousness,  to go on impenitently in sin and wickedness. It may  because thou art not so bad as others, thou thinkest y self too good to go to hell: that thy sins do not de∣ive hel; or it may be thou hast been humbled after a , & hast reformed many things, hast left thy swear∣g, cursing, lying, thy drunkenness, thy open Sabbath of a nation; & now thou livest after another fashion, ou art a diligent hearer, hast set up the worship of d in thy family, art just in thy dealings, &c. and refore now thou thinkest, thou deservest well at ods hand. But alas, one thing thou lackest, thou must  all, and come to Christ. Thou must count all ings dung, thine own righteousness filthy rags, and tre only to be found cloathed in the righteousness  Christ. Alas, alas, while thou trustest in thy , as having such a righteousness of thine own, ou art upon a false bottom, thou art but a proud irisee, and many Publicans are more likely to enter  heaven, than such self-righteous ones. If when
we cannot deny, but we are sinners; instead  humbling our selves before God, and suing to  for Grace and pardon, in and through Christ ( way that he hath set forth, wherein alone sinne may be reconciled to him.) VVe will go our  way (as if Gods way were too low) so we  think to make God amends some other way; what this, but to deny Pardoning, Gospel-grace,  (as one says) to spit in Christs face? VVhat this, but to make the Death and satisfaction Christ needless? As what needed Jesus Christ Die for sinners, to satisfie Gods Justice, if any thi that sinners can do, may satisfie? VVell sirs,  to it: Christs satisfaction was never intended, provided for such, as think themselves sufficient satisfie, and make God amends; such as hope th sins are not so great, but they may be Expiated their good prayers, works of Charity, or Right ousness, that they have done. VVere it so inde then Jesus Christ might very well have spared  great pains taken, and undergone about it. The truth is, there are very gross and danger mistakes both ways: Too many that would  Christs work out of his Hands, as Self-justiciari others again would cast that, which is their o proper work, upon Christ, as Antinomians.  sound Christian must warily avoid both these Ro both Extreams. Indeed Christ hath satisfied for us, for our bre of the Covenant of VVorks, if we perform  condition of the Covenant of Grace. But he  not performed the condition of the Covenant Grace for any (though he hath purchased that G for some, whereby they shall perform it.)
Christ was made under the Law, to fulfil the Law: Not under the Gospel, to perform the condition of the Gospel. He hath not repented for us, believed for us. Had he done these, then there were no∣thing at all for us to do; but he should save us alto∣gether without us. Christ's satisfying for mans breach of the Cove∣nant of works, will not exempt us from a necessity of performing the condition of the Covenant of Grace. As our performing the condition of the Covenant of Grace, is not that which satisfieth for our breach of the Covenant of Works. Sirs, be very clear in these points: Certainly, they are of very great weight. Suppose I am questioned, as being a sinner; what have I to plead here, but the satisfaction of Christ? But then suppose my In∣terest in Christs satisfaction questioned; in this case I have nothing to plead, but the condition of the Covenant of Grace. If I truly repent, and believe, then by Gods promise, and Covenant, I am assured of Remission and salvation by Christ. But for us to place any Act, Grace, or Duty of ours in the oom of Christ, is a most dreadful presumption, nd an undoing mistake. They that here would turn Christ out of Office may indeed expect, that he will turn them off to shift for themselves. They that are ot willing to be saved by him, and saved in his way, cannot be saved. So necessary it is, that we all come to a deep sense of our own wretchedness, nd unworthiness, and to be heartily willing that Christ and Free-grace should have all the Honour of our Justification, and salvation. As a personal wor∣hiness, so a conceit of such worthiness in our selves, will not stand with a Covenant of Grace, or with salvation by Grace.
Pardon, and peace with God, and Heavens ever-lasting Happiness, are too precious Priviledges and Blessings, to be cast away on such, as have no sense what it cost Jesus Christ to purchase them, and such as make light matters of them; and such as are so well conceited of themselves, as to look upon al as Deserved, and Due to them. The Water of Life is for souls that are a thirst. And Christs Wine and Milk for them that have no Money to buy. They that come with the Prodigal, Give me the portion of Goods that falleth to me; that think they may lay claim to Heaven, as their own, as a due Debt, shall go without it: They have no part, nor lot in it. Rather it is meet to come to God with the returning Prodigal, heartily confessing; Father, I have sinn against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, or to have any portion, or Inheritance among the children. Job 33.27, 28. He looketh upon men, and if any say I have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it profit me not: He will deliver his soul from going into th pit, and his life shall see the Light. Now, 2. I come to speak of the condition of the C∣venant of Grace, to shew what it requireth,  keep up Gods Authority; and evidence his ∣rity, Holiness, and Hatred of sin. (As I ha told you, though he is willing to be Reconciled  sinners, yet he can never be Reconciled to sin.  I also told you in my Discourse of the Covenant Works, that God in entering into Covenant wi man, did not lay aside his Authority, and co manding Power over man.) I confess I meet with one of very great wor
that makes faith the onely condition. Faith, Mr. Obad. Sedgw. of Cove∣nant, pag. 183.185. and no other thing. Yea, faith considered only as uniting us to Christ; (which he sayes is a point as difficult, and weighty as any that he meets with) Faith as justifying, doth not bring us into Covenant, (sayes he) for our justifying follows our being in the Covenant, &c. where by being in Covenant, (as all along in his Treatise) he meaneth, being internally in Covenant, or keeping, and standing to the Covenant, so that one may lay claim to the blessings promised in the Covenant. But I would fain know, whether souls are united to Christ by any other faith, than such a faith, as justifieth, and sanctifieth too? And elsewhere the same Authour telleth us, All-though forgiveness of sin be not the effect of mans repentance, (for then we should forgive our selves, yet repentance is required to the obtaining of for∣giveness; citing those texts, Isa. 55.7. Ezek. 18.21. If the wicked will turn—where it is plainly made the condition: And, if faith be any more, if remission and justification be the effect of mans faith, (then as he saith) we should forgive our selves, and justifie our selves. Again, where he is proving a condition, expresly de∣termined in Scripture, (as agreeing to the Covenant of Grace,) amongst other texts, requiring faith, he citeth these, Act. 2.38, 43, 19. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Come out from among them—and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my
ons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty;] which Scriptures make repentance, and conversion, as well the condition of the Covenant. If now you should say, that you know not what to think of the Condition of the Covenant of grace. And Ministers distract your minds, saying some∣times it is this thing onely, and sometimes it consist∣eth of other things, as well as that. Yet know, we are all agreed thus far, that where one grace is in truth, there are other graces with it. Where saving Faith is, there is repentance, and a disposition and resolution to perform sincere obedi∣ence. They are inseparable. As Moralists speak of a concatenation of vir∣tues So the Stoicks, . Diog. Laert. in Zeno. l. 7. p. 513., there must needs be concatenation of saving graces. Indeed the seed of God in∣cludes all graces in it. And all graces make one new creature. The new heart is both a believing heart, and an humble; a penitent heart, and a pure; and a loving heart, and a thankful heart; &c. And so he that will have Faith, and no other thing, the condition of the Covenant of Grace; yet afterwards telleth you what it is, to wit, "the bringing of the heart into Christ. Because I have long had the same apprehension touching this matter, I will recite his words at large, thinking them very well worthy of your observation when he is speaking of the principle of grace, re∣newing, saving grace; says he, According to the several wayes of working, it hath several names (e. g.) As it is the turning of the heart; it is cal∣led conversion. As it is the humbling of the heart;
it is called godly sorrow. As it is the the turning of us from sin, it is called Repentance. As it is the bringing of the heart into Christ, it is called Faith, &c. As it is the abasing of the heart, it is called Humility. As it is the gentle tempering of the heart, it is called meekness. As it is a submitting of the heart to God in sufferings, it is called patience, &c. Now if you attend to this; that all grace is radi∣cally, or virtually in that seed of God, you will know what to say to those nice questions, whether faith or repentance be first? And whether we are first united to Christ by; and then receive sanctify∣ing graces from him? It quite cutteth off such questi∣ons as these. As that faith, which uniteth unto Christ, supposeth the understanding enlightned, and the will set right; that is, the soul renewed. So that question, whether faith be seated in the understand∣ing, or in the will? would appear to be an imper∣tinent question. As many Philosophers of late can see no reason to suppose those faculties really distinct from the soul. Methinks, this may ease your minds of any per∣plexity, that the seeming difference among sober Divines, about the condition of the Covenant, may occasion. Take notice of this I pray; they that make faith the onely condition, yet are far from sup∣posing that faith goes alone; No, it hath the whole train of graces attending on it. The new heart, that which the Apostle Peter calleth, a divine, or Godlike Nature, hath them all. Another sound Divine I meet with, Bulkley of Covenant, p. 334. &c. makes faith the whole con∣dition of the Covenant of grace,
but there he takes Faith in so large a sence, as to in∣clude sincere Obedience. And so he telleth us, when God saith in the Covenant [I will be your God,] the meaning is not only, that he will be a God of Mer∣cy to us, to pardon and bless us; but a God over us, to Rule and Govern us: And that Faith closeth with him in both respects. He grants, The Covenant betwixt God and us, is, like that between a King and his People. Faith sets God upon the Throne, and saith, Reign thou over me. And again, If he do at all make a Covenant with us, he will be a God to us, as well to Rule us, as to save us; to say, Live as ye will, yet you shall be saved, is the Devils covenant, not Gods. Now I would not take such for Adversaries, who agree in the thing, only they differ in words, in the manner of expressing themselves. Faith indeed is the only Receptive condition. As in its own Nature it is an Accepting or Receiving of Christ offered in the Gospel, in which respect it is chosen and appointed by God, and is the great Sum∣mary condition of the Gospel: But then besides Faith, (the Receptive condition) there are other Dispositive conditions, which are either necessari∣ly implied, and included in Faith, or are necessary Attendants on it. For which see what the Lord re∣quired of Abraham, Gen. 17.1. I am the Almigh∣ty, or All-sufficient God, walk before me, and be thou perfect. Or be sincere, upright. Or [be thou perfect] though thou art not already perfect, yet be pressing on towards Perfection. As it is a con∣stant Note of Sincerity and Uprightness, to strive after Perfection. And no less is required of us,
2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises, (wha Promises? Those Covenant promises mentioned, Chap. 6.16, 17, 18.) let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness, and be perfecting Holiness,  in the fear of God. Though we are not perfect in Holiness, while here, yet we must be perfecting Holiness: This is required of all Gods Covenant People. And who are they that deal not falsly in his Covenant, but such as walk uprightly, whose hearts depart not from him, Psal. 44.17, 18. Who are they that keep his Covenant, but such as give themselves to keep his Testimonies, Psal. 25.10. Keep them, as Zacharias, and Elizabeth his Wife, Luke 1.6. As David, who desired to have a respect to all Gods Commands, would lay all Gods Judgments before them: Though they cannot yield sinless Obedience to any one Command, yet their desire is to Obey all Gods Commands. They Obey his Laws Impartially, though but Imperfect∣ly, Psal. 15.1, 2. Lord, who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? VVho shall go to Heaven? The Answer is, He that walketh uprightly. And what can be more plain, than that this is part of the condition of the Covenant of Grace; even from those very Texts. which may plead and urge a∣gainst all conditions. They who have God for their God, whom he owneth for his People, have his Law put into their Inward parts, and written in their hearts. View over again, Jer. 31.33. &c. with the other Texts, Paralel to it, which I had occasion to speak of before, under the Ninth Pro∣position. So Mich. 6.6, 7, 8. VVherewithal shall I come before the Lord, will the Lord be placated, appea∣sed
with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oyl? Shall I give my First-born for my Transgression, the Fruit of my body, for the  of my soul? He hath shewed thee, O man, whe is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any more: That which I see not, teach thou me; If I have done iniquity, I will do no more, as it is Job 34.31, 32. Is it not meet, that when a sin∣ner cometh to God, desiring conditions of peace, be unfeignedly sorry for sin past, and resolved against sin for time to come, fully purposing not to persist i any way of sin: Surely it is meet to be said unto God, Lord be at peace with me, and by thy Grace I will now break my former League with sin; O! I would no more return to Folly. I would not that other Lords should any more have dominion over me. Thus now you have heard, what are the tearm of the Covenant of Grace, as to secure the Honour of Gods Free-grace, and of Christs Merits, so to as∣sert Gods Authority over us, and evidence his Love to Holiness, and hatred of sin. And as ever you would enjoy the Blessings therein promised, as ever you would have the pardon of sin, and an Interest in God, and Eternal happiness, you must come up to these Tearms: And be it known unto you all, that if you do not like well of these Tearms, you may stick to the Covenant of Works, and from thence receive your Doom: But certainly, you cannot claim any part in that Happiness, held forth in the Covenant of Grace. God cannot in Honour con∣descend to any lower tearms. Should he pardon
Offenders, who had a purpose to Transgress a∣gain, to go on in sin? would not this be an embol∣dening of sinners? Would not it be a stain to his Righteous Government? A great blemish to his In∣finite Wisdom, and Goodness too? Most true it is, his Grace is Dispensed freely, yet not promiscuous∣ly. Though the Pope is prodigal of his pardons which cost him nothing, and indeed are nothing worth; though he grant out Pardons and Dis∣pensations for sins to come, Sins to be commit∣ted, yet the Wise and Holy God setteth more store by his Pardons. He cannot but account highly, of what was purchased at no lower Rate, than the most precious Blood of his dear Son. Of all things in the world, he cannot endure to have his Grace in Christ abused. Though he is a God that pardoneth Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, yet he will by no means clear the Guilty, or acquit the VVicked, as it is, Nah. 1.3. Ita mise∣ricors, ut maneat justus, & Sanctus. They shall not have a pardon from him, who would not care how they abused it. But only such as would say with Ezra: Should we again break his Command∣ments? He healeth their Back-slidings, whom he freely loves, and graciously receives. O sirs, we (as we are Gods Messengers) should sear to conceale any part of our Message: As we are his Ambasadors, we should fear to hide from you any part of our Ambassie. Would it not be un∣saithfulness to God and to your souls, did we shun to declare all the Counsel of God concerning you? Well, I must tell you what you are every one of you to trust to, God hath Sworn by his Holiness, and he will not Lye, he will never alter this thing
that is gone out of his Lips; he hath given you Propositions of peace in writing, you have the Ta∣bles of his Covenant, signed with his own Hand; Sealed in the Blood of his Son: You have heard the Contents what it is that the Lord requireth of you. Now what say you? Are not his Ways equal? Are not the Tearms very fair? Are not his Offers ex∣ceeding gracious? If you are not pleased with them, you may take your course; yet I must say, refuse them at your peril. As I must warn you, and in the Name of the Lord, I warn you this day, that you never look that he should offer Mercy to you upon other Tearms than these. I call Heaven and Earth to record against you this day, that you have had Life and Death set before you, and I warn you every one, that you do not presume of any part in Christ or Salvation purchased by him; or that any of the saving Benefits, and Blessings held forth in the Covenant of Grace, are yours, if you are not indeed sensible of the evil of sin, and truly humbled for sin if you do not truly renounce your own righte∣ousness, and really resolve to forsake all known sin, to practise all known Duty, to walk before God, and be upright. How is it possible, that they should be true to their League with God, faithful in his Covenant, who yet continue in League with any Lust, any known sin, Gods declared enemie; and who refuse to come under any known Law of his? Know this, that as a Pharisaical righteousness cannot, so neither can an Antinomian faith save a∣ny of you. The Apostle James would tell the Li∣bertines of his dayes, that the Devil had a faith as well as they. Indeed Libertines have another Gos∣pel,
not the true Gospel of Christ. Therefore they must eeds have another faith, not the true Faith of Christ. Some would perswade themselves, and others too, that Christ hath done all: That they must see their Repentance in Christ, and Gospel-obedience in Christ, which is a very short cut to Heaven. But how smooth and specious soever this Doctrine may seem to some, yet it is most false, corrupt, and dangerous Doctrine. Christ never satisfied for our full and final breach of the Covenant of Grace, though he did for our breach of the Covenant of VVorks. Not but that sins against the Gospel are pardoned for the sake of Christ. Not but that Christ satisfied for sins against the preceptive part of the Gospel, and Non-performance of the condition for a time; but these are pardoned to none, but those that come to perform the Gospel condition, that is, Believe and Repent in time. Shew me one Text, that will prove, there was ever any sinner in the world, pardoned and saved in a state of impenitency and disobedience. Christ hath told us, what is the portion of Hypocrites and Unbelievers, Mat. 24.51. Luke 12.46. And if any of you continue such, there you may read your Doom. Look what sentence he gives forth now in his word, he will not contradict, but fully ratifie in the last and great day. And see what he saith, Mat. 7.21. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that doth the will of my Father which is in Heaven. And Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies which would not, that I should Reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before e. As Jeptha said to the men of Gilead, Did ye
not hate me, and expel me? and why do ye come to me when you are in distress? Such as reject Christ now, will find such welcome to him another day, that they shall be rejected of him. [If I de∣liver you, shall I be your Head?] Christ will not be our Saviour upon other tearms. He will certainly re∣fuse to be our Saviour, if we refuse him as Lord. Hi God hath exalted to be a Prince, as well as a Saviour. Him God hath appointed not only to be a Deliver∣er, but also a Leader and Commander, Isa. 55.4. And thus I have spoken of the condition, of the Covenant of Grace. 1. As securing the honour of Christ, and free-grace. 2. As securing the honour of Gods Authority and Holiness, Now Thirdly, I will add a few words concerning the condition, as it respects the Interest and benefit of souls, Are not his wayes equal, when he requires nothing, but what is for our advantage? See Deut. 10.12, 13. And now Israel what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his wayes and to love him, to keep the Con∣mandments, which I command thee this day for thy good, So Deut. 6.24. Is it not good, that such weak imperfect creatures as we are, have our help laid on Christ, who is mighty to save? Is it not better that we have such an Alsufficient Saviour to lean upon, than to stand on our own Leggs? Tutissimum est, (As Bellarmi was forced to say at last, after a great contest against it) propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, & periculu inanis gloriae, fiduciam totam in solâ Dei misericordi & benignitate reponere; would not any enlightened conscience chuse and think it safer to abide by the perfect righteousness and satisfaction of Christ our
surety before Gods barre; would not such an one much rather desire to be found in that long white robe, than to be found in the short covering of his own imperfect righteousness? That to despise, slight, and reject Christ, is exceedingly to wrong our own souls? Again, is it not good that the heart be humbled for sin, broken for sin, the more to loosen it from Sin, and to engage it the more against sin for time to come? And though worldly sorrow is a burthen causing the heart to stoop; yet certainly you that know what Godly sorrow is, you find much more hearts ease in it: Have you not many times gone awy with lighter hearts, hearts more at ease, from prayer, from the word, from a Sacrament, when you have had them kindly melted into Gods sorrows? And is it not good to be divorc'd from sin? what are ye the better for any lust, you have harboured in your bosomes? Have they not been Delilah's to you? What fruit, what fruit of those base lusts? Oh how may you be ashamed! All that kindness you have shewn to your lusts, hath it not been great cru∣elty to your own souls? How have they robbed you of your strength, of your peace, true peace and comfort, of sweet communion that you might have had with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and with the Holy Spirit the Comforter! O what have you lost, to enjoy your base lusts? when the Prophet saith [his soul is not right in him] Non est recta anima, Hab. 2.4. The Apostle hath it thus, Heb. 10.38. My soul shall have no pleasure in him, yet to the same sence, quia rectitudo animae, in semet∣sâ consistit in eo, quod placeat Deo, & è contra, to ipso quod placeat Deo, in se est recta. Lud. Tenu. in Heb. 10. dip. 7. Sect. 2. pag. 473. b. And after all sin
would rob you of your souls and ruine them so ever. Would you have Christ and your Lusts together? Heaven and your lusts together? But that is im∣possible, Abstracting Gods decree, and positive consti∣tution, it is impossible in the very nature of the thing [What communion hath light with darkness?] If it be good for souls to contract with Christ, to receive Christ, it is then good to break with sin, and part with sin. As Christ cannot endure his greatest ene∣my to be his corrival; so neither can one heart be i League, in love with two, so contrary; while you love the one, you will despise, yea hate and be at Enmity with the other. And what should you do with your Lusts in Hea∣ven? You would find no company there, fit for you, no Objects there, no entertainment there fit for you. How miserable is Dives in Hell, with his perpetual scorching, parching thirst, while he can∣not obtain a drop of water there, to cool his Tongue? And would it not be a Torment to sinners to be in Heaven, with their craving Lusts, where is no∣thing suitable to satisfie them? No fuel for Lust i Heaven; no VVork, no Employment in Heave fit for you. O sirs, without new hearts, What should you do in the new Jerusalem? Without clea hands, and pure, holy hearts, What should you do in Gods holy Hill? If the enjoyment of Heaven be a thing desirable, then also it is desirable that w be sanctified, made meet for that Inheritance of th Saints in Light. It is impossible in the Nature o the thing, that we should be happy in the Fruiti of God, till first we are made Holy, and conforme to him.
And you that have no delight in the Service of God, in holy Duties, to whom the word is a bur∣then, and Prayer a burthen, and Sabbaths weari∣some days: Alas, what should you do in Heaven? Would those Carnal hearts of yours like well to keep an everlasting Sabbath there, that are so weary of these short Sabbaths here; saying, When will the Sabbath be ended? How would you like to be con∣tinually admiring, and adoring, and extolling God and his Infinite glorious Perfections, Christ and his Incomparable, Matchless Love and Grace; as those that think Eternity too little to take the Height and Length, and Breadth and Depth thereof. Thus it may appear that what God requires in the Cove∣nant of Grace, is plainly necessary in order to the Rectifying and Healing of mans corrupted Nature, to make it capable of true Blessedness; to make it capable of what the Covenant of Grace doth hold forth and promise. O my Friends, how easie were it Expatiating here, and to shew what enemies they are to their own souls, and what Bruitish, unreasonable Crea∣tures they are, that think what God requireth in the Covenant of Grace, is very hard. Surely they know not what is good for themselves. Consider once again, what it is the Lord requireth of us, and is it not, as if he should bespeak us after this man∣ner. Poor Creatures, though there is cause as you are Degenerated, and Apostatised from me, just cause indeed that I should sentence you to Hell, to depart from me, as accursed for ever; yet for my son's sake, and to manifest my Rich Grace and Mercy; I do here declare, I am ready to re∣ceive
you again into favour, that your souls should live for ever in my Sight, and that upon as good Terms, as ever you could possibly wish for your selves. You have seen when I had put Righte∣ousness into mans own hand, he soon lost it, to his undoing; well now it is in a safer hand, my Son Jesus Christ hath brought in everlasting Righte∣ousness; and though you have no Inherent Righ∣teousness of your own that can justifie you in my sight, yet come to my Son Christ, and he hath that for you, wherein I cannot but be satisfied, and well-pleased. Your sins have been very Injurious to you, de∣facing my Image in you, and exposing you to my Wrath, separating betwixt you and your God depriving you of my Gracious presence; but now heartily acknowledge and bewail them, watch and strive, and resolve against them; and though you cannot Live absolutely free from sin while here yet your sins shall be pardoned, and sin shall not have Dominion over you, nor hinder your com∣munion with me. Do but continue Fighting and you shall have the Victory, and Triumph a last in Glory. You have been walking contrary to me, weary∣ing your selves for very Vanity: O! but now a last bethink your selves, consider your Wayes and return to me; O! forsake not your ow Mercy. As averse as you have been from hear∣ening to my Commands, yet if now at length you would encline your ear to me, you shall find the my Commandments are not grievous; no, m Yoak is easie, my Ways are Paths of Pleasantness Not one that ever served me in Truth, that w
say they have served an hard Master. O sinners; as ever you wish well to your selves, either here or hereafter, shake off your sins, that have corrupted and would ruine you, and take up my Yoke, and and ye shall find rest for your souls. And now, Sirs, what can you say why you should not accept of Gods Tearms? What can you say, but that If here you turn a deaf ear to him, you indeed forsake your own Mercy to follow lying Vanities, and chuse Death rather than Life? It may be some will think I have used more words than needed, in a case so plain: But this is a Mat∣ter of as great Concernment as any thing I can pos∣sibly speak of, and therefore not to be sleightly pas∣sed over. Till you come to apprehend and accept of the Tearms of the Covenant of Grace, there is no peace etwixt God and your Souls. Do you ask: Is it Peace? I must tell you: No. What Peace, so long as you sleight Christ, the only Peace-Maker? What eace, so long as you will not lay down your Arms, andon your Lusts, and submit to Gods Righte∣s Scepter, will not be governed by his Laws, at is, so long as ye will continue Rebels? Alas, hile it is thus, there is no peace. And hitherto  Treaties and Offers of Grace, all Gods gracious Parleys with thee, all the Beseechings, Pleadings, arnings of Gods Messengers and Ambassadors ave been in vain, as to thee, who art not yet per∣aded to quit all thy Carnal confidences, to forsake , and come in to God. Yea, there is no possibility of thy Salvation upon ther Tearms than these, except the Lord Jesus rist would come again into the World, and Die
once more, to save thee in and with thy sins, as he hath dyed to save his from their sins. But that can never be, Christ being raised from the dead, dyeth no more; and there remaineth no other sacrifice for sins, or wouldest thou have God set forth a new Gospel, and some other Covenant, but that he will never do for any sinner in the world. No: this is the everlasting Gospel. This is the new Covenant (the terms whereof you have heard opened to you) the new Covenant, that shall never wax old, to give place to another. Oh that self-confident, secure, and pre∣sumptuous sinners might be convinced and awakne by what hath been said. As on the other hand, the poor in Spirit, the hum∣ble, and contrite ones should be encouraged and com∣forted. Thou that art so much, so oft discouraged at th thoughts of thy own sinfull vileness and unworthy∣ness; rather be encouraged, that thou seest thy o vileness, a thing which the most neither do, n have any mind to take notice of. It is not a sinne unworthyness that barrs him from Christ, but one presuming on his own worthiness. If now thou he such a sense of thine own unworthiness, as hu∣bleth thee, and heighteneth thy esteem of Jes Christ, and raiseth thy heart, and desires up to h that it is the constant cry of thy soul to God, O gi me Christ, or I dye, and am undone for ever; T is a good hearing, this is comfortable, and be  good chear, the Master calleth thee, Ho! every  that is athirst, come; And come all ye that are w∣ry and heavy laden. Are thy sins now a burthen thee? But come to Christ, and he will ease the And though thou canst not say, I have made
heart clean, I am pure from my sin; yet it is thine earnest suit unto God, that he would creat a clean heart within thee. And thou art so farre from in∣dulging and allowing of any lust, that thou criest out, O wretched man, or woman, when shall I be deliver∣ed! O that this thorn in the flesh were once pluckt out! Is there no member of the old man, that thou wouldest have spared? No, not the right eye, not the right hand? And though thou fallest short in thy obedience, yet thy will and desire is to follow God fully, and his commands are not grievous. Thou dost not ac∣count it a grievance, that God requires so much but this is the grief of thy soul, that thou dost no more. And how would it rejoyce thy heart, couldst thou serve him more, & serve him better? well, thy unworthiness, thy wants, and weaknesses should not so much discou∣rage thee, as the riches of Gods free grace in Christ ought to encourage thee. Is thy heart right with God? Then surely he will give thee his hand, his gracious helping hand; yea as thy heart is for God, and is now against sin, God will also be for thee, yea, his heart is towards every one, that offereth himself willingly. And so, as much as thou art wont to complain of un∣worthiness, and weakness, yet surely thou mayest say, in the Lord have I righteouseness and strength; poor troubled heart, now encourage thy self in the Lord and in his gracious Covenant. This is all thy salva∣tion, and here is all that thou canst desire, surely thou shalt be satisfied with favour, and full of the blessing of the Lord. To thee belongeth all the good and happiness included, and promised in the Co∣venant of grace, of which thou mayest hear some∣thing in the next proposition.
2 Sam. 23.5. All my salvation, and all my desire. Sect. 13. PROP. XIII. The benefits and blessings promised in the Co∣venant of Grace, and sure to all that per∣form the aforementioned condition, are ex∣ceeding great and many, are indeed inex∣pressible, inestimable, and inconceivable. O That I could borrow the tongues of men and Angels for a while! what need of the tongue of the Learned here? yea, of that wine of the King∣dom, which would cause the lips of those that are a∣sleep to speak? might one of us poor mortals have the priveledge (with him in 2 Cor. 12.4.) to be caught up into Paradise, to hear how those blessed ones above set forth, and magnifie Covenant-blessings, continually praising and adoring that Free-grace of God in Christ, that brought them to a participation thereof, should we not hear , such lofty strains of heavenly Eloquence, as our low capaci∣ties would not be able to repeat after them? As when Jacob first heard of his son Joseph's ho∣nour and advancement in Egypt, his heart fainted so it might be astonishing news to us, to hear wh great things God hath promised, if we come up to Covenant-terms. As when the Queen of Sheba had
seen the glory of King Solomon, there was no more spirit in her: how ravishing should it be to the souls of the faithful, to see and hear what glory God holds forth to them in the Covenant of Grace. Here are riches of glory on the vessels of mercy. O the ri∣ches of the glory of this mystery! unsearchable riches indeed. See Rom. 9.23. Col. 1.27. Ephes. 1.18. & 3.8. It is not to be thought, that any man on earth, much less that such a worm as I, should make a full discovery of all the Blessings, and glorious pri∣veledges contained in Gods gracious Covenant. In∣deed, eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. As we cannot by searching find out God to perfection, (Job 11.7.) so neither can we fully know, or de∣scribe the happiness of those, who have a special interest in God. As one sayes, we shall never see the Covenant of Grace fully unfolded, till (according to Heb. 1.12.) the Heavens come to be folded up; or rather till we see Heaven it self opened. The Grand promise here is [I will be their God] a promise containing all the rest. A promise con∣taining Him, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain. Who is he that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, let him no more walk dis∣consolately; but encourage himself in the Lord his God. Well mayest thou rejoyce in thy portion. Deus meus, & omnia. O rejoyce in his Highness or ever. Obj. But was not God the God of Ieshurun? as
Moses said, none like unto the God of Ieshurun. And yet Jeshurun forsook God, and lightly esteem∣ed the Rock of his Salvation. And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provo∣king of his sons, and of his daughters, Deut. 32.15, 19. To the Israelites in common pertained the Adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, as the Apostle saith. Yet with many of them God was not well pleased; but overthrew them in the wil∣derness. Yea, sometimes he said of them, you only have I known of all the families of the earth: there∣fore I will punish you for all your iniquities, Ams 3.2. Answ. Grant all this, yet it is no denial, or diminish∣ing of your happiness, who have a special propriety in God; nor should it be any damp to your joy, and rejoycing in Him As there is a twofold call, so there is a twofold relation to God; as a twofold manner of being in Covenant with God, so a twofold interest in Him. Observe it, there is a common, external, and ineffe∣ctual; and again there is a special, internal, and effe∣ctual call to God: So there is a more common Relati∣on to God, and a more special Relation to Him. A Common intrest in God, and a Special intrest in him. Indeed a great priviledge it is to be a people near unto the Lord, to be so much as externally in Cove∣nant with Him. Yea, it is far better to be continu∣ed in his House and Family, though under the disci∣pline of the Rod, than to be driven out of his house and heritage, though it were with Babylon, to fit as Queen in the earth. Better to suffer affliction with the people of God, to enjoy his word and ordinances, the ordinary means of salvation; than
to enjoy the largest share of worldly Pleasures, Plen∣ty, and Prosperity, without them. Thus Englands Mercies (were the Land more Impoverished than it is, yet) are to be prized above the Treasures of both Indies. That was a desperate prophane speech of him, that said, He would not change his part in Paris, for a part in Paradise. The Barrenest part of Gods Hill, is to be chosen before the fatest Valleys, where God dwelleth not. So Lot found: Surely, they have cause to say, The Lines are fal∣len to them in pleasant places, and they have a good∣ly Heritage, that dwell in Emmanuel's Land. Hap∣py are the People, that hear, and know the joyful sound: The Damned, with whom God will par∣ley no more, count such happy. The Heathen, that are without God in the world, and strangers to the Tearms and Tenor of his Covenant, did they un∣derstand their own Estates, would count such hap∣py. But as it is the Misery of those without, gene∣rally, not to know their Misery; so of too many within the Church, not to know, or consider their own happiness, what Advantages they have for Heaven above others. As our Saviour, weeping over that sinful City, that rejected him and his Grace; that chose rather to Die and Perish, than to be gathered under his healing Wings: [O, if Thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace, Luke 19.42.] If thou hadst known these things, then mightest thou have been for ever happy. But therefore thou that hast attended to the things of thy peace, and hast come in upon Gods Call, thou art happy: Now is Salvation come to thy soul. And if there be enough in God, in Christ,
in Heaven to make thee happy, thou shalt be for ever happy. Others have had Life and Salvation offered, but could not see to take it. But happy thou indeed, who hast (with Mary) chosen that good part, which shall never be taken from thee. To thee this everlasting Covenant (which I am opening) shall be a spring of Everlasting Consola∣tion. Now you may look upon God, as your God indeed. I say, God is yours. And though this be a short Sen∣tence, soon uttered, yet is it so Copious a Subject, as you might be Meditating on all your days, and yet never be able fully to comprehend the Happi∣ness included in it. When I say, God is yours, I have said all, I can say no more: For all Happiness is implied, and included in it. The misery of the Damned is comprized in two particulars, scil. In poenâ Damni, and In poenâ Sen∣sus, in what good they have lost, and are deprived of for ever, and what evil they feel, have Inflicted on them, and must ever lie under. On the contra∣ry, the happiness of the Faithful is sum'd up in these two Points, to wit, Freedom from Evil, and Frui∣tion of Good. And how safe are they, who have God for their Shield? How Rich are they, who have God for their Portion, an All-sufficient God for their Reward? O exceeding great Reward! As holy David says here, This is all my Salvation, and all my desire: Or as some read it, He is all my Salvati∣on, and He is all my desire. [1.] That now you have a special propriety in God, this is all your Salvation. (1.) It speaks you freed from the guilt of sin. So Jer. 31.33, 34. Where the Lord promiseth to be
their God, he addeth: [For I will forgive their Ini∣quity, and I will remember their sin no more.] Sin unpardoned separateth betwixt God and souls: Therefore God evermore forgiveth their Iniquities, unto whom he gives himself. Now what a blessed Priviledge is this, to have your sins pardoned! Even as David describeth Blessedness, Psal. 32.1. Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. What would not a condemned Traitor, or Malefactor give for the Kings pardon? And what is a Pardon from God worth then, which could no other way be Purchased, but by the most precious Blood of his dear Son? But you who have felt what a burden sin is, and have sometimes cried out of that burden, as Intollerable; certainly, you cannot but account the pardon of sin a Mercy and Priviledge inestimable. O blessed change indeed, for one that was a Rebel, sentenced to Death by the law of Heaven, to have the black Sentence rever∣sed, and to become a Favourite of God: For a Child of Wrath to become a Child of Love. The pardon of sin carrieth Redemption in it, Col. 1.14. In whom we have Redemption (through his Blood) even the Forgiveness of sins. The pardon of sin connotes, Justification, or is all one with it. The way of Justifying one that hath been a sinner, an Offender, being by the pardoning of all, wherein he hath offended. The pardon of sin speaketh peace, and Reconciliation with God, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ Reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them. The par∣don of sin inferreth Adoption, Gal. 4.5. (2.) It speaketh you delivered from the dominion
of sin. Though your Corruptious will be a Di∣sturbance to you while in this Imperfect state, y sin shall not have dominion over you: For ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, Rom. 6.14. You are not barely under a Law commanding, bee under a gracious Covenant, which as it requireth Duty, so it encourageth with a promise of Grace, and help to perform it. The Lord hath promised, as to Forgive, so likewise to Subdue the Iniquities of his People, Mic. 7.18, 19. Though there be some Life in the Members of the Old-man, as yo feel to your sorrow; yet it is wounded at the heart, of which wound it shall never recover. So (3.) It speaketh you safe from the final Preva∣lency of Temptations. Your God is greater tha all: Neither Men, nor Devils are able to pluck you out of your Fathers hand, John 10.29. Therefore the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. You are still liable to be tempted, yet being in firm League with God, you shall have seasonable succour from him. As Saul encouraged the men of Jabesh-Gilead, To∣morrow by that time the Sun is hot, ye shall have help. So God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. He will quench Satans fiery darts, before they shall have quite drunk up your spirits: Yea, the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your Feet short∣ly. (4.) It assureth of a seasonable Deliverance out of spiritual Troubles, so it may support one under present sad disertion. You have now shot the Gulph, you are passed from Death to Life. And though you may be full of Fears sometimes, and passing sen∣tence against your selves; though your condition
for the present may not be so comfortable, yet it is safe. You may sometimes walk in Darkness, yet the Lord will be your everlasting Light: Your days of Mourning shortly will be ended. The Lord will be a Sun as well as a Shield, to the Upright. (5.) It speaketh Exemption, or Deliverance from outward Troubles, when it may be good for you. God is known in Zions Palaces for a Refuge, God is in the midst of her; God shall help her, and that right early. And because thou hast made the Lord which is my Refuge, even the most High, thy Habitation: There shall no evil befal thee, Psal. 91.9, 10. (6.) Or it speaketh Deliverance from the evil of Affliction. You may be Afflicted but not Forsa∣ken, Psal. 89.32.33, 34. I will visit their iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving Kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my Faithful∣ness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor al∣ter the thing that is gone out of my Lips. Yea, as it is, Neh. 13.2. Our God turned the Curse into a Blessing. Your God will do as much for you, will turn Crosses into Blessings. No evil shall befal you, but what hath Rationem boni, what God will turn to good, Rom. 8.28. As it is, Ezra 8.22. The hand of our God is upon all them for good, that seek him. Yea, even his Afflicting hand too: His Af∣flicting hand is never on them, but for good. So I may allude to that Passage, 1 Sam. 16.4, 5. When Samuel came to Bethlehem, the Elders trembled at his coming, and said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord: sanctifie your selves, and come with me to the sacrifice. So indeed you may be set on trem∣bling,
when Sickness comes, when Poverty com when such an Affliction comes you may fall a tre∣bling; whereas, if you stay and enquire about t end of its coming, you may be satisfied, that comes peaceably. It is not the Wound of an E my, nor the Chastisement of a Cruel one: But Call from God, your Father, to sanctifie your selve and offer up some Lust, some sin, or other, a Sa∣crifice. It may be Sickness comes as a Cure of th spiritual Indisposition, security, and Deadness it may be crosses in Estate come, to cause thee  offer up thy Pride, Luxury, Sensuality, Coveto∣ness. As when David would know of the Chil∣dren of Benjamin, whether they came indeed  help, or to betray him: They answered (1 Chr 12.17, 18.) Thine are we, David, and on thy side Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine hel∣pers; for thy God helpeth thee. O the happy estat of those that are at peace with God! He will caus the very stones of the Field, and the Beasts of th Field, and what was most likely to offend, and an∣noy them, to be at peace with them. Great peac have such indeed, nothing shall offend them. Af∣flictions come not to harm, but to help them. A they said, We are thine, David; so if God be yours, then all things are yours. All changes tha come, are on your side, your helpers. (7.) It speaketh your security from final Aposta∣cy, and so from final Condemnation. Now your condition is safe indeed, safe to Eternity. Though you may not therefore give way to sinful Security, which is opposite to an holy fear, and cautiousness. No, but therefore your estate is safe, because God hath promised to keep you in his fear, Jer. 32.40. I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not part from me. And they that have his Grace, t to depart from him here, shall not be sentenced  depart from him hereafter. You that are brought , and kept close to God here, shall not be banish∣, separated from God hereafter: You whom God Justifieth here. he will not condemn hereafter. The Lord knoweth them that are his, and will own, d openly acknowledge them before the whole world at the last day. Thus you that come up to Covenant Terms, and  have the Lord for your God, you are delivered  the greatest evils; and delivered by lesser evils, at come upon you. I say, by lesser evils, God delivereth you from greater, who will deliver you rom all evils at last. Thus God is your Shield, and ll others are but as Paper-shields, or Painted-shields, compared with the Shield of thine help. Salvation  of the Lord. All Salvation; if God be for us, who,  what can be against us? No such Guard against il in all the world, as God, the chiefest Good. ee here the safety of those, who are in firm League ith the Almighty, under the special protection of God most High. See the wonderful Immunities of such, as have him for their Protector and Go∣vernour: Well might David say of it, This is all y Salvation. [2.] Yea, further in this special propriety in God, there is included all Good, that a gracious ul can desire, Psal. 73.25. Whom have I in Hea∣en but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire esides thee. You that have the Lord for your God deed, how can you desire more, than God hath romised to be unto you, and to do for you? You
have all, in having him, who hath all things, and can do all things. Not that you are Godded with God, as some hav spoken blasphemously. But remember ye wha followed the Ambition of our first Parents, thei affecting to be as Gods, sacrilegious Ambition. Th the Devil lifted them up by his Temptation, tha he might bring them down, to be like himself Such Heaven-daring pride as that, must needs have a fall. As Tyrus is threatned, Ezek. 28.2.6.8. Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said I am God. Because thou hast set thine heart as th Heart of God: They shall bring thee down to th Pit, and thou shalt die the death. Such high-flo spirits, as talk of the fulness of the God-head dwel∣ling bodily in the Saints, are not the Children o Light, but the Children of Pride, Erratick stars to whom (without a self-abasing sight of themselves) is reserved the blackness of Darkness for ever. It's true, God gives himself to his People, to b enjoyed, and glorified of them; but not so, as  be Debased, and Degraded in them, to the condi∣tion of his Creatures, nor so as to Exalt, and Rais them above the condition of Creatures. He com∣municates his Mercy freely, but his Glory he wi not give to another. As Pharaoh heaped Dignities and Royal Favours upon Joseph: Only (said he) in the Throne will I be greater than thou. Go will do wonderful things for his People: But a for those that talk of their being Godded wit God, they would un-God him, and deifie them∣selves. But I come to you, who have a special Interesti God.
(1.) God is yours in the sweetest Relations. God s your Shepherd. And what doth the Psalmist in∣er from thence? The Lord is my Shepherd, there∣fore I shall not want, Psal. 23.1. God is your Teacher, John 6.45. And there is none that Teach∣eth, like him. God is your Father, as Christ said, John 20.17. I ascend unto my Father, and your Fa∣ther, and to my God, and your God. If your God, then your Father. 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. And what a priviledge is this, to have God for your Father, and to be own∣ed as his Children. The Children of God can ne∣ver be left Orphans. The Sons of God can never want an Inheritance. Surely, Heaven is enough for all Gods Children. In our Fathers House there is Bread enough, and there is Room enough, John 14.2. God is your Husband, Hos. 2.16, 19. O happy Match for thee, to have thy Maker for thy Husband. He is a meet help indeed. An All-suffi∣cient God is a meet help indeed for poor Indigent Creatures; only we are infinitely unworthy of him, not meet for him of our selves. 'Tis his Infinite Free-grace that accounts, and makes us meet. (2.) All Gods Attributes are yours. There is no Attribute, or Property of his, but may speak Ter∣rour unto, and will set against all those, that are, and keep at a distance from him. Even the Pati∣ence of God, which such have abused, will plead, and witness against them; the Grace and Mercy of God, which they have slighted, and rejected, will rise up in Judgment against them one day. On the contrary, there is no Attribute of Gods, but speak∣eth
good to them that are at peace with God. O what a rich Store-house of Comfort is here, to have all Gods glorious Attributes engaged, and at work for you! His absolute Soveraignty, and infinite Power engaged, and at work to uphold, protect, and defend you. His perfect Wisdom, and Om∣niscience, to see to you, and to order all things for the best, that concern you. His tender and never failing Compassion, to pity you. His rich Mercy, and boundless Love, to relieve you. His constant Truth, and everlasting Faithfulness, to perform all the good promises that he hath made unto you. His Holiness to Transform you into the same Image, to Assimulate you. His Justice, to avenge you of your Enemies, to execute Judgment for you. His Om∣nipresence, graciously to accompany you. His Unchangeableness, and Eternity, to continue his loving Kindness to you, and to Crown all he does for you in endless Happiness. As when the Spouse had given a Lively, Lofty, and Lovely Description of her Beloved, Cant. 5.10. &c. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefe among Ten Thousand. His Head as the most fine Gold, his Eyes as of Doves. His Cheeks, as a Bed of Spices. His Lips like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrhe. His Legs as Pillars of Mar∣ble, set in Sockets of Gold. His Countenance a Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars. His Mouth most sweet; yea, he is altogether Lovely. The she concludes thus exulting, and making her boa of him, ver. 16. This is my Beloved, and this is my Friend. So you who have now given up your selves to be the Lords, after the largest survey of the Divine perfections, you can possibly take, you
may sit down, and rest in this sweet close, This God is our God; and he will be our Guide even unto Death, yea, unto Glory. This Almighty, All-commanding, All-wise, All-knowing God, this Immense Being, this Holy, Just, Loving, Graci∣ous, and Merciful God; this Faithful, Unchange∣able, Eternal God, is our God for ever and ever. This, this is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, and their Righteousness is of me, saith the Lord: So likewise their Bliss, and Happiness. (3.) If God be yours, his Christ is yours. In∣deed it is in, and through Christ, that God is yours. Though they speak not the words of Truth, and Soberness, but like men forsaken of God, and Rea∣son too; like men given up to strong Delusions, who talk of their being Christed with Christ. And that is a weak, and frivolous Objection, (which might seem to befriend them.) scil. If Christ and his Righteousness be made over to Believers, then they should be Mediators, Saviours, as Christ is. It follows not. As the Husband giveth himself in Marriage to the Wife, but that maketh not the Wife an Head, or Husband. Christ and his Righteous∣ness is made over to us, to a certain end, that is, to our Justification, and Salvation, not to make us Savi∣ours: He is made unto us Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. but e are never said to be made Redeemers by him. Aliud est justitia Christi Mediatoria quoad officium: iud est justitia Christi Mediatoris quoad Meritum. As Dr. Arrowsmith. Or it is for the sake of Christ, with respect to his Righteousness, and Satisfacti∣on, that we sinners come to be Pardoned, Justifi∣ed; not that we are as perfect, as Christ himself:
But being interested in him, we have his Satisfacti∣on interposing betwixt us and Gods Justice, and procuring Pardon for us. Now blessed art thou above Millions of Men, and Women, who mayst say, Christ is mine. Yea, this is Inconceivably more, than if all the King∣doms of the world were thine. He is the Pearl of greatest price. All things in the world, but Loss, and Dung, compared to this Pearl. O the precious Blood, and precious Benefits of Christ! O the un∣searchable Riches of Christ! O the Fulness of Christ! In him all fulness dwells. There is an Infiniteful∣ness both of Merit, and Grace in him. He is and hath all that souls stand in need or ca desire, to make them happy. He is the great Lord Treasurer of Heaven. And, O the Treasures of Wisdom, Righteousness, and Strength, that are with him! Ho, every one that thirsteth come, Isa. 55.1. Whosoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. There is enough i Christ to fill, and satisfie all the thirsty souls in the world; enough in Christ for every one that wi come, be they never so many. One Christ is enough for all the Faithful: Yea, Christ alone is enough for them. For whom I have suffered the loss of all thing (says the Apostle) and do count them but dung that may win Christ, Phil. 3.8. All things were accounted nothing in comparison of Christ; better want all thing than want Christ. He is All in all, yea, he is All eve out of all. Though you should have nothing here yet enjoying Christ, you may be happier, than i you possessed all things in the world. He is the Hun∣dred-fold Father, and Mother; as Mr. Vines used to say. He is the Hundred-fold House and Land
the Hundred-fold Estate spoken of, Mark 10.29, 0. And you would not count him a poor man, hat had put off his Lumber and Trash, and turned is Estate into Gold and Jewels, things of the great∣est value. Hast thou a Christ? why then thou hast the Heir of all things, even him, who will be all things to thee, 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made unto us Wisdom, nd Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redem∣ption. If Christ be ours he will be our Prophet, to struct us, our Priest to Expiate our sins, and San∣ctifie us; our King to Redeem and Save us. Thou that hast Christ, thou hast the true Light: d he shall give thee Light, when others still abide  darkness. Thou hast the Sun of Righteousness risen on thee, while others are under the power of the Prince of arkness. O the glorious Apparel of the meanest aints clothed with the Sun! Every true Believer ines in the Beams of this Sun of Righteousness, d is far more richly arayed therewith, than He∣d, was in his Cloath of Silver, glitter∣ng in the Sun. Josephus. Thou that hast Christ, thou hast the true Bread at came down from Heaven. The Bread of Life, while they that are strangers to Christ, feed upon es, feed upon Husks, things which can never tisfie. Thou that hast Christ, thou hast the Well  Life: Thou mayst drink freely of the Water of e, while others (alas) have only broken Ci∣erns, and stinking Puddles to go too. What a full Christ is this? Our Light, and our ighteousness, and our Peace, and our Life; in a ord, our All.
(4.) If God be yours, then his Spirit is yours▪ Indeed some speak of the Person of the Spirit, be∣ing given to, and the Person of the Holy Gho dwelling in the Faithful; which yet they thus Ca∣tion. You must not conceive that thereby  doth make us one Person, with himself, or tha he doth Communicate unto us any Personal,  Divine property of his own (for that is Incom∣municable) Lyford senses exterr. p. 141. No such as go this way must not be ranked in o thoughts with those I speak of before, men of cor∣rupt minds, and profligate principles. Though I confess I have some doubt, whethe the Expression of the Spirits personal In-dwelling i the Godly, be safe, as they lay it down. For e∣ther it would seem, not to hold forth enough, sci To import no more than that he is essentially prese in them, and so he is every where present, Ps 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or wh∣ther shall I flee from thy presence. Thus the wick have his presence, what ever they are doing, whe∣soever they are: Or else it would seem to impo too much, scil. a personal Ʋnion of the Holy Gho and Believers, which all that are sober must den Otherwise they must hold the Spirit Incarnate,  well as the Son, and that the Spirit and a Believe make but one Person; and so (as Christ the Son Mary, was the Son of God, the Humane Natu being taken into the Person of the Son of God) ev∣ry Believer should be the Holy Ghost. Again,  read as well of God the Father, and Christs dw∣ling in the Faithful, and making their abode wi them. And what reason there is to imagine so peculiar way of the Spirits In-dwelling differe
from that of the Father, and the Son, I am not able  apprehend. But you that have given up your selves to God, How is his Mercy magnified towards you? They re not mean things that he gives to you; No, he ives you Himself, he gives you his Son, he gives ou his Spirit. O thrice happy Creatures! who ave a special Interest in God, the Father, Son, and oly Ghost. O unspeakable Gift! O infinite Gift! s when God made promise to Abraham, because e could swear by no greater, he swore by Himself. o, when he promiseth himself, his Son and Spirit, e must say he could promise nothing greater. As raunah gave like a King; what God giveth to is people is like a God: as Christ is called the gift f God, Acts 8.20. Certainly God could give no∣ing more like himself, (John 10.30. John 5.7.) As Christ said, Whether is greater the Gold or e Temple that sanctifieth the Gold? Whether is eater, the Gift, or the Altar that sanctifieth the ift? The holy Spirit is such a Gift as sanctifieth all her Gifts; and so of all Gifts the greatest. The angelist Luke, for [good things] inserts [the holy rit,] in Mat. 7.11. How much more shall your eavenly Father give [good things] to them that  him. Which is thus, Luke 11.13. How much re shall your Heavenly Father give [the holy Spi∣] to them that ask him. Gods giving the holy irit to any, is the giving of all good Things, in gnore. His giving the Spirit is an Earnest and dge of more, that he intendeth to give. It is a ding Blessing, that comes to make way for more. is given to prepare you for Mercy, to prepare  for Glory. Think of those sweet and excel∣lent
Properties and Appellations given him i Scripture. He is the Spirit of Truth, and so he will lead yo into all necessary Truth, John 16.13. He is the be Teacher, 1 John 2.27. Ye need not that any ma teach you, but as the same anointing teacheth you O! there is none teacheth like him. He is the be Guide. Men may be deceived, and may deceiv others, may mistake and mislead others; so ca the Spirit of Truth, you that are Lead by the Spi∣rit, you have a good Guide indeed, a faithful guid that will not suffer you to Erre damnably, will a suffer you finally to miscarry; he is the Spirit  Wisdom, the best Counsellor. He is the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. A Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentlene Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, are th Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23. And what a the most precious Fruits of the Earth, to the Frui of the Spirit? Now let not the Eunuch that ha joyned himself to the Lord, say, Behold, I am dry Tree. Instead of the Bryer, shall come up  Mirtle-tree. Of a dry Tree the Spirit of Grac can make a fruitful Bough; like Joseph, can m a Tree of Righteousness, full of good and pleas Fruits. His presence is enough to turn a De into an Eden, a Wilderness into the Garden  God. He is the Spirit of Power, that though we  weak indeed, yet we may be strengthened in  Inner man by the Spirit, Ephes. 3.16. May  enabled to tread down strength, to mortifie our ∣ruptions, through the Spirit, Rom. 8.13. Th we are enabled to discharge Duties, the Spirit b∣ing
our Infirmities, Rom. 8.26. Thus we are ena∣bled to walk in Gods wayes, Ezek. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes. He is the Spirit of Life: The Quickning Spirit, Rom. 8.11. Can these dry Bones live? Yea, if the Spirit of Life enter into them. David oft pray∣eth for quickening. Such as are alive in a spiritual sence, should desire and pray to be more lively. Well, it is the Spirit that quickeneth, as it was with the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezek. 3.24. The Spirit enter∣ed upon me, and set me upon my feet. He is the Spirit of Liberty. The Free-spirit, Psal. 51.11. Uphold me with thy free Spirit, where the Spirit of the Lord is there is Liberty, we are oft streightned, alas: But it is because we are a-want∣ing to our selves, and because we do not entertain the Spirit of his good likeing, cherish his Motions, follow his Councels; we are streightned in our selves, but the Spirit of the Lord is not streightned. He is the Spirit of Glory, the Comforter. And you that carefully attend to his quickening Coun∣sels shall in the end attain to his chearing Comforts. And what is the Joy of Harvest, to that Joy in the Holy Ghost? VVhat is the Joy of them that divide the spoil, to the Joy of Gods salvation? As we read of the Spirits helping Believers in Prayer with groans unutterable, Rom. 8.26. So will he in due time furnish them as well for the work of Praising God, filling them with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, see Rom. 14.15. And such (as you have heard) is that good Spi∣rit of God, which is given unto all those, who tru∣ly give up themselves to God. O blessed souls in∣deed!
O thrice happy Creatures! To whom God gives Himself, his Son, and Spirit, Rejoyce in the Lord ye Righteous, and again, and again, I say rejoyce. Let not the Consolation of God seem small to you. If there be any Consolation in the God of all Consolation, if any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort to be had in the Spirit, the Comforter, it is for you. Gladness it is for the Up∣right in heart. What more can be wished to make you happy, than is included in the Apostles Vale∣diction, or Benediction, 2 Cor. 13.14. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Now these are all with you indeed, and shall be ever with you. As Crist promised, John 14.16, 17. The Spirit of Truth, the Comforter, shall dwell and abide with you for ever. O happy Crea∣tures, that have the good Spirit of God your Guide, and Counsellor, your Companion, and Comforter; The Spirit of Truth to teach you, the Spirit of Grace to sanctifie you, the Spirit of Power to assist and help you; the Spirit of Life to quick∣en; the Spirit of Liberty to enlarge you; the Spi∣rit of Joy and Peace to revive and comfort you; the Spirit of Glory to rest upon you. Though earthly Friends may fail, may forsake you; yet here is a Friend indeed, that will stick to you, and abide with you for ever. (5.) The good Providence of God is still at work for you. My Father worketh hitherto, and I work, says Christ, John 5.17. Gods attributes are still at work for you. His Eyes at work. Be∣hold the Eyes of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his Mercy. The Eyes
of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to watch over those, whose hearts are up∣right towards him, His Hands are at work: The good Hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek him; yea, many times his Arm is made bare, his Arm is stretched out. That the Heathen, and their Enemies are forced to acknowledge, The Lord hath done great things for them▪ It shall be said of Israel, What hath God wrought? Who raised up the Righteous man from the East? O how great is his goodness, which he hath laid up for them that fear him, and which he is also laying out on them, which he hath wrought for them before the sons of men! The Providence of God is two-fold, there is a com∣mon Povidence, and a special Providence. A Common Providence over the Creatures in ge∣neral, as they are Gods Creatures. A Special Pro∣vidence over the Faithful, as in nearer Relation un∣to God, his Children, his Friends, and Confede∣rates. As God hath a Special propriety in them, so he hath a special care of them. We read he preserveth Man and Beast, Psal. 36.6. But more especially that he preserveth the Faithful, Psal. 31.23. He is the Saviour of all men, but espe∣cially of them that Believe. Yet even the Common Providence of God is a special ground of Encouragement to his People, That he is the Preserver of all things. If he pro∣videth for the young Lyons, and the Ravens that cry; much more that he will provide for the Sheep of his Pasture, and for his Lambs; while he Feeds his Enemies, he will not let his own Children starve. Again, That he Governeth all things, without whom no man can lift up Hand or Foot in all the
world, without whom not a Dog that can move his Tongue. He that ruleth in Jacob, over-ruleth all t the ends of the Earth. But come we to his Special Providence over the Faithful. So, all the Paths of the Lord are Mercy and Truth unto such as keep his Covenant, Psal. 25.10. By the Paths of the Lord, there we are to un∣derstand, not the Paths of his Precepts, wherein he would have us to walk, but the paths of his Provi∣dence, wherein he walks towards his people: The way of his proceedings. And what is said of these paths? They are al [Mercy and Truth] which some make an Hendig∣dis, like that Jer. 22.3. Execut Iudgment and Righteousness; that is, Execute righteous Judg∣ment. So here Mercy and Truth, i. e. Mercy in∣deed. Or we may take them as distinct, as hold∣ing forth thus much, that God doth not only begin with them in a way of mercy, but goes on with them as he had begun. His mercy to such is constant. He continues his loving Kindness to these, even of his truth and Faithfulness; or thus, Truth hath re∣ference to some word that God hath spoken: Not to the word of threatning here, because Mercy is joyned with it: What can it refer to therefore, but the word of Promise? signifying Gods performing promise, keeping Covenant with such as keep Co∣venant with him? So the meaning is, in all the pas∣sages of Divine providence God is still intending good, and extending Mercy, and performing pro∣mise to his people. His Patience may be exercised towards others; but his special Grace and Favour, his loving Kind∣ness and tender Mercy is drawn out towards you.
God may shew some Mercy to wicked men, in some of his ways. But alas, their Mercies are not pure Mercies, No, there is wrath also mixed with their Mercies. As the murmuring Israelites had Quails and a Curse. But you have real Mercies, a blessing with Estate, a blessing with Health, &c. Gods special Love with Common Mercies, greatly Enhaunsing and Raising the Value of them. They come not as Wind-falls of common Providence (as one expresseth it) but are sound Fruits, growing on the Promise. So there is Mercy in all Gods Paths towards you. You shall meet with it at every turn, Mercy shall prevent you, and follow you, and compass you about. Yea, in the end you shall find Mercy in the crossest Paths of Providence, wherein at present you may apprehend nothing but Severity. Again, whatsoever Mercy God sheweth to sin∣ners, yet they have no assurance thereof. How soon may Gods Patience be turned into Fury, and his Goodness into Severity? But God hath promised that he will not turn away from you, (Ier. 32.40.) to do you good. But you who have a care to walk before God in sincerity and truth, you shall find all his ways Mercy and Truth. And this leads me to another Priviledge of yours. (6.) The Promises are yours, exceeding great and precious Promises. You are the Children, and Heirs of the Promise. Promises are held forth to others; but they are also made over to you. To the Jews in some sence pertained the Covenants, and the Promises, Rom. 9.4. God had written those great things to them, and offered those great things to them, yet they not looking after the Condition
required of them, it was in effect as if God had made no such promise. But you that can plead the Condition is performed, nothing can bar your right to the Promise? God will never plead a [Non est factum] against those who may plead the Conditi∣on is performed. As the Lord said to Abraham concerning the Land of Promise, Gen. 13. Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward: For all the Land which thou seest, to thee will I give it. So I may say to you concerning the word of the Kingdom (as the Gospel is called, Mat. 13.19.) The word of Promise, look it through from the beginning to the end, search this good land that floweth with Milk and Honey, a Land of Brooks of Waters, of Fountains, of Depths, that spring out of the Rock Christ; where are both the Upper Springs, and the Neather Springs, Promises concerning this Life, and the Life to come; a Land of Vines, and Fig-trees, and Pomgranates; Dig into its Mines, full of hid Treasure, more precious than Gold that perisheth, all is your own. The whole Land is before you, this Goshen, this Paradise, is given you, till you come to be Translated to the Heavenly Canaan. Your Joseph sends you these pleasant, and precious Fruits, to revive and chear your spirits, till you come to a fulness of joy in his presence, come to the sight and Fruition of Christ in Glory. Look up to Heaven, are you able to num∣ber the Stars of Heaven? Neither can you take the just sum of what the Lord hath promised you; They are called the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. Here are deep Mines, deep Mysteries, who shall lead us into these hid treasures, unknown to the VVorld?
What need of the Spirit of Wisdom and Revela∣tion to enlighten our minds, that we may know what is the Hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of his glorious Grace? O precious Promises indeed! promises of more Grace. To him that hath more shall be given, and he shall have in abundance, Mat. 25.29. God gi∣veth more Grace to the humble, Jam. 4.6. Pro∣mises of perseverance in Grace, Jer. 32.40. John 4.14. Again, there are Promises made to Grace, of which I could easily recite many: But after one hath used his utmost skill to open these Treasures, and to give you an Account, how much is contained in them, he must end with [an &c.] After all, he must acknowledge there is much more behind undiscovered, like that Path (Job 28.7.) which the Vultures eye hath not seen, as may allude to the Expression. It is quite beyond our Arithmi∣tick to find out the Total of the Divine Promises. So its impossible that any true Believer should know how rich he is in the Promises. O! the Promises are a long Field indeed, and much hid Treasure in this Field; yea, an unknown Treasure. (7.) Gods Ordinances are yours, especially in∣tended for you, and blessed unto you. Ministers are yours, as 1 Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, all are yours, given to the Church, for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephes. 4.11, 12. To be helpers of your Faith and Joy. Ministers are Gods Stewards appointed to give you Meat in due season. Gods Servants to conduct you into the Presence Chamber of the great King. Ordinance, they are the Chariots your Joseph sends to bring your souls nearer to him.
And O how amiable are his Tabernacles! O the pleasures of his House! O the sights of God, that you have sometimes in his Ordinances! Sights of his Power, sights of his glorious Grace. Have you not seen his Goodness pass before you? Have not his Footsteps dropped Fatness into your Souls? How oft that coming from the Word, or from Sacra∣ments, you might have said as they, Luke 5.26. We have seen strange things to day. God manifesting himself to your souls, so as he does not to the World. All the Paths of the Lord are Mercy to his People, as we heard before, but in the Paths of his Ordi∣nances, in the Walks of his Courtes, there they are wont to find his choisest Mercies: There espe∣cially the Lord commandeth the blessing. Bles∣sed they are in the House, and in the Field, but more blessed in Gods House, more blessed in his holy Mountain. There is an Expression, Deut. 11.21. [As the days of Heaven upon the Earth,] i. e. (Quamdiu mundus durabit,) which I only allude to here. The days we spend with God in his Courts, are as the days of Heaven upon Earth. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be still praising thee, a day in thy Courts is better than a thousand else-where, Psal. 84. To enjoy God here, this is Heaven upon Earth. Is not this the Mount of Transfiguration? The Gate of Heaven? The Mount of Blessing? Is it not good to be here? Well, you that have a special Interest in God, have a special right to the Ordinances of God; and may expect a special blessing on them, may look to enjoy God in them: Or if the Lord should see good to cut you short of Sanctuary-priviledges; yet you
should still enjoy the God of Ordinances, he would ea little Sanctuary to you. (8.) Gods Creatures are yours. As Jehoshaphat, [My People are as thy People, and my Horses as thy Horses.] When God is for you, what Creature of his can be against you? Angels the best and noblest Creatures, are your Friends, Heb. 1.14. And full little do you think how many wayes they do Befriend you, how many ways they are Ministring, and helpful to you: True, there is no ground for the Invocating of Angels; but there is ground enough, why you should give thanks to God, for the Angels Ministring unto you. Again, Devils and wicked men (the worst of Crea∣tures) are your servants. Though it be quite be∣sides their intention, sore against their will and In∣dination. Though they intend evil against you, God will turn it to good. So likewise other Creatures. The World is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22. The World is an appurtenance of your Inheritance, of that Estate which God by Covenant, and Deed of Gife hath settled on you, and confirmed to you. If Inferiour Creatures had a Tongue to speak, would they not say as Hushai, Whom the Lord shall chuse, his will I be? Or as the men of Benjamin, and Judah, We are thine David, e are on thy side. It is a burden and bondage to he Creatures, to serve those who are Enemies to their Maker. The Earth groaneth under such, and of God would but give the word, it would imme∣diately open her Mouth, and swallow them up. I do not deny but wicked men have a right to their Estates, and to the use of the Creatures. But he People of God have a better right than they.
That is certainly a mistake of some, that think all wicked men Ʋsurpers of the things they injoy. If they have a right before God: I ask (sayes one) by what Covenant. Is it by the Covenant o Works? Then they must fulfil it? Is it by the Covenant of Grace? But they are not within it, cannot claim by it. Answ. It is true, they ful∣fil neither Covenant, and therefore have not a rig by Covenant. But their Enumeration here is not full enough: Dater tertium. These things may be passed over, and men may have a right to them, and not by Covenant, Deut. 25. I have given Moun Seir unto Esau for a possession, ver. 9. I have give Ar unto the Children of Lot for a possession, with∣out any Indentures drawn betwixt God and then. By his Providence he determineth the Bounds o mens Habitations. He that giveth unto all me Life and Breath, giveth them Food and Raiment. Though wicked men shall be called to account for their Mercies, yet not as Thieves, or Ʋsurpers; but as ill-users or abusers of them, as unfaithful Stewards. Wicked men therefore have a right to their Creature-comforts; but not so good a right as you They have [a right by actual Collation, De presenti (As Mr. Baxter somewhere) but nor by promise, De futuro.] They have a right by common provi∣dence, you by Covenant, and Compact. They have a right as Servants to their daily Bread, you have the right of Sons. Not indeed that any de∣serve the least Mercy at Gods Hand, as the Labour∣ing Servant is worthy of his Meat; but a Servant may take his Masters allowance, and hath a right to the Clothes his Master gives him; only he hath
no assurance of being provided for by his Master still. The servant abideth not in the House for ever, but the Son abideth ever, John 8.35. You that are earthly Parents, know how to give good things to your Children: And much more does your Heavenly Father, and he hath enough to give, The earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof. Says the Father, Be a good Child, and while I have any thing, thou shalt not want. And so says God to you, You that fear me you shall never want any good thing; your Heavenly Father knoweth what is good for you, and hath promised, you shall never want, what is good for you. And how can you de∣sire more? What? Would you have more than e∣nough? when enough is more than all? Dimidium plus toto. Would you have more than is good? That were to wish evil to your selves. (9.) Heaven is yours, if God be yours, his Kingdom your everlasting Home, and Inheritance, Luke 12.32. As he said, Son, thou art ever with me and all that I have is thine: So, if the Children of God, then Heirs of God; then you shall be ever with him, ever with the Lord, and Inherit that everlasting Kingdom, prepared by the Father, pur∣chased by the Son for you. Of which Kingdom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered. Indeed as high the Heavens are above our Heads; so high above our understanding, and apprehension is the Glory and Felicity of Heaven. No greater dif∣ference betwixt the Throne, and the Footstool, nor so great indeed as betwixt the Kingdom of Heaven, and the most flourishing Kingdoms upon Earth. What is said of Mount Sion (the Type,) Psal. 48.2. Beautiful for Situation, the joy of the whole
Earth is Mount Zion: The like may much more be said of Heaven; Beautiful for Situation, the Joy, yea, the Glory of the whole World. Here is the City of the great King. O the serenity of Heaven! no scorching heat, nor piercing cold there. Here is a glorious Kingdom indeed, above the Clouds, yea, above the Stars. O the Lightsomeness of Heaven! no Night there. And no need of the Sun there, Rev. 22.5. O the pleasures of Heaven! Paradise was but an obscure Type, a dark shadow of it. No pricking Brier, or grieving Thorn there. In this Kingdom there  nothing to offend. No sorrow nor crying there▪ No pain there, no feeble person among the heavenly Tribes: There is health without sickness, and jo without sorrow, and pleasures without pain. Ther is hidden Mannah, and Rivers of pleasures, and ne∣ver fading Crowns of Glory. O the riches of that Kingdom, there are Trea∣sures that fail not. Solomon made Silver to be  Jerusalem as stones, 1 Kings 10.27. But the ne Jerusalem is described and represented, as if it wer all Gold, and precious stones, Rev. 21.18, 19, 2 Many a poor man goes to Heaven, Iam. 2.5. Mny poor in this world, yet rich in Faith, and He of the Kingdom. But that Kingdom will for e enrich all that come to it. There, and there o is the enduring substance. So now it is poor Di poor Dives, who is shut out of Heaven, but ri Lazarus. No poor to be seen in the streets of t New Jerusalem, no complaining in those streets. O the peaceableness of that Kingdom! no Se∣pent in the Coelestial Paradise, no Cananite in th Land of Promise, neither the Alarm of War,
the Voice of the Oppressor that shall ever be heard there. No hurting or destroying in that holy Moun∣ain, no possibility of a Forreign Invasion. There is a great Gulf fixed, Luke 16.26. No fear of In∣estine Divisions in that Kingdom. There Love hall be perfect. There Luther, and Calvin are a∣greed. There is the sweetest Harmony without the east jarring Discord. There the Faithful dwell at ase, and delight themselves in the abundance of Peace. O the Stability and Permanency of this Kingdom! And this Crowns all the rest; it is an everlasting Kingdom: The New Jerusalem lieth four square,  it is a Kingdom that cannot be moved) the Length d the Breadth, and the Height of it are equal, ev. 21.16. it is ever like it self. The Glory of eaven shall never suffer the least Eclipse. O bles∣ed state indeed, to be ever with the Lord! But after all, I must tell you, we have but a ve∣y short sight of those things that are within the veil. deed did Believers fully apprehend the Riches of e Glory of that Inheritance reserved in Heaven for em, they would stand in need of more patience,  be willing to stay their time, God hath appoint∣d them upon Earth, (though they should live in e most flourishing and prosperous Estate here;) an ever the Martyrs stood in need of, to endure e most grievous Tortures, and cruel Deaths. Thus you have heard something of the First and and Covenant promised [I will be your God] how onderful comprehensive it is. It is as high as Heaven, What canst thou know? The Measure ereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than e Sea.
Again, the second is like unto it, scil. [Ye shall be my people,] Jer. 31.33. It is true, sometimes this imports our Duty, and the Condition of the Covenant. And if we would have God for our God, we must be his people, we must give up our selves to Him, and account ou∣selves no more our own. But to be his People, a well holds forth the exceeding great Priviledge and Happiness of those, that indeed give up them∣selves to God, that come up to Covenant Term That God will own, and acknowledge them for  people indeed, and will carry it towards them  such, will remember them with the Favour that  beareth to his People. His Professing people, who have given up the Names, but do not give up their hearts to hi yet have some priviledges above others, that are no called by his Name, much more that his willin and Obedient people are priviledged. The Lo knoweth them that are his, (2 Tim. 2.19.) a will own them. And 1. This speaketh their freedom from other Lord Those cruel Task-masters, and Tyrants; Sin, t World, and Satan. Gods owning them for  will cut off others claims; Sin, the World, and  tan, can no more lay claim to you, if ye be  Lords. As that eminent Saint, and Servant of God,  Joseph Allein, (in his Life, p. 92.) did thus re Satan in his last Conflict: Trouble me not ( he) for I am none of thine, I am the Lords:  by Covenant, I have sworn my self to be  Lords, and his I will be, therefore be gone. if the Lord saith of thee, such a soul is mine,
Title (no doubt) will hold good against Satan, and all the World. O what a comfortable thing it is, if indeed you are the Lords, then you are Redeemed unto him from among men. You are no longer Satans cap∣tives, no longer slaves to Sin, and the World; as it is Isa. 62.12. They shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord. And Isa. 43.1. Fear not, for I have redeemed thee,— thou are mine. You are his, as Redeemed by him; you are the Portion which he took out of the hand of Satan, with his Sword, and with his Bow, Deut. 4.34. Hath God assayed to go and take him a Nation from the midst of another Nation, by Temptations, by Signs, and Wonders, by a mighty Hand and stretched-out Arm, and by great Terrours, according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt? O the exceed∣ing Greatness of his Power to us-ward that Be∣lieve; delivering us from the power of Darkness, and Translating us into the Kingdom of his Dear Son. 2. This putteth an Honour, an Excellency upon any. Since thou wast precious in mine Eyes, thou ast been honourable: What a great Honour is it nto any, for the Great God to own them, as in ear Relation unto Him? What she said of Solo∣ons servants, is much more true of Gods ser∣vants, 1 Kings 10.8. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before ee. As there is no God like him, so no People in the World like his People, 1 Chron. 17.20, 21. Deut. 32.9. The Lords portion is his People. Exod. 19.5. A peculiar Treasure unto him, Mal. 3.17. His Jewels. Does not this commend them indeed,
as the Excellent ones in the Earth, that God ac∣counts so highly of them? Psal. 4.3. Know that the Lord hath set apart, him that is Godly for him∣self. Set apart, or, as some Translate it, Miri∣ficavit; or Insignem vel eximium fecit. The differ∣ence God putteth betwixt his People, and others, the Godly and the Ungodly, is Notable and Won∣derful, The wicked he will put away like Dross, but the Godly he esteemeth as his Jewels; these he accounteth his peculiar Treasure: He sets great store by them. 3. Gods peculiar People have his special Favour And what happiness in this? The Psalmist desired no more, but that the Lord would remember hi with the Favour that he beareth to his People, Psal. 106.4. The Lord taketh pleasure in his people, Psal. 149.4. These only have his Complacential Love. Those whom he calleth his People, at other times he calleth his Chosen, his Sons and Daugh∣ters, his Beloved; yea, the Apple of his Eye: Relation and Propriety is a potent Exciter of Love. The world that is full of Malice, yet lo∣veth its own. And shall not God love his own? Yea, he loveth them with an everlasting Love. 4. For God to say of any, they are mine, i speaks Safety. He will have a care of his own. His Inheritance is Hedged, Fenced about with hi special Providence. His People shall have his pro∣tection. A dangerous thing it is for men to meddle with them. What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, Isa. 3.15. Do ye know what ye do, Isa. 52.5, 6. What is here to do, That my people is ta∣ken away for nought. God will Judge and Plea for his People, Deut. 32.36. Isa. 51.22. Joel;
2, 4. You would not see your Children wronged. And will not God avenge his own Elect? He is ve∣ry tender of the Apple of his Eye: And the Belo∣ved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, yea, the Foundation of God standeth sure; the Lord knoweth them that are his. And the very Gates of Hell shall not prevail against them. 5. His People are sure to be well provided for. Doth God take care for Oxen? Does he give the Beasts their Food, and will he not much more pro∣vide for them of his own Houshold? His Blessing is upon his People, Psal. 3.8. My people shall be satisfied with my Goodness, saith the Lord, Jer. 31.14. Yea, others must not see the Good he will do for them, they have Meat to eat that the World knows not of. 6. His People shall have his special presence, Ezek. 37.27. My Tabernacle shall be with them: Yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. So in other places, where the Lord promiseth to own any as his People; he doth further promise to dwell among them, and walk among them, Lev. 26.12. 2 Cor. 6.16. &c. Where should God dwell, but in the Lot of his own Inheritance? 7. When you hear of Gods Tabernacle being with them; you must not understand it, so, as if he were Flitting, or Removing from them again. No, The Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his Inheritance, Psal. 94.14. God hath not cast away his people whom he fore-knew, Rom. 11.2. He will not cast any of them away. He will not lose one of his Jewels. None shall pluck them out of his Hand. He will keep them safe, till he set them in a Crown of Glory.
And so lastly, They that are his indeed, it doth not yet appear what they shall be; but this is certain, they shall at last appear with him in Glory. Yea, the Lord will be for ever glorified in them, as a Bridegroom adorneth himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride decketh her self with her Jewels. And what Glory that is, to be like the Angels of Light as to our souls; and to have our vile bodies made like unto Christs glorious Body, no Tongue can express. Solomon in all his glory, not like one of these. When Christ was Transfigured in the Mount his very Raiment was shining, exceeding white as snow: So as no Fuller on Earth can white them, Mark 9.8. His very Raiment received Light and Lustre from his Body. His Face shone as the Sun, Mat. 17.2. And if the appearance of Christ was so Glorious in that Mount, which was but a Land∣skip of Heaven; What a glorious Body hath he now in Heaven? Well? The bodies of the Saints are to be Fashioned like his glorious Body, never to change that Fashion more. O the Lustre that God will put upon his People, when the Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43. And if the Body the earthly part of them, shall be so full of Splendor, How Glorious within, think we? Will not God polish the Jewel, when the Ring where it is set, is so En∣amelled, when the Cabinet hath so rich work be∣stowed on it? And now my Friends, consider of what hath been said, and shew your selves men. You have heard what the Lord requireth of you in the Covenant of Grace; nothing but what is your Indispensible Du∣ty; nothing that you can deny, or be backward to,
if you be not enemies to God, and your own souls' which should prevail with you, though there were nothing more to be said. But further you have al∣so heard, what the Lord hath freely and graciously promised here, even all that you can desire to your salvation and endless Happiness; yea, even more than you can conceive of. Now what say ye? Will ye be the Lords? Will you now from this day for∣wards give up your selves to God in Christ, to be Ruled by him, and saved by him in his own Way? O that there were such an heart in you all! Sirs, what say you? Though I be the unworthiest of Gods Messengers, yet I come in his Name, and the Lord expects your answer. Ah, Sirs, Have you not Delayed, and Dallied with God too long al∣ready? Whosoever thou art that shall deny to con∣sent to Gods Terms this day, for ought thou know∣est, this is the last time of asking: The Lord may never offer thee so fair again: That if this day thou dost not hearken to his Voice, the things that be∣long unto thy peace, may be for ever hid from thine eyes. If now you will be the Lords, then he will be your God, and own you for his People indeed, Jer. 30.21, 22. But if otherwise, do not say, but you have been fairly offered: And how will you for ever repent it, and Rue your folly, that you did not take Gods offer? O madness indeed, that you should like it to have the Bramble reign over you, rather than come under the shadow of the Almigh∣y! Do you not chuse sin, and the world, to your own Confusion? This know, God hath no need of you, he can be happy without you; though with∣out him you are miserable to all Eternity.
Sect. 14. PROP. XIV. The Coventut of Grace is one and the same for Substance in all Ages. Though it may seen to have Varied, yet the Difference is but in Circumstances, and manner of Admini∣stration. THe Covenant made with the Jews (of which is the greatest Doubt, or Question) was  Covenant of Grace, (the same for substance with that we are under) with a Covenant of Peculiari∣ty, or a Political Covenant added to it. Quest. When did the Covenant of Grace fir take Date? Answ. Immediately after the Fall. In that threatning to the Serpent, Gen. 3.15. was a Promis of Salvation to man. That as we read, Gal. 3.. the Gospel was Preached before unto Abraha (which was enough to the Purpose, and Business the Apostle had there in hand.) So it was Preach before that to Adam. For this cause as the Learn Mede supposeth, it is called The everlasting Gosp Rev. 14.6. , not so much in respect of th Future Time, as the Time past. That which wa promised , a Seculo, or from the Begi∣ning of the World, the Antient Gospel. That pr∣mise, [That the Seed of the Woman, should brea the Serpents head.] Was the first Draught,  Epitome of the Gospel. Here God promised th
destruction of Satans Kingdom, and Salvation of Fallen man, by Jesus Christ, the Seed of the Wo∣man. That all the true Seed of the Woman, the Faithful, (opposed to the seed of the Serpent,) should overcome through him, who is the Seed of the Woman eminently, and in a more famous sense, and peculiar respect. Thus Cain and Abel were di∣rected to offer Sacrifices, agreeable to that Dispen∣sation of the Covenant before Christs coming. And God speaks to Cain, Gen. 4.7. If thou dost well, shalt thou not be accepted: Which certainly cannot but refer to the Covenant of Grace, q. d. If thou didst serve me with the like sincerity, as thy Brother doth, shouldst not thou be accepted, as well as he? Now how could sinners look to find acceptance, whose best services are imperfect, and therefore de∣serve to be rejected, unless God reveal himself in a gracious promise, or Covenant to that purpose. By Faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was Righteous, Heb. 11.4. This is evi∣dent, that Remission of sin, Justification, and Sal∣vation (the great benefits promised in the Covenant of Grace) were granted out to some, before the Covenant made with Abraham. So Abel was righ∣teous before God: So Enoch, who walked with God on Earth, and was Translated, and taken up to God, Gen. 5.24. So Noah was Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith, Heb. 11.7. The Kingdom of Heaven was prepared for the Faithful, from the Foundation of the World, Mat. 25.34. Witness Enochs translation thither. By the way take notice, they that were acquainted with the History of Enoch, could not be ignorant of an hap∣piness
to be enjoyed of the Saints after this life: Yea, Eternal Life was promised from the beginning of the world, . or before Antient times, as that Text, Tit. 1.2. should be read. Thus God had a Seed to serve him, from the beginning of the world, and was a God in Co∣venant with them, was their God in Christ. So some understand, Rev. 13.8. as referring to the grand Antient promise, Gen. 3.15. The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. How slain? Not only Figurative, in Type, and Representation (as Dr. Lightfoot) The first thing that died in the world was a Sacrifice, or Christ in a Figure. Now only Dispositive, in Decree and Intention: Secun∣dum dispositionem totius Trinitatis, as Luther, (see 1 Pet. 1.19, 20.) But also Virtualiter, the Virtue and Efficacy of his Death extending backward, to Times past, as well as forward, (Rom. 3.24, 25. Heb. 9.15. and 10.4. and 13.8.) Or if we should read these words [From the Foundation of the World,] Rev. 13.8. as having Relation to the Writing of the Names in the Book of Life, not to the slaying of the Lamb; as there is a parallel place in the same Book, Rev. 17.8. It makes as well for my present purpose holding forth the writing of the Names of some in the Lambs Book of Life, from the beginning of the world. Or it is a Periphrasis of them that are saved. None are saved, but such as are written in the Lambs Book of Life, such as are given to him. And if none ever were, or shall be saved, but such whose Names are written in the Lambs book of Life, then none ever were, or shall be saved but by Christ, and according to the Cove∣nant of Grace.
And Mr. Ball would have the Apostle to refer to that antient famous promise of Victory to the seed of the Woman over Satan, and all spiritual Enemies, both in 2 Tim. 1.9. Who hath saved us, and called us, with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus,  (not before the world began, as we have it Transla∣ted there, and in Tit. 1.2. but) before antient times. And 2 Thes. 2.13. God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. From the be∣ginning , which phrase, as he saith, never imports from Eternity in Scripture. Of the Co∣venant, p. 41.42. And certainly, these were ever neces∣sary to salvation from the beginning [Sanctification, and belief of the Truth.] As we read of Abels Faith, and that his works were Righteous, (a proof of his sanctificati∣on.) We read of Enochs Faith, and of his con∣stant care, to walk with God, and to please God. We read of Noahs Faith, and that he was a just man, and upright in his Generations, walking with God. Neither were any of the Fathers saved without such a real, practical, living, operative Faith. Though we have much revealed to us in the Gos∣pel, which was hid from them, (Ephes. 3.9. Col. 1.26.) yet they heartily assen∣to Gods Truth, and complied with his will; as the Lord was pleased then to reveal it. Though as Camero says Si ante certum tempus prae∣stitutum a Deo, mysterium salutis uostrae, seu regnum caelorum suit obscurius re∣velatum, omnino consequens est ut fides adhibita revel∣tioni fuerit confusa. prae∣lect. p. 76. col. 1. That methinks it is plain, they were saved the same way even as we. Though to whom much is gi∣ven,
of them more is required; yet they had the same spirit of Faith. And had they been under the same Circumstances with us Christians, had they lived in Gospel-times, they would have been Gospel-believers. As Christ saith, John 7.17. If any man doth his will, he shall know of the Doctrine; whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. As such whose hearts were right, and sound, the Gospel being revealed to them with such clear Evidence, and proof, that it was of God, they could not but embrace it. As that Faith by which Abraham obey∣ed Gods call to leave his Country, and Kindred, and Fathers House, to go he knew not whither; would have enabled him to leave Father and Mother, House and Land, for Christs sake, and the Gospels. That same Faith, which made him so ready to offer up Isaac at Gods command, would have made him as willing to take up the Cross and follow Christ, as the Apostles and Primitive Christians did, had he li∣ved in their dayes. The like may be said of the Fathers before him, who obtained a good report through Faith. Thus it appeareth, that there is no real difference, betwixt the Faith of those VVor∣thies, who lived in former Ages, to whom God spake  at divers times, and in divers manners, and the Faith of Christians, to whom God hath spoken by his Son. Now though I have jumbled things together some∣thing confusedly in this Discourse: Yet ye may ob∣serve these two things cleared sufficiently, that the same substantial Benefits, which the Gospel pro∣miseth, were held forth to the Fathers; and the same kind of Faith, Holiness, and Obedience re∣quired of them, and therefore they must needs have
een under the same Covenant for substance. And is not this a Crediting of the Gospel? And should it not confirm our Faith in the Gospel? This is the good old Way indeed, many are greatly addi∣cted to Antiquity. You make great account of your old Deeds and Evidences. Let me tell you, you do not conceive aright of the Gospel, nor of Gods Grace, if you confine it to the Time of the New Testament, as if it was under 1700. years old. Even the Covenant of God made with Abraham was 430. years before the Mosaical Law (as the Apostle urgeth against those, who were ready to adhere to the Law in opposition to the Gospel.) And though that was sufficient for his purpose there, yet the Covenant of Grace was long before Abra∣ham, even from the beginning. This way God had set forth soon after Man was placed upon the Earth, immediately upon his fall. And it is questi∣oned, whether Adam stood one day, whether he lodged one night in that Honour, to which he was Created. O how should we reverence the Gospel! how should this advance the Grace of God in our thoughts! It is the antient Gospel, the everlasting Gospel, like the everlasting Hills; even from the beginning, God set forth this way of Salvation. The Gospel deli∣vered by Christ, and his Apostles, what is it, but that good old Charter, granted to Man upon the Fall, graciously renewed? VVhen almost the whole Race of Mankind had forfeited, and lost their Char∣ter, Christ comes, and renews, and Confirms it. But here another Question falleth in. VVhether the Covenant of Grace was made with all in Adam?
Answ. I think we must yield to this, Perpetua est foederis Dei ratio, quod filii in parentibus comprehen∣danter & censeanter: That this is the perpetual way and manner of Gods Covenant, to include and reckon the Children with their parents. Thus the Covenant of Grace was made with Adam, and his Seed, such as were to Descend from him, till such time as any of them Degenerated into the seed of the Serpent, and by their wilful Apostacy from God, and his VVayes, they did cut off themselves, and theirs from the Covenant. As afterwards the Co∣venant was made with Abraham and his Seed; and as now, under the Gospel the Covenant is made with the Faithful and their Seed: So was it at first with Adam and his Seed. But as now if any that are taken into Covenant upon the account of their Parents, being in Covenant with God, if when they shall grow up, they shall wilfully reject Grace offered, and manifestly renounce their Covenant with God; they should thereby break off themselves from their former Covenant-relation to God: So this hath been the case of the far greater part of Adams Posterity. Though whether the Law of Grace may not ex∣tend further, even to such as are not in Covenant, in the fullest sense, as it implieth a mutual consent; that is another Question. But so much of the Covenant, or Law of Grace, as it was given to Adam. That God might reveal more concerning it to the Fathers even before the Flood, I know no ground t deny. VVe read of Enochs Prophecy, Jude 5.14, 15. That God was manifesting himself to some o his Servants in those times extraordinarily.
But the next Edition of the Covenant, that we find extant, was that made to Abraham. And this latter Edition of the Covenant of Grace was larger, and clearer than the former. That Channel of Free-grace, which first brake forth in Paradise immedi∣ately upon Mans Fall, ran down to Abraham in a broader stream. Here Christ is spoken of, as the seed of Abraham, who was spoken of more gene∣rally before, as the Seed of the Woman. And bles∣sedness is promised in and by him, Gen. 22.18. In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. Which blessedness before was more obscurely hinted in that phrase of breaking the Serpents head. And here is express mention of Gods Covenant∣ing with Abraham, Gen. 17.2, 4, 7, 9, 10. Where∣as Gods Covenanting with Adam, and others of the Faithful before, is not plainly laid down, but only to be gathered, and deduced from Scripture by way of Inference. Though methinks, it is plain enough to all, that are not minded to Cavil, that there was a Covenant betwixt God and Adam, &c. they being mutually engaged. God engaged to Adam by promise, and Adam engaged to believe God, and worship God, according as he did re∣real himself. But whereas the Covenant was more tacitly and darkly held forth, betwixt God and Adam, it is most expresly delared betwixt God and Abraham, so that there is no room for any Cavil. Now that the Covenant made with Abraham was the Covenant of Grace, the same for Substance with that we are under, is evident. 1. The Gospel was preached to Abraham in that Covenant, which is proved by the Apostles express Testimony, Gal. 3.8.
2. The Covenant with Abraham was confirmed in Christ, Gal. 3.17. Therefore a Covenant of Grace. 3. The Covenant with Abraham has not yet been disanulled, as the Apostle there shews; and thence proveth, the blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles according to the tenor of that Covenant. 4. Abraham was justified by Faith in that pro∣mise, confirmed or renewed in the Covenant,  17.4. That he should be a Father of many Nati∣ons, see Gen. 15.5, 6. Now hence it will follow either that the Promise, and Covenant made  Abraham was a Covenant of Grace, or that Abra∣ham was not justified by a Covenant of Grace, b some other way. Either the Promise, and Cov∣nant made to him, was the same for substance wi that we are under, or he was justified and saved  a quite different way from us. 5. And then why should he be called the Fathe of the Faithful, Rom. 14.11, 16, 17. Or w should Gospel Believers be called the Children  Abraham, Gal. 3.7. He is not the Father of such in respect of Natural Generation, or Spiritual Re∣generation, does not beget or produce Faith  them; but only by similitude and proportion, as famous Pattern and eminent Example; as lo what way Abraham found acceptance with Go and was justified before God, and we may exp the Favour of God, and free Justification in  same way. But certainly you take away the Fo∣dation of the agreement, and Relation betw Abraham, and the Faithful. Now, if you de that to be the Covenant of Grace, which was m with Abraham: Can they be of the same Fai
who are not under the same Covenant? 6. Do we not read, Gal. 3.14. That the bles∣ing, which is come upon the Gentiles through Je∣us Christ, was first the blessing of Abraham. It as first the blessing of Abraham, and from him, nd through him, (as a prime subject, though not  a cause) it descends upon us. The Gospel, or the glad Tidings of Christ, and blessedness in him as first preached to Abraham, [In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.] And thus by aith in the Promise he saw the day of Christ, the blessias coming, though it was at a great distance; et he believed it would come, and be a happy day deed, the fore-thoughts whereof made him glad t heart, John 8.56. Object. 1. But some tell us the Covenant made ith Abraham, was not the Covenant of Grace; t that is one and the same to all the Faithful: But  this Covenant with Abraham are special promises, greeing only to him and his Family, or Natural Off-spring, as that the Messiah should come of his eed, Even He, in whom all Nations should be bles∣ed; and that God would give the Land of Canaan  his Seed. Answ. We must distinguish betwixt the Essen∣ls of the Covenant of Grace, and the acciden∣s. As the Covenant of Grace holds forth the ay of Salvation for Fallen Mankind of Gods Free∣ace in Christ; so it is the same Covenant, that braham was under, and the Faithful now are un∣r. And as to the now-mentioned Differences, ey were but Circumstantial, and accidental. This stinction must be granted, or else we must hold  Tribe of Judah, and House of David were in∣terested
in one Covenant, and the other-Tribes, with all the Jewish Proselytes in another Covenant; where∣as the Scripture Involves and Comprehends them is one and the same Covenant. Object. 2. Others say, God made a two-fold Co∣venant with Abraham, in Gen. 17. Scil. A Cove∣nant of Grace, in the beginning of the Chapt and a Covenant of Circumcision, ver. 9, 10. &c. which they make a Covenant of Works. Answ. But this is a mistake sure, for so it wo follow, 1. That whereas Abraham is acknowledge to be taken into a Covenant of Grace before, he  the priviledge after this, to be taken into the Co∣venant of Works; which is no priviledge. 2. T must say, that Abraham was at the same time  under a Covenant of Grace, and a Covenant  Works. But these same persons at other times ∣ny, that one can be under both Covenants together 3. The Apostle is express, Rom. 4.11. That A∣ham received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of  Righteousness of Faith. So that if the Coven to which Circumcision did belong, was a Covenant of Works (as Mr. P. would have it:) the Righte∣ousness of Faith should belong to the Covenant Works. 4. Gen. 17; Doth not speak of a  fold Covenant made with Abraham, but sets  both parts of the Covenant, scil. What the  promised to Abraham, and what he required of A∣braham. He promised to be a God unto him,  to his Seed after him, ver. 7. And required Abra∣ham to walk before him in Integrity, ver. 1. A∣ful mit to the Ordinance of Circumcision,  VVhich at that time he appointed to be the  the Covenant: He calleth it [My Covenant.]
methinks it is strange, that any Protestant should stumble at the Expression. It is a Sacramental phrase, ike that 1 Cor. 10.4. That Rock was Christ. And  Cor. 11.24. This is my Body. Again, look at the Spiritual meaning of Circum∣ision, as it was a bloody Sacrament, intimating the purging away of sin by the Blood of the Cove∣nant, and pointing at the inward Circumcision of the heart; what can be more plain, than that it must refer to the Covenant of Grace? But I may have occasion to speak more of this by and by. Lastly, That there was but one Covenant esta∣lished with Abraham, this appears (as Mr. Whi∣on noteth p. 36.) From the constant phrase of Scripture, always (where speaking of the Co∣venant made with Abraham) speaking in the sin∣gular number, the Covenant, and not in the plu∣al, Covenants. Now I might go on to shew how God repeated is Covenant with Abraham, as it were Comment∣ing upon it, in which respect it may be called the Promises, Gal. 3.16. so Gen. 12.1, 2, 3. and 15. . 5. and 17. and 22.17, 18. And I have heard  Learned man observe from Gods commanding raham to offer up his son Isaac, that on Gods art it was a further Exhibition of the Messiah to raham. Isaac must be the blessed Seed, or the rogenitor of it, because of that Promise, Gen. 11.12. In Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Now Isaac's usage (being appointed to be offered up a Sa∣crifice) holds forth to Abraham, that the Messias ould be offered up a Sacrifice for sin. Dr. W. (So that here was more of Goodness in God to braham, than of Obedience in Abraham to God.)
Again, there was a determinate place where Isaac, should be offered, Mount Moriah, on which place af∣terwards the Temple, the place of sacrifices, was built. Again, Isaac was laid on the wood, and Abrahams hand stretched out, to slay him: Yet Abrahams hand was stayed, Isaac was not Sacrificed, but God provided a Ram for a Sacrifice; this teacheth A∣braham that the time of Messiahs coming was not yet: But in the mean time God would be content with Sacrifices, as Pledges of the Messiah, which should Supponere locum Messiae, should be Typical, Significative, and Representative of him. Here I have given you anothers thoughts of that Myste∣rious passage, of Gods commanding Abraham  offer his son Isaac. But whether indeed Abraham had a distinct apprehension of these things, as we may have, since they have been cleared, and illu∣strated in the Antitype, I do not determine; but leave to others Judgments. I come next to speak of the Covenant made wi the Children of Israel. Here some distinguish  the Covenant made with them under Moses,  their return from the Babylonish Captivity, and th Covenant made with them after the Captivity. B that I may not run out too far, I shall only speak  the Mosaick Covenant: as indeed of that Cove∣nant is all the Question, whether it was a Covenant of Grace, the same for substance with that, whi Christians are under. Now I shall endeavour  clear this, That the Covenant of God made  Moses with the people of the Jews, was a Covenant of Grace, the same for substance with the Gospe Covenant: The way of Life and Salvation he forth in it.
It is granted, or if any should deny or question it, we have seen it proved before, that the Cove∣nant made with Abraham, was a Covenant of grace; But the Covenant made with Abraham, took in the Jews, as his seed, Gen. 17.7. And the Covenant made with the Jews, was a carrying on and esta∣blishing of the same Covenant; (though with a new dus, some things peculiar to the Jewish Church and Common-wealth, being added to it,) Deut. 8.18. Thou shalt remember the Lord thy God, that he may establish his Covenant, which he sware unto thy Fathers. And Deut. 7.12. If ye hearken to these Judgments, and keep and do them, the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant and Mercy, which he sware unto thy Fathers. 2. That Covenant which was Sealed with the son of Circumcision, and had a promise of Heart-Circumcision, was a Covenant of Grace. But the Covenant made with the Jews, was sealed with the  of Circumcision; and further, had a promise  Heart-circumcision. What did the outward sign of Circumcision sig∣nifit? That we learn, Deut. 10.16. Circumcise erefore the Fore-skin of your heart, which hath  accomplishment in Christ: Veteres Hebraei in  fuerunt sententiâ, quod tempore Messiae Circum∣ Spiritualiter, non Carnaliter amplius fieri de∣. Fag. apud M. Pool. in Synops. Col. 2.11, . In whom ye are Circumcised with the Circum∣on made without hands, in putting off the body  the sins of the flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism. Where me∣inks the Apostle intimates thus much, that Mo∣'s Circumcision, the outward circumcision made
with hands, did point to Christs Circumcision, the inward Circumcision not made with hands, [The Circumcision of Christ.] i. e. That which he effe∣cted by his Spirit. And this further we may take notice of, that he seemeth to compare Circumcisi∣on, and Baptism, as signifying the same thing, [Buried with him in Baptism.] Here let me Recite a Passage out of a Late Writer. Disc. of the  Cove∣nants. p. 37. [It is not unlikely (says he) but that as Heart-circumcision un∣der the Figure of Literal-circumcision, was, together with Faith, made the condition of the Covenant then: (Gen. 17.10. with Deut. 10.16.) So Spiritual Baptism, which is a death un∣to sin, and a living unto God, is under the Fi∣gure of Water-baptism, joyned with believing; as the condition of the promise of Salvation now. Mar. 16.16. He that believeth and is Baptized, shall be saved. According to which, the Apostle Peter having spoken of Noahs Ark, saith, The like Fi∣gure whereunto Baptism now saveth us; not the putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the an∣swer of a good Conscience towards God, 1 Pet, 3.21.] But this is one thing considerable, if Circumcision signified the same thing that Baptism doth, scil. The Mortification of sin, and laid  Engagement on them to put away Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit both; it must be the same Cove∣nant for substance, to which both those Sacraments referred. Hereunto add, That the Jews had a promise o Heart-circumcision, Deut. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of th seed, to love the Lord thy God. This is an evident
promise of Grace, where the Lord undertakes to work, what else-where he requires, as Deut. 10.16. Jer. 4.4. Object. But then why is the House of Israel said to have been Ʋncircumcised in heart? Answ. They were so generally, This Promise (like those Jer. 31.33. Ezek. 36.26, 27.) was fulfilled only in some of them, not in all, (its true) and yet laid down in so general Terms as might have encou∣raged any of them to apply themselves to God, for the bestowing of that Grace upon them. But there is an Objection against this Argument from Circumcision, from Gal. 5.3. Every man that is circumcised, is a Debtor to do the whole Law. And consequently, circumcision should rather have reference to a Covenant of Works. Answ. It is a mistake, to confound the Law (of which the Apostle there speaketh) with the Cove∣nant of Works, or covenant made with man in Inno∣cency. The Law to which Circumcision bound men, was the written Law of Moses, which though it is sometimes called the Law of Works, yet is really distinct from the Law of Innocency, or Co∣venant of works made with man at first. Indeed the Mosaical Jewish Law, taken in the Political sence, as it was the Instrument, or Rule of Govern∣ment of the Jews Common-wealth (as one notes) promising Temporal bene∣fits to the strict observation thereof, Discourse of the two Cove∣nants. p. 75. and threatning Temporal penalties to the Transgression and Violation of the same: So far it was a Law of Works. A Law of Works . As the Apostle saith, Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of Faith: But the man that Doth them, shall live in them, (as Lev. 18.5.) Which as it had reference
to the Law in the Political sence, is to be understood of a long and prosperous life upon Earth. Further, as the false Apostles and carnal Jews ex∣pected Justification, and Salvation, upon the Ex∣ternal Observation of the Law, as if Circumcision, and other works of the Law were highly Meritori∣ous (Rom. 9, 32. and 10.3.) Thus it was to them a supposed Law, or Covenant of Works. Not that God did so intend it, but they did so misapprehend it. Not that Circumcision did indeed bind men to the strict Terms of the proper Covenant of Works. But the Apostle there speaks of Circumcision, in the sence of the false Apostles, and as they abused it. They urged it as necessary to Justification, as a work of the Law, setting Moses against Christ: And would have it still practised, when by Christ it was abolished. Against these, the Apostle argues, if you will keep up circumcision still, by the same reason, you must keep up all Iewish Ceremonies, and observe the whole Mosaical Law, to which Circum∣cision did oblige them. But observe it, the use of Circumcision as insti∣tuted by God, was not to bind them to Legally per∣fect, and sinless Obedience; nor did Abraham, or any faithful Jew so understand it. So indeed it would have been no priviledge at all; Rom. 3.1. so it would have been no happiness or advantage, but a misery; and terror for them to have been taken into Covenant with God by Cir∣cumcision. But though compared with the more easie Institutions of the Gospel, circumcision was a Yoke, binding them to that more burdensome way of Service, which God at that time had appointed; yet comparing their estate then, with that of the
Heathen, circumcision was an Honourable Badge of them, whom God owned as his peculiar people. And though as Circumcision had relation to their political Law, it bound them to the strict Obser∣vation of those Statutes, Judgments and Ordinances, which God had given them in special: Yet as it had relation to the covenant made with Abraham, and his Seed, which was still on foot, it only bound them to serve and obey God in sincerity and truth, in what he then revealed to be his Will; and so much is (no doubt) required of every one in the Co∣venant of Grace. Again, 3. That covenant which holds forth Salvation to Fallen man, cannot be the covenant of works, but the covenant of Grace. But the covenant made with the Jews, held forth Salvation to them, John 4.22. Salvation is of the Jews: So it was while they were in covenant. And upon this account the land of Judah might be called Emphatically, The Land of the Living. Theirs was the Land of the Living, and the Valley of Vision: Whereas other People fat in Darkness, and in the Region and sha∣ow of Death, Psal. 132.16. I will clothe her Priests with Salvation: Ministerium eorum reddam salutare populo meo: Id quod eis erit honorificum, non secus ac elegans Vestis. Piscat. By their Ministration (standing in his councel) they might both save themselves, and others, Jer. 23.22. And they that were aliens from the Common-wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of Promise, are set forth as having no hope, and without God in the world, Ep. 2.12. Implying, 1. That the Gentiles had no grounded hope of future Happiness. 2. The Jews ad or might have had such hope. 3. What ground∣ed
hope they had of future Happiness, it depended, or was built and bottomed on the Covenant, then on foot. Called Covenants, being divers times renew∣ed, though otherwise for substance, it was but one. So again, Rom. 9.4. Ʋna fuit promissio, si rem ip∣sam spectes, Beza. sed saepius sancita. It was at se∣veral times renewed, and though the Mat∣ter and substance of it was the same, yet it was de∣livered in sundry forms in various Expressions. Or if by [Covenants] we understand, Et foedus gra∣tiae communis, & faedus peculiaritatis: Both the general covenant which God maketh with all his People, chiefly about their Eternal Happiness; and that special covenant made with the People of the Jews, about their prosperity in Canaan, the Land of Pro∣mise; the latter was but an Appendix, not a thing opposite to the former. Now if Salvation was of the Jews (as is already proved) it undeniably follows, that the Covenant of Grace was made with the Jews, as well as with us Christians. Surely, none that consider what they say, will dare to affirm that they might have Salvation, though under a Covenant of Works, and not of Grace. And as the way of Salvation was alwayes one and the same, to wit, through a Media∣tour; so the covenant of Grace in all Ages for sub∣stance, was one and the same. Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. Here (by the way) observe, how grosly they are mistaken, that hold, the Jews had only Tempo∣ral promises. A bold-fac'd Assertion, contrary to plain Scripture. If the Jews had no promises, but only of Temporal things, what shall we make of that Text, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, (where
certainly our Saviour speaketh of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, the Scriptures of the New Testament (not being then Extant) Search the Scriptures (sayes he) for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life; and they are they that testifie of me. And what would they make of that Promise, [I will be their God!] The Psalmist speaketh of it as a far greater Matter to have the Lord for our God, than to have and enjoy the world, Psal. 144.15. And the Apostle seemeth to say, that God would have been ashamed, to be called, Their God in so low a sence; as including meerly some outward Temporal priviledges, and Enjoyments, and no more, Heb. 11.16. This would have been little for his Honour: This would not have been to pro∣mise, or give like himself, like a God. Those words spoken to Moses [I am the God of Abra∣ham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,] prove them not only in being still, but in a state of happiness. And so the Import of the Phrase, Rev. 21.7. He that overcometh shall Inherit all things, and I will be his God. And certainly, the blessings of an earthly Canaan were not all, that God pro∣mised under the Old Testament; but Canaan it self was to them a Type of a better Countrey, that is an Heavenly. And if the Doctrine of future Hap∣piness after this Life, was not sufficiently Revealed unto, and commonly apprehended, and known a∣mong the Jews, one would wonder how such an one, as that Thief on the Cross, should be ac∣quainted with it, who prayed, Lord, remember me, when thou comest into thy Kingdom. 4. That Covenant, which had the Spirit and Grace of God attending the Administration of it,
was undoubtedly a Covenant of Grace. But the covenant made with the Jews, had the Spirit and Grace of God so attending it. The Spirit was pro∣mised, and Exhibited then, though not in so large a measure, as under the Gospel, Hag. 2.5. Ac∣cording to the word that I covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remaineth a∣mong you, Mich. 2.7. Is the Spirit of the Lord streightned? Are these his doings? Do not my words do good to him that walketh uprightly? Those high Encomia given to the Law, Psal. 19.7, 8, 9. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: The Sta∣tutes of the Lord are right, rejoycing the heart: The commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightning the eyes, agree to it only, as the Spirit doth accompany it. There was the same Spirit of Faith given out under the Old Testament, though not the same mea∣sure of Faith. And it was a Prayer, which a Saint under the Old Testament put up, Psal. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good: Lead me (i. e. by thy Spirit) into the Land of Ʋprightness. And there was the same Love to God, to his Word and Worship, to his Saints and Servants in the faithful of Old, as is in Be∣lievers, under the Gospel. And they obeyed from the same gracious Principle, as is evident from Heb. 11. 5. The Jewish Sacraments did represent and signifie the same thing, as Gospel-Sacraments do; from whence it would seem to follow, that the Co∣venant made with them is for substance, the same with that which Christians are under. Methinks it is plain, that the Apostle makes Circumcision and Baptism, the same in signification, Col. 2.11, 12. and 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. They did all eat the same spiritual
Meat, and they did all drink the same spiritual Drink: For they drank of that spiritual Rock, that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Would any one imagine, that Christ should be held forth Represented, or Typified, in Sacraments relating to the Covenant of Works? That their Sacraments did Typifie Christ to come, and ours do set him forth as already come; will not prove two Covenants Essentially different, but only two different Admi∣nistrations of the Covenant. As it will not prove two Christs, one that was then to come, and ano∣ther that is since come. Surely, there is but one Christ, though thus variously set forth and dis∣covered. 6. That Covenant which was capable of being renewed, after it was broken, must needs be a Co∣venant of Grace, and not of Works. But the covenant made with the Israelites, was capable of renewing. The covenant of Works being once broken, is irreparably broken, because it requi∣reth absolute, perfect Obedience. But the People of Israel were oft called to renew their covenant with God, which sheweth it was a Covenant of Grace. Moses, Nehemiah, &c. who truly feared God, and full well knew their own and others weak∣ness, and utter inability to perform sinless Obedi∣ence, would never have been so forward to engage themselves, and others in a covenant of Works; which was impossible for them to keep, whereby they could expect nothing but a curse. The covenant of Works admitteth not of Repen∣tance, promiseth not Remission thereupon: But there was place for Repentance, and a promise of Pardon and Forgiveness in that covenant made with
the Israelites, Lev. 26.40, 42. Deut. 4.30, 31. There was a way appointed under the Old Te∣stament for the Expiation of sin. The Sacrifices under the Law were Types of Christ, and to signi∣fie our obtaining Remission by his Blood. Doth the covenant of works admit of Sacrifices for sin? What a veil is over their eyes, in reading the Old Testament, that make it a covenant of works, when the great thing pointed at by its Types and Cere∣monies, is Christ, and Redemption by him! VVill any say, the covenant of works, was Typical of the covenant of Grace? 7. That Covenant which had the same condition with the Gospel-covenant, viz. Sincere Obedi∣ence to Gods Commands; is for substance the same covenant, that is, a Covenant of Grace. But the covenant made with the Jews. had this same con∣dition. The covenant of works would not take up with Sincere Obedience, but strictly requireth, and exacteth Perfect Obedience. But as God in his Covenant with Abraham, re∣quired his walking uprightly. So this was the thing required of Israel, Deut. 10.12. And now Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? VVhere the phrase [To serve him with all the heart, and with all the soul] is to be understood, by comparing it with other Texts, where the like phrase is used. As Deut. 30.6. VVhere God promiseth to circumcise their heart, to love him with all their heart, and with all their soul. And 1 Kings 14.8. VVhere it is said of Da¦vid, that he followed the Lord with all his heart And the like of Josiah, 2 Kings 23.25. Not tha
they did all that God in his Law required of them: But God in the Covenant made with them, did ac∣cept of their sincere and hearty Service, and Obedi∣ence, though it was Imperfect; which the Cove∣nant of Works would not admit of. Phrasis illa [ex toto Corde] in multis locis Scripturae apponitur hypocrisi, Chemnit. Loc. Com. de Lege Deî. p. 9. Col. 2. & externi simulationi, manifestum est [to∣to corde] seu perfecto corde, opponi du∣plici cordi. This of loving God with all the heart, and soul, and strength, Truman against some prevailing Opinions. p. 92.93, 94. must be considered either strictly,— and so it requires the utmost of a mans Natural ability; so that if he fails in the least degree of this, he fails so much of love due to God by the Law, and is un∣der its Curse. In this strict sence, no meer man in this Life, not Josiah himself, ever loved God with his whole heart, so highly as he ought. 2. These words may be considered as the condi∣tion of the Remedying Law, as taken with Gos∣pel-lenity, as if they love God with the prevail∣ing bent of their souls, or above all things, &c. So that when you read, Lev. 18.5. Ye shall keep my Statutes, and my Judgments, which if a man do, be shall live in them. (As in Neh. 9.29. and Ezek. 20.11.) You are not therefore to conclude, that this was a covenant of Works. Though it run in such a form, and though it is true; the carnal Jews with their Pharisaical Teachers, turned it into a covenant of Works. [Do this and live,] if you understand it, speaking of a Legal exactness, a perfect fulfilling of the Law; if you take it as a romise of Life, only upon condition of perfect
unsinning Obedience. So (its true) it is the plain Voice of the Covenant of Works. But as the Lord spake thus to the People of Israel, whom of his meer Grace, and Favour he had taken into Co∣venant with him; the words are rather to be taken in a Gospel-sence, as requiring sincere Obedience, and promising Life thereupon. And so the Faithful understood them, Psal. 51.6. Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts, ver. 16, 17. Thou desi∣rest not Sacrifice, the Sacrifices of God are a bro∣ken spirit. Psal. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God: Yea, thy Law is within my heart. Psal. 44.17, 18. We have not dealt falsely in thy Covenant, our heart is not turned back, &c. Yea, it is most plain, that such a keeping of Gods Com∣mands was meant, as had a promise of Gods Keep∣ing-mercy unto them, Deut. 7.12. and of his Shew∣ing-mercy, Exod. 20.6. Where there is need of Shewing-mercy, that plainly shews, the Obedience performed not to be exactly Legal, every way per∣fect. Shewing-mercy here, seemeth to intend, at least it concludeth, Pardoning-mercy. As it standeth in opposition to Gods visiting Iniquity, ver. 5. But supposing Obedience every way perfect, there is no room for, no need of such Mercy. Sincere Obe∣dience was no less accepted under the Old Testament, than under the New, (Mal. 3.17.) As it is no less required under the New Testament, than under the Old, Mat. 7.21. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father whit is in Heaven. Rom. 2.7. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, Honour and Immortality, Eternal life, ver. 13. For no
the Hearers of the Law are just before God, but the Doers of the Law shall be justified, and James, 1.25. And so the Harmony betwixt the Old Testament, and the New; betwixt Moses, the Prophet, and the Apostle Paul, Deut. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. with Rom. 10.6, 7, 8. The Obedience of Faith required by both, (vid. Truman against some prevailing Opi∣nions, pag. 35, 36.) As Mr. Ball, Of the Cove∣nant. p. 114. What word was that which Moses saith was near, even in their hearts, But the Law which the Lord gave upon Mount Sanai, and promised to write in the hearts of his Peo∣ple under the Covenant of Grace. It should be under the New Covenant of Grace. And though some may be ready to Object that of the Apostles, Rom. 10.5. For Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which doth those things, shall live by them; which would seem to make Lev. 18.5. and other the like Texts, a Covenant of works, of a contrary Te∣our to the Gospel-covenant. Yet the difficulty is solved, if we attend to what another hath obser∣ved. Truman against some prevailing O∣pinion. p. 36. It is apparent (says he) that the Law of Moses, though it was given designedly (as to the end of the Revelation of it) as a Covenant of Grace, and Pardon, even for the Sal∣vation of sinners; yet it was given (subservient∣ly still to the same end of Salvation) also to Re∣veal the Law, in its utmost exacting Rigour. And else-where Paraphrasing upon the place, [for Moses describeth the Righteous∣ness of the Law.] Append. to great Pro∣pitiation. p. 59. That is, these
words of Moses taken in the strict Law-sence, as a Law, and in the sence you understand them, set forth the way you stick too for Justification. For it is apparent, that those very words (Lev. 18.5.) and the whole body of the Mosaical Law, were a Covenant of Grace, as they were given from God by Moses, and understood (or intended by God) and ought to have been understood by the Peo∣ple: The meaning was, if you indeavour to do all these sincerely, and lament your falling short, you shall live and be blessed. Though he would not deny, but freely grant, that the same Mosaical Law, that is, Materially the same, was also given to Rule them, as a Common-wealth; according to the Observance, or Transgression whereof, they might look to prosper, or to be punished in this World. 8. That Covenant whereby the People of Israel came to have a special Interest in God, and special Priviledges above other People, could not be a Co∣venant of works, but of Grace. They could have had no Special priviledge by a Covenant of works, wherein naturally all are equally concern'd, and which lays sinners under the Curse, under an Intol∣lerable burden. It's impossible that sinners should come to have an Interest in God by the Covenant o works. Yet this was the Jews priviledge: The Lord was their God, Gen. 17.8. and Psal. 144.15. and 33.12. To them pertain the Adoption, Rom. 9.4. And they have God nigh to them, Deut. 4.7, 8. And had the advantage clear of all others, that wer strangers to the Covenant, Rom. 3.1, 2. Had i been a Covenant of works, they should only hav had God against them, not with them, or for them
what is spoken to them, Exod. 19.5, 6. is appli∣ed to Believers under the New Testament, 1 Pet. 2.9. What I have added here,  to shew, that the Covenant made with the Jews, was not a Covenant of works, is to shew some, how grossely Mr. Patient is mistaken; whose loose Discourse de∣serves not a large Refutation. Yet as weak as it is, it hath taken with some Friends of mine, whom I cannot but pity. But, Lay all these things toge∣ther, and I wonder if you can have any doubt, whether the Covenant made with them, was a Covenant of Grace, the same for substance with the Gospel-covenant. Yet because this is the  of the Ana∣baptists, the grand Mistake, which they lie under, and which leadeth them further out of the way; for the further clearing of the Truth, I shall answer all that I can think of, which may be Objected. Object. 1. That the Covenant made with the Jews, was but a Subservient-Covenant. Not the Covenant of Grace, but subservient to it. Answ. 1. It could not be Subservient to the first bringing in of the Covenant of Grace, which was in the world before this. The Covenant of Grace was made with Adam, immediately upon the Fall, and renewed with Abraham. And how could the Covenant made with the Jews, be subservient to the being of that, which was long before it? 2. Granting it was subservient to the Gospel-dispensa∣tion of the Covenant of Grace, and preparatory to it, (as it is Gods usual Method in the works both of Nature, and Grace, to proceed from that which is less perfect, to that which is more perfect) yet
this will not prove it no Covenant of Grace, but only that it was not so clear a Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, as the Gospel-covenant. 3. It certainly tended to the same end, which the Gospel aimeth at; to wit, the Salvation of souls, and had the same effect, attained this end in the Faithful a∣mong the Jews, and therefore certainly was a Co∣venant of Grace, the same for substance with the Gospel covenant, and not meerly subservient to it. Object. 2. It was a mixt Covenant. Answ. Though one hath raised a great dust, a∣bout the Covenant made with Abraham, and his Seed, calling it a Mixt-covenant: Of what Prin∣ciples was it mixt? Was it a Mixture of the Cove∣nant of works, and the Covenant of Grace? A compound of both these? But at other times, they will say these two are Incompassibilia, things that will not mix, and consist together; you may as soon mingle Heaven and Earth together. If Justificati∣on and Salvation be of works, then of Debt, and consequently not of Grace: So one of these plainly excludes, and overthrows the other. That either they must bring it to a Covenant of works, and not of Grace, or vice versâ, to a Covenant of Grace and not of VVorks. Or was it a mixt Covenant because it contained Temporal promises, as well as Spiritual; yet observe, this could not hinder its being a Covenant of Grace. For, 1. Those Tem∣poral good things promised were Typical of higher, and better, even of Spiritual things. An earthly Ca∣naan was a Type of Heaven. And long Life pro∣mised to the Obedient, was promised as an earnest to Eternal Life, And whatever some say and think,
this consideration would commend, and set off those outward Temporal blessings promised to the Faith∣ful; that they were Types and Pledges of Spiritual and Heavenly things. That they might say, as David, 2 Sam. 7.19. And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God, but thou hast also spo∣ken of thy servants for a great while to come; hast spoken what thou wilt do for us hereafter, in ano∣ther world. How great is thy Goodness which thou hast laid up for them, that fear thee, besides all that Goodness of thine laid out upon them here. 2. The Gospel it self contains promises of Out∣ward, Temporal-blessings, as well as Spiritual. Christ hath promised, Mat. 6, 33. All these things shall be added, to them that seek the Kingdom of Heaven first. And still that holds good to the Faith∣ful, [I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb, 13.5, 6. Godliness not only heretofore had, but still hath the promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. Now shall we therefore say, The Gospel is a mixt Covenant, and not a Covenant of Grace. If it be replied, that in the Covenant made with Abraham, and his Seed, the Land of Canaan was omised, which is no where promised to Believers  the Gospel. Answ. If upon this account it must be held, a ixt Covenant, in Opposition to its being a Cove∣unt of Grace; then that which made it a mixt Co∣enant, must be either that this was a Temporal romise, or that it was a promise peculiarly belong∣ng to Abraham and his seed; but neither of these ould make it such a mixt Covenant. Not the for∣mer
For by this Reason, the Gospel, which pro∣miseth, that the meek shall Inherit the Earth, Mat. 5. should be a mixt Covenant. That the promise of an Earthly Canaan should make such a mixt Co∣venant, and no other promise of the Earth, or Earth∣ly blessings do it; is such a groundless Fancy, as will never be proved while the Earth stands. Nor the latter. For so the Gospel should be a mixt Covenant too. As the Land of Canaan was pro∣mised in special to Abraham, and his seed; and as it was promised, that the Messiah should come of his seed: So in the beginning of the Gospel, there was a special promise of Miracles, to credit, and en∣courage the Faith of those, who first believed in Christ, Mark 16.17, 18. These signs shall follow them that believe. In my Name they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, &c. Which promise be∣longeth not to us, as those signs are not to be ex∣pected now: Must we therefore say, that was a mixt Covenant made with those Primitive belie∣vers, different from the Covenant of Grace we are under? Surely it is called the Covenant of Grace, from the main essential promises of Grace, and Sal∣vation: I say, it hath its Denomination from those Grand promises, which God made to his Church and People in all Ages; and which make it the same Covenant for substance, notwithstanding a difference, and change in certain accessions and cir∣cumstantials. So if it alledged, that the Old Testament doth more abound with Temporal promises. The Answer is ready, Magis & Minus non va∣riant Speciem. More and Less shew different De∣grees,
not different Kinds. Though the Jews had more of the Earth promised, and Christians more of the Spirit, this will only prove Christians under a better dispensation of the Covenant; it will not disprove the Jews being under a Covenant of Grace, since besides their temporal, they had also spiritual Promises. Obj. 3. Had the Covenant made with the Jews been a covenant of Grace, the same for substance with the Gospel covenant, then Christ should have been the Mediator of it; but Moses was the Me∣diator of that Covenant. Ans. 1. Inasmuch as that Covenant made with the Jews, did admit of a Mediator, this sheweth it was not a covenant of works. The covenant of works hath no Mediator. 2. Moses as he was Mediator was a type of Christ, therefore Christ was the true Mediator, even then as well as now, Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ the same yester day, and to day, and for ever. Indeed Christ is called the Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. Not wholly to exclude him from having to do  the former covenant, but because as the Law came by Moses, and he was made use of to report it from God to the Israelites, Acts 7.38. (in which respect he is called a Mediator, Gal. 3.19.) So the better covenant was delivered, the better dispen∣sation of the covenant was set forth by Christ him∣self, (as Heb. 1.2.) as it was fit he should have the Honour of it. But as Remission of sin, and Recon∣liation unto God was attainable under the first covenant, so Christ was the Mediator then, and not Moses. Indeed, in all Ages Christ was both Prophet, Priest, and King to his Church; though he
was not so clearly revealed in these his Offices be∣fore, as he is to his People under the Gospel. Obj. 4. The Old Testament was dedicated with the blood of Beasts, not of Christ, Heb. 9.18, 19. Answ. The virtue of Christs blood did certainly extend to the times of the Old Testament. And was not that Blood, wherewith the first Testament was Dedicated, Typical of the blood of Christ? Now how absurd is it to talk of a Covenant of works typical of a Covenant of Grace, (as Mr. Patient, holds it is, who makes this Objection.) How strange were it, if a Covenant of works should be so Dedicated, as to represent Christ and his Benefits; which is the soul and substance of the Covenant of Grace. Indeed, as a Modern writer notes: Mr. Truman indea∣vours to Rectifie some prevailing Opi∣nions. p. 151. In the sence wherein it did Typifie things to come, it was neither the strict Law of work, nor the Law of Grace, or Gospel promising pardon as to Conscience and future Happiness up∣on Repentance, and sincere Obedience, but the Jewish Political Law. But the Book of the Law in the Temporal sence, Ib. p. 27. Margin. And the like again, in the Margin, p. 83. (as it was the Instrument of the Jewish policy,) being sprink∣led with blood, was a pattern of the Law in the Eternal sence, sprinkled with a better Sacrifice. Object. But the Covenant which God made with the Jews, and the Covenant made with Believers under the Gospel, are spoken of as two Covenants; one called the First, and the old Covenant; the other
the New; and the second Covenant one said to have been faulty, the other called a better Covenant, Heb. 8.6, 7. Answ. 1. The terms Old, and New, First, and Second, will not prove them essentially Different, or different Kinds of Covenants; (nor were they, unless we restrain the Covenant made with the Jews, to that part of it, which was meerly political) but only various Dispensations of one and the same Co∣venant. In Deut. 29.1. We read of a Covenant made with the Israelites, besides the Covenant made with them in Horeb; not that these were two Co∣venants specifically different (as some have very groundlesly supposed) but the same Covenant re∣newed. The Gospel-covenant is called a new Covenant; not but that the Covenant made with the Jews of old, was the same for substance, as otherwise Sal∣vation had not been of the Jews: But because though these were the same for substance, yet they were di∣verse in respect of Administration. Faedus novum non substantiâ, sed for∣mâ. So a man is said to take a new lease, or to enter into a new Bond, when the Former and the Latter are the same for substance. The same Law of Love is called both an Old and a New Commandment. That which is called the new Cove∣nant, Spark. Myst. of Godliness. p. 64. is not (as one says) a Cove∣nant upon new conditions, but a New condition of the old Covenant. Or as ano∣ther, Statham Reviler rebuked. p. 91. that which the Scripture ex∣presly calls the Old Testament, or Covenant, Heb. 8.20. was but the old Administration of the Covenant of Grace,
the old Copy of Christs will: That which it calls the new Covenant, is the old for substance, though new for the Administration, the new Copy of Christs will. 2. When the first Covenant is supposed by the ensuing Alteration, not to have been faultless; the plain meaning seems to be, that it was a less per∣fect Dispensation, than that in Gospel-times, not so clear, not so powerful, &c. The Old Testament-dispensation was but as a first draught. We have the lively Representation of those things in the Gospel, which were more darkly shadowed out be∣fore, Heb. 10.1. The Old Testament was as a pre∣face, or Introduction to the New. Or else the Apostle calleth that the first Covenant, which the Jews then took to be the Covenant; to wit, the meer External part of it under the former Dispensation, which was but as the Shell or Husk; which yet the carnal Jews were most taken with, re∣jecting the Kernel. 3. The Gospel-covenant is called a better Cove∣nant, established upon better promises; because a better Dispensation of the Covenant, where there are clearer promises of Spiritual blessings, and which is fuller of such promises. Spiritual promises were more sparingly set down in the old Covenant. As was hinted before, it was most congruous, that Christ the Mediator of the Covenant, should have the ho∣nour of bringing in the best dispensation of it. That the best Dispensation of the Covenant was defer∣red, till the Mediators coming in Person. Or else the Gospel-covenant is called a better Co∣venant, comparing it with the covenant made with the Jews, onely so far as it was political, and a pe∣culiar
dispensation given to them, which the far greater part of them sinfully severed and divided from the Covenant of Grace, and stuck to, in op∣position to the Gospel; which was an higher, and a better Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace. Object. 6. One whom I mentioned a little be∣fore, Objecteth, Ezek. 16.59, 60, 61, 62. where God opposeth, Their Covenant to His Covenant. Thy Covenant, ver. 61. and My Covenant, ver. 62. Who would hence draw this wide and wild conclusion, that the Covenant made with the Jews, which God there calleth thy Covenant, was a Cove∣nant of Works, quite opposite to that which He calleth [My Covenant] that is, the Covenant of Grace. Answ. But may we not think, that they are put to their shifts, that are forced to such Allegati∣ons, as have nothing like a Proof, or Argument. And take Notice of ver. 60. there you may see, how well this place agrees to their purpose, Never∣theless, I will remember my Covenant (made) with thee in the days of thy youth, &c.] The Cove∣nant made with the Jews, God calleth, My Cove∣nant, (as Jer. 31.32.) And promiseth to remember it. Dixerat Paulò antè, [memor ero foederis mei,] jam dicit, [Non ex foedere tuo.] Conciliat igitur quae contraria videbantur, o∣stendit faedus illud irritum & abolitum esse ex parte populi, firmum autem ex parte Dei, qui eorum supe∣ravit malitiam, & faedus suum erga ipsos iterum e∣rexit. Calo. in pol. Synops. And was it a Covenant of works, that he would re∣member? Surely, such a Co∣venant would have made no∣thing for them, but against them. Rather as Oecolompadius notes, Habes hic locum me∣morabilem de duplici faedere,
&c. Here you have a memorable place concerning a two-fold Covenant; one with Israel alone, the other with all Nations. And there is this difference betwixt the New and Old Testament; that one was more obscure, and communicated but to a few, the other is more clear, and spread abroad, Propa∣gated in the whole world. So he, or else, as Dr. Lightfoot somewhere, Fall of Jerusalem (in Har. on the New Test.) p. 154. the 12. God made a two-fold Covenant with their Fa∣thers, viz. The Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Pe∣culiarity. And the latter (N. B.) was but a manner of the Administration of the former. The covenant of Grace was made with Adam, and belongs to all the Seed of Christ, be∣fore the Law, under it, and after it, Jews and Gentiles. Now the Oeconomy of Moses was such an Administration of this covenant of Grace. as made Israel a peculiar People. And may not this teach us how to understand ver. 61. [I will give them unto thee for Daughters, but not by thy Covenant.] That [thy Covenant] here, should rather be explained by this covenant of Peculiarity, a certain Mode of the covenant of Grace, as at that tme dispensed; than by the co∣venant of VVorks. Object. 7. It is further Objected from Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. If that new Covenant which God there promiseth to make with them, be a covenant of Grace, then the former Covenant was not. And so they must needs differ in Kind and Substance. Answ. Blake vind. Foed. p. 216. As a Learned man observes, that Text hath been very much vexed, and wrested, several Parties would writh
it to their several Opinions, and press it to serve se∣veral purposes. As the Antinomian would hence prove the covenant of Grace, to be absolute with∣out condition, God promising to put his Law in their hearts. The Familists hence cry down the Mi∣nistry, and Gospel-Ordinances; because it is said, they shall Teach no more, every man his Neighbour, and every man his Brother. (But these plainly con∣tradict themselves; and while they insist on the bare Letter of the Text, which if it be against Teaching by Man, it is more against Brother teach∣ing Brother, and Neighbour teaching Neighbour; (which is a thing they allow & practise) than against the Teaching of men in Office; of which the Text saith nothing.) Others again urge this Text to prove, that only the regenerate are in covenant, and have a right to Church-priviledges, and Ordi∣nances. To all which I may add one sort more: The Anabaptists, that hence conclude, the Cove∣nant made with the Jews, was not a covenant of Grace, and of Salvation; but a Covenant of Outward and Temporal Priviledges, or as the more Ignorant sort of them, a covenant of Works. And so Mr. Patient will have it. But, 1. If that Covenant made formerly with the Jews was a covenant of VVorks, not of Grace, then God was Married unto them by a covenant of Works: As ver. 32. he saith, He was an Husband unto them. But it is not to be imagined, that God should be Married unto sinners, by a covenant of VVorks. 2. That which is here called a New covenant, meaneth on∣ly a New dispensation of the Covenant, which should be at the Messiahs coming in Gospel-times. Called New, for the great change there should be
for the better in manner of Administration, in which respect it might seem to be a New covenant in∣deed. 3. The truth of this second particular will appear, if we consider what this New covenant is: [I will put my Law in their inward parts: &c.] which is spoken comparate, non absolute. Not as if God had not done this for them before in some measure; but that he would do it in a further mea∣sure: [I will put my Law in their inwards parts.] This God had done for some of them before, as he had promised this before, Deut. 30.6. There was some among them that could say as the Psalmist, Psal. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my heart. But that Grace which was more rare under the Old Testament, is promised to be extended to more, more plentiful∣ly, diffused under the New. And this is the mean∣ing of [I will make a New covenant— not accord∣ing to the Covenant that I made with their Fa∣thers.] Object. 8. That Covenant made with the Isra∣elites, they are said to have broken, Jer. 31.32. Ezek. 16.59. But it is impossible, that the New covenant lying wholly on Gods part, should be broken. Answ. This supposeth what is not to be sup∣posed, that the Covenant of Grace lieth wholly on Gods part, and nothing is required of man therein. But I have undeniably proved before, that the Co∣venant of Grace hath Conditions, conditions not required of God, but of men: As 'tis not required of God, but of man to Believe, Repent, Obey, sincerely. And if any of us do not come up to these Terms, and Duties, whereunto we stand
bound, we are guilty of breach of covenant. If God and Man be not mutually engaged; if all lieth wholly on Gods part, and Man is to do nothing, then it is an absolute Promise, not a Covenant. Dr. Of Attrib. 2 part. p. 87. Preston indeed speaks of a double Covenant, which cannot be broken, where God engageth to work the con∣dition in some, but that is restrained to the Elect. Others reduce it to that which is called the Covenant of Redemption, betwixt God and Christ. But the Covenant properly with Man, that covenant, according to the terms and tenor where∣of, we are to look for Remission and Salvation, is conditional; and in the tenders of it, common both to Elect and Reprobate. And as for all those that profess to own, and embrace the covenant, and yet come not up to the terms of it, they are guilty of breach of Covenant with God; and continuing such, shall be judged and condemned as covenant-breakers. VVhere the condition of the covenant ought to be performed, and is not, there (it is manifest) the covenant is broken. Yea, I do not question but Believers themselves are generally to be humbled for this sin, that they have broken covenant with God. They may have been guilty of breaking covenant with him for a time, who yet do not finally break covenant with him. Further, I would ask one that is of Mr. P's per∣swasion here (whether Anabaptist, or other) whe∣ther all in their societies be not persons entred in∣to Covenant? And next, whether there be no Hy∣pocrites in their societies? And then, whether any Hypocrite, while an hypocrite, keepeth Covenant.
Certainly the Covenant that Christian Churches are taken into, which is sealed in Baptism, may be broken, and is broken by some, if there are any Hypocrites within the visible Church, that is, if the visible and invisible Church be not all one. It is as little to be doubted, that there are persons in co∣venant, who yet break it, and shall be judged as Violators of it; as that there are branches in Christ that bear not Fruit, and therefore shall be cut off, and taken away, Joh. 15.2. Therefore they must search out some other mean∣ing of these words, Jer. 31.32. VVhich my Cove∣nant they brake. And not make this a Note of Dif∣ference betwixt the Covenant made with the Jews, and the Gospel-Covenant, that the former might be broken, not the latter. As to the Elect it is true, they do not totally and finally break Covenant; and that Grace enabling to keep the Covenant, is given out to a far greater Number than before; but we cannot say simply and absolutely, that the Gospel∣covenant is never broken. Obj. 9. The Covenant of Grace never ceaseth, it is the everlasting Covenant, but the Covenant made with the Jews is vanished, Heb. 8.13. Now what is vanished away, cannot be the same with that which is to remain. Ans. 1. As Tena, Novum Testamentum non tam abolitio, quàm impletio prioris. The New Testament is not so much an abolishing, as a fulfilling of the Old. 2. Where the Apostle speaks of the Old Covenant, as that which was to vanish away, we are to understand it of that part of the covenant which was peculiar and proper to that Dispensati∣on. The Ceremonial-Law given to the Jews, is va∣nished
Circumcision is vanished, yet the Covenant of Grace, made with Abraham, (to which Circum∣cision then did appertain,) remaineth still the same for substance, which Believers are taken into. The Judicial Law which was given to the Jews, is va∣nished, so far as it did peculiarly respect their Com∣mon-wealth: but not the Moral Law, I hope, which the Lord hath promised to write in the hearts of his People. Do we make voyd the Law through Faith? God forbid (sayes the Apostle) yea, we esta∣blish the Law, Rom. 6.31. Neither are all Old Te∣stament Promises vanished, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises, (dearly beloved) let's cleanse our selves— These Promises: what Promises? why, those before mentioned, chap. 6.16. which you will find, Lev. 26.12. I will walk among you, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. Obj. 10. If the covenant made with the Israelites, and the Gospel covenant, be one and the same for substance, how comes it to pass, that the Apostle so oft opposeth these two Covenants, as Gal. 4.24. &c. why does he make the Law and Gospel, and works of the Law and Faith Opposites? Ans. That late writer, whom I had occasion to make use of before, (in the Answer to the fourth Objection) distinguisheth of the Law given by Moses, thus (though not in these very words, yet to this sence) to wit, Mr. T. Endea∣vour to recti∣fie, &c. p. 23. to 37. That it is to be considered, either as respecting the Jewish Common-wealth, or as respecting Conscience; either in a Political or in a Spiritual sence. 1. As re∣specting the Jews common-wealth, so this was the Law of the Land, by which they were all to be
governed, as a Common-wealth. And this Law was two-fold, to wit, 1. The strict Original Law, ex∣acting Obedience to all Gods commands, whether Moral, Judicial, or Ceremonial, upon pain of death; so a violent temporal Death was due to every one that failed in observing any external Precept of the Law. 2. The Remedying Law answering to it, which appointed a Sacrifice to be offered in most cases, upon which the Offendor and Transgressor was discharged from the aforesaid temporal Death threatned. 2. The same Law (that is, materially the same) is also to be considered, as respecting conscience. And here we are to take notice likewise, 1. The Original Law here was so wonderfully strict, and dreadfully severe, that it threatned an eternal curse, everlasting death, to any the least transgression whatsoever. As it had to do with Conscience, it threatned Death Eternal to every Sin, even to in∣ward secret sins, in heart or thought; such things as it did not take notice of, or threaten with a vio∣lent temporal Death, as it was their Common-wealth Law. 2. The Remedying Law answering to it, and given with it, which was to this purpose, that not∣withstanding they were, all of them, many wayes guilty of the breach of Gods most holy Law, and so obnoxious to the curse; yet such was his Grace, that upon their sincere Repentance, and real and hearty Endeavours to obey God in all things, their sins should be pardoned, and their Souls saved. Now taking the Law in this last sence, as it held forth pardon and salvation to sinners upon their hearty return to God, and sincere Obedience, so there is no Opposition betwixt this Remedying Law, and the Gospel. The Apostle speaking of it, calleth it th
word of Faith, the same which we preach, Rom. 10.8. So it was the Salvation of the Jews, Joh. 4.22. the means of salvation to those that were saved. As it was their common-wealth Law, it typified higher things. First, in that it threatned every transgression with Death, it shewed the wonderfull strictness of Gods Law, as in an higher sence, threat∣ning eternal Death to every sin. Again, as there was a Remedying Law, given with it, appointing in most cases, a Beast to be slain, to prevent the Death of the Offender, it was a typical Gospel, sha∣dowing out the Reconciliation of sinners by a more excellent Sacrifice. Again, there is another distinction I would have you take notice of, to wit, that we must distinguish betwixt the Law, as it was given by God, and as it was mistaken and perverted by many of the Jews. Now as the Law was given by God, we may be sure, as Mr. Allen hath well noted, It was not to cross, or confront the Promise, Discourse of the two Co∣venants, p. 55. or Gods design in it, but to be sub∣servient to it. Gal. 3.21. Is the Law then against the Promises? God for∣bid. For it is not to be thought that God would prevaricate in his Design. So that when he had once made a new Law of Grace, for the saving of Fallen man, he would yet after∣wards give any Law, but what should one way or other subserve to the same end, if men do not deprive themselves of the intended Benefit, by perverting it. And therefore to be sure, God did not intend to revive the Old covenant of works made with Adam in Paradise.
Now to apply these things to our present pur∣pose, when the Apostle makes an opposition betwixt the Old Testament and the New; the Law and the Gospel; the works of the Law, and Faith; we are either to understand him, as speaking of the Law, so far as it was political, concerning the Jews Com∣mon-wealth: Thus indeed it made nothing perfect, it was but a shadow, and was to give place and va∣nish, the Substance being come: Or else he speaks of the Law in a strict sence, abstracted from those gracious Promises that were given with it to the Jews. And thus it was a copy of the Law of works, requiring absolute perfect Obedience. Thus it was opposite to the Gospel, as the Jews severed it from, and set it up against the Doctrine of Gods Grace; and so it gendred to bondage, Gal. 4.24. and was the Ministration of Death and con∣demnation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9. So there was no being justified by the Law; or if men could have been justified by it, they had not been justified by Grace, there had been nothing of Pardon in it. But otherwise the Apostle makes the Doctrine of the Old Testament all one with the Doctrine he preached, as we heard before. And if at any other time he useth any derogating expressions, when he is speaking of it, we must un∣derstand them as spoken comparatively, that is, com∣paring that darker and more burdensome admini∣stration, with this clearer and more comfortable dispensation of the Covenant of Grace under the Gospel. Quest. If you ask, how could the Law given to the Jews be considered both as a Law of works, re∣quiring perfect Obedience, and also as a Remedy∣ing
Law, taking up with sincere Obedience? Ans. Had the strict Original Law been given to them intentionally to bind them up to it, to expect Life and Happiness, onely upon those high terms of doing all things therein contained, and obeying perfectly; then had it been plainly exclusive of a remedying Law: But it was not given thus, but the very intention of publishing the strictness and severity of the Law of works (which all men natu∣rally are under) was to commend and set forth the Graciousness of the Remedying Law, to make it more welcome and acceptable. How gladly and thankfully ought they to have submitted to that Law of Grace, which held forth pardon and ac∣ceptation with God, upon their believing in him, and obeying sincerely, of whom God might (in Justice) have required nothing less than perfect, sinless Obedience. And therefore it was a most horrible perverting of the Law, when the Pharisees, and other self∣justiciaries, expected Righteousness, and Life from the Law, in their sence, and in opposition to the Go∣spel, For, 1. As it was the Law of the Land, as it respected their Common-wealth, so (it is true) it was possible for them to keep the Law, Phil. 3.6. They might not be guilty of any such external breach of the Law, as legally deserved a violent temporal death, and such as could not be expiated by Sacrifice, but all this could not justifie them be∣fore God. As it was their Common-wealth Law, it was never given for that end; but to keep them in order, and to shadow out greater and higher things. 2. As it held forth the strict Law of works, re∣quiring
perfect sinless Obedience, so they could not possibly keep it, to be justified by it; but were all transgressors of the Law, and so condemned by it; which should have moved them to embrace, and submit to it in a Gospel-sence. And in keeping the Law sincerely, heartily bewailing the sinfull defects in their Obedience, and having recourse to the free grace and mercy of God for pardon, they might have found acceptance, and an exceeding great reward. Obj. 11. If the old Covenant was a Covenant of Grace, then why are the Jews said to have been in bondage under it? why is the Spirit of Adopti∣on restrained to the time of the New Testament, if the former was the same Covenant of Grace, (for substance) with the latter. Ans. 1. One way how the former Covenant gendred unto bondage, was hinted before; to wit, carnal Jews, (men of base, servile Spirits) did mis∣interpret, and misapply it. 2. The faithfull under that dispensation might in another respect be said to be in bondage, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. As they were under a more burdensome way of Worship, than Be∣lievers under the Gospel. As they had not so much liberty, nor so much of a Spirit of Adoption, as the faithfull have under the Gospel. As some, The Church at that time was as an Heir in its minority. Ball of the Cove∣nant, p. 27. As an heir it was free, Statham, Reviler rebuked. p. 93. Ball, p. 35. but as an Infant, or in its minority, it was but as a Servant, under Tutors, and Governours. As Heirs, the faithfull then had the Spirit of Adoption and Liberty,, but mixed and tempered with this Spirit
of Servitude, as they were Infants, or children un∣der the yoke. Obj. 12. You will not deny but the Covenant made with the Israelites, may be considered as Po∣litical, and why might it not be only or meerly po∣litical? Ans. The highest, most noble, and primary end of the Law given to Israel, and the Covenant made with them, seems to be to direct, and engage them in the way to Life and Happiness. That it was but a secondary, and less principal use, or end of it, to govern them, as a Theocracy, or holy Common∣wealth. 1. As the Covenants, and giving of the Law are set down among the Jews Priviledges, Rom. 9.4. Psal. 147.19, 20. yet the giving of the Law was tothing near so great a Priviledge, taken in the temporal sence, (respecting their Common-wealth; as it was in that higher Notion, and consideration,) as it was to convert the Soul, and to direct in the way to true and eternal Happiness. 2. I should think, that the Israelites covenanting with God, did oblige them to keep his Law, not only as it was the Common-wealth Law, and for fear of temporal punishment, and in hope of a pre∣sent temporal Reward, but from a filial fear, and love of God, in sincerity and truth, the thing requi∣red in the Covenant of Grace, sc. Deut. 5.29. and 10, 12, 13. Heart-obedience was required in that Covenant made with the Jews. 3. That Covenant made with the Israelites con∣tained Spiritual, as well as Temporal Promises. Compare Exod. 19, 5, 6. with 1 Pet. 2.9. and Lev. 26.3, 11, 12. with 2 Cor. 6.16. So also Deut. 29.12,
13. Jer. 11.4. But this was proved before, that the Covenant made with the Israelites was a Co∣venant of Grace, the same for substance with the Gospel-covenant; therefore not meerly politi∣cal. Now this point having been sufficiently cleared, That the Covenant of Grace is one and the same for substance, under the Old and New Testament; it may be of good use. Ʋse 1. This shews us how the Church is One. There is one catholick Church, consisting of divers parts, Cant. 6.9. My Dove, my Ʋndefiled is but one. There is one Body, as one Spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, Eph. 4.4, 5. One Church-catholick, constituted by one Grand Charter, or Covenant of Grace, (though it's true, the Church of the Jews had a special clause in their Grant and Charter concerning them as a Common-wealth, which is not in the Christians charter.) So the Ordinances and Priviledges of the Church are given and granted by this Charter, to the whole Church primarily, and to particular Churches consequently and secondarily, as parts of it. And methinks it is very rational, what some have offered, that it is occasional, and accidental to the Universal Church, Dr. Stilling∣fleet. Mr. Hudson. that there are particular distinct Congregations, in regard of the multitude and distance of Church-members; for could we con∣ceive, that all the Members of the whole Church could meet together, to partake of the same Nu∣merical Ordinances orderly and to Edification, then the reason for their meeting in several places should
cease. David would praise God in the great Con∣gregation, among much People. And the more publick the Assembly is (Caeteris paribus) other things being alike, the more solemn the Worship is, the more for Gods Glory, and his Peoples be∣nefits, quickning, and comfort. (Though it is true, sometimes Gods People have not had the Liberty to meet openly, when the Church was to be sought: Non in tectis, & exteriori pompâ, sed potius in carceribus, Hillary. & speluncis. Some good men I know will not admit there is such a thing, as an Ʋniversal visible Church, for fear of bringing in the Pope, or an Ʋniversal visible Head of the Church, though this no way follows upon the other. But however Good men may dis∣sent in such Points here; yet when they meet at last in that General Assembly, spoken of, Heb. 12.23. There shall be no Dissenters then among them. In the mean time I would ask, What Church that was to which so many Souls were added, even Three Thousand in one day? Acts 2.41, 47. See also Chap. 4.4. and 5. and 14. Could it be a parti∣cular Congregation? And what Church that was, wherein God set Apostles, Prophets, &c. 1 Cor. 12.28. Were the Apostles set in particular Churches? Or were they ot general Officers unto, and over the whole Church? And what Church does Baptism declare, and sig∣nifie ones admission into? Is it only a sign of Ad∣mission into a particular Church? Suppose a Mini∣ster cast among a company of Heathen, and one, or more converted by him, should not such be Bap∣tized
upon the Profession of the Faith of Christ, though there was no particular Church constituted there, into whose Fellowship they might be taken? 2. This may serve as an Antidote, against the Error of the Anabaptists, who to out the children of professing Parents of their Interest in the Cove∣nant, would fain perswade men, that the Covenant made with the Jews (wherein children were com∣prehended with their Parents) was not the same for substance; but quite of another kind. Now since we have proved the Old and New Covenant, the same Covenant of Grace for substance; their Foundati∣on is shaken, and so what they would build upon it, not like to stand. If children were capable of being in covenant with God, with their Parents heretofore, why not now? Either they must say, our children are more incapable of a covenant Interest in God, than the children of the Jews; or that God is less Merciful, bears less respect to the children of his People now, than he did to the children of the Jews: Both which are loaded with absurdity. But more of this afterwards. 3. This may help to keep up in us a reverent, and high esteem of the Scriptures of the Old Testa∣ment; Wise men would not throw away their old Evidences. What you have heard, may let you see an Harmony betwixt the Old and New Testa∣ment: Yea, Christians though they are not to keep up Jewish ceremonies; yet they may make better use of the Ceremonial Law, than the Jews ordina∣rily did, who rested in the Letter of the Law, and were taken up with the outward shadows, not look∣ing to the end of that which is Abolished. We may see the End, and Scope of the Ceremonial Law
more clearly, than the Jews themselves did, having so fair and plain a Comment upon it in the Gospel: As Prophecies are best Interpreted by their accom∣plishment; so Types by the coming of the Anti∣type, and comparing them together. There are some that slight, and reject the Scrip∣tures of the Old Testament. This they never learnt of Christ, or his Apostles. We find Christ Ex∣pounding Moses and the Prophets to his Disciples even after his Resurrection, Luke 24.27. And are those Scriptures unworthy of a Christians perusal, which Christ thought not unworthy of his Exposi∣tions? The Apostle Paul tells us, Whatsoever things ere written aforetime, were written for our Learn∣ing, Rom. 15.4. And all Scripture given by Inspi∣tion of God, is profitable, 2 Tim. 3.16. He Vindicates his Doctrine, and confirms it from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, Acts 26.22, 23. And we find the Bereans commended for their searching those Scriptures, and trying Doctrines by them, Acts 17.11. The Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, (as we learn, Ephes. 2.20.) are one Foundation of Faith. Christians are there said to be built upon the Foundation (not Foundations) of the Apostles and Prophets. That to take away the Scriptures of the Old Testament, is to take away part of the Foundation. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, (says the Apostle Peter) where∣unto ye do well, that ye take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. 4. This may further confirm us in the belief of the Gospel. That it is no new Doctrine, but the Sub∣stance of it was held forth of old by Moses, and the Prophets; upon which account there is less Occa∣sion to suspect the truth of it. The main Doctrine
of the Gospel is non other, than what God hath Owned, and Delivered to his Church of old, Acts 26.22. Antiquity is a thing which many would pretend to follow. Well, this is the antient Gos∣spel: And it is proved to be of God; as by the Miracles wrought to confirm it, with other Argu∣ments; so by the writings of Moses and the Pro∣phets, John 5.46. Acts 3.24. It hath double con∣firmation. We have old Evidences to shew for it, to make it good. As God spake by the Mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began, Luke 1.70. 5. Hence we may see cause to admire Gods gra∣cious dealing with us, under the Gospel-Dispensa∣tion of the Covenant. The Jews were highly Fa∣voured, in being taken into that Covenant God made with them; though it was a darker Dispensa∣tion of the Covenant of Grace. Now God hath done more for us, than he did for that his antiently-beloved People, taking us into the same Covenant for substance, (it is true, but) in a clearer, a bet∣ter Dispensation of it. Many Kings and Prophets, and Righteous men among them, desired to see the things which we see, yet did not see them. The Jews heretofore were priviledged above any Nation in the world; yet we are priviledged above them: we that live in Gospel-times, we have the Cove∣nant of Grace, in the last and best Edition of it. 6. This shews what ground Christians have to apply Old Testament Promises, such as are of a common concern: as the Apostle Peter tells them, they should be no loosers by submitting to the Gos∣pel, Acts 2.38, 39. Repent and be Baptized.— For the Promise is to you, and to your children; and
(not only to you Jews, by Birth or Profession, but) to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. VVhat ever promises are included in that [I will be their God;] and belong unto it, to make it good, the Covenant being the same for substance in both Testaments; such promises, though found in the Old Testament do also belong to the Faithful under the New. See an Instance, Heb. 13.5. Be content with such as you have: For he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor for∣sake thee. VVhere hath he said this? See Josh. 1.5. of Deut. 31.8. So the like Instance you have, Heb. 13.6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me, Ʋpon what ground may we say thus? VVhy n as much as the Psalmist could say thus, Psal. 118.6. VVe who have an Interest in God, as well s he, may say the like.
Sect. 15. PROP. XV. There is a two-fold manner of being in Cove∣nant with God, viz. A being only External∣ly in Covenant, and a being also Internally in Covenant with him. IGnorance of, or not attending to this Distincti∣on, is a cause of very grosse Mistakes; as may be seen in that Pitiful, Loose Discourse of Mr. Patients, and others. Some Distinguish betwixt an Outward, and an Inward Covenant; but that seemeth to be attend∣ed with great Inconveniencies. Neither may we think, that God hath made with Men a Covenant, which containeth only outward Priviledges, upon the condition of an outward visible Profession; that he hath made any such Covenant, distinct from that which is called the Inward Covenant, that holds forth Pardon, Justification, and Salvation, upo Souls return to God, and hearty acceptance of Je∣sus Christ. One that sometime useth this distincti∣on, Blakes Covenant sealed. p. 125. yet expresseth his meaning thus The Covenant is but one and th same, but all are not in the Cove∣nant after one and the same manner. Some ar only in it by outward Profession, to the presen participation of outward Priviledges; but som by cordial acceptance, to the enjoyment of savin Benefits. Therefore it is much safer and cleare
to distinguish of the manner of mens being in Cove∣nant, which is different; as some are only out∣wardly in Covenant, others also inwardly. Then to distinguish of the Covenant as either outward, or inward. As Mr. Ball, Of the Covenant, p. 24. where you may see more to this purpose. As also, p. 202, 203. Exter∣nally this Covenant is made with every Member of the Church,— but Savingly, Ef∣fectually, and Special manner it is made only with them, who are partakers of the Benefits promised. They that are only Externally in Covenant, bare∣ly enter into Covenant, and do not stand to, or continue in it, Heb. 8.9. They continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not. Which yet (by the way) implieth, that the Covenant before made with the Jews, was a Covenant of Grace; which if they had observed according to the true Tenour of , God would then have accepted them, and would ave had a Gracious regard to them. They that re Inwardly in Covenant, are such as heartily close ith Gods Terms, and have his Laws written in heir hearts, and have a right to the Inward, Spi∣itual, Saving Benefits; and Blessings of the Co∣enant. That there are these two wayes of being in Cove∣ant with God, is a thing so plain, as methinks I eed not spend many words to prove it. 1. There is a Two-fold manner of being in Christ, d therefore a twofold manner of being in Cove∣nt. For all that are in Christ, are in Covenant. ow some are in Christ only Externally, such as e to be taken away: Others also Internally, such shall for ever abide in him. There are Fruitless
branches, and there are Fruit-bearing branches, John 15.2.6. 2. All that are called, are within the Church, and within the Covenant. Now some are called only Externally, others are also called Effectually: Ma∣ny more are called Externally than are chosen ones, called Internally and Effectually, Mat. 20.16. and 22.14. 3. They that are Sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, must needs be supposed in some sence within the Covenant. Now the Apostle supposeth of some, who were Sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, that they may be guilty of treading un∣der foot the Son of God, and doing despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. Now such as he there speaks of, were never real Saints, never In∣ternally in Covenant. They were Sanctified: How? Not Internally, but Externally, in being seperated from the world of Heathens, visible Saints; called out of the World, and devoted to God, and his Service. 4. All that are within the Visible Church, are in Covenant, as Ephes. 2.12. Aliens from the Com∣mon-wealth of Israel, and strangers to the Cove∣nant of Promise, were all one; so Vice versâ, with∣in the Church, and within the Covenant. But all within the Visible Church are not Internally in Co∣venant. Otherwise you must hold, there are no Hy∣pocrites, no Graceless, Unconverted persons with∣in the Church. Certainly, we have no ground to think, that all within the Church of Corinth, or other Churches, we read of in the New Testament, were true Believers, real Saints. No doubt, with many of them, as of the Israelites of Old, God
was not well pleased. They would be in Heaven before the time, that look for a Church consisting of one but real Saints. I wonder how or when that Scripture was, or will be fulfilled, [Isa. 19.25. Blessed be Egypt my People, and Assyria the work of y Hands, and Israel mine Inheritance.] If there are not some outwardly in Covenant, and the Peo∣ple of God by an outward Profession, who yet are ot Gods People by a real and hearty Resignation of of themselves to him. If the Church admit not of some, who are Christians only outwardly, and the People of God by External profession, then Egypt, Assyria, Israel; yea, all the Kingdoms of e World at some time or other, have been, or all be, all true Believers, and real Saints, see ev. 11.15. For the Scripture cannot be broken, John 10.35. The Word of God cannot fail. Object. Rom. 9.6, 7, 8. They are not all Israel, which are of Israel.— These which are the chil∣dren of Flesh, these are not the Children of God:  the Children of the Promise are counted for the ed. Answ. 1. Some urge this against the Children  professing Christians, being in the Covenant. ence they conclude, that the Natural Seed, as ch, hath no priviledge under the Gospel. But, 2. If it determines against the Children of lievers being in Covenant, it determines against y being within the Covenant, but such as are the ildren of God by Faith; the Children of the Pro∣se. 3. But indeed, both these are quite besides the e of the place, which is this: The Apostle be∣g to speake of the Rejection of the Jews, for their
open Rejection of Christ and the Gospel, shews how such a thing might stand with Gods truth. Though he had promised to be the God of Abra∣ham, and of his Seed; yet his Seed were either his Natural seed, or his Spiritual seed, or Seed by Analogy. Such as were meerly his Natural seed, might be cast off: They continued not in my Cove∣nant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord, Heb. 8.9. This we see verified in Ishmael, and Esau: But as for such as were also his Spiritual seed, Children of the Promise, not only in that larger sence, Acts 3.25. But in a stricter sence, as here, Rom. 8.9. Gods Covenant stood fast with them. And that Grace which others had offered to them, but wickedly rejected, these willingly embraced, and were blessed in. Besides that common Election of the Jewish Nation, whereby they were chosen and separated from among other Nations; there was also a Special Election of some of them from among the rest. And these God did not cast away, Rom. 11.1, 2, 5. These obtained that Grace and Mercy, which the rest missed of. So the Apostle sheweth, that while the generality of the Jewish Nation for their Infidelity, were to be Rejected, God would yet continue his Covenant with the Elect among them; and with the believing Gentiles, the Children of Abraham by Analogy, who were to be graffed into the like Covenant-state from whence the other were broken off, Rom. 11.17, 19. So the Apostles intent is to deny to the Natural seed of Abraham, that which was the Priviledge of the Spiritual seed only, (not to deny to the Spiritual seed such Priviledge as was even common to the Natural seed,) so likewise in Rom. 2.28, 29. the
Question the Apostle speaks to here, is not whether only true Believers are in Covenant, or whether the Parents being in Covenant, their Children are not in Covenant with them; but rather, whether they that are only Externally in Covenant, may not be broken off. Now to shew the Use of this Distinction of a be∣ing Externally in Covenant, and of a being also In∣ternally in Covenant: 1. Hold to this Distinction, and you will easily Answer what some urge with great Vehemence, and Confidence against the Jews, having been under a Covenant of Grace. Because it is said, Deut. 19.4. The Lord had not given them an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear. But this was necessary only to their being Internally in Co∣venant, not to their being Externally in Covenant. Whereas some suppose it a strange absurdity, to say, God entered into a Covenant of Grace with hem, to whom he had not given an heart to per∣ceive, &c. It is no more than to say, All who are Externally in Covenant, have not an heart to be∣ve, an heart to Repent, do not come up to Co∣venant-terms. It is no more than to say, that all ho are called Externally, are not called Inwardly d Effectually. No more than to say, that there aints now by an External separation, and Visible ofession, who are not Saints by a Spiritual Reno∣tion▪ And as heretofore there was a Seed, after  Flesh, and a Seed after the Spirit, even so ow. Again, whereas the same Persons tell us, that  the Children of Believers be in the same Covenant ith Believers, then they must all certainly be Sa∣ved,
as he that believeth, shall be Saved. This will not follow. Though indeed I see no reason, or ground to doubt of the Salvation o the Children of Believers; such as die in their Infancy, while they are pure Appendices of their Parents, when actual Faith and Repentance, is not required of them, while they have no will of their own, the Parents will and act, stands for their will and act. It would seem that in what sence God hath promi∣sed to be the God of believers, he hath also pro∣mised to be the God of their Seed, while they are to be looked on purely as their Seed; for so they are Interested in the Covenant upon the Parents ac∣count, without any thing more required of them, But now the Covenant made with believers and their seed, hath such and such Conditions, required of all that are of Age, and not naturally uncapable of performing the same. Now supposing a true believer to fall from the condition, i. e. That he ceaseth to be a believer; it would certainly fol∣low, that the Covenant of Grace would cease to justifie him, that he should not be saved. So the Children of believers, if as they grow up, they do not come up to Covenant-Terms; that Covenant that would have justified them, dying Infants, re∣quiring no more of them at that Age, than what might have been pleaded for them; yet that same Covenant will condemn them as Violaters of it. And if when they are of capacity, they do not per∣form the condition which is then required of them in their own persons, with prophane Esau, they Sell their birth-right, and cut off all claim to the special benefits and blessings of the Covenant, by their own Act and Deed.
If I have been mistaken in what is here said of the salvation of believers Children, that die in their Infancy; yet I can say, I desire to Learn, and am willing to see my mistakes. But though I know not, that the Scripture, which affirmeth, Ephes. 3.2. That we are all Children of wrath by Nature, doth any where hold forth the Salvation of all that die in Infancy; which to assert, would seem to im∣ply, that Gods destroying the old World, and So∣dom, &c. were eminent Acts of Mercy, rather than of Justice, where in such multitudes of souls were sent to Heaven together; who if they had lived, had probably (at least, for the greatest part of them) gone to Hell. And how it may be Reconciled with that Reason, God giveth the angry Prophet, for his sparing Nineveh, Jon. 4.11. That there were more than Sixscore Thousand persons that could not discern betwixt the Right hand and the Left, I am not able to discern; if these (supposing Ninevehs Destruction, and their Fall in the Ruine of it) had all then been certainly saved, and not one of many of them (probably) saved, their Lives (with the rest of the City) being spared. Yet methinks it should be granted, that there is more hope of the Salvation of the Infants of believers, than of Pa∣gans. Now that there is so, it must be because of their Interest in the Covenant, There were no more hope of the Salvation of the one, than of the other, if they were both alike Interested in it. 2. That there is a being only Externally in Co∣venant, as well as a being Internally: This would teach us not to expect a Church upon Earth, whol∣ly Constituted, or consisting only of Real Saints. Certainly, all whom the Apostles themselves Bap∣tized,
and admitted into Christian Fellowship, and Communion, were not true Converts, or real Saints. And when Three Thousand were admitted, all in one day (as in Acts 2.) how was it probable, or in∣deed possible, to take a particular account of each one, touching a work of Grace, and to enquire af∣ter the soundness of their Conversion. The Visible Church is a Field that hath Tares, as well as Wheat. It's not to be expected, that all the Tares, should be gathered out, till the end of the World. Then it is, that the Son of man should send forth his An∣gels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do Iniquity, Mat. 13.40, 41. That such are said to be gathered out of his Kingdom then, it implieth there are, and will be such in his Kingdom till then. Again, ver. 47. The Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a Draw-net, which here encloseth Fish, both good and bad; and I would fain know, what Church we may find in all the New Testament, that was constituted by the Apostles themselves, all whose Members were to have been accounted real Saints, such as had true saving Grace. 3. That there are some only Externally in Cove∣nant with God, and not Internally; this should teach and warn us, not to rest in the former. As John Baptist said to them. Mat. 3.9. Think not within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father: So, think it not enough, to have been born of be∣lieving Parents, or that you have been Baptized, or that you are Gods People by External profession; but walk in the steps of the Faithful, and as you have given up your Names, so give up your selves o Christ. As I may allude to that of the Apostle,
Rom. 2.28, 29. He is not a Christian, who is so only outwardly, neither is that Baptism, which is only an outward washing of the Flesh: But he is a Christian indeed, who is so inwardly, and that is Baptism indeed, where the heart is cleansed, and where there is the answer of a good Conscience to∣wards God. And the Covenant of Grace may well be compared to Noahs Ark; as it was not hang∣ing on the outside of the Ark, that would have sa∣ved any of the Old World, but getting within the Ark, as Noah did. So our being Externally in Covenant with God will not avail to our Sal∣vation, unless we are also Internally in Covenant, coming up to Covenant-Terms. There are Chil∣dren of the Kingdom, that shall be cast out.
Rom. 3.1, 2. What Advantage then hath the Jew? Much every way: Chiefly, because that unto them were Committed the Oracles of God. Sect. 16. PROP. XVI. They that are only Externally in Covenant, yet are priviledged far above those who are strangers as to the Covenant. COvenant-Priviledges are not like the Common benefits of the Sun and Rain; but are Special and Distinguishing Favours. As was said of Israel of Old, Deut. 4.7. What Nation so great, who hath God so nigh unto them? It must needs be a great Dignity and priviledge to be a People near unto the Lord. A great priviledge for People to have the Tabernacle of God with them. The Ark, where were the Tables of the Covenant, was Israels glory. The Apostle makes this, the chief priviledge of the Jews, that unto them were committed the Oracles of God. The Word is a Treasure to be chosen be∣fore thousands of Gold and Silver: This is a Trea∣sure highly to be valued, though brought to us in earthen Vessels. The Word and Ordinances are choice Priviledges, belonging to those who are in
Covenant, Rom. 9.4. It's a greater mercy to have thy spiritual Manna, than to have the greatest a∣bundance of Corn and Wine. Better is the Fatness of Gods House than the precious Fruits of the Earth. How much better are the Rivers of plea∣sure that run there, than Rivers of Oyl? Yea, the gleanings of Gods holy Hill, is better than the Earths Vintage. As the Soul is of more worth than the Body, so are means of Crace to be prized a∣bove Means of outward Subsistence. As Gods Oracles and Ordinances belong to those that are in Covenant, so that choyce part of the Word, The Promises. Children of the Covenant, are Children of the Promises, Rom. 9.4. To all within the Covenant the Promise of Salvation is offered, though but conditionally, yet sincerely. And if we fall short, the fault is onely in our selves. But the greatness of these Covenant-priviledges will appear in the sad and deplorable Estate of those that want, or are deprived of them. See what it is for men to be strangers to the Covenant, Eph. 2.12. Such are said to be without Christ, without hope, and without God in the World. How dolefull is their condition, who can never hear the joyfull sound. To want the ordinary Means of Salvati∣on, is a want indeed: Ordinarily, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, Acts 2.47. Where no Vision is, there the people perish. Such sit in Darkness, and in the Region and shadow of Death. How miserable was the state of the Jews, when they were unchurched, when God called them Lo-ammi, would no longer own them as a people in Covenant with him. Then wrath is said to have
come upon them to the uttermost. It made the Apostle sad at heart to think of it, Rom. 9.1, 2, 3, 4. Now what is said of the Priviledges of those who are but so much as externally in Covenant with God, should quicken us to Duty, not breed, or nourish security. The greater our Mercies, the greater our Engagements. The higher our Pri∣viledges, the greater Gods Expectations. Isa. 5.4. What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes? To be lifted up to Heaven (with Capernaum) and not into Heaven, will oc∣casion our greater down-fall, and sink us deeper in∣to Hell.
Acts 2.39. The Promise is unto you, and to your Chil∣dren. Sect. 17. PROP. XVII. Besides those personal Benefits and Advantages accruing to men in Covenant, there is this comfortable priviledge also concerning their Seed, that they are involved and taken in∣to Covenant together with the Parents. As this is the Tenour of the Covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. NOw to clear this, observe, 1. This hath been Gods Way and Manner all along, when he hath taken Parents into Cove∣nant, to take in their seed with them. You shall not find, that ever heretofore God entred into Co∣venant with those that were Parents, singly by them∣selves, excluding their seed. The Covenant of Works was made with Adam for himself and his Posterity, I suppose that will be readily granted. And when the Covenant of works was broken on mans part, that there was no possibility of attaining Happiness that way, God made another Covenant with our first Parents, pro∣mising Salvation by the Seed of the Woman, that is,
Jesus Christ, who was to be born of a Virgin, which was the first Edition of the Covenant of Grace, as I shewed before. And here the seed of Adam were not excluded, but included; till such time as any of them cut off themselves from Gods Covenant by their own Act and Deed. Who are we to understand by the Sons of God, spoken of Gen. 6.2. but the seed of godly Parents, such as were descended from Seth, E∣noch, &c. who are called the Sons of God, not meer∣ly as they were his Creatures? for so they should not have been opposed to the Daughters of men, as there they are. Have not all one Father? Hath not one God created us? Mal. 2.10. Nor are they called the Sons of God, as being regenerated, and made new Creatures: For no such thing appears in the Context, but rather the contrary. But they are called the Sons of God as the Israelites are called the children of the Lord their God, Deut. 14.1. be∣ing within the Church, and in Covenant-relation to God. Vid Ayns∣worth. As by the Daughters of men there, are understood such as were of wicked Cains cursed posterity, such as were without the Church. Again, when God took Abraham into Covenant, his Seed were taken in with him. This is evident, Gen. 17.7. so God owneth the Children of the Jews for his Children, his Sons and Daughters, Deut. 32.19. with Ezek. 16.20. Yea, observe, the Church in Abrahams Family consisted most of strangers, yet their children must all be cir∣cumcised, even such as (in the opinion of our Op∣posites) were to have no Lot or part in the Land of Canaan, Gen. 17.12, 13. So the children of Pro∣selytes,
that joyned themselves to the Church os∣e Jews, were taken into Covenant with their Pa∣ents. Thus it was from the Beginning, that Children ere taken into Covenant with their Parents. And why should it seem strange to any, that they should be taken in now? (1) I would know of any man, if Children ere capable of being taken into the Covenant of urks with Adam, what makes them uncapable of eing taken into a Covenant of Grave with their Pa∣rents now? And if children are capable of deriving Original corruption from their Parents, together with those manifold miseries that attend it, why re they uncapable of Covenant-priviledges, to be onveyed from Parents, taken into a Covenant of Grace? May we think, God's Justice is more con∣cuous in the Covenant of Works, than his Grace s in the Covenant of Grace. (2) If the Covenant made with Abraham, and he Covenant made with the people of Israeel, was he same for substance with the Gospel-Covenant, d the seed then was taken in with their Pa∣nts, what should exclude the seed of Believers ow? (3) Why should it seem strange, that God accept∣th the Act of the Parent to enter his child into Covenant, for the Act of the child, so long as the ild is at its Parents dispose, and the Parent can∣ot truly and heartily devote himself to God, and is service, without being willing to devote all that  his to Gods service? Why should it seem strange, hat here God accepteth the will of the Parent for he will of the child, till it comes by its own will
to cross and revoke what the Parent had done for it? And here methinks, no Anabaptist, but if he be serious, instead of opposing our Doctrine of chil∣drens Interest in the Covenant with Parents, so hot∣ly and earnestly as they are wont, should so far en∣cline to it, as to wish it true, and be willing to hear all that may be brought to prove it, and desire to see it cleared, both for their own comfort, and their childrens benefit. What a strange thing it were, if a godly man should not desire, and account it a great priviledge, to have his children in Covenant-relation to God? and that one who hath truely de∣voted himself to God, should not desire by all means possible to engage his to God too? Now what is already said, maketh it at least pro∣bable, that children are taken into Covenant with their Parents still; they were taken in of Old, and the Covenants are the same for substance, and chil∣drens capacity the same, that except God bear less respect to his People and their seed now, than here∣tofore, they have the same priviledge of being in Covenant together with their Parents, as hereto∣fore. Indeed what was noted before of Proselytes and their seed being taken within the Covenant, proves it was not any specialty, peculiarly belonging to Abrahams Natural seed. Yea, was it not a figure of, or a Praeludium unto the calling of the Gentiles. A fore-runner of that which is foretold, Isa. 49.22. I will lift mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the People, and they shall bring thy Sons in their Arms, and their Daughters shall be carryed upon their shoulders.
2. Whereas our Opposites cannot deny, but children were in Covenant together with their Pa∣rents under the former dispensation, they can never prove Children excluded from the Covenant now under the Gospel. And as Dr. Stilling fleet well noteth, If it had been Christs in∣tention to exclude Infants, Account of the Grounds of the Protestant Re∣ligion, p. 108. there had been far greater reason for an express prohibition, than of an ex∣press command, if his intention were to admit them; because this was suitable to the general Grounds of Gods dispensation among them be∣fore. And so Mr. Baxter: In one of his Epistles to his Book for In∣fant Baptism. If Christ had revoked Infants, Church∣membership, (and Interest in the Covenant together with their Pa∣rents) whether is it possible, that no word in Scripture should once mention it? nor one Apostle either question or discover it? or that the Jews, 1. Who were in present pos∣session of it, 2. And were so hainously offended at the Non-circumcising of their Infants, Acts 21.21. would not once open their mouths to object a∣gainst the total unchurching of them, which were  an hundred times more? that neither the believ∣ing Jews should once scruple it, nor the unbeliev∣ing charge it on Christ, nor the Council, Act. 15. reveal it, even when those that taught Circum∣cision, did take it for granted, that Infants were Church-members, or else they could not have said they must be circumcised. Is there a possi∣bility of all this, if the Scripture be perfect?
The Anabaptists use to demand of us expresse Scripture for the Right of Infants; but we have more reason to demand of them plain Scripture, ex∣cluding them from the Covenant, and denying their ancient priviledge of Church-membership. And had Children been cut off from that their ancient privi∣ledge, it must needs have been one of the grand Questions in the Apostles dayes, and so would have been as cleerly decided, as that Question about Circumcision, Acts 15. But observe this, when it is plain and undenyable, that Infants were taken in∣to Covenant, and Church-members, if their Parents were in Covenant; they that would deny Infants this priviledge now, ought to bring as plain proof of Gods rescinding and revoking this priviledge of theirs, as we can bring of his granting it: which they have never yet done. Before any dare to af∣firm, God hath rescinded this ancient priviledge, they ought seriously to consider, how they can prove it, that they be not found false witnesses of God, as the Apostle speaks in another case. 3. We are able sufficiently to prove that the Gospel still supposeth Children to be in Covenant together with their Parents. What say you? will you be satisfied, if we can produce as clear Scrip∣ture-proof for Infants being still in Covenant, as Christ himself produced for the Resurrection Matth. 22.32. Then I doubt not but you shall b satisfied. (1.) That Text, Act. 2.39. if there were n more, should satisfie you, [For the Promise is un∣to you and to your Children, and to all that are afa off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. These words are brought in by the Apostle, as
tive to perswade his hearers to repent of their reat sin in crucifying Christ, to own him as the romised Messiah, and to submit to the Gospel∣y, shewing that neither they nor theirs should  loosers by it. That whereas they had impreca∣d Gods Curse on themselves and their children, Matth. 27.25. and were now in danger to be cast , yet coming in upon the Gospel-call, they should ave the Promise still continued to them and theirs. That is, as with respect to Christ, God had promi∣ to be the God of Abraham, and of his seed, d that in Christ, who was to come of Abraham's d, all the Families of the Earth should be blessed, Acts 3.25.) this ancient and famous promise should  hold good to them, as it was now also to be ex∣ded to the Gentile Nations with them. Some would have [The Promise to you and to  Children] to referre unto that, Gen. 17.7. ere God promised to be a God unto Abraham,  to his seed. Others understand that Promise,  12.3. & 22. v. 18. mentioned Act. 3.25. In  seed shall all the Kindreds, or Families of the th be blessed. But indeed both these come to . It was in that seed (in whom the Nations, Kin∣ds and Families of the Earth were to be blessed) t is, in Christ, and with respect unto Christ, that d promised to be a God unto Abraham, and to seed. So the Covenant with Abraham (as the postle saith, Gal. 3.17.) was confirmed of God in rist. Again, the blessing of the Nations, Kindreds, and milies of the Earth in Abrahams seed, that is, in rist, was taking them into Covenant, (that God s their God, and the God of their seed) the
same Covenant for substance with that made wit Abraham. As the blessing of Abraham came upo the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.14. Tha God is our God, and the God of our seed, as h before promised unto Abraham. So that this is the plain meaning of the Apostle The Promise is to you and your Children, if you d not cut off your selves by standing out against Chris and not to you Jews only, but to the Gentiles, t all that are afar off, as many of them as the Lo shall call, to them, and their Children. And taking th words thus, you may see the harmony of the Scri∣tures, and how the Families of the Earth are blessed  Christ; how Believers under the Gospel are blesse with Faithfull Abraham; how the blessing prom∣sed to Abraham, [I will be a God to thee and  thy seed,] is come upon the Gentiles; and ho Abraham was made the Father of many Nation He was the Father of many Nations, in that sen relating to the Covenant, wherein he was the F∣ther of the Jewish Nation: That as all the Natu seed of Abraham, his seed by propagation, till th wilfully forsook and rejected the Covenant, w included in it, they and their Children; so the  ritual seed of Abraham, his seed by proportion,  called Gentiles, were priviledged, as his natu seed, being taken into the Covenant, they and th Children. Exception 1. It is not said, The Promise is to y and to your Infants, but to you, and to your C∣dren, which might be of grown years. Answ. When God promised to Abraham, I be a God to thee and to thy seed, this took in Infa though they were not named: So, The Promis
you, and to your Children, must comprise Infants. None will deny, but Infants are Children; though ll Children be not Infants. Exception 2. Some by the Promise here, under∣and that, Joel 2.28. recited in this Chapter, Act.  17. And to strengthen this Interpretation, they rge the foregoing words, v. 38. Repent and be ptized— and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost. For  promise is to you, and to your children— Answ. 1. This Interpretation is quite overthrown y the following words, [For the Promise is to ou, and to your Children, and to all that are afar , even to as many as the Lord our God shall ll.] Now that Promise in Joel 2. is not made to that are called. Have all the Spirit of Prophecy? ave all the gift of Tongues? 2. Neither hath Baptism reference to the confer∣ng of extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, ough these followed the Baptism of some in the imitive times, for a special reason: but it hath ation to the Covenant made with all that are called,  the Seal of it. Except. 3. Some turn the words thus, The pro∣se is to you, and to your Children, that is, such of em as the Lord shall call. Answ. 1. Then these words [and to your children] e plainly superfluous. Unless they grant Chil∣ren to be called in their Parents call, there should no more promised to their children here, than to  the men that were, or should be in the world. 2. We cannot think, the Apostle would speak llaciously, with a mind to delude his Hearers. How these his Hearers knew, that their Children ver till now, at least, were accounted Children of the
Promises, and within the Covenant. And when the Apostle affirmeth the Promise to be made to them, and to their children, how should they understand him otherwise, than as asserting their ancient privi∣ledge in reference to their seed? 3. Taking the words otherwise, instead of being a motive, they would rather have been a disswa∣sive; a Discouragement, instead of being an En∣couragement to their submitting to the Gospel∣dispensation. It had been a better Argument to have kept them in the Synagogue, than to have called them to the Christian Church, Of Baptism, p. 49. as Dr. Jer. Taylor. What could have been more likely to pre∣judice the Jews against the Gospel, than to rank and put their Children into the state with the Chil∣dren of Heathens and Idolaters. 4. , as many as the Lord our God shall call] cannot referre to Children, . They are not of the same gender. This is ad homines, as they will not allow  them, to referre to the word , Nations, Matth. 28.19. because they differ in gender. Though indeed we can produce clear instances in Scripture of the same codstruction. See Rev. 2.26, 27. & 19.15. & Act. 26.17. (2) Childrens Interest in the Covenant and Church-membership, may be proved by a series of Texts, Rom. 11. v. 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24. Methinks these things are very plain, 1. That the Apostle speaks there of a breaking off from, and of being graffed into the visible Church. For, 1. There is no breaking from the invisible Church. If a member of the invisible Church may
be broken off, then a true Believer may fall away from Grace. 2. The breaking off here mention∣ed, was from that Church, of which the unbelieving Jews were natural branches, v. 24. Now they were natural branches of the Visible, not of the Invisible Church. 3. That Church into which the Commu∣nity of the Gentile-professors were graffed (in the the room of the Jews that were broken off,) was the Visible Church; for many of them were not members of the Invisible Church. They that were most apt to boast against the natural branches, and were in danger of being cut off, as well as the na∣tural branches, v. 18, 21. were no better than For∣nalists, and out-side Christians, who had onely a standing in the Visible Church. 2. Not all, but some of the Jews onely were bro∣ken off, v. 17. And if but some of the Jews were bro∣ken off, then some of them remained branches of the Olive still. 3. They that were broken off, were broken off, they and their seed, from the Church, and from the Covenant: They that were not broken off, conti∣nued, they and their seed, within the Church, within the Covenant. For, 4. None were broken off, but because of Unbe∣lief, v. 20. scil. their own, or their Parents. There∣fore the Infants of the believing Jews were not bro∣ken off. They could not be broken off because of their Parents unbelief, when their Parents were Believers; nor for their own unbelief, when they were not capable of rejecting Christ and the Go∣spel, in their own persons. How could those Chil∣dren which were within the Church, and Covenant, before their Parents embraced the Gospel, be cast
out, and cut off before they came actually to re∣ject Christ and the Gospel. If the Children of the believing Jews were not continued in the Olive∣tree with their Parents, to partake of the root and fatness thereof, then it will follow, that they were in the same state with those broken off. Now how strange is it, that they who were once in Cove∣nant, and within the Church, received for their Fathers sakes, should be cast out again, without any fault of their own, or their Parents? would God revoke such a priviledge granted his people for their seed, unprovoked? 5. That Unbelief which brake off many of the Jews, was not barely the privation of true, saving, justifying Faith; but a positive, open, wilfull re∣jection of Christ and the Gospel. Which is plain thus, viz. Because divers who were not broken off were unbelievers in that first sence. 6. VVhat State and Priviledges the unbelieving Jews were broken off from, unto that state, and to those Priviledges, the main body of that People were again to be restored, v. 23, 24, 25, 26. The Apostle teacheth, they were to be graffed again in∣to their own Olive-tree. Now if their Children were not to be taken in with them, it would not be their own Olive, they were graffed in; but a Church of a quite different constitution, from what it was before the breaking off. 7. If the Children of the Jews that kept their place in the Church, and of them that were after∣wards to be taken in, must be looked on, as in an opposite state to that of the off-broken branches; we must say the same of the children of the Gen∣tile prosessors. The believing Gentiles are graffed
into that state from whence the unbelieving Jews were broken, ver. 17.24. And there is now no Partition-wall; but Jew and Greek, are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28. The Jews have no pri∣viledge now above the Gentiles. And besides, this was not the sole priviledge of the Jews before, but of any of the Gentiles as well, that became Prose∣lytes, if they were Proselytes of the Covenant; their Children were taken into the Church, and into the Covenant. Object. 1. If the believing Gentiles were graffed into the same Visible Church with the Jews, then they were to be Circumcised, as the Jews. Answ. It follows not. 1. As one sayes, The House may be the same it was, though there be a new Door, or Porch to it. We must distinguish betwixt the Essentials, and the Accidentals of the Church. Abrahams Family was a Church before Circum∣cision, and Circumcision did not change the Species of it. 2. If there was any strength in this Objection, t would follow, that the Jews could not be graffed nto their own Olive-tree again, but they must be Circumcised. See here, who they are, that would ring in Judaism. Object. 2. The Gentiles are said to be graffed in way contrary to Nature, into the Olive-tree, ver. 4. But your way would make them as the Na∣ral branches. Answ. They were wild before their Ingraffing, ot after; but being Engraffed, then they come to ave the priviledge of the Natural branches. What he Apostle saith, [If thou wert cut out of the O∣live-tree,
which is wilde by Nature; and wert graf∣fed contrary to Nature, into a good Olive-tree.] Is to be understood of those Gentiles, who were called out of Paganism, Heathenism, whose imme∣diate Parents were without the Church, strangers to the Covenant. But these being graffed into the good Olive-tree, their Children are buds, or Sprouts of the same Olive; as well as the Children of the Jews, the Natural branches, were. And yet we acknowledge it a great Favour of God towards such Children, that they are descended of Parents, that are within Gods Covenant, and so compre∣hended in the Covenant with their Parents. 3. Another Text plain, and full for my present purpose, is that, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your chil∣dren unclean; but now they are holy.. This is a third Scripture I produce for Childrens Interest in the Covenant with the Parents: In the mouth of two or three witnesses, the truth of what I last laid down, shall be established. These words are brought to remove a Scruple, which it seems trou∣bled the minds of some of the believing Corinthi∣ans, scil. whereas some of them had unbelieving Yoke-follows, the doubt was, whether living with such were not a defiling of Conscience, a thing unlaw∣ful; whether the Infidel Husband should not be deserted; and the wife remaining a Pagan, or Infi∣del, should not be put away? Which the Apostle resolveth in the Negative, that they should not re∣fuse Cohabitation, and Society with their unbelie∣ving Yoke-fellows, ver. 12, 13. For the unbelie∣ving Husband is sanctified by, in, or to the believing Wife: Else were your children unclean, but now they are holy, ver. 14. Here note, 1. That by the
Wife, by, in, or to whom the unbelieving Hus∣band is sanctified, we are to understand the believing Wife; and by the Husband, by whom, or in, or to whom, the unbelieving wife is sanctified; we are to understand the believing Husband. For, 1. It is such a Wife as is opposed to an unbelieving Husband. And otherwise it had been enough to say, Only the Husband is sanctified by, or in the wife, and the wife is sanctified by, or in the Husband. And the Term, or Epithite [Ʋnbelieving] would be superfluous in both places. But it is too great boldness for any to say, the Apostle adds this word Superfluously. 2. The same parties are called, a Brother, a Sister, ver. 15. Again, 3. When the Apostle sayes, ver. 16. What knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy Husband? Or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife? It is only the believing wife, or Husband, that he would put in some hopes of gaining their unbelieving Yoke-fellows. 4. The Apostle would not say, that the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by, or to the believing wife, or by, or to the wife, though an unbeliever. He affirmeth the contrary, Tit. 1.15. To the unbelieving nothing is pure, or sanctified. If nothing be sanctified to them, then no Relation is sanctified. 2. That when he speaks of their Children being holy, he speaks of Believers Children, as such. To call the Children of Pagans, and Infidels, holy, is a strange, uncouth speech; and such as the Scrip∣ture is not acquainted with. But that the Children of Gods People are an holy Seed, this the Scripture owneth, Ezr. 9.2. 3. Therefore when he calleth their Children holy,
he must necessarily mean more than Legitimate. For, 1. The Children of Infidels, if begotten in lawful wedlock were Legitimate, as well as theirs. But what the Apostle sayes here, he saith only of a believers Children, not of the Children of Pagans, and Infidels. Here the Apostle supposeth, or granteth, that if one of the Parents had not been a believer, and so the other Parent sanctified (by virtue of the Covenant) in, or to him, then the Children indeed had been unclean, not holy. 2. They that take [holy] for Legitimate, must take the word [sanctified] for made lawful; in the foregoing clauses. But they will never find the word [sanctified] used only for that which is law∣ful. Besides, so the Apostle should argue weakly, that it is lawful for the believer to live with the un∣believing Yoke-fellow, because it is lawful. Again, this of the unbelieving Husband being sanctified by, or to the believing VVife; they that are not minded to wrangle, may see plainly is made an Ef∣fect, or consequent of her being a believer; but that which was not lawful before, cannot be made lawful by ones believing: Or if it was lawful before, then it is not ones believing that made it so. 3. Taking [holy] for Legitimate, the Apostle should go about to prove Ignotum per ignotius: To clear one thing doubted of, he should bring in ano∣ther; which might possibly be more doubted of: Which is going about indeed. Might not one of these believers have less doubt, whether such an Infidel was his wife, than whether the Children were indeed his children? The Apostle argues here as from an acknowledged Principle, that they were well
satisfied of; that their Children were not to be ac∣counted unclean, but holy. Now would any man think the Apostle so weak, to go about to prove, that such a Couple were lawful man and wife, be∣cause their Children were Legitimate. Or that the Corinthians were so senseless, as to doubt whether they lived not in Fornication, while they lived with their unbelieving Yoke-fellows; and yet to have no doubt, but that the Issue they had by them was Legitimate. 4. We shall never find the word [holy] used for Legitimate. Then is not that likely to be a private Interpretation, that takes it so here? And is it to be imagined, that when the Apostle is writing to satis∣fie scrupulous Consciences, he would use a word in that sence, they were none of them likely to un∣derstand; as being never used, and taken in such a sence before, and that without any thing to ex∣plain it? 5. Taking the word [Holy] for Legitimate, it would follow, that the Apostle is besides the Que∣stion, and does not speak to the Corinthians scruple. Have not they a strong fancy, who can conceit such a thing, that diverse of the Corinthians, because their Yoke-fellows remained Infidels, were afraid, if they Lived with them still, they should be guilty of the sin of Fornication, and defile their bodies? But we have no ground to think this troubled them, as if they feared, this were to be dishonest: No, Marriage is honourable among all, Heb. 13.4. And yet though Marrirge be lawful in it self, they might scruple notwithstanding, whether to live in society with such as were Idolaters, and open Enemies to God, and Jesus Christ; might not be Irreligious, and
a defiling of their Consciences. Now this being their scruple, not the other, What satisfaction could it be, to tell them, that their Marriage was lawful on a civil account, so that their Children were Legitimate, not Bastards? Notwithstanding that, they might fear Spiritual defilement in it. Lay all these particulars together, and I hope, when the Apostle says of these believers Children, that they were holy, you will be satisfied; he must mean something more, than that they were not Bastards. 4. And therefore how can we understand it, but that they are holy in relation to God, holy as sepa∣rated to God. Holy, by virtue of his Covenant with the believer, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. So if but one of the Parents be with∣in the Covenant, it takes in the Seed with him: Till the opposite party can find out some other sence, and make it out to be the sence, this must stand. All must grant, that the general use of the word [holy] is for a thing or person seperated to God. Which Mr. Baxter, Of Infant Bapt. p. 81. clearly and fully distinguisheth thus: 1. A Thing or Person may be Holy, or seperated to God, either in state and standing Relation, or only for some particular Act, or Use. Infants, while Infants, are not capable of any such work for God: Therefore it is an Holiness of state, which is ascribed to them. 2. Those that are holy thus in state, are either Holy by meer Separation and Relation; or else they are also qualified with Endowments sutable to the state.
3. There is a Sanctifying, or Separating to God, either Directly and Immediately: So every believer, and so their Children are sanctified. and there is a Separating, or Sanctifying to God remotely and secondarily. Thus the unbelieving Husband, or Wife, is sanctified to the Believer; both as being separated to one who is separated to God, and as an Husband, or VVife, they make up that Conjugal state which is more directly for God: And if they beget an holy seed, it is one of the Uses, that they were sanctified to. 4. Sometimes Persons, or Things, are sanctifi∣ed Actively,—and sometimes Passively.— And as he notes, All these Distinctions are but from several ends and degrees of seperation. The common Nature of Holiness, is one and the same in all; that is, a separation to God. Now the word [Holy] constantly denoting a Thing, or Person separated to God, either in State, or to some perticular Act, or Use; and Children being called holy, who are not capable, while In∣fants, of the latter way of separation to God, but were known to have been separated to God the for∣mer way, to stand in the same Covenant-relation with their Parents, and called an holy Seed; as when the People of the Jews are oft called an holy People, (Deut. 14.2. and 26.19. Dan. 8.24.) We are to understand not only the Adult, but the Chil∣dren; the Infants among them, were a part of that boly People: These things considered, we have no ground to understand what the Apostle says here of a believers Children being holy, otherwise, than that they are in Covenant-relation to God, as the Seed of his People formerly were; holy in state,
separated to God. I say, we have no ground to understand the Apostle here otherwise, nor were the Corinthians likely to understand him otherwise, unless he had otherwise explained himself; or some evident Reason could be brought, that the word [holy] cannot be so taken here. Surely that sence of the word which fully agrees with the Ʋse of the word in other Scriptures, and best suites with the Scope of this place; that ought to be acknowledged the sence here. But to take the word holy, as we do, fully agreeth with the use of the word in other Scriptures (as they, the Oppo∣site party cannot but acknowledge) and best suites with the Scope of this place. Now that it best suits with the scope of this place, appears thus; that here the Apostle would satisfie, and remove a scruple of some of the Corinthians, whether to live with their Yoke-fellows, who re∣mained Infidels, were not Irreligious; and that that would defile their Consciences? Now for the Apo∣stle to tell them, that their Children were Legiti∣mate (which is the sence the Opposite party must stick to, and the best sence they have, to bring in opposition to that we lay down) this would not come up to the Corinthians scruple, as I have shew∣ed; but ours does, proving that it was not Irreli∣gious for believers to continue with their Unbelie∣ving Yoke-fellows, since they were sanctified to, or by them, and their Children holy, or separated to God. Object. 1. VVould not this prove it lawful for a believer, supposing him guilty of Fornication, to Live with the Fornicatrix, if the Child so begotten be holy, and within the Covenant?
Answ. This Objection is so commonly taken off by almost every one of ours that urge this Text, that I might pass it by, without mentioning. Mr. Baxter, hath spoken to it fully, and deared this Text so, Of Infant Bapt. that (as Learned Rutherford, says,) The Dispute now is at an end. Indeed, I should be of his mind, if men were not Prejudiced, Conceited, or minded to Cavil. Though the Child of a Believer, as it is his Child, may be taken into Covenant (though it was gotten in Fornication;) Yet is not that a lar∣ger Measure of Charity, than the Word allows of, to suppose that one may live in Fornication, and be a Believer, or be so Reputed? We think such an one ought to be cast out of the Church; and conse∣quently, his Children, as such, should have no right to any Church-priviledges, nor be reputed holy. That if such Children be admitted, it should be up∣on the account of some other, who hath not For∣eited his Covenant-right, and hath the Child at his dispose. But more directly, to the Objection: It is no etter Reasoning, than the Devil used, to perswade our Saviour to cast himself down from the Pinacle of the Temple; saying, [It is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee.] Leaving ut the condition, [To keep thee in all thy ways,] ee Mat. 4.6. with Psal. 91.11. The Apostle teacheth this indeed, that they that were lawful Man and Wife, might Live together as Man and VVife, though the one was a Believer, and the other an Infidel, without crossing the Rules of Reli∣ion; which he cleareth thus, Gods Law or Cove∣ant, which availed to the putting of the Issue of
such Parents into an Holy, or Church-state, as Children separated to God; would as well avail to the sanctifying of the unbelieving Yoke-fellow, to the believers use in a Conjugal-state. And that if they held it a prophane thing, to Live still with such as were Infidels, they had as much reason to ac∣count the Children they had by such, unclean; and in no better state, than other Children; where both the Parents were Pagans and Idolaters. Now what the Apostle says here, to prove that a believer may without Impiety, Live still with his Yoke-fellow, upon this account; that such a Yoke-fellow is san∣ctified to his lawful use in Marriage, cannot be stretched to the case of Fornicators, who are not sanctified one to the others use; nor lawful Man and VVife, as the other are presupposed to be. VVhat is not lawful, cannot be sanctified. A state of Incest, or Fornication, cannot be sanctified, be∣cause sinful. Of Infant Bapt. p. 98. And as Mr. Baxter says, God sanctifieth not sin in, or to any (though he may bring good out of it.) Object. 2. VVhat is said of the Children here, the like is said of the unbelieving Parent. As the Children are said to be holy, so the unbelieving Pa∣rents are said to be sanctified? Answ. , and  are not alike. Ma∣ny things are sanctified in, or to a believer, that are not therefore holy. Afflictions are sanctified, Food is sanctified, 1 Tim. 4.4, 5. yet not holy. VVhen the Apostle speaks of the unbelieving Hus∣band being sanctified, he is careful to limit it, and shews in what respect, to whose use he is sanctified; that is, to the believer: But there is no such Restri∣ction, or Limitation, when he speaks of the Chil∣dren
being holy; If they are holy, they are holy to God: If not Inherently, yet at least Foederally, and Relatively. So the Children of a Proselyte before, stood in Covenant-relation to God, as an holy seed, though it might so happen, that the other Parent would not come in, as a Proselyte. 2. If sanctified, and holy here are all one, and mean only a civil Holiness, (as some would have it) or lawful to use, it was lawful to the unbelie∣er to use his Child, as his Child, as well as to the believer; and yet to the unbelieving nothing is sanctified. 3. Or if Children are called holy; In respect of holy, sanctified use to be made of them, it would llow, that the Apostle had no Special reason to ing in their Children here, but that they come in omewhat oddly; when it had been as much to his urpose to have named any thing else. And so he ight as well have said, your Acquaintance, Kin∣ed, Neighbours, are holy; that is, you may ake an holy use of them, your Callings are holy, d what not? 4. If by sanctified, and holy, in this place the postle only intends a Matrimonial, and civil Ho∣ss; opposed to Fornication, Uncleanness, and tardy (as some tell us;) then they must hold, that  Apostle alloweth us to say, That all lawfully rried persons, keeping to their own Husbands, VVives, are sanctified; and that he allows us to all that are not Bastards, or Illegitimate, Holy, Saints. Here now I cast mine eye upon what one of note,  much cried up among the opposite y, hath lately written. H. D. p. 191. There
is no such holiness in the New Testament, as a Foederal holiness belonging to children. (1) Because it contradicts the Gospel-dispensa∣tion, as before. Answ. By foederal holiness of Children, we mean their standing together with Parents in Covenant-relation to God. That this is agreeable to the Go∣spel-dispensation, I have proved before. It is Abra∣hams Covenant, that the believing Gentiles are ta∣ken into. In which Covenant God promiseth to be a God to his people, and to their seed, Act. 2.39. And if the Root be holy, so are the Branches. (2) Because such Apprehensions intail Grace to Nature, Regeneration to Generation, in con∣tradiction to that of our Saviour, Joh. 3. Tha which is born of the flesh is flesh. And that we ar all children of wrath by nature, Eph. 2. Answ. 1. How many Anabaptists, that plainly contradict these Scriptures, denying that Infant have any sin, who thence conclude, that they hav no need of Baptisme? 2. The Children of Believers under the Old T stament were flesh, conceived in sin, and broug forth in iniquity, children of wrath by Nature, y were they in the Covenant. 3. Therefore, to be Children of wrath by Natu considered as the corrupt Off-spring of fallen Ad and to be children of the Covenant by priviled and Grace, as they descend from believing Paren to whom God hath promised, I will be your G and the God of your seed; these two are not o tradictory to one another. (3) Because it contradicts all the Exp ence, both of former and later times, whe
godly men have had wicked children, &c. Answ. 1. Observe again, this Reason would overthrow the Covenant-holiness of the children of the Jews under the former dispensation; wherein be contradicts himself, and the whole current of the Old Testament. 2. Here he grossely mistakes, and confounds oederal, relative holiness, with real, personal, in∣herent holiness. Many of those who are called the holy seed, Ezr. 9.2. in regard to Gods Covenant made with them, and their relations to God up∣on that account, were yet in another respect un∣holy. (4) Because it necessitates an owning the Doctrine of Falling from Grace. Ib. p. 192. Answ. 1. How many Anabaptists that are not afraid to own that Doctrine? I have sometimes lived amongst many of that way, where were more Arminian-Anabaptists, than Antinomian-Anabap∣tifts; and scarce one that I could hear of among them, a meer Anabaptist, that held that Errour a∣lone. 2. As for the Children of Believers that growing up, do not stand to the Covenant, we cannot say they fell from Grace, which they never had. Though many do suppose the Infants of Believers that die in Infancy, renewed, and sanctified, to fit them for glory; yet as for those that live till they come to be of capacity, there is more required of them in the Covenant, as the Parents are bound by their Cove∣nant to train them up for God, so the Children are bound to receive Instruction, and to comply with other Gods Means, in order to a sanctifying, savi work. As a learned Writer noteth, Infants
in Covenant with the holy Ghost conditionally as their Parents are, Christ. Directory. p. 821. sect. 9. — The holy Ghost is promised in Baptism to give the Child Grace in his Parents and his own faithfull use of the ap∣pointed means. 3. The unbelieving Jews before their breaking off, were foederally holy. And if their breaking off will not necessitate an owning the Doctrine of Fall∣ing away from Grace, neither doth what we hold inferre it. The same Author goes on to prove that The Text intends a Civil or Matrimo∣nial Holiness (as he calls it) in opposition to For∣nication, Uncleanness, Bastardy. This he saith, is proved, 1. From the scope of the place. Implying, that the Question propoun∣ded by the believing Corinthians, which the Apo∣stle here resolves, was, Whether they could con∣tinue Marriage-society with their unbelieving Yoke-fellows, without being guilty of Fornication? Yet as he layes it down, no such thing appears, but it is well, he had told us his meaning before. Now he would have the Apostle here to ar∣gue ab Absurdo. P. 193. Inasmuch as they had no question of their childrens Legitimacy, neither had they any cause to scruple the other, that is, that they were lawfully married. Answ. This would make these Corinthians as ab∣surd men as were ever heard of, to doubt whether their Marriage was lawfull, in opposition to Forni∣cation, and yet to have no doubt, but their Children were legitimate. For it is impossible to know the children are legitimate, without knowing first, that
the Parents were lawfull Man and Wife. And they that doubt whether they are lawfull Man and Wife, cannot but doubt, whether their children are legitimate. And they that have no doubt of the Legitimacy of their Children, take it for granted, or necessarily suppose, they are lawfull Man and Wife. He goes on, The Believer had least ground to doubt hereof, because to him all lawfull things are clean— which is all the Holiness I conceive can be meant in the Text, agreeable to the Holi∣ness, 1 Thess. 4.3, 4. & Mal. 2.15. The Bastard being among the unclean, Deut. 32.2. Answ. Then in his Opinion, to the Believer all lawfull things are only lawfull. When we read they are pure, and sanctified to the Believer, is the mean∣ing only this, they are lawfull? Are they not law∣full to others too? When the Apostle sayes, To the unbelieving nothing is pure, can his meaning be, that nothing is lawfull? Then we must per∣swade them never to marry, nor eat, nor drink, nor work, nor sleep. For it is not lawfull for them to do any of these. 2. That Text, 1 Thess. 4.3, 4. This is the will of God, even your sanctification,] is not to be re∣strained to a Civil, or Matrimonial Holiness, in that Authors sence, but intends all holy Conversation, and Purity of Life, to which Fornication, and Un∣cleanness is greatly opposite. But no sound Expo∣sitor will say, that the Heathen, who lived chastly, came up to that, which the Apostle here exhorteth unto. Certainly, there is a great difference betwixt the Chastity of a moralized Heathen, and Christian urity, which is required here.
3. To that Text, Mal. 2.15. A godly seed, or seed of God. It is not the same with holy seed. Fur∣ther, I see not, why it should mean no more than legitimate. Did he only seek a legitimate seed? Rather, (as Grotius) Hoc unicè agebat, ut liberos haberet qui Deum colerent: vos autem eas praefertis matres quae filios ad idola deducant; He sought to have Children, who might be true Worshippers of God, whereas the persons there reproved af∣fected strangers, and such women as drew their chil∣dren to Idolatry. 4. To Deut. 23.2. If Bastards were held un∣clean, as being so legally, and typically, yet there is no reason to think, that the Apostle would call them unclean, when that Law was abrogated, which made them so. His second Argument is just the same with the second Objection answered a lit∣tle before. P. 194. His third Argument that Children are not to be taken for Infants only, P. 195. is of as little force. As Dr. Lightfoot notes, when the Apostle saith thus of the Children of a believer, But now they are holy, he speaketh in the common phrase of his own Nation. As the seed of Prose∣lytes were said to be born in Holiness, that is, within the Religion, not in Heathenism. Yet it was possible that some of their Children, who were grown up, might not accept of Gods Covenant, and so not be proselyted with their Parents: Now he may as well say, that I will be a God to thee and to thy seed, did not hold good to Proselytes, because some of their seed might still remain Hea∣thens.
His fourth Argument is a strange one, it hath many feet, and halts on them all. This cannot be a New-Covenant Holiness, P. 195. that must qualifie and intitle to Bap∣tisme; (1) Because that cannot be known; for if the Parent professing Faith be an Hypocrite, and not in Covenant himself, then may you bap∣tize a wrong Subject as well as a right one. Answ. 1. When he views over this again, who knows, but he will be of the mind, that none are to be Baptized? because that Holiness, which Entitleth to Baptism, cannot be known. 2. An Hypocrite may be in Covenant External∣ly, as I have shewed before. 3. This maketh full as much against their Bapti∣ing of grown persons, unless they have such a Spi∣rit of Discerning as to Discover, and Reject any Hypocrite, that offers himself. (2.) Such an absurdity would follow, that no Unbelievers Child is in Covenant or Elect; which is notoriously false. Answ. 1. It is a gross mistake to hold, that none are in the baptismal Covenant, but the Elect. It seems they baptize none but the Elect. That if you would make your Election sure, you must go over to them to be baptized. 2. He wandreth pitifully, when he Instanceth in Abijah, Ahaz, and Amon (who were Kings of Judah) as persons out of Covenant. Doubtless, they were not out of Covenant, not as the Uncir∣cumcised; though it was their great sin, that they for sook the Lord God of their Fathers, did not keep Covenant, see 1 Kings 15.4. 2 Chron. 28.5. 3. The Conditional-Covenant, which was Seal∣ed
heretofore in Circumcision, and is Sealed since in baptism, running to Gods People and their Seed; such as are neither visibly believers, nor the Seed of such, cannot be adjudged by us to be within the Covenant. Though some of Gods Elect may be among the Heathen, and Idolaters, yet they are not within the Covenant, meerly because they are within the decree of Election. They are not in Cove∣nant, till renouncing their Paganism, they come to know, and worship the true God. (3.) From the concurrent Testimony, and Confession of many Learned Commentators, and Parties themselves. Answ. We must grant a concurrence here among Popish Expositors, taking holy for legitimate, and we know it is to serve a turn. For taking the word holy here to import their Covenant-relation unto God, as they are the Children of Believers; it does not favour their Tenent of the absolute Necessity of Baptism to salvation: and further gives a sad shake to their Limbus Infantum. But he can never shew a concurrence of Protestant Writers in his sence. It is true, he nameth two or three; and no doubt it were easie to adde many more, if he deal but with them as he doth with Beza, P. 201. whom he feigneth to say, what he plainly confuteth, as any one may see, that readeth his Notes upon the place. Further I desire you to weigh this Argument, to prove Children in Covenant together with their Pa∣rents: Either the children of Believers are taken into Covenant together with their Parents still, or it is worse with the Faithfull, in respect of their seed, now since the coming of Christ, than it was
before. But it is no worse now with the Faithfull in respect of their seed, than it was before. For that would make the Church a great loser by Christs coming, whereas she is a gainer. Then Christi ad∣ventu factum fuerit ut obscurior & minus testata sit nobis Dei gratia quàm antè Judaeis erat, (as Calv.) Num post Christum, factam esse deteriorem parvu∣lorum sortem existimemus? Whitaker. It is mani∣fest, that those Jews, who embraced the Faith of Christ, if they onely had the Promise, that God would be their God, so that their children were left out, that God promised no longer to be the God of their Seed, then they could not but see themselves in a worse Condition, in respect of their children, than they were before. And how unrea∣sonable is it to think, that when the Scripture makes cutting off from the Covenant so sad a Judgement, and the fruit of Unbelief, Rom. 11. that the chil∣dren of the believing Jews, which were in Cove∣nant once, should be cut off upon their Parents be∣lieving (i. e.) cut off for no fault? And would not this be dishonourable unto Christ, whose coming certainly was not to lessen, but enlarge his peoples Priviledges? and according to this Doctrine, it should have been a greater priviledge to be born under the Law, than to be born under the Gospel. And how derogatory to the Grace of God, which he would have to shine forth more gloriously in the Gospel-dispensation? Whereas one sayes, This is no more to be esteemed the loss of a priviledge, than our not enjoying literally a Holy Land, City, Temple, a succession of an High-priest, and a Priesthood by Generation, or Lineal descent.] We can tell
them, we have greater mercies and priviledges in the room of these. But it is a wonderfull strange thing, that any Christian Parent should account it no priviledge, for God to be the God of his seed. As heretofore he promised his people, to be the God of their seed. If the children of Gods people now are out of Covenant, I wonder what priviledge they can have, in lieu of that, which is denyed to them. And whereas some tell us, The state of the Chri∣stian Church is more spiritual, than to admit of In∣fants; they may as well exclude all Infants out of Heaven. Doubtless, the state of the Church Tri∣umphant is as spiritual, as the state of the Church Militant on Earth. If Infants may be Members of the Church Triumphant, what reason can be given, but Infants may be also members of the Church Militant on Earth? Indeed, if they are not of the Church, if they be not in Covenant, then are they in the same Estate with the Heathen, and the Jews that are broken off; that for the present we should be without hope concerning them. Again, methinks, there is something of weight in this, to prove that our Children are in Cove∣nant with God, as well as the children of the Jews were heretofore; because it is as much our Duty to train them up for God, as ever it was the Duty of the Jews. What God required of the Jews, Deut, 6 7. Thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, &c. The like is required of us Christians, Eph. 6.4. we must bring up our chil∣dren in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Now how strange were it, if God should require us to train up our children for him, and yet not own
them for his? Then we should not have so much Encouragement to our Duty here, as the people of the Jews had before. Then the Jews had more help, more to hearten them to their Duty, than we. Can this be so, and yet we be under a better, a more gracious dispensation of the Covenant, than they? Surely, in this respect, we should come short of them. It will not enter into my thoughts, that where the Duty is the same to us, and to the Jews of old, we should not have equal Priviledge with them at least, and equal Encouragement to what they had. Lastly, I would ask those that would race our childrens Names out of the Covenant, What is be∣come of all those gracious Promises of Old made to the seed of Gods people? That Promise, I will cir∣cumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed. May not Believers plead this Promise still, as well as heretofore the People of God might have done? And yet how can they do it, if their seed now are left out of Covenant? Does God make that Pro∣mise to any out of Covenant? So the Lord promi∣seth, Isa. 44.3. I will pour out my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine off-spring. And Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, saith the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. So we read, Psal. 37.26. The seed of the Righteous is blessed. And Isa. 61.9. They are the seed which the Lord hath blessed. And Isa. 65.23. They are the seed of the Blessed of the Lord, and
their Off-spring with them. What shall we say? That the people of God might have pleaded these Promises heretofore; but they do not concern us under the Gospel? Then Believers now have no ground to plead them with God, or to hang their Off-spring and issue upon him, as his people had heretofore. And so there was more grace extended to the Jews under the former Dispensation of the Covenant. If such Promises do as well concern us Christians, as they did the Jews; if we may plead these Promises with God on the behalf of our chil∣dren, certainly they are Covenant-Promises. And if these Promises belong to our seed, the Covenant must as well belong to them. Remember that, God promiseth such things to none that are out of Cove∣nant. If it be objected, These things are not made good to all the seed of the Jews: Yet I suppose it will not be denyed, but these were some of those Promises which the Apostle reckoneth among the great Priviledges of the Jews, Rom. 9.4. And the Question is, Whether ever God faileth of perform∣ing these Promises, but where there was some gross failure on the Parents part, or on the Childes, or on both, their not doing their part towards the accom∣plishment of them. I hope enough hath been said to evince it, that where the Parents are in Covenant, their children are in Covenant too. Now by way of Corollary and Inference, Note the Warrantableness of Infant-baptisme. The In∣fants of Christians being in Covenant together with their Parents, and Baptism being the initiating Sign and Seal of the Covenant; they that are in Cove∣nant, must needs have right to the initiating Seal
of the Covenant. They that are known to be in Covenant, may be declared to be so by Baptism, (the Sign of entrance into Covenant,) that being an end of Baptism, to distinguish those that are entred into Covenant with God, from those who are not in Covenant. Certainly, to be in Covenant with God, is a greater matter than to have the out∣ward Sign: And there can be no reason to deny the outward sign of entrance into the Covenant, to those that we can prove entered into the Covenant, as children are together with their Parents. And there was no other ground imaginable (I think) upon which such strangers as dwelt not un∣der the Jews, as their Servants, nor among them, as Sojourners, but in another Countrey, such as the Eunuch, Act. 8.27. were circumcised, and so ad∣mitted, and joyned to the Church of the Jews. There was no express command for the circumcising of such Proselytes as were neither Servants nor So∣journers among them, yet were they circumcised upon that general ground of their entring into Co∣venant with the God of Israel, taking him for their God; as if they had not been circumcised, they had been debarred from joyning in Temple-wor∣ship. (See Act. 21.28.) The Covenant, [I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed,] was the ground of the Command, Thou shalt keep my covenant, therefore thou and thy seed, particularly, every male∣child among you shall be circumcised, in token of the Covenant. See Gen. 17.7, 9, 10. But against what I have laid down, that the In∣fants of Christians being in Covenant, they must needs have right to the initiatory Seal of the Co∣vant, it is objected:
Objection 1. That all the faithfull, from Adam to Abraham received no such Seal. H.D.p. 205. Answ. Now what a pitifull Evasion is this? Be∣cause persons in Covenant did not receive any ini∣tiatory Seal (that we know of) in that state of the Church, when there was no such seal (that we know of) appointed by God; therefore persons within the Covenant, have no right to the initiatory Seal of the Covenant, when such a Seal is instituted. Objection 2. H.D. p. 206. Neither did any Believers out of Abrahams Family, as Lot, Mel∣chisedek, receive any such Seal, that we read of. Answ. 1. A particular Exception or two will not overthrow a General Rule. If Lot, and Melchi∣zedek were not circumcised, there might be some thing extraordinary in their case: As Gods not in∣tending to settle and continue a Church in their Families, as he did in Abrahams Family, therefore he might give and appoint Circumcision to Abra∣ham, and not to them. 2. It is false, that none out of Abrahams Family were to be circumcised. The Proselytes of the Covenant could not be so, with∣out Circumcision. And such an one was the Eunuch, Act. 8. though not of Abrahams Family. Object. 3. Some to whom the Covenant did not belong, received that, called the initiating Seal of Circumcision. As Ishmael, &c. Answ. Ishmael was externally, visibly in Cove∣nant, at that time when he was circumcised, though he was afterwards by Gods Sentence cast out of the Church, and dis-covenanted. The strangers in Abra∣ham's house, or bought with Money in Israel, that
were Circumcised, were no doubt, some of them Internally, and all of them Externally in Covenant, and of the Visible Church. As for that Circumcision which some Gentile-Nations took up from the Jews, De repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 5. which Cunaeus, and others, take notice of; it was not the Ordinance, and Sacra∣ment of Circumcision used among them, but an Apish Immitation. Object. 4. But some will go further and Object, That if all within the Covenant have thereupon a Right to the Seal of Admission, then it will follow, that the whole body of the Jews should have been Baptized, had a right to Babtism, being within the Covenant. Answ. I have told you before, that though the Covenant of Grace be one and the same for substance in all Ages; yet there have been various dispensati∣ons of it. And as the Dispensations have differed, God has appointed different seals of Admission. And as God hath revealed himself more plainly and fully in the Letter, than he had done in the former Dispensation; so proportionably more hath been required to mens being taken into Covenant in this Dispensation. From Adam to Abraham, the Pro∣mise of Christ was more Dark and Indeterminate. To Abraham he was promised to come out of his Loins, and that in his Seed all Nations should be blessed. And under his Dispensation, God requi∣red not only the belief of that general promise gi∣ven to Adam, that the Seed of the woman should break the Serpents head; but also that the promised Messiah was to be of Abraham Seed. After this gracious Revelation to Abraham, this new Article
of Faith was to be received, owned, and professed in the Church, into which Circumcision was a sign and Seal of Entrance, and admission. And when afterwards God delivered his Law by Moses to the people of the Jews, the Seed of Abraham, then they that would joyn themselves to the Church, must not only profess to believe the promised Messiah, but that he was willing to be Governed by those Laws. And a Proselyte of the Gate, as he was called, that had liberty to Dwell, or Sojourn among the Jews, only observing the seven Precepts given to the Sons of Noah, (as they were called) was not owned as a Member of the Jewish Church, but distinguished from the Proselyte of the Covenant, that was Circumcised, and received the Law of Moses. Again, when Christ was come in the Flesh, then was the clearest Dispensation of the Co∣venant of Grace. And then this became a new article of Faith to believe; that this was he. And when he appointed Baptism a Sign and Seal of Ad∣mission into the Covenant, and Church under the Gospel, the Faith of a Jew, to believe a Messias to come; was not enough, where the Faith of a Christian was necessarily required, scil. To believe that this was he indeed, who was to come, and no other to be looked for. Now the Jews notwith∣standing they were in Covenant before, yet since this new Dispensation, if they will stick to the former Dispensation, and not admit of it in that further De∣claration, God is pleased to make, they can have no right to the Initiating Seal: But plainly cast themselves out of Covenant. I hope this is plain, and satisfactory. But to strengthen what we laid down before, I
shall prove by Scripture, that Children, Infants, being in Covenant together with their Parents, they have a right to Baptism, the Initiating Seal of the Covenant. And, 1. So much is implied in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and Teach (or, as the word is , Disciple) all Nations, Baptizing them.  answereth to , as the Learned Note, and both sides com∣monly agree. Now suppose the Commission had run thus [Go, Disciple the Nation of the Jews, Baptizing them.] How could the Apostles once have thought, but they must have Baptized their Children with their Parents; as Children were a part of the Nation, and were constantly taken into the Church, and Covenant with their Parents be∣fore? Unless Children had been plainly Excepted in the Commission here, as they are not, the Apostles must needs take their Commission to reach unto Chil∣dren with their Parents still, that all the Children of Parents Discipled, were to be baptized, as well as their Parents. Or suppose Circumcision had been continued, as the Initiating Seal, or Sacrament of dmission under the Gospel, that the Commission ad run thus: Go, Proselyte, or Disciple all Nati∣ns, Circumcising them: Or suppose the like Com∣ission had been granted to the Prophets of old. Go, Proselyte all Nations, Circumcising them; and eaching them to observe the Law of Moses, and ll the Statutes, and Ordinances, which he com∣anded you: Must not Children have been taken in ere together with the Parents, except the contra∣y had been declared by the same Authority? And this is undeniable, that Children are a con∣siderable
part of any Nation: and if Children are not capable of being Discipled, and Baptized, then a Nation properly is not capable of being Dis∣cipled, and Baptized? And so Christ set his Apostles here upon a Task impossible to be per∣formed. And methinks, it is very considerable, that [all Nations] here: Examin. p. 130. As Mr. Tombes himself does not gain-say. Stand in Oppositi∣on to [one Nation.] under the former Dispensation, the Church, and Covenant was con∣fined to that one Nation of the Jews: But as God had promised of Old, that all Nations should be blessed in Abrahams seed; so in pursuance of that promise, Christ Commissioned his Apostles, and Ministers that were to succeed them, To go, and Disciple all Nations. All the Kingdoms of the world now under the Gospel-dispensation, were soo∣ner or later to become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. And if Children are part of those, that were to be blessed in Christ, there can be no reason, when Christ says, [Go, Disciple all Nati∣on:, Baptizing them.] to exclude them from being comprehended here. And further, That the Apostles had reason to take in Children, to Baptize Infants with their Pa∣rents, (unless Christ had expresly excepted) ap∣pears from hence also, that the Baptizing of In∣fants was a thing well known, and commonly pra∣ctised in the Jewish Church before, when their Parents were Proselyted. A Proselyte was made with three things, Drus. d. tribus Sect. l. 2. p. 89, 90. (as Learned Dru∣sius, and others observe,) viz. With Circumcision (a sign of the Covenant
unto which he was received;) with Baptism, (which was required for cleansing all Gentiles, being held unclean;) and with offering Sacri∣fice (for Expiation of sin, to make Attonement for him.) And this is out of Dispute, that Chil∣dren were Proselyted with their Parents. Yea, Magmony goes further, saying, that When an Israelite takes a little Heathen child, and Bapti∣zed him for a Proselyte, behold he is a Proselyte. This Right of Baptizing Proselytes, it seems, the Jews retain to this day. Hist. of the present Jews. part 5. c. 2. p. 223. Though Dru∣sius questioneth it, yet Leo Mondena, (a Rabbie) expresly affirmeth it. And as yet, I see not any reason to be of Mr. George Galaspy's mind, who would have this of Baptizing Proselytes, a corrupt Invention, or Tradition of the later Jews. Me∣thinks, it might very well be supposed, that the Heathen, who wanted the Rule to teach them to put a difference betwixt the Clean, and Unclean, (as Lev. 11.) were Legally unclean; in which case Washing was prescribed by the Law. And with∣out Cleansing, they were not to come to the Tem∣ple, or to joyn in Gods Worship there. Before God gave the Law at Mount Sinai, The Lord said to Moses, Go unto the People, and sanctifie them to Day, and to Morrow, and let them wash their clothes, Exod 19.10. From this precept (says Ainsworth) the Hebrew Doctors gather their Doctrine and pra∣ctice of baptizing all whom they admit to their Church and Covenant. But if they had reason to suppose the Heathen Legally unclean, as consider∣ing how many ways that might come about, and how they had Lived before while Heathen, with∣out
out any care to keep themselves clean that way; it was an hundred to one, that any Proselyte that came and offered himself, had some uncleanness on him: and considering that the unclean were unclean for ever (and in many cases also defiled other things and persons) till they were cleansed; if there was one Law for them of the Congregation of Israel, and for any stranger, that should joyn himself to them, (as Numb. 15.15.) there would seem to have been sufficient Warrant for this practice of their Washing, of Baptizing Proselytes. Not like the practice of the Pharisees, Mark 7.3. &c. who added unto Gods Command for washing in case of Uncleanness, and placed Religion in their oft Wash∣ing, though they had no Legal uncleanness on them. But what I have offered here concerning the war∣rantableness of baptizing Proselytes at their Admis∣sion, as supposing them to have been some way Legally unclean, I submit to the censure of better Judgments. Indeed, I just now find in Doctor Hammond [of the baptizing of Infants, pag. 473. this passage: And that this Custome of washing new born Chil∣dren, and not any other sort of Purification, was it; that this Baptism of Native Jews and Prose∣lytes referred to, may appear by that which in the Gemara, is said of the baptized Proselyte, that he was made [as an Infant new born.] Which if it please our Opposites better, I shall not be dis∣pleased with it. But that the thing was in use before, Ainsworth on Gen. See the like in Godwin. 17.12. doth not at all question, who says: Hereupon, Baptism was nothing strange unto the Jews, when
John the Baptist began his Ministery, Mat. 2.5, 6. They made question of his person (or his Authority) that did it, Moses and Aa∣ron. l. 1. c. 3. towards the end. but not of the thing it self, John 1.25. Observe now, as the outward Ele∣ments in that other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, were taken from the Jewish Passeo∣ver. (Bread and VVine being constant appendants to it, and one Cup used at the Pascal Supper, cal∣led, The Cup of blessing; which Expression the Apostle useth, 1 Cor. 10.16.) So concerning the Initiatory Sacrament of Baptism, what was a Jew∣ish Rite before, Christ setteth his Royal stamp upon, and advanceth to a Gospel-Ordinance: That by his Institution, it becomes the Sacrament of admission in∣to the Gospel-covenant, & into the Christian Church. And hence there was no such need for the express mentioning of Infants, supposing Christ would have them baptized, as for the express excepting of Infants, supposing Christ would not have them baptized; because as Doctor Lightfoot hath well noted: Harm. of New Test. sect. 9. p. 10. The baptizing of Infants had been a thing ordinarily practised in the Church of the Jews before. It was enough to men∣tion, that Christ established baptism, as an Ordi∣nance under the Gospel; and then, who should be baptized, was well enough known by the use of it before. He further addeth, our Saviour would have given some special Prohibition, if he intended that they should have been excluded. Others I know there are, that would have Bap∣tism refer to that washing of New-born Infants inti∣mated, Ezek. 16.4. Or to that baptizing of the
Israelites under the Cloud, and in the Sea, spoken of 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. Yet in neither of these respects are Infants to be excluded from Baptism, unless Christ had excepted them. Questionless there were In∣fants among the Israelites, baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea. 2. Another Text plainly proving what I last laid down, as Acts 2.38, 39. Be baptized every one of you. For the promise is to you, and to your Children. I made use of this Text before, to prove that Chil∣dren are within the Covenant still. And now I make use of it, to prove that being within the Covenant, they have a right to Baptism, the Initiating Seal of the Covenant. Those to whom the Promise here spoken of belongeth, to them Baptism belongeth: But the Promise belongeth to Children, therefore Baptism belongeth to Children. What the Apostle saith here, is as much as if he had said, Be baptized you, and your Children: For the Promise is to you, and to your Children. If there be any force in this reason for the baptizing of the Parents, it argueth as strongly for the baptizing of their Children. And if any of this great company had Children with them, we have no reason to doubt, but they were baptized with them: Because he says, Be baptized every one of you; for the Promise is to you, and to your Children. If because the Promise was to the Parents, they were to be baptized for the same rea∣son the Children are to be baptized, the Promise being also to them. Are not they sadly blinded with prejudice, that cannot see here, that such as have a right to the Promise, have a right to the Ini∣tiatory Seal of the Promise? And they that have right to the Promise, are not adult persons only, but Fathers, and Children.
3. I may add Ex abundanti, that there wanteth ot probable proof, and Testimony in Scripture, hat Infants, or young Children were baptized: When we read of so many whole Housholds bap∣tized, it is improbable that there should not be any ung Child in any of them. And was it not likely  prove of dangerous consequence, to relate the aptizing of whole Families, (which does so clearly point at the former practice of Proselyting he whole Family, when the Head and Governour f the Family came to be Proselyted,) if any part f the Family (as young Children ordinarily are a part) be uncapable of Baptism now. It is strange hat we should be told of Housholds baptized again nd again; which according to the ordinary phrase nd practice among the Jews, used to signifie the Heads of the Family, and all under them, even ttle ones. (As is shewed before.) It is very strange say, if it be an Error now to baptize Infants, that he Scripture should tell us oft of Families baptized, nd not give one Instance of an Houshold baptized, ll but their little ones. When it was promised of ld, that all the Families of the Earth should be essed in Christ; and when Paul and Silas tell the aylor: Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou halt be saved, and thy House, (Acts 16.31.) With which may be compared that speech of our avour to Zacheus, Luke 19.9. This day is Salva∣tion come to this House; forasmuch as he also is the on of Abraham. And when further we find, that upon a persons receiving the Faith, having the Charge and Government of a Family; that person, nd his, or her Family, were baptized together: What Impartial, Unprejudiced mind would not
hence conclude, that the Covenant, and Initiating Seal, extended to Parents and Children still under the Gospel, as before. You read of Lydia's hous∣hold baptized, Acts 16.15. and ver. 33. That the Jaylor was baptized, and all his, , filii ejus, (as some) his Children. Or if  should not be restrained to Children only, yet it must necessa∣rily comprehend Children (if he had Children.) And 1 Cor. 1.16. The Houshold of Stephanas was baptized. And Acts 18.8. When we read that Crispus, the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, belie∣ved on the Lord with all his House: And many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were bap∣tized. Though I know some would alledge this Text for the baptizing of such only as are actual be∣lievers; yet being narrowly looked into, it may be found to reach further. As when we read only that Crispus believed with all his House, in the former part of the verse; yet we are to understand that Crispus, with all his Houshold, were baptized. We are to supply the word [Baptized] used in the end of the verse. And when it is only said in the later part of the verse, that many of the Corin∣thians hearing, believed, and were baptized; yet we may very well think the word [Houshold] is to be supplied here from the former part of the verse. We have no reason to think, that the Hous∣hold of Crispus, was the only Houshold baptized among these believing Corinthians. The full sence of this place. therefore seemeth to be this, that Crispus believed with all his Houshold, and were bap∣tized, with all his Houshold: and many of the Co∣rinthians hearing, believed and were baptized with their Housholds; so taking in their Children, even
little ones: As it is no way probable, that there should be no little ones in any of their Families Here∣with compare what the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, but now they are Holy. Now methinks there is something in it, that the Scripture mentioneth divers housholds being bapti∣zed, without excepting the little ones in any one houshold baptized, and it is very strange, if none of those housholds had little ones in it. Though some will argue from Act. 16.32. They spake unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house. It may mean no more, than that they preached to all in the house, that were capable of hearing the Word taught. So when Jacob said to his Houshold, and to all that were with him, Put away the strange Gods that are among you, and be clean, Gen. 35.2. This will not prove, that there were no little ones of his houshold with him. And yet further, they might be said to speak to all that were in the house in a sence, to which the Scrip∣ture is not a stranger, the Jailour being bound to each those things to the least in his house, as soon as they should be of capacity to understand. Surely, there is as strange an expression, Hos. 12.4. He found him in Bethel, and there he [spake with us.] And see Deut. 29.1, 2, 10, 11. & Deut. 31.1, 12. Again, it is further objected, that v. 34. it is said, the Jailour rejoyced, believing in God with all his house. As the like is said of those Corinthians, Act. 18.8. Many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized.
But methinks, Harm. of N. Test. p. 81. what Dr. Lightfoot hath on another Text, may serve to take off this Objection. Act. 2.44. All that believed were together, and had all things common. The children of those that believed, must come in under the Title of Believers too, or they must famish (or be cast upon others.) If the community of goods reach't them as well as their Parents, the title [Believers,] must reach them too. Further as touching the Jailour, it is thus in the Original, , which may as well be read, And he believing in God re∣joyced in all his house, or he exulted, expressed his great joy in all his house, after that he had believed in God. And note, that when it is said of Crispus, Act. 18.8. that he believed on the Lord with all his house, it is not , as here, but . Thus I hope sufficient Scripture warrant hath been produced for Infant-baptism. Many things I have praetermitted, because I would cut this Dis∣course as short, as I well may. Yet before I pass from this point, I shall take notice of the chief Ob∣jections made against it, because it may tend to your further satisfaction. Object. 1. We have neither express Precept nor Example in Scripture for the baptizing of In∣fants. Answ. 1. A virtual Command there is in the Gospel for Baptizing of Infants. The Infants of discipled Nations ought to be baptized, as appears from what hath been said. It is implyed in the Com∣mission, Matth. 28.19. Now a virtual Command
is equivalent to an express command. And when Mr. Tombs (the most learned Advo∣cate the Anabaptists have) grants Baptism in use, even before John Baptists time, in the admission of Proselytes, the New Testament mentioning whole housholds that were baptized (never excepting In∣fants, or little ones) we have reason to think, that as the Children of the Proselytes were baptized be∣fore, so the children of the Christians were bapti∣zed too. 2. What express Precept or Example can the Objectors shew for Christian Magistrates in the New Testament? And must all Christian Magi∣strates therefore be discarded? Again, what express Precept for the Christian Sabbath? Whereupon some Anabaptists have returned to the Jewish Sa∣turday-Sabbath. Again, what express Precept for Womens receiving the Lords Supper? In 1 Cor. 11.28. it is, Let a Man examine himself? Where though the word  be of the common Gen∣der, and used both for Man and Woman, yet , the Word that follows, is of the Masculine gender, it is himself, not her self. Again, to speak ad hominem, let one that objects against us the want of express Precept and Example for Infant-Baptism, shew us, where he finds any such Precept or Example for the se-Baptists, that persons unbaptized should baptize themselves, as they do in the first setting up of their way. Again, where do they find either Precept, or Ex∣ample in all the New Testament for Christians de∣ferring their childrens Baptism, till they come to an adult age? Thus the Objection falleth soul upon themselves.
Certainly, there is a total silence in Scripture concerning the Children of those that were Christi∣ans, not one tittle there of any Christians child ha∣ving his Baptism delayed, till it came also to make a personal profession. No doubt but many of those who were converted to the Christian Faith by the Apostles, had little ones, who either were baptized upon their Parents embracing the Faith, or it can∣not be known at what age any of them were bap∣tized, and consequently we cannot tell at what age the Children of Believers now are to be bapti∣zed. Now certainly, this is a weighty Case, and I wish that they who seem so desirous to keep close to Scripture-Rule, would seriously consider it. They that are only for the baptizing of adult persons can∣not give a Scripture-Instance of one child born of believing Parents, whose baptism was deferred till it came to be adult. And besides, this would cross another Rule, that all who are discipled, as soon as they are discipled, are to be baptized. It is true, that they and we differ concerning the Subject, who are discipled; we holding that the Infants of Chri∣stians are discipled, (belonging to the Church, the School of Christ, and the Parents being bound by the Covenant to train them up in the knowledge of Christ, and they bound to receive Instruction, as they come to be of any capacity;) but our Oppo∣sites holding none to be discipled, till they are in∣structed in the Principles of Christianity, and make a personal Profession. Now suppose that they were in the right here, that none were Discipled, and to be baptized but upon a personal Profession; yet since it is evident, both from Christs commission,
Matth. 28. and from all those Examples of Per∣sons baptized, upon Record in the New Testa∣ment, that as soon as any are discipled, they are presently to be baptized. I would fain know how they either do, or can follow Scripture-Rule in baptizing the Children of Christian Parents, many years (it may be) after they were Disciples in their own sence; that is, made a personal profession. We could give many Instances of little Children, who have been Religiously Educated, Children of Five or Six years age, See Mr. Whites little Book for little Children. that have not only made a profession, but given great Signs and Evidences of Grace. And should not such be owned as Disci∣ples? And then why not other Children of that age that can give as good an account, as may be expected from those Years? And did not Christ, and his A∣postles admit all to Baptism, who made but the least visible profession? Where do we find any rejected? If now they will not admit persons upon making the least visible profession, but Demur them, till they have arrived a Degree higher; why may they not defer their baptism, till they are got one degree higher than that, and so in Infinitum? And how will they observe Scripture-rule, which is clearly for the baptizing of persons, as soon as they become Disciples? If I was of their Opinion, that the bap∣tizing of the Infants of professed Christians, was against Rule, and a Nullity; I must seriously pro∣sess, I should be altogether at a loss, and not know when to baptize the Children of such. If they must be baptized so soon as they make a visible pro∣fession, I would fain be informed from Scripture, at what age they may make such a visible profession,
which ought to be taken for their admission to bap∣tism. And this further, whereas those whom they Re∣baptize, were many of them Religiously Educated, and seemed to have a love to Religion from their Childhood, and were acquainting themselves with the principles of Religion; I would fain know, whether they will say they only began to make a profession, when they first owned Anabaptism? Or if they were professors of Christianity before, and so ought to have submitted to the Sign, and Sacra∣ment of their Entrance, and admission amongst Chri∣stians, whether it was not a great sin against the Gos∣pel-rule, that they did not submit to their baptism before? And then I ask, From what time, for how long they are to charge this sinful Omission upon themselves? Now compare their way, and ours, and Judge Impartially, which is most agreeable to Scripture-Rule. VVe are not for the baptizing of Heathens, or any without the Church, without their having the Gospel first Preached to them, and their profes∣sing to believe it. Now when they receive the Gospel, they receive it not only for themselves, but for their Children; and were bound to Instruct, and Educate their Children according to it. And so such Families were Discipled, and to be Bapti∣zed; and what Children they might have after∣wards to be baptized, as all of them belonging to the Church, and School of Christ, to be Trained up in the Knowledge of Christ. And so all along God had put a Distinction betwixt the Seed of his pro∣fessing People, and the Children of such as were without the Church: Not only the Natural seed
of Abraham, but the Seed of the Proselytes, that joyned themselves to the Lord, had the Sign of the Covenant. Thus the way is clear to us, whom, and when to baptize. Our Opposites are not for the baptizing of the Children of Christians, but upon their own per∣sonal profession. Now that baptism is not unneces∣sary to be deferred, after one comes to make pro∣fession, they must grant. But how soon, or how long before a Childs profession, is to be accounted such, as entitleth him to baptism; they cannot shew from any Command, or Example in the VVord. Here they have no Rule, as much as they seem to be for keeping close to Scripture-Rule. Now think of it seriously, whether it be at all Credible, that if God would not have the Children of Christians baptized, but upon their first making a visible profession, there should yet be no Rule, or Direction, when that might be. VVe can easily discern, when such as were Heathens come first to a profession of Christianity: but when a Child of Christian Parents that hath been Learning the Prin∣ciples of Christianity from his very Infancy, I say, when such a Child shall be taken first to make a per∣sonal profession, is no easie matter to determine. Now when the most that they baptize, are such, as they cannot say, when they first came to make a personal profession, let any that are Impartial judge, how well they follow Scripture-Rule. Besides, since they must hold, that to baptize a Child before its making a personal profession, would make such baptism a Nullity; and to defer to baptize it, af∣ter it has come to make a personal profession, is a sinful neglect, and plain breach of Gospel-Rule,
and Order; and one man may take that for a per∣sonal prosession, which another would not admit to be so: Hereupon it must needs follow, that their way layeth a certain ground of Clashing and Con∣fusion in the Church, and tends to lead both Mini∣sters and Christians into endless perplexities, touch∣ing the first admission of our Children. Thus you see in this first grand Objection, that we have neither express Precept, nor Example for In∣fant-baptism; they are like a man that rolleth a stone, which returneth upon him that rolleth it. The Objection returns, and falls heavily on themselves. There is no need of an express Precept, or Example for the baptizing of Infants born within the Cove∣nant, this being suitable to the Scripture-way before, (as from the time that God had appointed an Ini∣tiating Seal of the Covenant, the Infants of Parents within the Covenant, were ever before admitted to the Initiating Seal with their Parents.) But there is need of express Direction, Rule, or Ex∣ample, if such Children are not to be admitted now, but upon their personal profession, to shew, when such profession hath been, or may be taken. Object. 2. But further they will Object, that they can shew both Precept and Examples against Infant-baptism. 1. Precept, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them. They must be Taught before they are to be baptized: To which agrees, Mar. 16.16, He that believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved. A Rule for believers baptism. Infants are not capa∣ble of being Taught, are not Actual believers. Answ. 1. As Learning, and believing (accord∣ing to that Dispensation) was required of adult
persons at the first Institution of Circumcision. A∣brahams servants that were to be Circumcised, as well as he, were such as he had Taught the way of the Lord, see Gen. 18.19. And afterwards none could be Proselytes of the Covenant, and taken in∣to the Jewish Church, none that were of years, but they must first know, and acknowledge the God of Israel. Yet all this hindred not the Circumcising of their Infants. So in constituting the Gospel-Church, they that were of Years, must first know, and profess the Name of Christ, before they could be admitted as Members of the Church, or ac∣counted Christians. But this hinders not, but that the Parents being Discipled, their Chil∣dren were to be acknowledged, as belonging to the Church with their Parents. At the first Institution of Baptism, and first Constituting of the Gospel-Church; it was necessary indeed that the first Mem∣bers of the Church, and first Subjects of Baptism, were taught and brought to profess the Faith, be∣fore they were baptized, (the Gentiles being gene∣rally strangers to the Covenant, and the Jews stran∣gers to this new Dispensation of it, and none have right to Baptism, the Initiating Seal of the Gospel-Covenant, till they come within the Gospel-Covenant.) And therefore Infants could not be the first Subjects of Baptism, because it was necessary their Parents should be in Covenant, to bring them within the Covenant; so the Parents should be first Baptized, as their right to Baptism in order of Nature, preceded the right of the Chil∣dren. But because the Parents were not admitted to Baptism, but upon their being Taught, and ma∣king a personal profession, (which was necessary to
bring them within the Covenant) it will not follow that their Children must be first Taught, and make a personal profession before they may be baptized. These being now in Covenant together with their Parents, have also a right to the Initiating Seal of the Covenant, as well as their Parents. Thus the Baptism of such adult persons, and of their In∣fants is but one, and the Ground or Reason of bap∣tizing both, is one and the same; to wit, their be∣ing taken into Covenant. Only the way of adult persons being taken into Covenant, is diverse from that of their Infants. When persons come to make a profession of Faith in Christ, they are taken (at least, Externally) into Covenant, though they were not born of believing Parents; and such as are the Children of believing Parents are (at least Ex∣ternally) in the Covenant, though they are not at present, capable of being Taught, or of making a personal profession. Thesi Salm. par. 3. p. 48. Sect. 9. Nec ab adultis exigitur nascendi conditio, modo credant: Nec ab Infantibus exigitur ut credant, modò nati sint ex iis qui sese credere profitentur. 2, From Mat. 28.19. [Go, Disciple all Na∣tions, baptising them.] It will follow, that all who are Disciples, are to be baptized. As soon as any are Disciples, (though Incompleat) Ministers, have Authority from Christ to baptize them. And our Opposites will not deny, but all Disciples are to be baptized. So that if it appear, that the In∣fants of Disciples are Disciples too; it will follow, that they are to be baptized. And as yet, I could never meet with a clear an∣swer
to that Argument Mr. Of Infant-bap∣tism. p. 15. &c. Baxter urgeth from Acts 15.10. They upon whose Necks the false Teachers would have put the Yoke of Circum∣cision, are there called Disciples. But the false Teachers would have put this Yoke, not only upon Christian Parents, but upon their Children and Infants. It plainly appears from ver. 1, 5, 24. that Circumcision was the Yoke there spoken of. And it is out of question, that there were more young Children than adult persons, upon whom those false Teachers would have brought this Yoke. And since this Scripture only declares against their lay∣ing that Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples, it follows, that either the Children, and Infants of Disciples are included in this term [Disciples] or that the Circumcising of such was not forbidden here; but only the Imposing of Circumcision upon adult persons. Neither should it seem strange, that Children, Infants, are called Disciples, being admitted into the School of Christ, and to be Trained up in the Knowledge of Christ. Sometimes we send our Children to School, before they can Learn of a book, and such are numbered among the Scholars, being designed for Learning, as soon as they are capable. And it is not so strange, that such as are intended for Learning, and entred into a School, should be called Scholars, before they have Learnt any thing; as that none should be accounted Christs Scholars, or Disciples, till they have made so great proficiency (as some would have it) that they can give an ac∣count of their Conversion, of the Work of Grace being wrought in them; of the time when, and
manner how it was wrought: Scholars are entred in∣to a School, not because they are already Taught, but that they may be Taught. And Timothy was Learn∣ing the Holy Scriptures  from his Child∣hood, 2 Tim. 3.15. That it is certain from Child-little, he was a Disciple of Christ. This which is Recorded of Timothy, should Teach all Christians, that have Children, to begin with them betimes, to teach them to know God, and his Will. The things of God cannot be Learnt too soon, neither are little Children uncapable Subjects of Divine Illumina∣tion, and Grace. But that Christian Parents are bound to Instruct their Children in the Doctrine of Christianity, and to Teach them their Duty, as soon as ever they are capable of receiving such In∣struction, and that Children ought to attend to such Instruction; Would not this imply that they are Disciples? But indeed they that are against In∣fants Discipleship and baptism, have been general∣ly against the Instructing and Catechizing of Little ones. If some of them of late go not so far in their Opposition, I am glad of it. Yet further, Is it not as strange, that little Chil∣dren, and Infants, should be called Servants, as that they should be called Disciples? Yet such are called Servants, Lev. 25.41, 42. The Children of the poor Israelite (of what age soever) are there called Gods Servants. So David professeth, Psal. 116.16. O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, the Son of thy Hand-maid. (i.e.) born thy Servant in thy House, as Ainsworth says. So Psal. 86.16. David was born a Servant of God. 3. Suppose we could not prove, Infants included
in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. (as hath been pro∣ved already) yet that they are not expresly menti∣oned here as Subjects of baptism, is not enough to ex∣clude them, unless there were no other Scripture-Rule but this, to direct us about it, who are to be baptized. As because this Commission was ex∣presly directed to the Apostles only, to the Eleven, ver. 16. It will not follow that they only were au∣thorized to baptize. Now I come to consider that other Text, Mark 16.16. which some I know build most upon. [He that believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved.] The Scope whereof is to shew, who alone partake of the saving benefit of baptism, (and other Gospel-Ordinances) being adult. Whiston of In∣fant Baptism. p. 295. Or (as one says) Here Christ informs them what the Issue of the Execution of their Commission should be.— Those that should believe, and be baptized, should be saved; but those that believed not, (however they might be baptized, yet) they should be damned. But that there is no colour for making this Text the Rule of baptizing; or for any to suppose, that it determi∣neth who are the only lawful Subjects of baptism; is evident (I think) from these following parti∣culars. 1, That it is not said, [He that believeth only, shall be baptized.] But, [He that believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved.] He that believeth, and is baptized, is the Subject in this Proposition, of whom this is predicated, that [He shall be saved.] Hence it is manifest, that these words hold forth the sub∣ject of Salvation, not the subject of baptism. Yet we must not say, they determine the only subject
of Salvation, unless we will hold baptism of ab∣solute necessity to Salvation, and hold that no Infant (that does not actually believe) can be saved. 2. That in the Opposite Member, it is not said, [He that believeth not, shall not be baptized.] but, [He that believeth not, shall be damned.] 3. If this Text should be taken to determine the only lawful Subjects of baptism, then it would fol∣low, that the Apostles, and their assistants, were guilty of Male-administration, and Erred in bap∣tizing many, (such as Annanias, Saphira, Simon Magus, &c.) who were not believers, in the sence of this Text: Either such had a right to the out∣ward Ordinance, or not. If they had no right to it, then it was amiss for any (were they Apostles themselves) to admit them to baptism, who had no right to it. If they had a right to the outward Ordinance, then [He that believeth, and is bap∣tized, &c.] Doth not determine the only lawful Subject of baptism; diverse having been rightfully baptized, who were not true believers, such as this Text speaks of. 4. If believers baptism, be the only lawful baptism (in the sence that believing is here used) then how is it possible for any Minister to dispose this Ordi∣nance in Faith? He cannot baptize others but doubt∣ingly, of whose unfeigned Faith, he is not assured. And he cannot be assured, that anothers Faith is true and saving, without Special Revelation. And thus without Special Revelation he should not know who may lawfully be baptized. 5. If this Text concludes against Infants baptism, it concludes as well against the Salvation of Infants.
If you say, They believe not, and therefore are not to be baptized; it followeth more directly from the next words, They believe not, therefore they shall be Damned. If now to avoid so horrid a consquence, as that all Infants are Damned, you will have the Text Restrained to the adult, as needs it must be; you take away the force of the Argument hence a∣gainst the Baptizing of Infants. As more is requi∣red of adult persons, than of Infants, in order to Salvation; So that may be required in order to the baptizing of the adult, which is not required of Infants. And yet I must mind you, that this Scripture does not determine, who only of the adult ought to be baptized; but who only of the adult enjoy the saving benefit of that, as of other Gos∣pel-Ordinances. Other things I pass by for bre∣vity-sake. (2.) They bring diverse Examples as they con∣ceive, against Infant-baptism. As the Example of the Three Thousands, Acts 2.38, 41. And of the Samaritans Act. 8.12. And of the Eunuch there, ver. 36, 37, 38. And of Cornelius, and those that were with him, Act. 10.47, 48. Answ. 1. Note here, that the Socinians, who would have baptism a Temporary Rite, do in like manner argue from these Instances, that we only Read of the baptizing of such as were Con∣verted to the Christian Faith; not of such as were born in it, and had all along professed it. 2. Our reading, that such and such were bap∣tized upon the profession of Faith and Repentance, and the like, will not prove, that such only were baptized. The profession of Faith and Repentance might
well be required of adult persons in order to baptism, and yet the Children of such as made a profession, be baptized without it. As God re∣quired Abraham to walk before him in sincerity, [Walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my Covenant between me and thee,] Gen. 17.1, 2. Yet this did not hinder the Covenant being made with his Seed, when they could not so walk before God, 3. If those words, Act. 2.38. [Repent, and be baptized.— For the Remission of sins.] Must be so taken, as excluding Infants from Baptism, they must then be understood also to deny to Infants the Remission of sin. 4. If we may argue from Act. 8.37. Exclusive∣ly, that none but such as believe with the heart, are to be baptized; this Text would make against our Opposites as well: those that Object it against us. will they say, they baptize none, but such as be∣lieve with all their heart? 5. So if Act. 10.47. must be so taken, as if none were to be baptized, but such as had received the Holy Ghost, as those had done; they themselves should be Excluded from Baptism, till it appears, that the Gift of the Holy Ghost is poured on them, that they speak with Tongues, as these did, ver. 45, 46. Indeed as the Gift of the Holy Ghost was an Evidence of their being taken within the Gos∣pel-Covenant, (see Mark 16.17.) and so a ground for the baptizing of them: It will follow, that whosoever can be proved to be within the Covenant, have a right to baptism. And this will also plead for the admission of the Children of believers to baptism, we having seen it proved, that they are within the Covenant.
6. Sometimes we find, upon the Personal pro∣fession of the Head of a Family, the whole Houshold o have been straightway baptized. And therefore hey that tell you, the Apostles baptized none but uch as made a Personal profession of Faith, and Repentance, speak quite beside the Book, say more than they can prove. Turn to Act. 16, 14, 15. There you will find Lydia, and her Houshold bap∣tized; where no mention is made of any one in the family being wrought upon, but only Lydia her self, Methinks it is observable what one hath No∣ed: Whiston of In∣fant Bapt. p. 281, 282. How the Holy Ghost doth va¦ry his manner of Expression here, when he speaks of the baptism of Housholds; he tells us, the Hous∣holds were baptized together with their Parents; not giving the least Intimation of the Faith of any besides, in, or of those Houses, as the ground of their Baptism, but when he speaks of more Ge∣neral Assemblies, or Concourses of People; he speaks more Distinguishingly: [As many as gladly received the Word, were baptized, Acts 2.41.] And why the Holy Ghost should speak so distin∣guishingly in one place, and not in the other, is hard to say; unless it should be, because in respect of such more General Assemblies, and Concourses of People, consisting of Grown Persons; the per∣sonal Faith of each was necessary to their Baptism, but not so in respect of the Houses of believing Parents. Further, Some urge the Example of Christ, who was not Baptized till he was Thirty Years Old. Answ. 1. What? Would they have had him
baptized, before John was sent, or had authority to baptize? 2. How well do they follow Christs Example, who are for baptizing persons at half Thirty Years Age? 3. And the reason of Christs not being Baptized till he was about Thirty Years old, could not be to Teach that none are to be admitted to baptism, till they can make a personal profession. Certainly, Christ had for a long time before, made a Personal profession. He being a Child was filled with Wis∣dom, and the Grace of God was upon him, Luke 2.40. And when he was but Twelve Years Old, he was able to Dispute with the most Learned Do∣ctors, to the astonishing of all that heard him, ver. 42, 46, 47. 4. This Example, that Christ went to John to be Baptized of him, rather makes against their Se∣baptists. And the first of their way, baptize them∣selves. Surely, they cannot plead Christs Example for this Practice. So, some urge the Example of the Romans, Rom. 6.3. Of the Galatians, Gal. 3.27. Of the Co∣lossians, Col. 2.12. Answ. It is certain, all the baptized Romans, Galatians, Colossians, had not Savingly and Really put on Christ, neither were Really buried with Christ; but only Sacramentally many of them. And thus in infant-baptism there is a putting on Christ, and a being buried with Christ; some being really Ingrafted into him, and really partaking of the Fruits of his Death; and all being under an Obli∣gation, as they shall grow up, to put on Christ, and to Conform themselves to the Death, and Bu∣rial of Christ.
Object. 3. Another great Objection against In∣fant-baptism, is that it Frustrates the ends of Bap∣tism, is Unprofitable and Vain; Infants being Un∣capable of Understanding, or Improving it. Answ. 1. Here that is a sure Rule, Instit. l. 4. c. 16. sect. 20. which Calvin lays down: Quaecunque ad qualifaciendam Circumcisionem ar∣gumenta inclinant, vim nullam habent in oppugnando Baptismo. Those arguments which would over∣throw Infant-Circumcision, (which was an undoub∣ted Ordinance of God) cannot be Valid against Infant-baptism. There were Spiritual, and Holy ends of Circumcision, and adult persons were to make that use of their Circumcision, which an In∣fant could not make of it. Now shall any hereup∣on deny, that the Circumcision of Infants was an Ordinance of God, or deny the Wisdom of God in appointing it? Since it is Obvious, that what is Objected here against Infant-baptism, may as well be turned against Infant-Circumcision: May we not say, to any such Objector, as the Apostle (in another sence) Nay but, O man, who art thou that disputest against God? 2. Of all those Seven ends of Baptism, which H. D. lays down: I would fain know which, or how many of them agreed unto Christs own bap∣tism. Was his baptism to witness his Repentance, who had no sin to repent of? Or was it to evidence his present Regeneration, who was Gods holy One from the birth, and from the Conception? &c. 3. Did all those Ends agree to the baptism of Simon Magus, &c. Did the baptism of Simon Magus witness his Repentance, and Evidence his present Regeneratian? Or declare his being buried with Christ? &c.
4. Since baptism is acknowledged a Sign of Gods Covenant, and of entrance into the Church, and the Infant-Children of believers are within the Co∣venant, and of the Church (as hath been sufficient∣ly proved) in these respects baptism doth belong to such Infants, as well as it would to others adult, up∣on their embracing the Christian Faith, and making a profession. Where the same thing hath several respects, it may agree to one in one respect, and to others in other respects. 5. Regeneration, and Remission of sin (which is the Inward Baptism) are things that Infants are not uncapable of, if they be not uncapable of Salvati∣on: Why then should they be thought uncapable of the Outward baptism, the Sign thereof? 6. The Fruit, and benefit of this Ordinance of baptism, is not restrained to the very Time of the Administration of it; but may come in afterwards. Yea, that baptism received in Infancy, is of use through ones whole course. 7. Yea, in some respects it hath its special uses and advantages, even above that in adult Estate. To name a few particulars here. 1. As the Child baptized is a declared Member of the Visible Church of Christ, and so especially Interested I mean, above others who are yet without the Church. in the Churches Pray∣ers, even before it can pray for it self. Certainly, to have a share in the Prayers of all Gods People, is no mean Priviledge. When Abra∣ham prayed for Ishmael, though he was not the Son of the Promise; yet, As for Ishmael, I have heard thee, (says God, Gen. 17.20.) Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him Fruitful. That he
fared some way better for Abrahams prayer. Though the Church of God out of common Chari∣ty, prays for all men; yet more especially for her Members, for whom she can plead Gods Covenant. And thus Infants by their baptism being declared Members of the Church, and within the Covenant, are in a greater probability of reaping benefit by the Prayers of Gods People, than if they are supposed to be without the Covenant. So likewise upon our Principles, Christian Pa∣rents have stronger Pleas to urge with God in Pray∣er, on the behalf of their Children, than they of contrary Principles can have. They can pray for their Children, only as they may pray for Hea∣thens, while they suppose them out of the Covenant. Now see the difference of these two States, Isa. 63.19. We are thine,— they are not called by thy Name. So we can pray for our Children upon better grounds, Lord, bless them, own them, they are thine. When our Opposites deny themselves this Plea, and instead of it must pray God to pity them, though they are not called by his Name. 2. Infant-baptism lays a stronger Obligation up∣on Parents to bring up their Children in the Know∣ledge, Nurture, and Admonition of the Lord. And how many have cause to bless God for the Privi∣ledge of good Education? And how strong a Motive is this, to Excite and Quicken Godly Parents to their Duty, in the Religious Education of their Children, to consider Gods special Interest in them, their solemn devoting of them to his Service, and solemn promise to Train them up for him? Yea, many from the meer workings of Natural Conscience, hereupon have shewn some Care, that
their Children might be Instructed in the Principles of Religion, whereby the Knowledge of Christ and Christianity, is further spread. 3. Infant-baptism also lays a special Obligation upon Children, to acquaint themselves with the Terms, and Tenour of that Covenant, their Pa∣rents have engaged them in. And so it is a special means to continue the Covenant-Relation betwixt God, and his Peoples Seed. Parents being here∣by obliged to Catechise, Instruct Children, and Teach them their Duty, and to bring them to the Means, the Word and Ordinances of Christ; and Children being obliged to receive such Instructions, and to attend upon the Word, and Ordinances, and apply themselves to the Service of Christ, where∣unto they have been Devoted. And herein Gods preventing Love and Mercy towards our Children is seen, that he would not have them left to their own choice, whom they would serve, any more than the Seed of his People of Old; and that as they could never have chosen better for themselves, so the sence of their baptismal Covenant might prevail with them, as soon as they come to any understand∣ing, and will of their own, to serve the God of their Fathers; to set forward in the good and right Way, wherein they should go, betimes before they are sinfully Habituated in any other Course. 4. Infant-baptism carrieth in it the clearest Evi∣dence of our miserable, sinful, and corrupt Estate by Nature, and of the need there is (in respect of Original corruption) both of the Blood of Christ, to take off the Guilt, and of the Spirit of Grace, to free our souls from the power of Corruption. And thus it hath a direct tendency towards a deep
Humiliation, and sound Conversion, as soon as Chil∣dren are of Capacity to reflect upon it. If bap∣tism was only Administred to persons of adult age, though it denotes thus much, that they are sinful, unclean Creatures (considered in themselves) such as have need of washing; yet it would not point at Original Corruption, as Infant-baptism doth; for they might be accounted sinners by practice, with∣out being acknowledged sinful by Nature. As we know, many who have been against Infant-baptism, have denied Original sin. 5. Infant-baptism is a more visible Character, and Expression of Gods Free-grace, the subject being purely passive. It may seem strange, that God should this way hold forth his Free-Grace under the Old Testament, providing an Ordinance of which Infants were capable, and make no such provision under the Gospel. 6. Infant-baptism engageth us against sin, as a vowed Enemy for ever. As Israel was to have War with Amalek for ever: So are we ever to resolve, and strive against sin, and seek the utter Extirpation of it. That we were false to Christ, and lived in the Violation of our Baptismal Covenant, all that while we served sin: The remembrance and consideration thereof, is a means to further the Humiliation of many gra∣cious hearts for sins past, as a means to quicken them to greater watchfulness and resolvedness against sin for the time to come. Here methinks it is worth noticing, what one says, Ep. Ded. to Mr. Fords practical use of Infant-Baptism. p. 5. Though it may in some cases be granted, that an Ordinance administred
with some considerable circumstantial Irregulari∣ties, may sanctifie; yet that those Irregularities themselves should be the Channels of Sanctifying Grace, it is not easily imaginable. Now this is the case of Infant-baptism. Many holy men of many Ages, have found their hearts Warm∣ed, and Quickned in the Exercise of Faith, Re∣pentance, Love, Thankfulness, restrained from sin, excited to duty, by the consideration (not only of Baptism, and the Personal Covenant therein Sealed, but also) of Infant-Baptism un∣der that Circumstance, and the Covenant of An∣cestors, the Foundation of that Administration. 7. Infant-baptism affords much Comfort and En∣couragement to believing Parents, in reference to their seed. It may well rejoyce the heart of a Chri∣stian Parent, to see his Childes baptism a token of Gods good Will towards it, Sealing his Covenant with it. And take away the grounds of Infant-bap∣tism, and what ground hath a Believer to hope of the salvation of his Child dying in Infancy, more than to hope of the salvation of the Child of any Heathen or Infidel? Infants are not saved upon account of Native Innocency, (though they are innocent in respect of Actual Transgression, yet are they Guilty in respect of Natural inherent Cor∣ruption) but Infants that are saved, are saved upon the account of Christ: And if saved by Christ, then Interested in him: And if Interested in him, by what Covenant? I know no other but that, where God promiseth to be the God of a Believer, and of his seed, that can give us hopes of the salvation of our Children, dying in Infancy. No other Cove∣nant, that I can find in Scripture, to make over Christ and his saving Benefits to Infants.
But now God promising to be a God to the seed of believers, and sealing this in their Baptism, such of them as die Infants, and so no ways revoke or violate the Covenant by any Act or Deed of theirs, we have good ground to conclude that they are sa∣ved: as Christ said, Of such is the Kingdom of Hea∣ven. These being in Covenant, and not breaking Covenant with God, it is not to be thought, that God will break Covenant with them. Again, hence godly Parents may be encouraged, in reference to their living Issue. Since God hath taken them into Covenant, there is more hope, that God may have special Covenant-blessings in store for them, than there is of such as are out of Cove∣nant. And if Parents and Children were Diligent, and Faithful in doing their part, we might see then, it should not stick at Him, the Lord would not fail to do His part. See Gen. 18.19. 8. Infant-baptism (engaging the seed of profes∣sed Christians to the embracing and professing of Christianity) hath been one great means to enlarge the Visible Church, and Kingdom of Christ. A means to preserve the Christian Religion, and pro∣pagate it to many, that otherwise were likely never to have come so far, as to an outward owning and profession of it. It is not so easie to draw persons to a renouncing of Christ and Christianity, who have been engaged to a Profession of it from their very Infancy; as it would have been to have kept many such from owning it at all, had they been left to themselves, till they were grown up, then to chuse for themselves. I hope, there are none of us, so sence∣less, as not to acknowledge it a priviledge, to live in a Land, where Christ is generally owned by an
open, outward profession; rather than to Live a∣mong Jews, Turks, or Pagans, that are Enemies to the very Name of Christ. You may see more of this Nature in Mr. Fords, practical Use of Infant-baptism. Object. 4. They Object, that Infant-baptism is followed with Mischiefs, attended with very evil Consequences; bringing in false Matter into the Church, and Deforming her with so many Rotten Members, Ignorant, and Scandalous Persons, as many of those prove, who were Baptized in Infancy. Answ. 1. They might with as good Reason bring in the like Charge against Infant-Circumcision. Now would not that be to charge God foolishly? And shall a man be more pure than his Maker? 2. Were there no Rotten Members among all those whom John Baptized? Mat. 3. No Rotten Members among them of Samaria, Baptized by Phillip? Acts 8. No Rotten Members in the Church of Corinth, Galatia, and other Churches, we read of planted by the Apostles themselves? 3. Are there no Rotten Members that they take in? No Hypocrites? None of corrupt Principles? 4. Infant-Baptism is neither a cause of Igno∣rance, nor of Profaneness, but an Engagement up∣on all that have been partakers of it, to Learn the Doctrine of Christ, and live according to his Laws. And however Infants may prove afterwards, yet when they are admitted to Baptism, they are free from all culpable Ignorance, not guilty of Hypo∣crisie, nor to be charged with any Actual sin. 5. The true cause of these Mischiefs is Parents neglect of their Duty, of Instructing and Train∣ing up Children as they ought; or want of the due
Exercise of Church-Discipline, and Censures. And so they might be prevented, or removed by other wayes and means, than denying Infant-bap∣tism. And if any that are Parents think they have done enough, in having brought their Children to be Baptized; or any Person thinks, he is a good Chri∣stian, because he is baptized, they have not Learnt so of us. More I would have said to this, because it is ta∣king with some well-meaning Souls; but I had ra∣ther refer you to what Mr. Baxter hath written of Infant-baptism, pag. 117. &c. Object. 5. They Object, that Baptism being Ad∣ministred to one in Infancy, he hath no way to be certain, that he was Baptized, but must take it upon trust from others. And in this respect there is more to be said for Infant-Circumcision, because that left a Mark and Character, whereby it might be known, such were Circumcised. Answ. 1. Circumcision was used amongst others, besides the Jews; some that were Idolaters, and Heathens, took up this Rite; though to them it was not the Ordinance of Circumcision, or a Sign of Gods Covenant. And it was possible for the Jews to be sometimes taken Captive by these, and their Children to be Circumcised with their Mock-Circumcision. Now look how the Jews might be satisfied, that they had the true Circumcision, and n the like way our Children may be certified of their Baptism. 2. How was Paul certified, that he was Circum∣cised the eighth day, Phil. 3.5. Surely, he could ot remember it? Only it was so testified by others,
And the same way may our Children be certified of their Baptism in Infancy. 3. What assurance can they that are Rebaptized have, that their later baptism was right? I suppose the words [I baptize thee in the Name of the Fa∣ther, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,] are pronounced as they are Plunging into the Water; at which time it is not possible they should hear, and attend to them. How do they know in whose Name they were baptized? Must not they also take it upon trust, that they were Baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; which the By-standers sometimes could not hear distinctly. 4. Why may we not as well be certified of our Baptism in Infancy by a Register, as of our Birth? They that will question what is so Recorded, may as well question their Christian Names, and so feat to claim any Earthly Inheritances, Portions, or Le∣gacies under those Names. Further, some of them will plead Antiquity: but how vainly and groundlessly, some of ours have shewn. I cannot but wonder H. D. should make such a Flourish with the Citations he meets with in The plain and well grounded Treatise concerning Baptism, (falsly so called) without taking any notice of Mr. Colbet's answer thereunto. The Pelagians (though bold enough, yet) had not so great a stock of Confidence, De peccat. Mer. & Remiss. l. 1. c. 26. (as Augustine observes) who never durst deny the baptism of Infants, be∣cause they saw, they must too open∣ly have Clashed with the whole Church. Certainly,
if those antient Hereticks could have found any fair pretence from Antiquity to have opposed Infant-baptism, since it would have made so much for their purpose, they would have thought their Labour here well bestowed. Object. Last, One Objection more, that must not be passed by, is, That we have changed the antient Rite and Ceremony of Dipping. This some make so Essential and Necessary to true Baptism, that they hold our Baptism no more Baptism, than it would have been Circumcision; if instead of Cut∣ting off the Foreskin, they had only pared their Nails. Now, 1. They argue for the Necessity of Dip∣ping, from the Notation of the words, , and , which they will have only to signifie Dipping, or Plunging into Water. Answ. But if it could be proved that the word [Baptize] primarily signifieth to Dip, Plunge, or Cover all over; yet the Scripture-use of the word is against them. This is plain from Many Texts which are ordinarily produced, Mark 7.4. Ex∣cept they wash , They Eat not. I hope they do not Imagine, that the Pharisees Dipt themselves every time they went to Meat. So the word is used to signifie any way of Washing, and not only that of Dipping. And whereas they use to oppose [Baptizing] to Rantizing, or Sprink∣ling; yet the Scripture useth them promiscuously: In the Language of the Holy Ghost, Sprinkling is sometimes called Baptism, Heb. 9.10. We read of diverse Washings, in the Greek it is Baptismes. Where some of those Washings spoken of, were by way of Sprinkling, ver. 13, 19, 21. Numb. 8.7.
and 19.17, 18. And whether is more proper to the place, diverse kinds of Dipping, or diverse kinds of Washing and Purifying? So we read of the Israelites being Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. Were they Dipped in the Cloud? No, but Be-dewed, or lightly Washed, as men are in a shower of Rain. Were they Dipped in the Sea? No certainly, not the Israelites, but the Egyptians were Dipped, Plunged in the Sea, Exod. 15.10. : Demersi fuerunt ceu plumbum in aquâ, So , Vid. Bez. in Mat. 3.11. differt à verbo, . it is of a milder signification, that there is no reason they should put so great an Emphasis in it. Again, Rev. 19.13. We read of Christ that he was Cloathed in a Vesture  Dipt in blood, says our Translation. But it hath refer∣ence to Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. where it is [Garments sprinkled with blood.] As that must be the mean∣ing. As the Expression is taken from great War∣riours, returning from the Slaughter of their Ene∣mies, who do not use to Dip their Garments in the blood of the Slain; though they have oft their Gar∣ments besprinkled with blood. By this time I hope you may see, their Dipping is grounded on such a Criticism, as will not hold water. 2. They argue from Primitive practice, the man∣ner of baptizing used, when the Ordinance of bap∣tism was first set up. Answ. 1. But first the Texts of Scripture they bring to prove it, if well looked into, are no cogent Proofs of it. The phrase of bapti∣zing
, Mark 3.11. will not necessarily infer Dipping. The preposition , signifying [with] as well as [in,] Mat. 5.13.  With what shall it be salted. So we have , Mat. 3.11. Whether is more consonant to Scripture-phrase, to say, he shall Dip you in the Spirit; or to say, he shall Pour the Spirit on you? So that phrase seemeth to be more against Dipping, than for it. Another Text they urge, is Mat. 13.16. Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: but in the Greek it is only , he went up [from] not [out of] the wa∣ter. Another Text which they think very consider∣able for their purpose, is John 3.23. John bapti∣zed in Aenon, , because many wa∣ters were there. The Text proves not the waters of such depth, as was convenient for Dipping; though here was a conveniency, when great Mul∣titudes came to John's baptism, that he and his Disciples might be employed together. The word Aenon signifies no more than Fonticulus, a little Spring, or Rivulet. And they tell us, it was a small Brook indeed, which one might almost stride over; though of no small account in that hot Coun∣trey, where water was so scarce. Another Text they stand much upon, is Acts 8.38. which if it will prove, that Phillip Dipped the Eunuch, it will prove also that he Dipped himself: For it is said, ; they both went down unto the water. The proposition  and  there, may as well be rendred [to] and [from] as by [into] and [out of:] No wonder, Philip is said to go down to, and come up from the water, (ver. 39.) The water Running in the Valleys, and that
being a Land of Hills and Valleys, Deut. 11.11. 2. They have little to say, to those Instances, which some of ours produce of Persons baptized, and no probability of their being Dipt. As we read of Three Thousand baptized in a day, Acts 2.41. Yea, in part of a day. (Compare ver. 15. with 41.) VVhen so few hands were to be employ∣ed, it would seem passing strange, that they should Dip so many as Three Thousand, taking them one by one, in part of a day, (as one part of the day was spent before the Company met, and a further part of it was spent in Peters Sermon, by which they were Converted.) Now had they been bap∣tized in their way, it would scarce have been the work of a day or two. Again, if they were Dipt, they were either Dipt Naked, or in their Cloaths. If Naked, then they might all have seemed full of new Wine indeed. If Davids servants were asha∣med, when Hanun cut off their Garments to the Middle, (2 Sam. 10.4.) What matter of shame had it been, if all these had been stript Naked? And what reproach would this have brought upon the way of Christianity? If in their Cloaths, such Dipping would have been a Washing of their Cloaths, rather than of themselves. So the Cloaths had been baptized immediately, and primarily, and the Body only consequently, and secondarily. Thus indeed their Bodies might be wet, but not proper∣ly washed. So likewise some parts of the body might have been untouched, And then how would such Dipping hold forth a being Sanctified through∣out. Again, when Paul was weak after three dayes Fasting, Ananias comes to him in the House of
Judas, and baptized him. And afterwards recei∣ving Meat he was strengthened, Acts 9.9, 18, 19. What Evidence or Probability can they shew, that Paul in that weak condition he was in, was taken out to a River, or Plunged into cold water, which might in an ordinary way have destroyed him? The old Rule [I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice,] approved by Christ himself, Mat. 12.7. may sa∣tisfie us, that either it was not Pauls duty (pro hic & nunc) to be baptized, or that Plunging the body into water was not then held indispensibly ne∣cessary, and essential to Baptism. Again, we read, the Jailor and his Houshold were baptized in the Night. Had the Jailor a Pond, or River in his House? Or if he was so well stored with water laid in, as might suffice to Dip or Plung them into; yet would it be pure enough for those that came last, when others had been washed in it before? We know sometimes they Ar∣gue from that Expression of [Bodies washed with pure water,] Heb. 10.22. (3.) Had it been never so clear and manifest, that in those Hotter Countreys, Baptism was Admini∣stred in the way of Dipping; there is more to be pleaded for it, than for this Practice in such a cold Climate as ours, where it would be to cross other Scripture-Rules. As Mr. Baxter conceives, that The Practice sprung up in the Hotter Countreys, where Custome had Taught them to go almost half Naked, in comparison of us, and therefore it was there more Civil, or less Immodest, and less Dangerous to their Lives. But what he hath written of this Practice in our Circumstances, pag. 134. to 138. deserves to be well weighed. So far
as I am able to judge, he there clearly proves, that our Dippers break the Commandment of God, to fol∣low their Tradition. 3. They argue from the Nature of Baptism, and the Analogy and Resemblance betwixt Dipping, and Christs Burial, or our burial with Christ, held forth in baptism, Rom. 6.4. And on this, the wisest of them lay the greatest stress: To overthrow this, is to overthrow their greatest strength. Answ. 1. Whereas one of them makes Dipping the very Form of Baptism: If it were so, then (for as much as Forma dat esse rei) whensoever per∣sons are Dipt, (as some are for Punishment) or Dip and Douse themselves, (as some do for Pleasure) this should be the Ordinance of Baptism, here being the true Form of baptism. 2. It is not the Measure and Quantity, but the Quality, or Ʋse of water, that is Representative, and Significative (by Christs Institution) in Bap∣tism. For my part, I should not dare to make the Acti∣on of Dipping, or Sprinkling, or (which we gene∣rally use) Pouring on of water a Sacramental, with∣out clearer Evidence of Scripture, than I could ever yet see produced. As in the Lords Supper, Christ hath appointed Bread and VVine, without determining how much of these each Communi∣cant should take: So in Baptism, he hath appoint∣ed water to be used (to signifie the Cleansing virtue and Efficacy of his Blood and Spirit) without de∣termining the quantity of water, or the manner how it should be applied, whether by Immersion, Aspersion, or Superfusion. 3. If because Dipping best Representeth the Bu∣rial
of Christ, &c. therefore we must be for Dip∣ping upon any Terms, and account that no Baptism, which is not this way Administred; I doubt this way of Arguing hath a Reach, quite beyond the Intention of them that use, and urge it. They that are so Zealous for Dipping, to hold forth their being Buried with Christ, by a parity of Reason should as well be for Crossing, to hold forth their being Crucified with Christ. VVhereas they Insist so much on Rom. 6.4. We are buried with him by Baptism: In the two next verses, the Apostle speaks of being Planted together in the likeness of his Death; and of the Old Man being Crucified with him, (ver. 5, 6.) Now might they not from hence Argue as well for Crossing all that were Bap∣tized, as holding forth the likeness of Christs Death more clearly, than Dipping only doth? Only they should be for Crossing first. and Dipping after that; as the Crucifixion and Death of Christ preceded his Burial, and as men use not to be buried before they are dead. So might not others plead as well for the White Garment, as holding forth that Purity and Holiness Christians are called, and obliged un∣to? So might they not in like manner Argue for the Ministers Breaking and Giving to every Commu∣nicant a whole Loaf, more clearly to hold forth such an ones duty to take whole Christ, and the Privi∣ledge of very worthy Receiver, that he is Inter∣ested in whole Christ? And might they not as well contend for every ones taking their full of Bread and Wine, in the Lords Supper, to hold forth in a plain and Lively manner, that plentiful Provision which is made for Souls in Christ; and that one Christ is enough to fill us all: According to the In∣vitation,
Eat, O Friends, Drink, yea, Drink abun∣dantly, O Beloved. By this way of Arguing, might not men soon bring into that part of Gods so∣lemn Worship, as great Disorders as ever were in the Church of Corinth? So likewise should they not as well plead for the use of Musical Instruments in singing of Psalmes, as from the proper signification of the word : So from the Nature of the thing, it fitly setting forth the Melody we should make in our hearts to the Lord, (Ephes. 5.19) But further, may not others as well Argue for Sprinkling, because Baptism is to signifie the Souls being cleansed by the Blood of Christ, which is called the Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2. And the Inward Washing, which the Out∣ward Baptism representeth, is set forth under the Term of Sprinkling, or (as they call it) Ranti∣zing, Heb. 10.22. As the same thing was shadow∣ed out under the Law by Sprinkling. Or may one not say (as Mr. Cotton) that Sprink∣ling, or Pouring on water, where water is applied to the Body, sets forth in a more lively manner, the Grace of Christ in washing away our sins, than Dipping, where the Body is applied to the water? That being done rather by applying Christs Blood to Us, than by applying our selves to Christs Blood. And may we not as well Argue for Baptizing, by Pouring on water (which we generally Practise) as best setting forth the Communication of the Spi∣rit, promised to be Poured on us, Joel 2.28, 29. Certainly they are all one, to be Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and to have the Spirit poured on us.
Thus it is plain, that their Arguing for Dip∣ping from Allusion and Analogy, hath no strength, or Cogency at all. The same Argument may be urged against them. As they decry Baptizing by Sprinkling (which I think few or none amongst us use) or Pouring on water, as not holding forth the Burial of Christ, &c. Others have the like Plea against Dipping, as not holding forth the Sprink∣ling of the Blood of Christ, and Pouring forth of his Spirit, which Baptism is as well to signifie. Let them answer here for themselves, and they will answer for us too. Here I shall only add this Note, That whatso∣ever Rite be used in Baptism, whether theirs, or that which we hold best and safest in our Circum∣stances, being Baptized unto Christ; it must needs follow, that we are Baptized unto his Death, and obliged to Conformity to him; and to improve Christ, to our dying more and more unto sin, and rising again to Newness of Life. And thus we are buried with Christ by Baptism, Baptism serving for this Use and End, to hold forth our Duty and Pri∣viledge (if Faithful in our Baptismal Covenant) of being made Conformable to his Death. As for the Objections against Dipping, as they hold it necessary for all Times, and Places, they are not so weak as H. D. would make them: Who says thus, Treatise of Bap∣tism. p. 252. As for the Cavils of Unseemliness, and haz∣zarding of Health to the weak, they are the Fruits of Carnal Wisdom, Unbelief, and Shunning of the Cross, &c.
But, Pag. 133. in Margen. 1. To Baptize Naked, he grants to be Abominable, and consequently is it not unseemly, to Baptize persons in so light and loose an Habit, as is next to Nakedness. They are for Washing all and every part, as the whole man is unclean. Pag. 250. Now must it not be a very loose Attire, wherein the whole body, and every part may be washed with one sud∣den Plunge, at first Dash? If there be no Unseem∣liness in their way, VVhy do they ordinarily chuse the Night for it? Baptism being solemnly to de∣clare ones Admission into the Visible Church, the more publickly and openly it is Administred, (Cae∣teris paribus) it is the more solemn. 2. It cannot be denied, but some are so tender, that they can scarce look into the Cold Air without Hazzard and Prejudice: And can it be thought, that there is no Danger in casting such into the Wa∣ter? Of Infant Bap∣tism. p. 136. As Mr. Baxter hath Noted: God hath not appointed Ordinan∣ces in his Church which will de∣stroy them, except they be preserved by a Mi∣racle; for then it were a Tying himself to a con∣stant working of Miracles, which he hath not done, except the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be true. 3. Add this, as Dipping is Hazzardous in cold Countreys, so it is scarce Practicable in some Hot Countreys. How many Miles may one Travel in some places, ere they come to a River of sufficient Depth for this purpose? VVhereas the positive In∣stitutions of the Gospel are usually Commended. and Prefered to the Legal Services, for their Easi∣ness; their way would make Circumcision less
Painful, Troublesome, and Dangerous than Bap∣tism. Some may think, I have Expatiated too far here: But is there not a cause? How many that Unchurch us in their rash Censures, and will have no Com∣munion with us in other the undoubted Ordinances of Jesus Christ, because we maintain our Childrens Interest in the Covenant, and Right to Baptism, the Initiating Sign and Seal of it? What a sad Snare is the way of Anabaptism to many well-meaning, but mistaken Souls? If so deep Censuring of their Brethren, and Separating from all the Churches of Christ, that are not of their way, as the strictest, and the most of them do, be the way of Christ; Then Christ would seem to be against Himself, and then how should his Kingdom stand? Whether their way be not Injurious to the Churches Peace, to the Comfort of Christian Parents, and Prejudi∣cial to Christs Interest in the World; let the Sober∣minded judge. Whether the Engaging of a Chri∣stians Children from their Infancy, to the Enter∣tainment and Profession of Christianity, and enga∣ging Christian Parents to Train up their Children in such a way; or leaving both Parent and Child Free, and Uningaged here, which of these ways hath the more direct Tendancy to bring in Igno∣rance, and Irreligion; Let any, but such as are strangely prepossessed, and prejudiced judge. Now you that are satisfied in the point of In∣fant-baptism, account it not enough to own it, or that you may be able to Plead for it; but see that your Practice be such as may bring Credit and Com∣mendation to it. It is a woful Solecism, yet too Common, for men to be Zealous for Infant-baptisin,
and to Glory in it, that they were thus Devoted to Christ and his Service, in their Infancy; and yet really to Disown it again, and Disgrace it in their Lives. How should we fear laying such an Ordi∣nance of Christs under Reproach and Contempt? Shall we scarce have patience to hear others Deny, or Question Infant-baptism, and yet by our unwor∣thy and unsuitable walking, make it stink among prejudiced Minds? Not to give up your selves to the Service of God, to whom ye were Devoted in Baptism, is a kind of Sacriledge. As Calvin says, Nec specie Sacriligii carere, In Rom. 12.1. si ad im∣munditiem relabimur: Quoniam id ni∣hil aliud est quàm rem Sanctificatam profanare. Again, Have we given up our Children to God, and Christ in Baptism? Let us Train them up for him. VVe should be often minding them of what we have done for them; and that as they come to have a Will of their own, God expects they Confirm what we have done. VVe should Instruct, and warn them, Charge and Command them to keep the Way of the Lord; go before them in an holy Ex∣ample, and do all we can to help them forward, that so God may establish his Covenant with us, and ours.
Rom. 3.28, 29. He is not a Jew, which is one (only) out∣wardly. But he is a Jew which is one (also) inwardly, &c. Sect. 18. PROP. XVIII. They who are also Internally in Covenant, are Priviledged far above those, who are only Externally in Covenant. THey that are Internally in Covenant, have an Actual right to the greatest Benefits and Bles∣sings of the Covenant, whereas the other have a Right only Conditionally, viz. If they perform what on their part they are Engaged unto. Surely there is a great difference, between a Par∣don offered, and a Pardon accepted, and obtained; betwixt Salvation offered upon Condition, and an Actual right in Salvation, as having the Condition, to which it is promised. To all that are Outwardly in Covenanr, Remission and Salvation are promised Conditionally; that is, if they Believe, if they Re∣pent. But where the Condition is not performed, the Promise cannot be pleaded. but now such as are Internally in Covenant, having the Condition, have an Immediate actual Right to the Blessings pro∣mised.
What those Covenant-blessings are, you heard something before under the Thirteenth Proposi∣tion. Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, I will put my fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Sect. 19. PROP. XIX. One Special Priviledge of those who are Inter∣nally in Covenant with God, is, that they shall never totally depart from God, or fall from Grace, or be cast out of Cove∣nant. WHere Special Grace hath wrought the Can∣dition, it will maintain the work. Where Special Grace beginneth, it will finish the work in due time. Thus the Faithful, as they have an Im∣mediate right, so on Indefeasable right to the great Benefits contained in the Covenant. The Remonstrants hold Grace to be Vincible, both in Conversion, and after Conversion. Si Deus fidem vi irresistibili quae impediri non potest, non effi∣cit, neque sustentat: As they. And we know their
meaning, when they deny Vim Gratiae irresistibilem; that when God had done all that belongs to Him to do, yet mans will may Frustrate his Grace, and render all ineffectual and to no purpose. If the Saints perseverance be not certain. Then, (1.) What becomes of Gods Decree? Here they will say, that God Electeth men upon fore-sight of Faith, and Perseverance, not unto Faith and Perse∣verance. But (methinks) the Scripture teacheth otherwise, Ephes. 1.4. Elected, to be Holy: Not upon Gods Fore-sight that such would be holy. Jam. 2.5. God hath chosen the Poor of this world Rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom. Cho∣sen, not because Rich in Faith; but to be Rich in Faith: As they were Chosen, not because Heirs of the Kingdom; but to be Heirs of the Kingdom. 2 Thes. 2.13. Chosen to Salvation, through sancti∣fication of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. He could not foresee Sanctification in any, but as the work of his own Spirit: He could not foresee Faith in any, but as his own Gift. (Phil. 1.29. Tit. 1.1.) Acts 13.48. As many as were Ordained to Eternal Life, believed. Some indeed would have it taken thus: As many as were fitted, or disposed unto Eternal Life, believed. But what Disposition, or Aptitude unto Eternal Life is there found in any, before Faith, before they do believe? Besides, the word is (Plusquam perfecti temporis) , ordinati fuerant: As many as had been ordained to Eternal Life. Importing a previous Ordination ra∣ther than a present disposition to Faith. To the like purpose consult what our Saviour saith, John 6.37, 39. All that the Father giveth me, shall come to me. And this is the Fathers will, that of all
which he hath given me, I should loose nothing; but should raise it up again at the last day. Raise it up, that is, to everlasting Life, as it is ver. 40. Hence it is plain, that in regard of Gods Will and Purpose, all the Elect shall certainly come to Christ, and be kept by him to everlasting Life. And so much is implied in that speech of his, Mat. 24.24. Insomuch that (if it were possible) they would deceive the very Elect. It is impossible that false Christs should deceive the Elect. Though in themselves they are liable to Deception, as well as others; yet being Elect, God hath a special care of them, and they are the special charge of Christ, and the holy Spirit of Truth; for which cause it is not possible they should be finally deceived, and drawn away from Christ, and Fundamental Truth. And may we not gather as much from Rom. 8.28. All things work together for good, to them who are the called according to his purpose. How will this hold true, and yet they may fall into the greatest of Evils, both Sinful, and Penal, Apostacy, and Per∣dition. And ver. 30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: And whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glori∣fied. They that can prove their Election by their effectual Vocation, may thence conclude their pre∣sent Justification, and their future Glorification. Though the former of these Texts should make no∣thing against those, who grant the certain Perseve∣rance of the Elect as such, but not of all the Justi∣fied, or Sanctified; (supposing there are some such, who are not Elect) yet this last Scripture clearly Determines that all that are called, that is, effectu∣ally called (and so Sanctified) and Justified, are
or shall be Glorified, and Consequently must needs Persevere. (2.) What becomes of Divine Promises, that look this way, if the Faithful do not certainly Per∣severe? Is not Gods Promise good Security? Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Here we see Persevering-Grace is a Gift, which God hath promised. And they in whose hearts God putteth his Fear, they shall fear him for ever, (ver. 39.) they shall not depart from him. It is Evident, and Undeniable, that this is here promised. Now it is promised ei∣ther Absolutely, or Conditionally. If absolutely, then it inevitably follows, that they must continue in his Fear, and never depart from Him; Or else where were his Truth and Faithfulness? If Condi∣tionally, Then what is the Condition? Can we un∣derstand it thus, I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: If there will be to continue to fear me, if their will be not to de∣part? But hold: The same thing cannot be the thing promised, and the condition unto which it is promised. Otiosa est haec conditio, facit enim per∣severantiam conditionem perseverantiae: Non enim deesse gratiae sufficienti est perseveraere, (Suffrag. Bri∣tan. de 5. Art. p. 225.) I hope, they with whom we have to do here, would not make God, as one that Mocketh. And then how can this be the sence, I will give them to fear me, that they shall not de∣part from me: Provided their will be to fear me still, and their care not to depart from me. I will give them to continue and persevere in my fear, if their will be to continue in my fear; that is, If they do continue in my fear; Certainly, they that do
persevere, must persevere, whether God promised it, or no. No need for God to promise that, the contrary whereof would imply a Contradiction. VVe neither consult the Honour of his Wisdom, nor of his Grace, if we would have no more meant than so. And further, If the Lord promised no more here, than Grace to persevere, if we will; then there should be no more promised to Believers un∣der the Covenant of Grace, then Adam might have concluded on under the Covenant of Works. Adamo fuit datum, ut posset. si vellet in bono perseverare, sed non fuit datum, ut vellet: Nobis verò, qui verò Christo insiti sumus, talis data est gratia, ut non so∣lum possimus, si velimus, sed etiam ut velimus in Chri∣sto perseverare, (Aug. de Correp. & grat. in c. 11. & 12. Ut Suffr. Britan ib.) Yea, the condition of Believers would be so much worse than Innocent Adams, by how much they have less strength, than he had. Innocent Adam had the fear of God in his heart, (other∣wise he had not been Innocent) and that fear pre∣served in his heart; must needs have preented his departing from God. So he had that which might have kept him close to God, without any contrary principles to turn him aside. VVhereas the best of Saints upon Earth are not so perfect in Faith, or Fear, or any Grace, but that there is something of a contrary corrupt principle still remaining in them, as a Bck-byas drawing them another way. Again, The Lord hath promised, Mat. 16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church. Now if the Faithful should not persevere, it is
plain in this case, the Gates of Hell would prevail. Therefore the perseverance of the Faithful is cer∣tain; Or else how should this word of promise hold certainly true? If the perseverance of the Faithful be not certain, but purely contingent, that this Believer may fall away, and that Believer, and so another, and another; and if there be no one in particular, to whom it may not happen, that he may fall away, then that any should hold out to the end, and be saved, it must be purely contingent and uncertain. And if it be purely Contingent, whe∣ther any one Believer in the world will persevere, what is not certain, cannot be certainly known; what is not certainly Future, cannot be certainly Fore-known. Qualis est res, talis est rei sci en∣tia, &c. Camero. Resp. ad Ep. vi∣ri docti. p. 162. in fol. 757. VVhen Christ says, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Faithful, (who are built on him, the Rock) it is certain, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail a∣gainst them, otherwise he might be mistaken, and his word not hold true. If any suppose this to be the sence, That the powers of Hell shall not prevail against Believers, without their will, and consent; if this were all, then Christ should promise here, as much as comes to nothing. There was no fear of the Devils forcing away any soul from Christ, quite against its will. Besides, what is promised to Believers, would hold as true of Unbelievers: So the Gates of Hell should not prevail against Them neither. For none will say, that Unbelievers are kept off from Christ by force, but that their wills are to keep off from him. Another Promise you have, 1 Cor. 10.13. God
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be Tempted above that ye are able; but will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Another, John 10.28. I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. If we must understand these Promises, as depend∣ing on such a Condition as this, that they yield not of themselves to Temptation, nor cast themselves out of Christs hands: But not as securing them at all, that they shall not Totally and Finally yield up to Temptation, and cast themselves out of his Hand; then it will follow, that they speak not at all to a Believers fears: but to what he has no fear of. Be∣lievers have no fear at all of being plucked away from Christ by strong hand, and against their wills; but all the fear is, whether they shall not at one time or other, be Tempted away from Christ, and their hearts prove Treacherous to Him. To these Promises, agreeth that of the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good Work in you, will perform ( Finish) it until the day of Jesus Christ. Where observe, his confidence was not in them, but in him that had begun the Work. Likewise that of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1.5. Kept by the power of God through Faith, unto Sal∣vation. Where we see the Lord hath them in his keeping. And, Qui custodit nos per fidem, custodit in nobis fidem: He that keepeth us through Faith unto Salvation, keepeth Faith in us to Salvation. How are they kept by his power, who are suffered to Apostatize, that they are lost Creatures? (John
17.12.) Surely, such are deserted and cast off, not kept. (3.) VVhat becomes of Christs Prayer, and prevalent Intercession, if Believers shall not perse∣vere? There is therefore no Condemnation to them, because Christ is at the Right-hand of God, making Intercession for them, Rom. 8.34. VVhat is it that Christ Sueth and Pleadeth for, on the behalf of his People? That their Faith may not fail, as he Prayed for Peter, Luke 22.32. That God would keep them through his own Name, keep them from the evil. If they are not kept from the evil of Total and Final Apostacy, How is Christs Prayer for them heard? See John 17.11, 15, 20. If there be any power in the Intercession of Christ (whom the Father heareth always) Believers shall be kept by Gods power. The Father should not have his will, if they be not kept unto Salvation, John 6.39. Neither should the Son have his will, John 17.24. And to say, that Christ meaneth no more, but that they might be kept, upon condition that they be not wanting to themselves; is as if he should only Pray that they might be kept, while indeed they shall keep themselves. So to deny the certain per∣severance of the Faithful, is to make Christs Inter∣cession on that behalf, either Needless, or Fruitless, and Successless. (4.) VVhat becomes of the Saints prayers for Perseverance? And what ground have any of us to Pray, that the Lord would Ʋnite our hearts to fear his Name, that he would give us an heart to fear him for ever; or that we may be kept by his power, and so guarded with his Grace, that no Temptati∣on
may prevail, to draw us away from him? If the Faithful may fall away, and if God doth not promise their Perseverance, but conditionally, then the meaning of such Petitions can be no more than this: Lord, keep me, so long as I have a care to keep my self. Lord, uphold me by thy Grace, so long as I have a care not to fall. Preserve me in thy fear, while I have an heart to fear thee. Give me to persevere, if I will. (5.) If the Faithful do not certainly persevere, what becomes of Gods everlasting Love to them? That Love which the Apostle doth so greatly glory in, Rom. 8.38, 39. Should he suffer them to draw back, his Soul could then take no more pleasure in them, Heb. 10.38. Then he should not remember them with everlasting kindness, as Isa. 54.8, 10. Or Love them with an everlasting Love, as Jer. 31.3. If any Believer fall away, and perish, certainly it is not for want of Power in God. He that could quicken them, when dead in Trespasses and Sins, could settle them when Staggering; could Raise them when Fallen. I say, it is not for want of Power in God to keep them, if they be not kept: He is of power to Establish them, Rom. 16.25. He is able to keep them from falling, Jude ver. 24. He is able to build them up, and to give them an Inheritance a∣mong all them that are Sanctified, Acts 20.32. And otherwise the Apostle Peter would not have prayed, as 1 Pet. 5.10. That the God of all Grace would make them Perfect, Establish, Strengthen, Settle them. Nor would Christ have Prayed for Peter, that his Faith might not fail; if it had not been in his Fathers hands, to prevent the failing
of Peters faith. And if it be not for want of Power, it cannot be, that they are not kept for want of Love, and good will in God towards them. The Love of God being such, as brought them to the Participation of his Grace, and Reconciled them to Himself, who before were Enemies; how strange were it, if he should not continue to Love them, whom he hath Reconciled. See how the Apostle argueth, Rom. 5.9, 10, 17. (6.) VVhat ground for that joy of Faith the Scripture speaks of, if the perseverance of the Faith∣ful be not certain? Take away the Doctrine of perseverance, and what becomes of Assurance? VVhat ground for that Assurance, which many of the Faithful (of whom we read in Scripture) had, and all are called on, to give Diligence to obtain, 2 Pet. 1.10. Heb. 6.11. VVhen we read of the the full assurance of Hope, as attainable, as in the Texts last Cited? And methinks, they which from that Caution, 1 Cor. 10.12. [Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall.] Infer, that he that standeth may fall; they should not deny, but from this Councel, and Exhortation, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give dili∣gence to make your Calling and Election sure.] This may be Inferred, that by giving Diligence, we may make our Calling and Election sure. And conse∣quently our Salvation. As that Golden Chain, Rom. 8.30. can never be broken, but one Link will Certainly, and Infallibly draw on another. And so when we read of the Peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keeping the heart and mind, Phil. 4.7. VVhen we read of the God of Hope, filling souls with joy and peace in Believing,
Rom. 15.13. And giving them everlasting Consola∣tion, and good Hope through Grace, 2 Thes. 2.16. VVhen we read of Believers Rejoycing with joy un∣speakable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Me∣thinks, these things do strongly Imply the Safety and Security of the Faithful. Otherwise though we do suppose their Estate at present to be never so happy, yet if their happiness be no way secured; but in the event they may be more miserable, for having once been so happy, Acriores sunt morsus liber∣tatis amissae. Cic. the thought of this must needs be a great allay, and sad check to their Joy and Peace. If the state of Believers be so Lubrick and Ʋncertain, as some would have it; then what ground can they have for such an Hope, and such Peace, and such Joy, as the Scripture speaks of? Rather it would be but like Jonah's Gourd, that sprang up in a Night, and perished in a Night: VVould this afford strong Consolation, and everlast∣ing Consolation, to believe that they are Elect per∣sons to day, but may be Reprobates to Morrow? That they are Saints to day, but may be wretched A∣postates to morrow? VVould this yield Joy unspeak∣able, and such Peace, as passeth understanding, to apprehend their Adoption to day, but to live in fear of their Abdication to Morrow? Indeed if the Saints Perseverance and Salvation depend on their mutable, Inconstant will, not on Gods Purpose and Grace; Then how little hope is there of their Perseverance, and Eternal Happi∣ness? VVhile Innocent Adam being Tempted, was overcome; How much rather may the best of us conclude, that we shall fall by the hand of the Tem∣pter?
VVho of us all is fit to Encounter, and go out against this Goliah? How little hope of the Perseverance of any of the Faithful, if God hath no more promised to secure them from Total and Final Apostacy, than from common Slips, and Falls? VVhen there is scarce any probability, that we should at all times do our Duty, but much to the contrary; that partly through the Remainders of Inbred Corruption, and partly through the Impetuousness of Temptati∣on, we should at one time or other grow Negligent; if, as we are letting go our Hold with God, and Je∣sus Christ, the Lord should let go his Hold of us; VVhat is like to become of us at last? But should we suppose the Scales to be even here, and that it is every way as likely, a Believer will never carry himself so, as might provoke the Lord to withdraw, and to leave him to himself, as that he will; yet it is plain, that to deny the certain Perseverance of the Faithful, must needs Lessen a Believers Com∣fort. So his joy could not be full, no, not though he knew himself to be a true Believer. But admitting the certain perseverance of the Faithful, a Believer that had but a probable perswasion, (and much more being assured of the Truth and Soundness of his Faith) might have more comfort for that. As Mr. Baxter hath well Noted: If I have no perswasi∣on either of my own sincerity, or perseverance, or yet of my perseverance as certain, if I were cer∣tainly sincere, then I should have two difficulties in the way of my comfort; which is more than one alone, and therefore must put me further off from comfort. But if I were sure that all true Be∣lievers shall persevere, if I had withall but a
strong hope, or probability that I am a true Belie∣ver, I should freely receive the comfort of that probability, without the Impediment of farther doubts concerning perseverance. When other∣wise I should be thinking, what if I be Justified, yet how can I tell but I may lose it by Back-sli∣ding? But against the certain perseverance of the Faith∣ful, many things are Objected. Object. 1. We read, Ezek. 18.24, 26. When the Righteous turneth away from his Righteousness, &c. Answ. It is true, that when a Righteous man doth turn away, or if he turneth away from his Righteous∣ness, he shall Die: But it is Propositio conditiona∣lis, quae nihil ponit in esse. An Hypothetical proposi∣tion doth only hold forth the Connexion as true. Not that the Antecedent shall, or may be: but if it should be, then such a thing would be consequent upon it, John 16.7. If I go not away, the Com∣forter will not come. This will not prove, that it might have so fallen out, that Christ might not have departed. His going away was a thing cer∣tain, and Determined, notwithstanding his putting this Supposition. So Gal. 1.8. If we, or an An∣gel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. This will not prove, that an Angel from Heaven ever shall, or may Preach another Gos∣pel. Object. 2. Do we not read of some that believe for a while, but in time of Temptation fall away? Mat. 13.20, 21. Luke 8.13. Answ. A Temporary Faith is not a true Faith. It is there said of a Temporary believer, that he
hath no root: But of the true believer we read, that he is born of Incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. And that his Seed remaineth in him, 1 John. 3.9. And it is Noted as the property of the good Ground, that it bringeth forth Fruit with patience, or perse∣verance, Luke 8.15. That never was good Ground that only maketh a flourish for a time, but doth not bring forth Fruit to perfection. Object. 3. Do not Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and Chap. 10.26, 27, 28, 29. Speak of a Total and Final Apo∣stacy? Answ. 1. To that [If we sin wilfully after, &c.] We answer as before to Ezek. 18.24. 2. These Texts speak of that sin unto Death, which the Regenerate shall never fall into, 1 John 3.9. and 5.18. 3. That having Tasted of the Heavenly Gift, is a Diminutive Expression, denoting a Slighty, and Superficial, not a sound Perception; signifying some∣thing short of that Drinking, John 4.14. Whosoever drinketh of the Water that I shall give him, shall ne∣ver Thirst: But the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life. Something short of that Eating and Drinking, which is by a true and lively Faith, John 6.35, 54. Whoso eateth my Flesh, and drink∣eth my Blood, shall never Hunger, nor Thirst, but hath Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. 4. It would seem that the Apostle does not speak of true Believers, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. But when he speaks of such, he useth another Dialect, ver. 9, 10. But beloved, we are perswaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation. For God
is not Unrighteous to forget your Worth, and La∣bour of Love. 5. That Text, Heb. 6. as they urge it, crosseth another Principle of the Objectors. There it is said, It is Impossible if such fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance. But they hold a Be∣liever may fall away Totally, and yet be raised again by Repentance. As Thompson would say: See Mr. Hickmans Animadver. Dr. Heylins Quinq. Hist. p. 396. I am a Child of the Devil to day; but I have Free-will, and to Morrow I will make my self a Child of God. Object. 4. Instances are brought of some that have fallen, and fallen off: As David, Solomon, Hymeneus, Philetus, &c. Answ. It is granted, some of these were in a state of Grace, and yet fell Foulely; but not Totally, and Finally. They were worsted in praelio, lost this and that Battel, and yet were on the Conquer∣ing side in bello. As we read of Dan, A Troop shall overcome him; but he shall overcome at last. So however they were Foiled for some time, yet they overcame at last. Sometimes God suffereth his own Children to Fall, to make them more Humble, Cautelous, and Circumspect ever after: That they stand more surely, and walk more steadily after∣wards. Again, Some of those mentioned, did fall quite away; but it cannot be proved, that ever they were true believers. The contrary is Intimated, when the Apostle subjoyneth that word of Encou∣ragement to the Faithful, 2 Tim. 2.19. Neverthe∣less, the Foundation of God standeth sure, having
this Seal, the Lord knoweth them that are his. Im∣plying, that the other who had Apostatized were none of his, and never had a good Foundation; o∣therwise they had stood sure. As the Apostle John hath the like, 1 John 2.19, 20, 27. They went out from us, but they were not of us: For if they had been of us, they would (no doubt) have continued with us. But ye have an Unction from the Holy One, (yea, by way of contradistinction to those that went out, and fell off.) And ver. 27. The anointing which ye have received of him, abideth in you: And even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in it. So that according to the Apostles Doctrine, if those Apostates and Impostures, had ever received that Anointing, which true Believers have, they should then have abode in the Truth, and not have proved such wretched Apostates. Object, 5. If the perseverance of the Faithful be so certainly Determined, then all Exhortations and Promises to Perseverance, and all Threatnings in case of Apostacy, are needless, if not absurd. Who would make a business of it, to perswade the Sun to keep its course, that can do no other? Answ. Some things Naturally hold on their Course, Est duplex genus perseverantiae, unum Physicum, quo modo coelum perseverat, & Terra,— Pro∣fectò hoc genus persever antiae non admittit admonitiones. Sed est aliud genus perseverantiae quod est ab animi propositio, id vero admittit, & poscit ultro admonitiones; Nam propositum animi est à judicio & ratione, &c. Camero praelect. p. 227. c. 2. without any understanding of it, or Natural inclination to do otherwise; as the Sun shines, and the Fire burns, whether they are bid to do so, or no. And here it's true, it were Irrational to use
Exhortations to that which their very Forms and Natures put them forth unto. Again, others are so confirmed in their state, and course, that there is no more danger of their being Diverted, or turned aside. So are blessed Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect in Heaven. And therefore being fully confirmed, and no more in any danger of fal∣ling from that state of Perfection; whereunto they are arrived, Ordinances, Exhortations, and the like means of Establishment are needless to them. But the perseverance of the Saints on Earth, de∣termined by God, is promoted, and affected in a Rational way, with Understanding, and Delibera∣tion (wherein it differeth from the Course of Na∣tural Agents) joyned not only with a Natural pow∣er of doing otherwise; but also with great danger of their not persevering in respect of themselves, and of the manifold Temptations, which here they are surrounded, and assaulted with. In which last Respect, the state of the Saints on Earth, is differ∣ent from the state of the Saints in Heaven. And what is not needful to those blessed souls, who are absolutely freed from sin, and set so much above the Power, and reach of Temptation; yet may be needful for the preservation of the Faithful here, who are annoyed both with remainders of Cor∣ruption within, and with Temptations from with∣out. As the Faithful are kept, and held on in their Course by a close application of Spiritual Objects to their Faculties, all means of strengthening their Apprehension of the goodness of their way and state; are very useful, and proper for their Pre∣servation.
2. And now methinks the Absurdity rather fal∣leth on their way, who would separate the means from the end. Gods Intending and Determining the end, does not Exclude, or Overthrow, but ra∣ther Takes in, and Establisheth the means conducing to the Saints Establishment and Perseverance. Though they could not do the work of themselves, yet by Divine appointment they are subordinate to that power of God, which does preserve the Faith∣ful. The Spirit of God making use of them, and concurring with them. As Gods determining whom he will effectually Call, and Convert, does not make the Ministry of the Word needless; So nei∣ther does his Determining that these shall presevere, render the means needless. Grace is nourished and maintained by the like means, whereby it was at first wrought. Again, when God determineth that the Faithful shall be kept unto Salvation; the meaning is not, that they shall be kept without their having any care of themselves: But that he will keep up in them a care not to cast away, and Ruine themselves. Which care is promoted by Exhortations, Promi∣ses, Threatnings: So likewise they are kept through Faith. Now Faith submits to Divine Precepts and Admonitions, closeth with Divine Promises, trem∣bles at Divine Threatnings. Thus Faith takes in the whole Word. 3. Take one plain Instance, Christ assureth  of his standing in Grace, [I have prayed  that thy Faith fail not.] I hope, it  that Peters Faith should not fail, whe  ∣ed that it might not fail: Yet Christ  as well as on the rest, to Watch.
Object. 6. The Doctrine of the certain perseve∣rance of the Faithful is Securitatis pulvinar, the Bolster of Security, the Pillow of Sloath. Answ. 1. Then Christ Preached a Doctrine of Security to Peter, when he told him [I have pray∣ed that thy Faith fail not.] 2. It is possible, that some may abuse this Do∣ctrine of the Saints perseverance, to sloth and secu∣rity; but that is the fault of men, not of the Do∣ctrine. So many did, and do abuse the Doctrine of Free-grace, and Justification by Christs Righte∣ousness, without the works of the Law, Rom. 6.1. which must not therefore be rejected, as false and dangerous Doctrine. 3. But the Doctrine of the Saints perseverance is so far from Teaching, or encouraging to Security, that we cannot hold it, but we must hold our selves condemned by it, if we give up our selves to Secu∣rity. Indeed it tends to beget in the Saints an holy Confidence, not a sinful Security. If I hold, that a Regenerate man does never fall Totally from Grace, then I must needs conclude, I cannot fall totally in∣to Security; or fall into any sin, so as to be wholly under the power of it, and yet be a Regenerate man. These two are purely Inconsistent. To fall totally under the power of Security, or of any o∣ther Reigning sin, is to fall totally from God, and from Grace. So again, If I believe that all sound Con∣verts shall continue in Gods fear, how can I hope, that I was ever a sound Convert, if I cast off his fear? Or if I have a certain perswasion, that I shall be saved, then I as little doubt of my continuing in the way to Heaven even to the end, as of my en∣joying Heaven at last: And every man that hath
this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. 4. The Apostles Doctrine and Practice, both cuts off this Objection. As for his Doctrine, he telleth us, Rom. 11.29. The Gifts and Calling of God, (understand such as flow from Election, spoken of ver. 28.) are without Repentance. Yet in the same Chapter, ver. 20. gives this Caution and Counsel: Thou standest by Faith. Be not high minded, but fear. Indeed the Doctrine of Perse∣verance doth not befriend Carnal security; nor the duty of an holy fear, Cross and Thwart the Doctrine of Perseverance: [Be not high minded, but fear.] Not that the Apostle commendeth doubting, or di∣strust in Christians: he only opposeth Security, and Self-confidence. Christians may have an humble sense of their own Weakness, and Insufficiency, and withal an holy confidence in Gods Power, and Faithfulness. Again, where the Apostle encourageth the Faith∣ful from the very Faithfulness of God to expect a good Issue, whatever Temptations they are put to encounter; yet at the same time he warneth them [Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall.] 1 Cor. 10.12, 13. And as to his own practice, though none will de∣ny, but he was fully perswaded of his own perse∣verance, yet this had no such effect as to make him Remiss and Careless. See the contrary, 1 Cor. 9.27. 5. There is an Anxious fear, and there is a Cau∣tious fear. 1. There is an Anxious fear, inclu∣ding doubtfulness concerning the event. And so far as any one is certain of his perseverance, so far
he is freed from this fear. 2. A Cautious fear, inclu∣ding such an apprehension of the evil of Apostacy, as puts the soul upon an holy care to shun it: And this is a means of preserving the Faithful. Now this is contrary to security. Therefore the Doctrine of the certain Perseverance of the Faithful is not a Doctrine of Security. We (with the Scripture, Jer. 32.40.) Teach it is promoted by such means, as are very opposite to security. And further, Mr. Baxter will grant them: That it is not (at least by any ordinary means) to be expected in this life, that the knowledge of our Sincerity, Justificati∣on, and Perseverance should be so perfect as to have no degree of Doubting, Habitual or Actu∣al, at one time or other. Seeing therefore we are all Imperfect in our certainty of our Sincerity and Perseverance; it's meet and requisite that we be called on to (and so that we keep up) a Rati∣onal working, preventing fear, according to the measure of our uncertainty. 6. They that make this Objection, sometimes grant, that the Apostles might have a Special pro∣mise of Perseverance, and Donum indefectibilis perse∣verantiae: And further cannot deny, but supposing they were certain of their perseverance, yet they might be put upon the use of means from a principle of Faith and Love. Res est soliciti plena timoris Amor. Now will it not hence follow, even from their own Concessions, that the Certainty of the Saints Perseverance will not ne∣cessarily inferr, or produce Security and Negli∣gence? Object. 7. What need have the Faithful to pray for Grace or Perseverance, if their Perseverance be Certain and Determined?
Answ. 1. Prayer is a necessary part of that Worship, and Homage due to God, an acknow∣ledgment of our Dependance on him; and that he is the Author of all that good, we either have, or hope for. 2. That the Perseverance of the Faithful is pro∣mised, this can be no Bar to their praying for it. But the Promise is an Encouragement to Prayer, and Prayer a means to obtain the Promise, Ezek. 36.36, 37. I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. Yet for this I will be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them. The Lord would have his People to sue his Promise, to put his Bond in suit. As David did, 2 Sam. 17.27. And Daniel prayed with a Courage, when he understood the Number of the Years, whereof the Word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish Seventy Years in the Desolations of Je∣rusalem. Promissiones Dei non huc tendunt ut Ho∣mines torpeant, & inde captent occasionem ignavia & socordiae, quia certo persuasi sunt Deum facturum esse quicquid promisit, Vid. in M. Pool. Synops. in Dan. p. 3. sed ut eos so∣licitet stimuletque ad preces. As a good Expositor notes. 3. They that hold Perseverance a Benefit offered to all alike upon this condition, Nempe si gratiae sufficienti non defuerint: That is to say, If they shall not be wanting to that sufficient Grace, and Help afforded to them; these rather take away the use of Prayer here. For so one can∣not pray with understanding any other way than thus; Lord, give me to improve that sufficient Grace which of course thou offerest to me, as to all others, if I have a mind to improve it. Let me peresevere, if I will.
Object. 8. How should God ever seriously try the Faith of his People, if he hath determined, that their Faith shall never fail? Answ. 1. Gods trying of his People, is not for his own sake, he knows their minds, and thoughts afar off, Psal. 139.2. That which we read, 2 Chr. 32.31. God left Hezekiah, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart. Is spoken per , after the manner of men. The same is to be said to Gods trying of Abraham, Gen. 22.1, 12. Exploratio obedientiae Abrahae non est ignotae deprehensio, sed notae jam illustrior patefactio & so∣lennis approbatio. (Alting.) So it is not for his own sake, but it is for their sakes, and others sakes, that God trieth them, That they might be more known to themselves, and others. 2. Was not Christs Obedience tried, Heb. 5.8. when yet there was no doubt to be made of his Obedience? 3. Thus one might Argue as well against the Divine praescience, and deny that God foresees who shall persevere in the Faith, and consequently deny that any are Elected so much as ex fide praevisâ, (which yet they maintain) because God could not seriously try and prove their Faith, if it was cer∣tainly known to him before. Indeed a new Writer hath started that strange Notion, Middle Way of Elect. and Re∣demp. p. 14. that some things are Insoibilia, as well as other things are Impossibilia in themselves. Their nature's such, as God cannot foresee them, because he would have them Contingent; now though I hope, his Design is good, to represent God more Lovely, and more Adorable, (as he says.) Yet the Asserti∣on seemeth to be a very bold one, and very unwor∣thy
of God. He best knoweth, whether here he loweth with Socinus's Heifer, Socin. prelect. c. 8. f. 26. Quae∣am sunt, que Deus scire nullâ ratione ei potest, nec tamen ipsius omniscien∣iae quicquam derogatur. But when a man killeth mother by chance, not Intentionally, we find Gods hand in it, Exod. 21.12. Castal. in M. Pool. Synops. Quae pu∣ant Homines casu fieri, providentiâ Dei fiunt. And if Gods hand be in such things, Known unto God are all his Works from the beginning of the World, Acts 15.18. And David could not think a thought, but God knew it afar off, Psal. 139.2. As a man that knows what roots are in his Garden, though there be no appear∣ance of them, yet he can say, when Spring comes, such and such a Flower will come up: So the Lord knows a mans thoughts afar off. It is Doctor Preston's Comparison: So Ezek. 11.5. I know the things that come into your mind, every one of them. Again, That God hath foretold future Contin∣gents, it is an Evidence, both that he is the true God, the Disposer and Governour of all things, Isa. 41.22, 23. and 46.9, 10. And a proof that he foresees future Contingents. Else how could he fore-tell them? God revealed to Elisha what Hazael would do to Israel, as that he would dash their Children in pieces, and rip up their Women with Child, 2 Kings 8.12. Now either this Writer must say, that God determined Hazael's will to these things, (which he would not think to be any lovely Representation of God) or else that these things were so Contingent, that God could not foresee them. As he says, There are some things depend on mans will, which
God determines; and here he fore-knows mens Wills, because he Knows as well as Does what∣soever he Will: And there are some things de∣pend on mans Will, which we are to conceive that he determines not, but will have Contingent, &c. More I would have said to this, but that it would look like a Digression. First, From this last Proposition here Confirmed and Cleared, we may infer the happiness of the Faithful; Gods Covenant with them being so well ordered, and so sure. They may say, as Psal. 48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever: He will be our Guide even unto death. None so safe as they, against whom the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. None so Rich as they, who have an Interest in God, in Christ, in the Promises, and in the purchased Possession: And none have their Estates so well settled. Their Estates settled by the Decree of Heaven, and their Names Enrolled in Heaven. 2. Therefore it is our greatest Interest and Con∣cern, that we come up to the Terms of Gods Co∣venant, Isa. 55.3. Incline your Ear, and come un∣to me: Hear, and your Souls shall Live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David. Of David, the Lord said, 2 Sam. 7.15. My Mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul. O rest not in being only outwardly in Covenant, as Saul was! But see that you come up to Covenant-Terms, as David did. What gross and ground∣less presumption is it for one to hope he shall be
preserved in a State of Grace and Salvation, who never yet was in such a State? 3. Then what Enemies are Believers to their own Peace, and Comfort, who do not use all Dili∣gence to clear up the Work of Grace, and prove themselves to be in the Faith; whereupon they might have such strong Consolation? If our Title to an outward Estate, as House or Land was que∣stioned, we would do what we could to clear it. And why are we at no more pains to clear our Spiritual estates? 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whe∣ther ye be in the Faith. If I have Faith, it is not impossible, but upon a due Examination, and dili∣gent Enquiry I may come to know, I have it. And if once I know, I have true Faith, then I may know, I shall be saved: He that believeth shall be saved. 4. Then such as can see their special Interest in God, and in the great blessings of his Covenant, have cause indeed to walk on cheerfully, but not to grow secure, or walk carelessly. None can be more certain, that they shall not fall short of Hea∣ven. and Glory hereafter, than that they shall not fall from Grace and Holiness here. This Doctrine may greatly Encourage the Faithful to strive against sin, assuring them of final Victory: But it gives no encouragement to any to yield to sin, and continue in it. And assurance of ones Per∣severance and Salvation cannot be maintained with∣out an Holy watchfulness. As one says well: Sin doth as naturally bread Troubles and Fears, as a grosse Substance in the Sun-shine causeth a Sha∣dow.
Sect. 20. PROP. XX. The Covenant of Grace is the best Cove∣nant. NOt but that the Covenant of Works was per∣fect in its kind, and most exactly fitted to that State, wherein Man was Created. God there∣in required nothing but what was mans Duty, as he was His Creature. Required nothing, but what man was able to perform. And promised all that man could desire. As perfect perpetual Obe∣dience was required of Man in the Covenant of Works; so perfect and perpetual Happiness was promised thereupon. Thus the Covenant of works did excellently Comport with the state of Man in Innocency. But then the Covenant of Grace only can be to Mans advantage, in his fallen Estate. The Cove∣nant of Grace is the best Covenant for us sinners. It is impossible, that sinners should have Relief, and Benefit by the Covenant of Works. Indeed it may be beneficial unto sinners, Occasionally, Indirectly, that is, shewing our Misery by sin, that hereby we are fallen short of Glory and Happiness, laid under the Curse and Condemnation of the Law; and be∣come Obnoxious to Gods Wrath, and subject to Death Temporal, and Eternal. Thus it is true, the Covenant of Works may be an Occasion of Awa∣kening our Consciences, shewing what lost Crea∣tures
we are, should we stick to that Covenant, and if no other way be found out, but we must stand or fall by the sentence of that Covenant. And thus it may some way prepare sinners to accept of the Covenant of Grace, propounded and held forth. As the Israelites Bondage under the Egyptian Task-Masters should have prepared them to hearken to, and welcome Moses and Aaron, who were sent about their Deliverance, Exod. 4.31. But ob∣serve, all the benefit sinners can have this way from the Covenant of Works, is only upon supposition of a Covenant of Grace, provided to relieve them from the strict Sentence of that other Cove∣nant. That sinners can have no benefit Properly, and Directly from the Covenant of Works, (which makes against them) but only from the Covenant of Grace, framed on purpose for sinners Relief. And that the Covenant of Grace is best for us: Appeareth thus, (1.) The Covenant of Works was for the Pre∣servation and Continuation of Mans Happiness: But it speaketh not to his present case, being now sinful and miserable, whereas the Covenant of Grace was provided for his Recovery: Post naufragium tabula, a Plank after Shipwrack. The Covenant of Grace holds forth the way of Mans Restitution and Restauration to Happiness. (2.) The Condition of the Covenant of Works, is utterly Impossible to sinners. To be a sinner, and to be perfectly Conformable to the Will and Law of God; to be a sinner, and not to be a sinner; is a plain Contradiction: It is impossible, Quod fa∣ctum est infectum fieri. But the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace is possible, and attainable; yea, easily in it self. Object. But do not many Divines say, That it is as possible for a man to keep the Law perfectly, as heartily to accept of Christ upon the Terms of the Gospel? Answ. Such Expressions must not be taken strict∣ly, and Rigorously, but with a favourable Con∣struction. For it is simply, and naturally impossible, that a sinner should be perfectly Conformed to Gods Law: But it is not naturally impossible that a sinner should Repent, and should come to Obey from the Heart. True, (as I have proved before) none so with∣out Gods Special Grace; yet that any, who are called on to Repent, and Believe, do it not, they can only blame themselves: The hindrance is in their Wills. They might come to Christ if they would. As Mr. Of the Cove∣nant. p. 343. Ball says: The Invitation of God is not so hard, that Man cannot fulfill it, if he would: But such as if Man would, he could not but Execute. Sinner, How it it? Art thou unseignedly willing to leave thy sins, that would Ruine thee for ever? Art thou heartily willing to accept of Christ; as to be Redeemed and Saved, so to be Guided, Ruled, and Governed by him? This is the Sum and Sub∣stance of the Condition of the Covenant of Grace. If thou art unwilling to this, certainly, thou judg∣est thy self unworthy of Eternal Life, and shalt be Self-condemned. You see, they are no hard Terms, whereon Life and Happiness is offered and promised in the Covenant of Grace. If you be but willing, truly willing, it is done. And if you be unwilling
to abandon your Lusts, that would be your Death, and unwilling to give up your selves to Jesus Christ, the only Redeemer, and an All-sufficient Saviour; it is evident, your Destruction is of your selves, that you are left without excuse. (3.) The Covenant of Works requiring and ex∣acting Obedience every way perfect, as the Con∣dition of it, there was no provision of a Mediator, no place for a Mediator, when God made that Co∣venant with man. The Covenant of Works own∣ed no such thing, as Acceptation through, and for the Righteousness of another. But the Covenant of Grace does admit of, and hold forth a Media∣tor. According to the Covenant of Grace, we may be Justified and Saved for the Righteousness of another, scil. of Jesus Christ, the Lord our Righ∣teousness; when it was impossible that we should be Justified, and Saved by our own Righteousness, And the Righteousness of Christ (God-man) which is made over to a believing sinner for his Justificati∣on, is a more excellent Righteousness, than that of any meer Creature. (4.) The Covenant of Works holds forth no such thing, as Pardon. Absolute perfect Obedi∣ence being (as I said) the Condition of it, upon the least sin, that Covenant was Irreparably broken. But the Covenant of Grace accepting of sincere Obedience, and requiring no more as its Condition, granteth out a Pardon to those, whose sins are not Inconsistent with Sincerity. And so this Covenant is capable of Renewing. Wast thou not obliged to forsake sin, and to give up thy self to Christ, and his Service, by thy very Baptism? But alas, Hast thou not broken thy Baptismal Covenant?
Yea, Hast thou not lived long in the breach of Co∣venant? And yet if at last thou wouldst Repent, and come in to Christ, thou shouldst be pardoned, and accepted. (5.) Man might keep the Condition of the Cove∣nant of Works for a time, and yet afterwards fall off, and lose all. God Created Man at first in a state of Integrity, with sufficient ability to Obey perfectly if he would; but did not then think meet to Engage, and Undertake for him, that his will should be ever to Obey. But such as come up to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, stand safe, are upon surer ground than Adam in Innocency. Their Perseverance is certain; and as their Perse∣ance is certain, so their Salvation, and Happiness. Thus get within the Ark of the Covenant, and you are Lodged safe indeed. Now, 1. Here take Notice of the Riches of Divine Grace and Mercy. When man had once broken Covenant with God, one would have thought, the Divine Majesty should have been so Incensed against him for it, as never more to have dealt with man in this way; or if He did make another Covenant with man, it should have been upon harder Terms: Yet behold, and wonder, from mans breach of the Covenant of works, he takes occa∣sion to manifest more of his Grace, in making another Covenant more to his Creatures advantage, when man might rather have concluded, that he would cast off for ever, and would be favourable no more. Is this the manner of man, O Lord God? If a man find his Enemy, will he let him go well away out of his hand? God dealt not so with the Angels that fell, as he hath done with sinful men.
2. See here the gross Ignorance, Folly, and Mad∣ness of Self-justitiaries. Such as adhere to the Co∣venant of Works, and hope to be saved by their works, slighting and contemning Christ, and Grace offered. They that say to the works of their hands, ye are our Saviours: And say, we are Lords, we will not come to thee. Surely, they are miserable, foolish Creatures, they know not what is good for themselves, that go about to establish their own Righteousness, rejecting Christ, and his Righte∣ousness. These trust to a broken reed: To turn a∣way from Christ, to relie on ones own Righteous∣ness, is to build on the Sand, not on the Rock: Or as if a man leaned his hand on a Wall, and a Serpent bit him. Indeed better no hope, than false hope; Better no confidence, than Carnal confidence. It is better to have no peace, than that which is false. A lying refuge will at last prove no Refuge, will be no Pro∣tection, but the Confusion of those that put their trust in it. I should have far greater hopes of one that is low in Self-despair, than of one that is highly Confident in himself.
Heb. 8.6. and Chap. 7.22. Mediator of a better Covenant. Sect. 21. PROP. XXI. The New Covenant of Grace, is the best Dis∣pensation of the Covenant of Grace. THe Gospel-Dispensation, this last Edition of the Covenant is the best: And it was meet, that the best Dispensation should come in with Christ, the Mediator of the Covenant. It was fit, he should have the Honour of bringing in the best Form, and Administration of it. Now this is the best Dispensation of the Cove∣nant. (1.) In regard of Plainess and Perspicuity. As Mr. Of the Cove∣nant. p. 33. Ball observes: From the first gi∣ving forth of the Promise, until the Coming of Christ in the Flesh, the Revelation was more Clear, Distinct, Ample, as the Coming of the Messiah did approach nearer and nearer. So it was Clearest, and Fullest, when Christ Came. And so much it seemeth was expe∣cted: As the Samaritan woman could say, John
4.25. I know that Messias cometh, when he is come, he will tell us all things. No wonder that the Church of Christ under the Gospel hath more sight, since the Sun is Risen. Christ was darkly shadowed out under the Old Testament, but is clearly Revealed in the New. Moses was vailed, and an hard thing it was for the Jews to look to the end of that which is Abolished, (2 Cor. 3.13.) Christians have the Advantage clear of those that Lived before Christ. So that what the Prophets foretold, we may have a clearer understanding of, than they had them∣selves. As we read, 1 Pet. 1.12. That not unto themselves, but unto us, they did Minister the things that are now reported. We may see those things that many Prophets, and Kings, and Righteous men heretofore could not see, (Mat. 13.17. Luke 10.24.) We may know Christ in his Offices, and special Undertaking, and his saving Benefits, of which they knew very little. Types are best ap∣prehended by the presence, and coming of the Antitype. So Christians may understand the scope and meaning of the Legal sacrifices, and other Types of Christ, better than the Jews themselves did. Yea, it is a wonder, if any of us now should be Ig∣norant of Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him, 2 Cor. 4.3.4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; such whose eyes the God of this World hath blinded. What should we think of such as enjoy the Gos∣pel, and yet are Ignorant of Christ, and the way of Salvation by him? Must it not needs be affected Ignorance? Must it not be wilful Blindness, if not judicial too? Indeed, they that like not to receive the Truth in Love, that they might be saved, may
justly be given up to Satan, to be further blinded, and deceived by him. That as the Philistines dealt with Sampson, so should he deal with them, even put out their eyes, blind their minds, lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine into them. Do not such forfeit their eyes, who will not see the things that belong unto their peace? As it is Isa. 6.9, 10. (A Text that is Cited no less than six times in the New Testament.) Hear ye in hearing, (hear as much as ye will) but understand not: q.d. In summâ rerum abundantia peribitis same. (As Occolump.) The New Covenant of Grace holdeth forth Eter∣nal Life and Happiness more clearly than the Old. What was more darkly propounded, and promised in the Old Testament, is brought to Light, and more plainly discovered, and offered in the New. 2 Tim. 1.10. Life and Immortality, is brought to Light, through the Gospel. Thus New Testament-promises are better Promises: Though not better for the Matter of them, yet better for the manner of propounding them. The Church of God of old, for a long time (even from Adam to Abraham) had but one noted Promise, that we read of, to Live upon; and that very Dark and Mysterious too, [The Seed of the Woman, shall break the Serpents head] And the Church of the Jews had Spiritual, and Heavenly things promised more Darkly, sha∣dowed out under Earthly things; as Heaven was shadowed out under Canaan, the Land of Promise. The way unto the Holiest was not so manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing, Heb. 9.8. But we have Heven opened in the Gos∣pel, and the Vail taken away.
(2.) The Gospel-Dispensation of the Covenant is the best Dispensation, in regard of the Easiness of Services enjoyned. Our Gospel-Service is far more easie, than the Legal-services appointed to the Jews. Under the Old Testament, God required a mul∣titude of Outward services. Many Carnal Ordi∣nances the Jews had, which stood in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, Heb. 9.10. And many of those Services were Costly, as the sacri∣ficing of Sheep, and Oxen, &c. And some of them painful, as Circumcision, and going up from the Remotest parts of the Land, to make their ap∣pearance at Jerusalem thrice a Year, Exod. 23.17. The positive Institutions under the Gospel are very few, and those very plain, and easie. Christs Yoke is very easie, compared with Moses yoke. (3.) The Gospel-Dispensation is the best Dis∣pensation of the Covenant of Grace, in regard of its Extensiveness: Bonum quò Communius, eò me∣lius. The Old Covenant was made with one Na∣tion, the Nation of the Jews, the Gentile Nations being strangers to it. Though a scattering of Gen∣tile Proselytes were taken in, yet they were Incor∣porated into the Jewish Church, shewing that Or∣dinarily salvation was not to be had, but among the Jews. It was , the Prehemi∣nence of the Jew, that unto them were committed the Oracles of God, Rom. 3.1, 2. Before they were the Children of the Covenant. But the Gos∣pel-Covenant is not so Confined to any Nation, ex∣cluding orhers, Mark 16. Go, Preach the Gospel to every Creature. He that Believeth shall be saved. Here's good tidings of great Joy to all People.
(4.) The Gospel-Dispensation of the Covenant is the best Dispensation, in regard of Power and Efficacy accompanying it, Heb. 8.8, 9, 10, 11. The Spirit was given more sparingly to those under the Old Testament, but is poured out more plenti∣fully in the Times of the Gospel. Those appoint∣ments which the Apostle is not afraid to call Car∣nal Ordinances, had less of the Spirit accompany∣ing them than Gospel Ordinances have, 2 Cor. 10.4. The Weapons of our warfare are not Car∣nal, but Mighty through God. The Gospel-Ministration is the Ministration of the Spirit, Signantèr, Emphatically, and Especi∣ally, 2 Cor. 3.8. And is not that the best Dispen∣sation, that hath more of God, more of his Grace and Spirit in it? Of the Cove∣nant. p. 35. It is true, as Mr. Ball hath well observed, (which preventeth an Objection some might make here) If we speak of some particular Persons under the First Covenant, they were endued with greater Gifts of the Spirit, than many under the New: But more Light of Knowledge, and greater Plen∣ty and Abundance of Grace, is bestowed upon the Church in the time of the Gospel, if we re∣spect the Body of the Church, and Faithful in General. (5.) The Gospel-Dispensation is the best in re∣gard of Duration, and Continuance. Indeed as the Old and New Covenant are the fame for Sub∣siance, so that for substance was an everlasting Cove∣nant, 2 Sam. 23.5. Yet as to the Outward Form, and Seals of it, it is changed: So as the New Co∣venant is not to be changed. The New Covenant
shall never wax Old, but remain every way the same to the End of the World. The Old Covenant was to prepare, and make way for the New, and so to give way to it: But the New Covenant is not to give way to any other. There is no Third Dis∣pensation to be expected here upon Earth. They are Idle Dreamers, that Talk, or Think of such a thing. The Gospel-Ministry, Ordinances, and Seals are to continue, till we all come in the Ʋnity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the Stature of the Fulness of Christ, Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13. Till the Lord come, 1 Cor. 11.26. Till the end of the World, Mat. 28.19, 20. Till the End, when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, that God may be All in All. As for Saltmarsh, his Conceit, that under∣standeth [Till the end of the World, Mat. 28.20.] thus: Till the end of that Age, after which a Third Dispensation of the Spirit should take place, and Ministry, and Ordinances, cease: It is very gross. 1. How well does this Interpretation agree with the fore-going words, [Go Teach (or Disciple) all Nations, teaching them to do observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you.] Were all Na∣tions Discipled, and Taught to observe all things whatsoever Christ commanded in that Age? 2. Though  sometimes be put for an Age; yet so it is as well used for , World, as we have it Translated, (Heb. 1.2. and 11.3.) And , again, and again used for the end of the World, Mat. 13.39. The Harvest is the end of the World, . And v. 40.
So shall it be in the end of this World, , not in the end of this Age. So again, ver. 49. So let the Evangelist Matthew, Interpret this [.] And who may better do it? And we see plainly according to him, it must be [Ʋntil the end of the World,] in a proper sence. See Gerhard. Har. Cap. 160. p. 467. c. 1. As for that Text, Heb. 9.26. But now in the end of the World, , it favoureth not Saltm. at all. Eadem est hoc loco , quae est Apostolo alibi ple∣nitudo temporum. Camero. praelect. p. 237. c. 1. In consummatione seculorum. id est, diebus novissi∣mis. Beza. 3. Saltmarsh, his Conceit is plainly against the Gospel, and therefore (sure) is not Gospel. He opposeth the Gospel-Ministration, to the Mini∣stration of the Spirit; which is directly contrary to the Apostle, who calls the Gospel-Ministration , the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. We are sure, the Apostle was in the Right, and therefore Saltmarsh must be in a very great Error here. Others have the like Pretence for casting off Gospel-Ordinances, as when we urge, 1 Cor. 11.26. to prove, that the Lords Supper, is to conti∣nue in the Church: (And if that, why not other Ordinances Instituted by the same Author?) Till he come. To this some say, He is come to them in the Spirit; and being come in the Spirit, such Ordinances are out of Date. But what Ground or VVarrant have they to understand it of his
coming in the Spirit? Will it not hence follow, that the Lords Supper was Instituted for none but Unbelievers, Carnal, unregenerate Persons, such as have not the Spirit? If they that have the Spi∣rit, have no more to do with this Ordinance, then we must say, it was never intended, as a Feast for Christ Friends: But for such as are none of his, (as, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.) Again it is manifest, that the Apostles and o∣thers, to whom Christ was come in the Spirit, did yet continue to hold Communion in this, and other Ordinances. As we read, Acts 2.42. They con∣tinued stedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and Pray∣ers. The Apostles Practice, with other Primi∣tive Christians, who had the Spirit in an Eminent Degree and Measure, and yet kept close to this, and other Gospel-Ordinances, plainly Condemns their VVay, and Overthrows their Conceit, who under Pretence of having the Spirit, cast off Ordinances, and think themselves above them. Therefore we are to understand another com∣ing of Christ, to be meant in 1 Cor. 11.26. Then his coming in the Spirit, even his Second coming, his coming in Glory, Luke 9.26. His coming at the end of the VVorld, Mat. 24.3.37, 39. Rev. 22.20. The Gospel-VVay be∣ing to Continue from His First to His Second coming.
The Times of the Gospel are oft called the Last dayes, As the ends of the World, , 1 Cor. 10.11. Fines, Idcirco hi dies vocantur novissimi, & aetas Christi adventum consecutae verè dici potest Seculorum perfectio ac complementum. Beza. Isa. 2.2. Heb. 1.2. God hath in these Last days spoken to us by his Son; the Gospel being to succeed, and put and end to the Old Testament-Dispensation, and so being it self to Continue to the end of the Time. So the ancient Hebrews, called the Kingdom of the Mes∣siah, The World to come; which Expression the Apostle useth, Heb. 2.5. In these Last days of the Gospel, God hath poured out of his Spirit, as we see Acts 2.16, 17. Then judge whether they speak according to Scripture, who would make the Gos∣pel-Dispensation a middle Dispensation, and to give way to a Dispensation of the Spirit. If Gospel-Times be the Last times, and if that pouring out of the Spirit which was promised, was to be in and under the Gospel; then there is no such Dispensa∣tion of the Spirit to be expected here on Earth, as Quakers and Enthusiasts talk of. Now how does it concern us all to see, that we receive not this Grace in vain? If we are strangers to God, and Grace, who Live under the best Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, How Inexcusable are we? And how can we think to E∣scape, if we Neglect Gospel-salvation? This is the Everlasting Gospel. No other Gospel to come af∣ter it. Lud. Tena. in Heb. 1.2. p. 28. b. Evangelium dicitur Lex no∣va, non tantum quia successit veteri, sed quia post illam non est alia futura. God will never Treat with men upon other Terms,
then are set down here. These are the last offers he will ever make, Mark 16. Go, Preach the Gospel to every Creature: He that Believes, shall be Sa∣ved: But he that Believes not shall be Damned. If you reject these Terms, God will reject you. You that have not only Moses, and the Prophets, but the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, if you do not Believe, and if you are not this way brought in, your Case is desperate. If any bring any other Gospel than this unto you, let him be accursed, says the Apostle, Gal. 1.9. And that Doctrine which would lay the Publishers under a Curse, is no way likely to bring the Hearers on to true Blessedness. And then, that the Lord hath kept the best to the last for us, that we have been brought forth under the last and best Dispensation of the Covenant, it should teach us to acknowledge his Exceeding abun∣dant Grace to Us-ward. It was not because we were better than others that went before, that we have been thus Priviledged above others. No, we were by Nature the Children of Wrath, even as o∣thers: Our Father as an Amorite, our Mother as an Hittite, and We as the Children of the Ethiopi∣an before God. Yet the Mystery which was hid from Ages, and Generations, is made manifest un∣to us, to whom God would make known the Riches of his glorious Grace. And thus the last come to be first, (to allude to that, Mat. 19.30.) VVe that Live under the Gospel-Dispensation, are Pri∣viledged far above those that went before; not only such as were altogether strangers to the Common-wealth of Israel, and to the Covenants of Promise, but even such as were taken into Covenant under the Old Testament-Dispensation, see Mat. 11.11.
with Luke 7.28. John's Ministry is preferred to that of the Prophets, as clearer; and the Gospel-Ministry preserred unto Johns, as clearer still. So it is a greater Priviledge and advantage (if men would Improve it) to enjoy a Gospel-Ministry, than to have sat at Moses feet, or to have heard of any of the Prophets of Old. But a word more: As we Live under a better Dispensation, should not we indeavour to be bet∣ter? As we have greater means, should we not a∣bound more in Grace and Knowledge? As we en∣joy more, should we not do more than others? Now let our Conversation be as becometh the Gospel. I shall not Enlarge further upon the Doctrine of the Covenants. Though many things are Preter∣mitted, yet I hope I may Conclude, as Cunaeus, Diximus autem neque omnia, neque Nihil. I have not said all (but far short of all indeed) yet I hope what hath been said, it is not as Nothing. THE END.
The Table. A. ANtiquity of the Gospel. Page 303. 350. B. Baptism, Infants right to it proved, p. 398. 403, &c. Objections against it Answered, p. 412, &c. No need of an express Command for it, p. 407. Antipaedo-Baptists have no Scripture Rule for defer∣ring their Childrens baptism. p. 417 The special advantages of Infant-Baptism. p. 430. Dipping not necessary to Baptism. p. 439, &c. C. Children taken into Covenant together with their Pa∣rents, p. 365, &c. How stiled holy, p. 378. Dis∣ciples. p. 421 Christs Conception, why Miraculous, p. 90, 91. A∣gainst being Christed with Christ. p. 273 Church. Of an Ʋniversal Visible Church. p. 346 Condition. The Conditions God propounds, man is bound to accept. p. 44, 45. There are Conditions in the Covenant of Grace, p. 134. &c. The Conditions are performed by us, not by God, or
Christ for us. p. 145, &c. But by the help of spe∣cial Grace, p. 148. God not unjust in requiring the Condition, where yet he gives not Special Grace, p. 163. The Condition of the Covenant of Grace, what, p. 225. (1) What, in rèference to the Honour of the Redeemer, and of Free-grace, p. 229, (2) What, for the Honour of Gods Holi∣ness, and Authority, p. 242, &c. (3) What, to secure the Interest and Benefit of Souls, p. 252, &c. [Corruption, vid. Nature.] Covenant. The difference between a Promise and a Covenant. p. 44 Covenant of Works, why so little said of it in Scri∣pture, p. 2. Made with Adam and his Posteri∣ty, p. 5. How far it is now abrogated, p. 72, &c. Children might be Involved in it, though they know nothing of it. p. 84, 85 Covenant of Grace. It is made betwixt God and man, p. 229. It is Conditional, p, 134. One and the same for Substance in all Ages, p. 298, &c. It was made with Adam, p. 298. With A∣braham, p. 305, &c. With the Israelites, p. 311, &c. How this was a Subservient Covenant, p. 325. Of a Mixt Covenant, p. 326. Of a Co∣venant of Peculiarity, p. 334. Of a Political Covenant, p. 339, &c, 345. Atwofold manner of being in Covenant, scil. Externally, and also Internally, p. 352. The Priviledges of those, that are Externally in Covenant, p. 362. The Special Priviledges of those, who are also Internal∣ly in Covenant, p. 451. &c. The Covenant of Grace is the best Covenant, p. 478. Its Dispen∣sation twofold, scil. Old, and New, p. 331. The New is the best Dispensation, and why, p. 484
The Covenant of Redemption. D. Death. What kind of Death threatned in the Cove∣nant of Works. p. 51, 52 Dipping. Whether Necessary, and Essential to true Baptism. p. 439, &c. Dispensation. The Old and New Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, p. 331. No third Dis∣pensation to be expected here on Earth. p. 489 F. Faith. Of the Faith of those that Lived before Christ. p. 229, 301, 302 Fear, twofold, Anxious, and Cautious. p. 471 G. vid. Interest. God. Against being Godded with God. p. 270 Grace. No Subtraction of it from Man till he sin∣ned. p. 64, 65 Of Special Grace in the work of Conversion, p. 148. What Duties Special Grace teaceth, p. 174. Spe∣cial Grace promised to some, p. 179, &c. Sa∣ving Grace purchased by Christ for some. p. 199, &c. I. Image of God in man threefold, p. 7. Wherein it cbiefly consists p.8. Whether Gods Image in Adam was Natural, or Supernatural, p. 11. Na∣tural two ways.
Incogitancy, probably the first step in mans Fall. p. 71 Infants, if not sinners in themselves, they should not be saved by Christ. p. 95. [v. Baptism.] Interest in God twofold. p. 262 What happiness Included in the Special Interest. p. 262, &c. L. Law. Whether the Moral Law bind only as deliver∣ed by Christ Redeemer, and not also as the Law of our Creator. p. 17, 23, 49, 50. Whether the Moral Law obliges, as given by Mo∣ses. p. 20 The distinction of the Law of VVorks, of Faith, and of Christ, considered. p. 22 Whether God ever dispensed with a Natural, or pure∣ly Moral Law. p. 32 Covenant of Grace a Law. p. 120 How the Law is opposed to the Gospel. p. 339 Life. What Life was Promised to Adam in Innocen∣cy. p. 38, &c. M. Man holy at first but mutable. p. 63, 64, 65 Mediator. No Mediator in the Covenant of Works, p. 61. Whether Christ be a Mediator for Confir∣mation to Angels. p. 62, 63 Merit. Whether Innocent Adam in a strict sence, could Merit the Reward. p. 42 How the Saints cannot Merit. p. 205, &c. Moral Agents governed in a different way from Na∣tural. p. 25
N. Nature. Corruption of mans Nature following the Fall. p. 86 It makes all liable to Condemnation. p. 93 [vid. Original.] O. Obedience. Whether it be in Heaven. p. 67 Offers of Grace. God mockes not Creatures in them. p. 166 Original Corruption Propagated. p. 88. [vid. Na∣ture.] P. People. What Happiness included in Gods special owning any for his People. p. 292, &c. Permission. Why God permitted mans Fall. p. 68 Perseverance of Saints proved, p. 453. Objections against it answered. p. 464 Precepts. Of positive Precepts, p. 35. What un∣der the Gospel. p. 36 Promise. The Promise of Life to Adam, not of strict Justice p. 41. 48 Of the Promises of the first Special, Inward, Dis∣criminating Grace, p. 189. The use of such Pro∣mises, p. 194. Whether the Israelites had only Temporal Promises. p. 317 R. Redeemer. The Faithful had some knowledge of a
Redeemer before Christ's coming. p. 229, &c. Respecter of Persons, how God is not. p. 170. Reward. In our Obedience, we may have an eye to the Reward. p. 26 S. Salvation cannot come by the Covenant of Works. p. 99 Sin. The greatness of mans Sin in eating the forbid∣den Fruit. p. 69, 70 Sinners. We are Sinners, not only by Imitation. p. 91 Spirit. Whether the Expression of the Spirits personal Indwelling in Believers, be sound. p. 276 T. Testament. The Covenant of Grace a Testament, p. 115. Old Testament of use to Christians. p. 348, 349, 351 Threatnings. A Righteous man awed with them, p. 53. Declare what punishment is due. p. 80, 81 U. Usurpers. Wicked men not Usurpers of what they have by Providence, though no right by Covenant. p. 288 W. Will. Freedome of mans Will not overthrown by Special Grace. p. 158
Texts of Scripture Cleared and Vindicated. GEnesis 3.15. Page 298, 299. Lev. 18.5. p. 321. Deut. 10.12. p. 320. Jer. 31.31, &c. p. 179, &c. 334, 335. Chap. 32.40, p. 455. Ezek. 16.61, 62. p. 333. Chap. 18.24, 26. p. 464. 36.26. 27. p. 179, &c. Mal. 2.15. p. 392. Mat. 16.18. p. 457. 28. 19. p. 403. 418, &c. Ver. 20. p. 489. Mar. 16.16. p. 423, 424. John 5.22. p. 18. Acts 2.38, 39. p. 370, 408. 13. 48. p. 453. Rom. 4.11. p. 236, 237. 5. 12. p. 94. Ver. 19. p. 89. Rom. 6.4. p. 444, &c. 9. 6, 7, 8. p. 355. 10. 5. p. 323. 11. 15, 16, &c. p. 374. 1 Cor. 7.14. p. 378. Gal. 4.24. p. 339. 5. 3. p. 313, 314. Tit. 1.2. p 131. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. p. 465. 8. 6, 7. p. 331. Heb. 8.10. p. 179, &c. Ver. 13. p. 338. 9. 20. p. 118. Jam. 4.12. p. 19, 1 Joh. 4.18. p. 56. Rev. 3.4.  p. 216. 13. 8. p. 300.
