c132 e455_10 99864462 162029
A Glasse for the Times By Which According to the Scriptures, you may clearly behold the true Ministers of Christ, how farre differing from false Teachers. WITH A briefe Collection of the Errors of our Times, and their Authors Names. Drawn from their own writings. ALSO Proofes of Scripture by way of Confu∣tation of them, by sundry able Ministers. Collected by T. C. a Friend to Truth. LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1648.
The Gospell Minister gifted, and made an able overseer, and sent, Rom. 10.11. For, HIs great labour is compared to a Steward; As good Stewards, &c. 1 Cor. 4.1. To a Shepheard, John 21.16. Peter feed my sheep. To a Watchman, Ier. 6.17. They watch for your soules. To a Prophet, Matth. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet. To an Apostle, the 12.28. His abi∣lities are answerable; To explaine the word. To convince the soule. To reach the affections. To build up, nourish and cherish Christs members by Application, Information, Exhortation, Re∣proofe and comfort. Having the light of knowledge, heat of zeale, and influence of vertue in life and doctrine; being filled with zeale for Gods glory, and zealously compationate towards poore lost soules. The Word delivered by such a Minister, is a sovereigne salve for every sore; Compared as followeth, To a Medicine for the wounded, Psalme 119.10. To a Lanthorne for the ignorant, Psal. 119.5. To a Guide for our feet in the way of peace, Luke 1.79. To a Bit to curbe the unruly, Iames 1.26. To a two-edged sword for the Christian souldier, Heb. 4.12. To a Treasure. 2 Cor. 4 7. Wee have this Treasure in, &c. To a Key or Inlet to glory; Matth. 16.19. To Wine, to revive and cheare the heart, Matth. 19.17. To water to wash the defiled, Heb. 10.21. Revel. 22.17. To Fire to warme the frozen hearted, Luke 24.32.12.35. To Salt to season the unsavoury, Matth. 5.15. To Raine, Isa. 55.10.11. As the raine upon the Earth, &c. To Milke for babes, Luk 9.54. To Hony, Psal. 19.10. Doubtlesse no hony in my mouth, &c. To everlasting Food, John 6.27 Its meat that perisheth not. Labour not for the meat that perisheth, but for that which endureth to ever∣lasting life. The entrance of thy word giveth light, Psal. 119.130.
False Prophets not gifted, unable, and not sent; For their deceitfull and soule-murthering opinions may be compared as followeth, TO seducers, 2 Tim. 3.13. To corrupters. To deceitfull workers, 2 Cor. 11.13. To raylers and wresters of Scripture, 2 Pet. 3.16. To hypocrites. To lyers, Revel. 2.2. To Antichrist, 1 Iohn 2.18. To belly-servers, Rom. 16.18. To pernicious false teachers, 2 Pet. 2.2. In the 2 Tim. 3.8. They are called men of corrupt mindes, reprobate concerning the Faith. To cunning crafty creepers into houses, 2 Tim. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. The Doctrine delivered by such, is compared, To the doctrine of devills, 1 Tim. 4.1, 2. To damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. To fained speeches. To a pernicious evill. To perverse disputings, 1 Tim. 6.3, 4, 5. To fables, 2 Tim. 4.3, 4. To windy do∣ctrine, Eph 4.14. Thus teaching things they ought not, speaking lyes in hypocrisie, 1 Tim. 4.2. From which corrupt fountaine proceeds these pernicious errours mentioned; in the Testimony of the London Ministers, viz. Against the Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures. Against the Nature and Essence of God. Against the Trinity of persons in unity of Essence. Against the Deity of the Son of God. Against the Deity, and the divine worship of the Holy Ghost. Against Gods eternall decree of Election and Reprobation. Concerning originall sin, and Christ our Mediator. Touching universall or generall Redemption. About naturall mans freewill, and power to good supernaturall. Against the true nature and ground of Faith and Justification. Touching those that are in Christ, in reference to the morall Law to sin and perfection. Errours against the Ordinances of Christ in generall. Against the Lords day, Sabbath, against Baptisme. Against lawfull oaths, touching Marriage and divorce Against the souls Immortality, & the being of Heaven or hel now. About a generall Toleration, promoting all kinde of errour and heresies under the pretence of Liberty of Conscience.
A collection of the Errours of our Times. Together with the Authors names, drawne from their owne writings. To which is added proofes of Scripture by way of Confutation of them, by sundry able Ministers. THe errour of Laurence Clarkson cited in Londons Testimony. pag. 5. That the Scriptures in the true Manuscript is but humane, and so not able to discover a Divine God. Confutation, Exod. 31.18.32.16. Iohn 5.39. Rom. 3.2. Errour of J. G. 1 That no writing whatsoever, whether Trans∣lation or Originalls, are the foundation of Christian Religion. Ioh. 5 46, 47. 2 To believe the Scriptures in English to bee Gods Word, is no foundation of Christian Religion, Confuta. Acts 18.28. Errour of Iohn Bidle. 1 To take God otherwise then personally, is to mistake him. Confut. Deut. 6.4. Esa. 45.6. 2 To distinguish between Essence and Person in God, is a wicked distinction. Heb. 1.3. Ioh. 10.3. 3 That the Holy Ghost is a created Spirit among the Angels, and no more omnipresent then the devill, and worshipping the Holy Ghost is not allowed in Gods word. Ioh. 3.5. Acts 13.28. Rom. 15, 16. Errour in Divine light in the booke of Comfort for Believers. 1 That the Father and the Spirit suffered in the Son. Confu. Iohn 1.14.3.16. That more then the Elect shall be saved. Acts 13.48. Rom. 11.5.7. 2 That God hath more hand in mens sinfulnesse then they them∣selves, and is the authour of his peoples sinfulnesse. Psal. 5.4. Hab. 1.13. Heb. 10.30.38. Errour of Paul Best, cited in Lond. Test. 1 That God the Father is God essentially, the Son visentiall; and 2 The Holy Ghost potenti∣ally.
Confut. Acts 5.3, 4. Job 33.4. 3 That Christ is a mighty God, but not Almighty; John 4.42. Matth. 2.21. 4 That he is not truly and properly God; 2 Timoth. 1.10. Tit. 2.13. 5 That the better part of Christs person is man. Esa. 45.21, 22. 6 That to make Christ coequal with the Father, is to make a false Christ. Error, In the fulnesse of Gods love by L.S. 1 That if the love of God be limited to a few, its far from infinite. confut. Eph. 2.4. C. 3.8. 2 That it is not sutable to God to pick and chuse among men to shew mercy. Rom. 9.20, 21. 3 That the reprobate condition of men and Angells shall bee re∣gained. Confu. Rom. 9.22. Matth. 25.41. Errour, in mans mortality, written by R. O. Cit. in Lond. Test. 1 That the soule of Christ was in the Grave. Mat. 27.50. Acts 13.29. 2 That Christ ascended into the Son. Heb. 1.3. 1 Pet. 3.22. 3 That whole man is a compound wholly mortall; Gen. 2.7. Mat. 10.28. 4 That the going of the soule into Hell is a meer fiction. Confutat. Matth. 22.32. 2 Cor. 5.4. 5. That the soule is mortall, and sleeps with the body. Errour of P. Hobson, Cit. in Lond. Testim. 1 That Christ was pur∣chased by love. Confu. Heb. 2.12. 2 That Christ did not purchase love for us. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Errour of H. Hammond, Cited in Londons Test. That Christ Jesus was given to satisfie for all the sinnes of all mankinde. Confut. Heb. 2.14. Philip 2.8. Gal. 3.13. Errour of J. S. Cited in Londons Testim. 1 That the Father is a Sabbath commanded to Christians. Confuta. John 20.19.26. Acts 20.7. 2 That every day is a Sabbath to Christians. 3 That none ought to give Baptism, because they cannot give the Holy Ghost with it. Matth. 3.11. John 1.33. Acts 19.4. Errour of M. Web, Cited in the Testimony of London Min. 1 That Johns Baptisine ended at Christs; Confutat. Matth. 3.11. 2 That there must be another institution of Baptisme, or else it is of no weight. Acts 19.4. Ioh 1.33. Matth. 28 19. Errour of M. Bacon in the Testimony of London Ministers. 1 That Baptisme is a shadow of Christ; and must goe out, as the substance
comes in. Confut. 1 Pet. 3.21. Rom. 4.11. Col. 2.12. Rom. 6.4. 2 That the baptisme of Infants is a great delusion, and of as dan∣gerous consequence, as any the man of sin brought into the world. Rom. 11.15, 16, 17. Marke 10.14. Errour of S. Gorton and R. Williams. 1 That it is forswearing to sweare at all; Confut. Ier. 4.1.2. 2 That it is unlawfull to call a wicked man to sweare, or pray. Matth. 5.39. Errour of E. Avery, Cited by the London Ministers. That there is no resurrection of the naturall body, but onely mysticall. That the bodies of flesh belonging to the Saints shall be annihilated, and that the soul is God. That hell is a non-entity. That no soules are yet in hell. That all torments of men and devills are yet to come, that Beasts shall rise againe. That divells shall bee tormented in the bo∣dies of the wicked. Confutat. Iohn 5.29. Iob 19.25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 15.12.13. 1 Iohn 3.2. Col. 3.4. Matth. 25.4.1. Iude 6. These following are so grosse, they need no further Confutation. Errour of M. Rand. and M. Iohn Simpson. That the morall Law is of no use at all to a believer, no rule for him to walke by; Nor to ex∣amine his life by, and that Christians are free from the mandatory power of it. Errour of M. Iohn Eaton in The hony combe. That the Law and Christ are two contrary things, one cannot abide the other. By the Believers are nurtered for heaven, and God fits them for service  the world by leading them into sins. Another grosse Errour is this, by M. Randall. That he that be∣lieveth that Christ hath taken away his sinnes, is as free without sin as Christ. That it is as possible for Christ to sin as for a childe of God to sin. That a childe of God need not, nay ought not to aske pardon for his sin; and that it is no lesse then blasphemy for him, so to doe, delivered and maintained by him. Errour of D. Crispe in his Sermons. That every elect person from the first instant of his beeing, is as pure in the eyes of God, as hee
shall be in glory, no more sin is reckoned to him now, then in hea∣ven. That the Lord hath not one sin to charge on any elect person, from their first conception, not so much as originall sin to bee laid on him, though he be in the height of iniquity, and excesse of riot, committing all abominations, God hath no more to lay to the charge of such a person then to a Saint Triumphant in glory. M. Simpsons Errour. That if a man by the Spirit know himself in the state of Grace, though he be drunke or commit adultery, God sees no sin in him, witnesse Mr. Gattaker. That God doth not chastise any of his people for sinne, nor punish the land for the sinne of his people. In the assertion of Grace by Rob. Towne. That as well our workes as persons are perfectly holy and good. N. Coulin an Officer in the Army. That a Saint in this life, with∣out any addition hereafter is perfectly just, perfectly holy, and compleatly glorious in this life, and not capable of any addition after death. M. Saltmarsh in the Smoake of the Temple. That the fulnesse of time is not yet come for Ordinances, there is no Church, no Ordi∣nance yet. They are to begin with gifts and miracles, as in the A∣postolicke times. In the booke called, Little Nonsuch, concerning Marriage. The very next of kin may joyne in Marriage by custome and command, for Sarah was Abrahams sister whom he tooke to wife. In the doctrine of divorce by Iohn Milton. That unfitnesse or contrariety of minde betwixt man and wife, from a naturall cause which hindereth solace and peace are a great reason of divorce. Errours concerning generall Toleration, and Liberty of conscience in The bloody Tenent, by Williams. That Liberty be granted for every man to worship God in that manner as shall appeare to them most agreeable to Gods word, and no man punished, and that no detriment can come to the Church or State by the toleration of Religion, and why may not Papists bee permitted. That it is the will and command of God, since the comming of Christ, a permission of the most Jewish, Turkish, or Antechristian
consciences and worships be granted to all men in all Nations and Countries. By this it appeares what damnable and dangerous errours and blasphemies are sprung up amongst us, we have great need to take our Saviours counsell in Matth. 7.15. to beware of false Prophets, v. the 16. By their fruits yee shall know them, 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be false Prophets who privily shall bring in damnable heresies. For a conclusion and caution against errours, read 2 Tim. the whole third Chapter. Vers. 1 This know also, that in the last dayes perillous times shall come. 2 For men shall be lovers of their owne selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankfull, unholy, 3 Without naturall affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, 4 Traytors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, 5 Having a forme of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof: from such turne away. 6 For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly wo∣men laden with sins, led away with divers lusts, 7 Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 8 Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses: so doe these also resist the truth: men of corrupt mindes, reprobate concerning the faith. 9 But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest to all men as theirs also was. 10 But thou hast fully knowne my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience, 11 Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra, what persecutions I endured: but out of them all, the Lord delivered me. 12 Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. 13 But evill men, and seducers shall waxe worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. 14 But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned, and hast beene assured of, knowing of whom thou haft learned them. 15 And that from a childe thou hast knowne the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. 16 All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for do∣ctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse,
17 That the man of God may be perfect, thorowly furnished unto all good workes. Looke in the 2 Cor. 11.3. But I feare lest by any meanes, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your mindes should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2 Iohn 8.9, 10. Looke to your selves that we lose not those things which wee have wrought, but that we receive a full reward. 9 Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God: he that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Sonne. 10 If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed. Matth. 7.17. Ye shall know them by their fruits: Doe men gather grapes of thornes or figs of thistles? Iohn 7.17. If any man will doe his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speake of my selfe. Prov. 14.12. There is a way which seemeth right unto a man: but the end thereof are the wayes of death. All the words of Scripture in confutation of them, could not be contained at length in this briefe Catalogue, if you turne to them you shall finde them pertinent, as a true touchstone distinguishing gold from drosse. Let this serve for a warning peece to wise Christians, to take heed lest they be corrupted with these notorious Errours of the times, and so fall from their owne stedfastnesse. FINIS.
