C1713 E122_23 99872781 125227
CERTAINE OBSERVATIONS TOVCHING The two great Offices of the Seneschalsey or High-Stewardship, and High-Constableship of ENGLAND. LONDON, Printed for L. Chapman: Octob. 17. 1642.
CERTAINE OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING The two great Offices of the Seneschalsey or High-Stewardship, and High-Constableship of ENGLAND. THe Seneschalsey or High-Stewardship of England is known to be the greatest Office in England by reason of the authority it hath over all other Of∣ficers, wch since the Norman Conquest hath long continued by descent inheritably in the Family of the ancient Earles of Leicester, was after tran∣slated to the house of Lancaster, and by K. Henry the fourth, of that stock, when he had obtained the Crown, was incorporate into the same, as all other the honours, Lands, and he∣reditaments of that house were. For the plainer manifestation thereof, it will serve wel to the purpose, before the Office it selfe be described, to shew the first institution thereof, and to recount in or∣der the succession of the Officers whilst it passed inheritably. It is therefore to be understood that amongst the persons of chie∣fest account which entred this Kingdome with D. William of Nor∣mandy,
and were assistant unto him in the conquest thereof, one Hugh Grauntmesuell a Baron of Normandy was of special reckoning, whose father Robert of Grauntmesuell, one of the chiefest Noblemen of all Normandy reteined at home with him for his own comfort, and for the preservation of this stock, the elder of them named Robert, who succeeded him in all the inheritance of Normandy: but sent with the Duke his second son, called Sir Hugh of Grauntmesuell, who so demeaned himselfe in the enterprise, that when by conquest and strong hand the whole Kingdome was subdued by the Normans, their Duke regarding the good service of those that adventured and laboured with him, forgot not the praiseworthy desetts of this No∣bleman, whom therefore he rewarded liberally with sundry great Territories and portions of Land in many shires of the Realm; as namely with those great Lordships Peberworth, Merestone, Quening∣ton, Weston and Wileot in Glocestershire, with divers Lands in Feren∣dow, Meristow, Thorp, Welington, Staverton, Mereford, Newbottle, Middleton, Sutton, Biveld, Wodeford, Edgdow, and Ceroilton in North∣amptonshire, with Wichingston and Hinkley in Leicestershire, with divers Lands in Edwolton, and Sandy-acre in Nottinghamshire, and with Ley in Suffolke, as appeareth by the record in the Exchequor commonly called Domesday. Moreover he made him high Seneschal or Steward of the whole Kingdom according to the Norman usage, a dignity ne∣ver heard of in this Land before, did further advance him in marriage with a great Lady inheretrix of sundry possessions, named Adalisa or Alice, on whom he gat two daughters, his heires, the elder of them called Petronelle or Pernell was married unto Robert Earle of Leicester, surnamed auecles blanches maines, that is, Robert with the white hands, that was the son of Robert le Rossa Earle of Leicester, who was son unto Robert of Beanemount Lord of Pont Adomare and Earle of Mellent in Normandy, brother to Sir Henry of Newburgh the first Earle of War∣wicke after the Conquest, unto whom the said Pernell brought the one moyity of her fathers possessions, and withall for increase, because she was the eldest daughter, together with the honours of Hinckley, the Office of Seneschalsie or Highstewardship of England, which were not partable as the other inheritances were. The yonger of the said Sir Hugh Grauntmessuels daughters called after her mother Adalisa was given in marriage unto one Roger Bygot a Norman with the other moyity of her fathers possessions; unto
whom she bare divers sons and daughters, from the eldest whereof named Hugh Bygot, that was the first Earle of the East-Angles of this family, containing Norfolk and Suffolk, the other Bygots that were after Earls of Norfolk are lineally discended: between which two families contention had often been about the Office of Stewardship, whereof in this place to note what is set down in the record of the Exchequer called the red booke is not impertinent to this purpose, where it is said, that on the Sunday before Candlemas-day, in the 20, yeere of the raigne of K. Henry the son of K. Iohn, commonly called K. Henry the third, at the Coronation of his wife Q. Elenor that was the Earle of Provinces daughter, Simon of Mountford then Earle of Leicester and high Steward of England, lineally descended of the be∣fore-named Parnell, being ready the day of the Coronation to execute his Office of Highsteward, which by right appertained unto him, was forbidden and gainsaid by Roger Bygot then Earle of Norfolk, who being descended from the before named Adalisa, the yonger of Sir Hugh Grantmesuels daughters, alleaged that it was his right to exer∣cise that Office, which controversie (as also divers others then moved) was heard judicially before the King, unto whom Earl Simon replying answered, that it was true that contention had been heretofore mo∣ved between their Ancestors for the same matters, in the daies of King Iohn the Kings father, which was compounded and pacified for the service of ten Knights, or rather ten Knights fees, given by the Earle of Leicester unto the Earle of Norfolk, who therefore released all his title and right to the Highstewardship. Whereunto because Earle Roger of Norfolk alleaged that there rest∣ed of these Knights feet, two and a halfe to be assigned unto him, Earle Simon made answer that he might well recover them with the Arrera∣ges by the Laws of the Land, in the Kings Court, and ought not there∣fore to hinder him in the execution of his Office, seeing he acknow∣ledged the former accord; and by vertue of the same was already in quiet possession of seven Knights fees and a half. And so was Earle Si∣mon by the Kings own doom and sentence admitted to the quiet exer∣cise of the Seneschalsie at the same Coronation. And now to return where we left, Robert Earle of Leicester that wedded Dame Parnell, was high Seneschall or Steward of England, and was the man for whose greatnesse of stomacke the walls of the Town of Leicester were rased to the ground because he took part with
the yong King Henry against his father K. Henry the second, as histories make mention, begat on her sons and daughters, and after in K. Rich∣ards daies, the first, warring in the holy Land, was slain at the siege of Acon, in the yeere of our Lord God 1190, whose eldest sonne Robert, summed after his mother Fitz-Parnell, was after his death Earle of Leicester, and high Steward of England, of whom many worthy acts are by histories remembred, both of his prowesse in the field, and fide∣lity to K. Richard the first, with whom he continued as a most faithfull companion during the Palestine wars, was partaker of his evill fortune by being taken there prisoner, compelled to pay for his redemption 1000 Marks of Silver, and therefore constrained to sell his Castell of Plasey in Normandy. But to be briefe and not to stay upon the Narration of these things. It serveth onely to the purpose, to note that he was one of our high Seneschals, and dying without issue of his body, in the yeere of our Lord God 1204. was buried in the Abbey of Preux neere Leicester, leaving his two sisters to be his heires, between whom the whole in∣heritance was divided, in the daies of K. Iohn. Amicitia the eldest sister was married to Simon of Mountford yonger brother to Almarick Earle of Eureux in Normandy. And Margaret the yongest was wife unto Saher of Quencie, whom K. John made Earle of Winchester, unto whom she brought the one halfe of the Earldome of Leicester, and of the honour of Hinckley; and among other Lands, the Mannor of Grobye, Quitwicke, Shepeshend, Hales, Brackly, South-Keston, Timisbury, and Chimnomere. Simon of Mountford according to the Law and custome of the Land, was in the right of his wife, being the elder sister, made Earle of Leicester, and high Seneschall of England, in the daies of K. Iohn, but he enjoyed not long those honours, being for his con∣tumacy and disobedience, both he and his children shortly after ba∣nished the Land, and his honours and possessions bestowed on Earle Randolph of Chester, who held them a great time, except onely the Patronage of the Abbey of Preux neere Leicester, and the Office of the Stewardship of England, which the King kept in his own hands. This Earle Simor, a great warriour, was head and leader of the yong French King Lodowicks Forces, fighting against the Albigenses about the City of Tholose where he was after shine. These Albigenses be∣cause they began to smell the Popes treachery, and to controle the inordinate proceedings and discipline of the See of Rome, the Pope
therefore accounting them as people hereticall, excited the French King to lay siege against the said City of Tholoso to expugne those Albigenses his enemies: But such was the mighty protection of God fighting for his people against the might of man, that the French could doe no good with all their Engines and Artileries against the City but were forced to retire with great losse of people: among whom this Earle Simon of Mountfort generall of the Army, to whom the Pope had given a little before the Earle of Tholosas Land, was sli with a stone before the gate of the City in the yeere of our Lord God 1219. as likewise was a brother of his besieging of a Castle neere unto Thotosa at the same time; he left two sons of great fame, Earle Altarick of Mounfort, Constable of France, that was taken prisoner in the holy Land, and after his redemption in returning homeward dyed at Idruntum in Italy, Anno 1241. And Simon the yonger that after obtaining the good grace and favour of K. Henry the 3. whose sister he married, was restored to the Earldome of Leicester, and to the integrity of his fathers lost honours & patrimonies in England: a man was he of great courage, and renown, well experienced in the wars, & in matters of government, for long time had he been Seneschall and Governor of the Countrey of Gascoigne, for the King of England his brother in Law, which of his own accord he resigned contrary to the Kings mind, that greatly desired to reteine him in good affection towards him, both because he was a man of great power, wise and valiant, and for that the French laboured to make him their Seneschall; but such was the Earles hap that in the new begun variance between K. Henry and his Nobles for not observing the Laws of the Land, especially such new decrees as had been made at Oxford for the expelling of strangers out of the Realm, he was chosen chiefe Captaine and leader of the No∣bility, and for the time so much prevailed in the enterprize, that the King was by them taken in the battaile neere Lewes in Sussex, together with his eldest son, and the King of Romans his brother, howbeit Ed∣ward the Kings eldest son escaping out of their hands, renewed the war, and at Evesham in battell slew this Earle Simon, and delivered his father from the hands of his enemies in Anno 1265 which was the 48 yeere of the raigne of K Hen. 3. Those that tooke part with Earle Simon were disinherited, and their Lands given to such as stood with the King; divers fled the reale, and amongst them Simon and Guy, and the other sonnes of
this Earle, which escaped into France, leaving no posterity in this Land. The King afterward gave the Earledome of Leicester to his yonger son Edmond that was the first Earle of Lancaster, and to his heires, which ever afterward contnued in the house of Lancastr, who beare the title of Leicesters Earledome, and withall held and enjoyed the of∣fice of the high Stewardship of England, untill the same, with all other the honours, Lands and hereditaments thereunto belonging, was uni∣ted to the Crowne in the daies of King Henry the 4. being of that stock, till that now of late it pleased the most Noble and vertuous Pricesse Qeene Elisabeth our gratious Soveraigne to revive the ho∣nour and title of Leicesters Earledome in the person of the right noble Lord Robert of Dudley younger brother and heire to the right noble Lord Ambrose Earle of Warwick and Viscount Lisle, both sonnes to the high and mightie Prince John late Duke of Northumberland, line∣ally descended and heire in bloud of the bodies of Robert of Beaumount Earle of Mellent auncestour to the before-mentioned Earles of Leice∣ster and of Hen. of Newborough Earle of Warwick Ancestour to the Earles sonne, both brethren as before hath been declared, and living in the time of the Norman conquest, as more plainly is shewed by Pe∣degrees deduced. Thus much declared by way of preface or ingression to the matter in hand, and to shew that the office of High Stewardship of England hath heretofore passed inheritably in diverse families, as other great Offices have done. It remaineth now to declare what these Stewardships are, with the authorities and prerogations to them belonging, and to produce such notes and observations as are extant touching the same. And to begin with the chiefest, Seneschall. the Seneschalsey or Stewardship of England, as it is not to be doubted of, but that it took beginning from the Normans, and was by them, first established in this land after their great conquest, and victory over the English Saxons in the yeare of our Lord God 1066 by their example of their home government in Normandy, where the Duke had under him for his chiefest Officer a Se∣neschall or Steward, so cannot the right of this office be better or in briefer sort described then by setting downe of the Dukes Steward faithfully in such sort, as it is to be seene written in the old cu∣stomary booke of the Duchie of Normandy in these words following.
In times past there was to wander throughout Normandy a certaine Justicie greater then these before mentioned, who was called the Princes Seeschall or Steward he was wont to perfect and amend that which the other Justiciers had left undone, he kept the Prince, his land, the lawes and rights of Normandy he caused to be observed and a∣mended, all that was not right done by the Bailiffes, whom he removed from the Prince his service, if he saw it expedient so to doe. He was once to visit the Prince his forrests and inclosures, to keepe Courts of the forrests, to enquire how they were used, their customes he commanded to be observed delivering right to everie one as the same by antiquity grew due, or by Charter had been confirmed unto them, so discreetly conserving the Prince his rights that in the observation of them he notwithstanding hurt none of his subjects. Such as upon diligent enquirie he found faultie and to forfeit, within the for∣rest, either in trees, or in wilde beasts, or in free fowle, he was wont to punish by the purse, or for want of ability that way by long imprisonment. He chiefly gave his minde to keep the countrey in peace, and so wandrlng hither and thither throughout Normandy once everie three yeares did visit all the parts and Bailiages thereof. To him it belonged to make enquiry in every Bailiage of the excesse and wrongs done by the under Justiciers, and likewise of common robbers, of violent deflowrers of Virgins, of murthers, of burnings, and of all those things which belong to the pleas of the sword, whereof peace and reformation had not been had in courts. Of all other cri∣minall facts he likewise diligently searched and upon enquiry caused justice to be done throughout, he caused enquiry to be made of treasure digged under ground, of wrekes cast upon sand, and other the Prince his rights, the removing of waters, and the stopping and hindering of their courses did he reduce unto their old forme, so as their passage might be hurtfull to no body, if any man were minded to turn the course of any water running thorow his own groūds, the banks, where∣of on either side were siituated within his own fee he might lawfully do it, so as the said water when it passed out of his ground might be cō∣veyed into his old channel without any mans hurt or hinderance. It is to be understood notwithstanding that none may stop the course of a∣ny ordinary running streames within his banks or ditches longer then from the rising to the going down of the sunne. Neither may any one stay the course of waters with any new ponds diches or sluces, but shall permi thē to run their course, lest the mills standing upō their streams
And Or men in their affairs, Tanners, Diers, and such like should thereby suffer losse and detriment. If any shall stay them for the filling up of his pools or ponds, they shall be bound to restore such losses as the Milners or others living by the passage of those waters shall have sustained by the with-holding of them, and waters shall be suffered to run their accustomed course. No man may erect a Fishing, or build a Mill, unlesse the water-banks on either side be within his own Fee, wherein he hath Liberties, Weares, or other such like things: for fish∣ings may not be made in running streams, because by them oftentimes the wa∣ters are corrupted, yet notwithstanding they may bring the waters by Ditches and Trenches out of the running River into their grounds, so as the same re∣turn not back into the running stream. It belongeth also unto the Steward to cause the bounds and limits of Towns and Villages the streets and paths to be revoked to their antient state and to see that old accustomed highways be opened; for no man may in these cases alledge for excuse any lett or hinderance, wherefore he ought not to make amends un∣to the Prince. As for towne ditches and common streets, which serve to no private persons possessions, but are common unto all. If they be by any usur∣ped or incroached upon, they ought to be restored to the common benefit, and they that doe occupie them, ought not to escape punishment. All these things appertaine unto the Office and charge of the Seneschall, for the due execution whereof there needeth not neither plea nor assise, but where∣soever he found cause, and he did therein, and provided as he saw needfull and expedient. This farre-forth is the High Stewards office described in the old customarie booke of the Dutchie of Normandy, from whence came the first institution of the same with us in this Kingdome, established no doubt with no lesse authori∣tie and priviledge here under the Kings of this Land, then the same was then practised under the Dukes of that Duchy, whereof there is an espe∣ciall title written, though nothing Clerke-like among other matter in an old booke of Parchmine belonging as it is said unto the learned Lawyer and skilful Antiquarie Master William Fleetwood Esquire, one of the Serjeants at the Law, and Recorder of the Citie of London, which word for word followeth. Here is shewed who is to be High Steward of England, and what his Office is; THe Seneschallie or high Stewardship of England belongeth to the Earle∣dome of Leicester, and of old time did thereunto appertaine; And it is to be understood, that it is his Office under and immediatly after the King to o∣versee
and governe the whole Kingdome of England, and all the Offices of the Justice within the same Kingdome in all times both of Peace and Warre in manner following. The manner how and when the Lord High Steward ought to exercise his Office by duty and Oath of Fealty is such. VVHensoever any man or woman shall come into the Kings Court in whatsoever Court it be and possibly unto the K. himselfe to seeke for redresse against injurie done unto them, and he or she be not able in due season to obtaine remedie. Then the High Steward of England ought and is bound to receive their Petitions and complaints, and to keepe them untill the next Parliament then after to be holden and to assigne unto such Complainants if he thinke good, a day wherein they may exhibite and prosecute their Petiti∣ons, and in full Parliament in the presence of the King to reprehend and blame that Officer or those Officers, who ever they be, that so have failed in doing of Justice, and those thereof call to accompt unto whom in such cases every one throughout the Kingdome is bound to answer, the King onely excepted. If the Chancellour of England have failed of making originall remedy, and amends, and the Justices. Treasurers, Barons, & Chamberlain of the Exchequer, Steward of the Kings house, Escheators, Coroners, Sheriffs Clerks, Bayliffs & o∣ther officers of what places and respects soever they be in their Processes Judge∣ments, Executions of Judgements, and Justice to be made to the favour of th'∣one & losse of th'other party, for gifts bribes or other procurements shal fail or give over at the least-wise if any Justicier, when as both parties pleading before them shall stand in Judgement, shall by such false procurements deferre judge∣ment, contrary to Justice, and the Lawes and customes of the Land: If then the Chancellour of England, or any other of the Kings officers in such case shall alledge in Parliament and say for their excuse, that in that case such hardnesse and doubtfulnesse of the Law and rights did arise, when the same was heard and propounded before them that neither he nor the Court of Chancerie or any other Court wherein he is an Officer, were able or knew to attaine unto the safe determination of the right; Then shall he open and declare the same Am∣biguitie and doubt in Parliament; then if it bee found that the Law was doubtfull in that Case, the Chancellour or other Officer shall be held excused, and then shall the high Steward of England, together with the Constable of England in the presence of the King and other of the Parliament make choice of twentie five persons more or lesse, according as the case shall require, toge∣ther with such other cases in that Parliament rehearsed, amongst whom shall
be Earles, Barons, Knights of the Shire, Citizens and Burgesses, who there shall ordaine, agree upon and establish remedy by Law in all such Cases, for ever after to endure; And those Lawes shall be recited written and allowed in full Parliament, and sealed with the great Seale, and delivered forth to all pla∣ces of Law and Justice from thence forward to be holden for Lawes and in publick places, where it shall be thought expedient, they shall be proclaimed and divulged, whereas all other common Lawes, and chiefly Statute Lawes throughout all the whole Kingdome, ought to be publickly proclaimed. If so it happen that there was in such like case either Cōmon Law or Statute-Law, so that the Kings Steward, and others of the Parliament may understand and perceive, that such default and delayes in Processes and Judgement doe happen by such Officers, when as the deceipt and malice of such Officer hath openly and often before beene apparant, then shall he be removed out of his Of∣fice, and some other fit officer shall be put in his place; If they shall presume a∣gainst the Justices and such other Officers, as by excusing themselves shall say, that they have not heretofore known themselves and the Courts, whereby they are in such Cases to deliberate and take advisement; Then shall they be admo∣nished by the Steward, on the behalfe of the King and the Parliament, to studie and search better the Common Law, that no such ignorance or negligence bee found in them in the like Cases afterward. If they shall happen to offend in the like againe; they then to be put out of their offices and other discreeter and more diligent persons shall by the King and his Counsell be assigned to their roomes. Likewise it is the Stewards office, if the King have evill Counsellours about him, that advise him to doe things, tending openly and publickly to his disho∣nour, or to the dis-inheritance or publicke hurt and destruction of his people. Then the Steward of England, taking with him the Constable and other great estates, and other of the Commonaltie shall send to such a Counsellour, for∣bidding him in such sort to lead and counsell the King, and of such his evill Counsell shall make rehearsall, enjoyning him to depart from the Kings pre∣sence, and longer not to abide with him to his dishonour; and the publick hurt, as is aforesaid, which if he shall not doe they shall send unto the King to remove him from him, and to give no more eare unto his Counsell, for that amongst the people he is esteemed to bee an evill Counsellour to the King against his Subjects. If hereupon the King doe not put him away, againe and often shall they send aswell unto the King as unto him. If at the last neither the King nor such Counsellour of his have regard unto the Messages and requests made unto them, but shall refuse to doe thereafter;
Then for the Weale Publick it is lawfull for the Steward, Constable of Eng∣land, noble men and other of the Commonaltie of the Realme with Banner in the Kings name displayed to apprehend such Counsellour, as common enemie to the King and the Realme, to commit his body to Ward untill the next par∣liament, and in the meane time to seize upon all his goods, lands and possessions, till Judgement be pronounced of him, by the advise of the whole Kingdome in Parliament, as it happened unto Godwine Earle of Kent in the dayes of King Edward the Confessour, next predecessour to VVilliam Duke of Normandie, Con∣querour of England, who for such ill Acts and Counsels of his, was deprived of his Earldome, Escheted to the aforesaid King, notwithstanding at the Kings and Noblemens permission, Godwine came againe into England, and did after forfeit as before. And as it happened likewise to Hubert of Burgh, Earle of Kent, in the time of King Henry, that was Sonne of King Iohn, who for his evill deeds and bad Counsell was apprehended, and by the high Seneschall, and other Peeres de∣prived of his Earldome, by the allowance and consent of the whole Par∣liament. And likewise did it befall unto Pierce of Gavestone, who in the dayes of King Edward, the Sonne of King Henry for such his evill Acts and Councells was banished out of all the King of Englands Dominions, as well on this side, as beyond the Seas, which Pierce of Gaveston afterwards by the Kings means, and by the favour and permission of the Nobilitie returned into England, and had of the Kings gift the Earldome of Cornwall, yet was he after that for his evill deeds and Counsels banished the Realme againe by the Nobles and Com∣mons, and his aforesaid Earldome Escheated to the King, but returned after∣wards without the Noblemens leave and consent, and did resort and associate himselfe unto the King as before he had done, which when the High Steward, Constable, and others of the Nobilitie understood, he was by them apprehended, and beheaded at Blacklow in VVarwick-shire, as a publicke enemy to the King and to the Realme. So have you as much as in the said old Booke is to be seene touching the Of∣fice of the High Steward of England, After the death of any King or Queen absolute of this Land the high Steward of England, by vertue of his Office sitteth judicially, and keepeth his Court in the Whitehall of the Kings Palace at VVestminster, neere unto the Kings Chappell, and there receiveth the Bills and Petitions of all such of the Nobilitie and o∣thers, as by reason of their tenure as, or otherwise claime to doe services at the new Kings Coronation, and to receive the Fees and allowances therefore due and accustomed. As did Iohn Duke of Lancaster, Earle of Leicester, high Ste∣ward
of England, &c. at the Coronation of King Richard the second, and Tho. Pierce Earle of Worcester, who exercised the same Office of the Coronation of King Henry the fourth as substitute and Deputie to Thomas the Sonne of the said King Henry then being very young, unto whom his Father had assigned that Office, being parcell of his owne inheritance, who before hee had obtained the Crowne, was not only Duke of Lancaster, as his Father Iohn of Gaunt had, but also was Earle of Darbey, Lincolne, Leicester, Hereford, and Northampton, and by the Earledome of Leicester, inheritably also Lord high Steward of England. And since the time that the said Office hath beene extinct in the Crowne by the Descent of the same unto King Henry the fourth, as heire to Dame Blanch his Mother, Daughter and Heire to Henry Duke of Lancaster, Earle of Leicester, and high Staward of England: experience sheweth that upon the Arraignment and Tryall of any Peer of the Realm; that is to say, Duke, Marquesse, Earle, Viscount, or Baron, or any of their Wives or Widdows upon Indictment of Treason or Felony, the sheweth to grant the Office of the high Stewardship of England (pro illa vice tantum) to some Peer of the Realme by Letters Pa∣tents, the tenour whereof hereafter ensueth, who instead of the Lord high Ste∣ward, that by ancient Law hath been holden for a competent and indifferent Judge betweene the King and such Peers, ought and always hath used to be Judge, and give sentence of Acquicall or Condemnation upon the Peere ar∣raigned. The tenor of the Patent. Regina &c. Praeclarissimo Consanguineo & Consiliario suo A.B. &c. saltem sciatis quod cum G. D. Marchio E. indictat. existit, &c. ac pro eo quod ossicium Seneschall. Angliae cujus praesentia pro administratione justitiae & executionis ejus∣dem in hac parte facienda requirit, ut accepimus jam vacat: de strenuitate, fideli∣tate, provida circumspectione & industria vestris plurimum confidentes, ordinavi∣mus, & constituimus vos ex hac causa Seneschallum Angliae, ad officium illud cum omnibus eidem officio in hac pante debitis sive pertinend. hac vice gerendis, occupan∣dis, & exercendis. Dantes & concedentes vobis tenore praesentium plenam potesta∣tem indictam entum praedictum cum omnibus idem tangendis a praefat. justitia nostris recipiendis & inspiciend, ac ad certos diem & locum quos ad hoc pro∣videritsipsum Marchionem, e&c. coram vobis evocandum & ipsum superinde au∣diendum, examinandum & respondere compellendum ac sine debito terminandum, Nec non tot & tales Dominos Proceres, & Magnetes hujus regni nostri Angliae; ejusdem Marchionem, &c. & alios pares per quos rei veritas in hac parte melius scire poterit, ad diem & locum praedictum ex causa praedict. coram vobis comparere astringerdum, &c.
Thereupon the Lord High Steward directeth forth a precept to the Justices before whom the Indictment is taken, willing them to certifie the same Indict∣ment at a day and place by him assigned. And doth likewise direct another precept to one of the Serjeants at Arms, for the Summonition of the Peeres against the day of tryall in these words. A.B. comes, &c. I. N. servienti Do nini Regis ad Arma salutemetibi praecipio quod summon. tot & tales Dominos, Proceres, & Magnetes, hujus regnt Angliae praedict. C. D. Marchionis: E. &c. & aliorum pares, per quos rei veritas melius scire poterit, quod ipsi personaliter compareant coram me apud Wostmon. 1 die Junii, &c. ad faciend. ea quae ex parte Domini Regis, tunc thidem in praemissis injungent, &c. The like precept doth he also send to the Lievenant of the Tower of London, for bringing forth the Peere, being prisoner to his tryall and judgment. It appeareth that at the Common Law, before the twentieth yeere of King Henry the Third, a Subjects having title to lands, which are in the Kings posses∣sion, might have a Writt to the Sheriff of the County, where the Land doth lie against the King after this manner. Praecipe H. Regi Angliae quod reddat S. L. centum acras ter. in D. &c. But whether the Writt should be a Ward under the Teste of the High Stew∣ard or Constable of England, that is to be doubted of. Touching the Office of the Lord Steward of the Queens House. OF the Lord Steward his Office of the Queens House, being thorowly well known to the chiefe Officers of the Houshold, It seemeth needlesse to set down any notes, or observations, at all by reason of the daily and continuall execution thereof stil in practice, howbeit because there is left unto us from elder age, a forme thereof, is greatly to be regarded in these our days, this place ser∣veth fitly for the exemplification of the same, so in such sort as it is set down in an old Book of Record, called Domus Regis Angliae, preserved in the Counting∣house of the Houshold, wherein the whole State of the Kings House is orderly described. And this Office amongst the rest after this manner ensuing. The Steward of the Kings Houshold. THe Steward of the Kings Houshold receiveth his charge of the Kings high and proper person, and the Houshold staffe in those words following. Se∣neschall venetz le Baston de nostre Maison, By which forthwith he is also Stew∣ard of the Marshalsey, that is the Court of Houshold, of which he is a Judge of Life and Limbe; and except those cases, the Treasurer, Comptroller, Coffe∣rer,
two Clerks of the Green-cloth, and the chiefe Clerk of Controllment, for any matters else done within the Houshold, or appertaining thereto, they fit with him at the Board of Doome, that is at the Green-cloth in the Compting house, as Recorders and Witnesses of the Truth. The state of all this excellent Houshold is wholly committed to be ruled and guided by his discretion, and all his commandements in Court to be obeyed and observed. Also within the Houshold except the Kings Chamber, alway to be observed, covered out of the Kings presence, what great estate else that be present, as for a cup, a cupboard, and dishes, but none assay. Also while he is present in Court, there ought no new commandement, charges of Officers, or any other person be made without commandement first of his person, for the Offices more sure discharge. Also in the Houshold rules and judgments hee representeth the Kings estate, his staffe is taken as for a Commission, Also he may in houshold of his power, adnull any custome not medled with worship and profit; or change it, and erect a new, such as shall seem to his wis∣dom by advise taken at Compting board, for the better, and to the King and his Houshold of more honour and profit. And in that he is head Officer, he giveth example to all others to be of Go∣vernance with inordinate rule to be contented with moderate Costages within the Court in Liveries and Services taking Dinners and Suppers in the Hall and in his Chamber, or in any other Office as often as it pleaseth him to search and see the good said rules, and the directions in them. He hath daily in the Hall eating one Chaplain two Esquires foure Yeomen, and in his Chamber daily for his breakfasts, and his Chamberlains meat at Sup∣per and Livery for all night, eight Loaves, foure Messes of great Meat, two re∣wards of Roast, two Pitchers of Wine, six Gallons of Ale from Hollandtide till Easter, one Torch to attend upon himself, one Tortays to fetch his Livery by three Perches of Wax, six Candles of Wax, eight Candles per 5. viij Tal∣low, foure Faggots, Litter and Rushes all the yeer, of the Serjeant Usher of the Hall and Chamber, and after Winter season, foure Shyddes, two Faggots, and when him liketh to have more largely in any thing then his Chamberlain that doth fetch it, or receive it, must record thereof by Taile or Bill into the Comp∣ting house. Also the Steward taketh of the Compting house for his Fee at Easter and Mi∣chaelmasse, twenty Marks, and for his Robes for Winter and Summer at the Feasts of Christmas and Whitsontide sixteen Marks, and for his Napery at the foure Feasts of the yeere by even portions, three pieces of Linnen Cloth in
the great Spicery, or in money therefore of the Compting house, in all 13 l. 1 s. 4 d. And he hath one Yeoman of his Chamber still abiding, whilst himself is out of Court to keep his Staffe, taking for his Livery daily one cast of bread, two messes of great Meat for noon and night, one Gallon of Ale. The Steward and Treasurer of this honourable Houshold, represent within it the State of an Earle. Item, The Steward or Treasurer, or one of them is bound to be at the Comp∣ting house, at the awayt of the daily Accompts of Houshold; and by the wri∣ting of Noble King Edward the Thirds Statutes. In case it passe for lack of them three days unaccompted, that then they two shall acquite the Costages of the Kings Houshold for one day of their own proper costs. The Steward and Treasurer make a Warrant yeerly at Michaelmas to the chiefe Butler of England, assigning him for how much Wine, and in what pla∣ces of the Kings House, he shall lodge the same for the yeer following. For the daily expence of his Houshold, which hath and must with good oversight be sure of three hundred Tuns, And for other things look the Statute of noble Ed∣ward, Anno 15. Edw. 3. cap. 21. Thus much out of the Book called Domus Regis Angliae. Sir William Stam∣ford the Judge in his Book of the Pleas of the Crowne under the title of qui Iudgera treason, &c. who shall judge of Treason and Felony, by reason of their Offices without Commission, and who not, mentioneth the Statute made, Anno 33.44. 8. cap. 12. Whereby it is ordained that the great Master or Lord Steward of the Kings House only, and in his absence, The Treasurer and Controller of the Houshold with the Steward of the Marshalsey, or two of them, whereof the Steward of the Marshalsey to be one, may without Com∣mission heare and determine of Treasons, of misprision of Treasons, of Mur∣ders, Manslaughters, and Bloudsheds perpetrated within the Kings House; for these, saith hee, are great and chief personages in whom the King reposeth such trust, that hee hath ordained them especially, for the safety and good Govern∣ment of his Realm and Houshold. More hereof is to be read in the Volumes of the Statutes, 25 of Edw. 3. cap. 21, 3 H. 7. cap. 14.33. H. 8. cap. 12. Wherein the preheminences of the Lord Steward of the Kings Houshold are rehearsed, needlesse therefore in this place to be recited. FINIS.
