c4017a 47682838 172796
ARTICLES OF Visitation and Inquiry Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL, EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-men of every Parish within the Arch-Deaconry of BERKS. At the Visitation of the Right Worshipfull PETER MEWS Doctor of Lawes, And Archdeacon of BERKS. Holden in the Year of our Lord God 1667. OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, Anno Domini,
The Tenor of the Oath to be given to the Church-wardens of every Parish. YOu shall swear that you will truly execute the office of a Church-warden in your Parish; You shall give a true account at the going out of your office, of all such Monies as you have or shall receive for the use of your Pa∣rish, and if any shall remain in your hands, you shall deliver it over to your Successor. You shall likewise upon due consideration of the Articles given you in charge, Present every such Person of your Parish, as you shall know to have wilfully committed offence, or omitted any duty mentioned in any of them; And this you shall doe uprightly and truly, without Favour or Malice, hope of Reward, or fear of Displeasure, so far as by Law you are bound. So help you God. The Sidemens Oath. You shall swear that you will be assistant to Your Church-wardens in the Execution of their office so far as by Law you are bound. So help you God.
Articles of Visitation and Enquiry within the Arch-Deaconry of Titul. 1. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Ornaments and Furniture thereto belonging. IS your Parish Church or Chappel kept in good and sufficient repair?Can. 85. are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or Slate? the Windows well glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fasten∣ed, and conveniently placed, and all things so decently ordered, as be∣cometh the House of God? 2. Hath the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chappel, or any part thereof been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto, been imbezelled, sold, or made away? in whose hands or custo∣dy doth the same, or any part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or have heard therein. 3. Is there a Font of Stone, with a good cover thereunto,Injunct. Eliz. Can. 81. Can. 82. Rub. Com. Can. 20. standing in a convenient place towards the lower part of your Church, for the Ad∣ministration of Baptism? and is there in your Chancel a decent Com∣munion-table for the Administration of the Lords Supper, with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or Fine Woolen Cloth, and another covering of white and pure Linnen to spread thereupon? And have you a fair Communion cup or Chalice, with a cover of Silver, and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging. 4. Have you in your said Church or Chappel,Can. 82. a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read Divine Service in? a Pulpit, with a comely cloth or cushion for the same?Can. 83. Can. 30. A Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume, and two Books of Common Prayer, established by Act of Parliament, 1662. both well and substantially bound? Have you like∣wise the Book of Homilies, set forth by authority? a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a Printed Table of the Degrees wherein Marriage is prohibited? 5. Have you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his publick Ministration in the Church provided,Can. 58. and to be duly washed at the charge of the Parish? 6. Have you a Register-book of Parchment,Can. 70 wherein to Register the Names and Sirnames of all such Persons as are Married, Christened, or Buried within your Parish, together with the Names and Sirnames of both the parents of the children so christened, expressing the day, month, and year of all such Christenings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the Transcript thereof yearly, within one month after the 25th of March, brought into the Bishops Registry?
7. Have you likewise another Book of Paper,Can. 52. wherein to record the Names and Licenses of all such strangers, as are admitted at any time to preach in your Church or Chappel? as also a third Book, wherein to write down the Church-Wardens Accompts;Can. 84. Can. 89. together with a strong Chest, with locks and keys, wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned Furniture in safe custody? and lastly, Have you a Biere, with a black Hearse-cloth, for the burial of the Dead? Titul. 2. Concerning the Church-yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tythes belong to the Church. 1. IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced, and decently kept? Hath any person encroached upon the same,Can. 85. or made any door into it, out of his own ground, or habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? Have any Trees there growing been cut down? how long since? by whom? and to whose use and benefit? 2. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gar∣dens, Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage, or Vicarage? as also a Note of such Penstons, Rate-tythes, and porti∣ons of Tythes,Can. 87. or other yearly profits (either within or without your Pa∣rish, as do belong thereunto? Have any of the same been with-held from your Minister? or by whom, as you know, or have heard? Titul. 3. Concerning Ministers. 1. IS your Minister defamed,Injunct. Eliz. 26. or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice, or Orders, by any Simonaical compact? 2. Hath he been legally Inducted into his Benefice? and did he within two Months after his Induction publickly in the Church,13. Eliz. Cap, 12. upon some Sun∣day or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39. Articles of the Church of England, established by Authority, and there publish his as∣sent thereunto? 3. Doth your Parson, Vicar, Curate, in reading the Morning and Evening Service.Can. 14.21.68. Rub. Matr. Visitat. Eurial. Comminat. Administration of the holy Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women after Child birth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and pronouncing Gods commination against impeni∣tent sinners, use the Forms and Words prescribed in the Book of Com∣mon-Prayer, without any addition, omission, or alteration of the same? and doth he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said Book? so far as you have ob∣served? 4. Doth your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating any Devine Of∣fice in your Church,Can. 58. or Chappel, wear the Surplice?
5. Doth he observe the Holy dayes, and Fasting-days, as also the Em∣ber weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week,Can. 64. Rub. Com. Pra. Injunct. Eliz. 19. as in the Common-prayer-Book, or by the Ecclestastical Canons is appointed; giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church in the time of Divine Service, upon the Sunday next before? 6. Hath your Minister been licensed to preach by the Bishop? if so,Can. 48. Can. 49. Rub. Com. Can. 45. Can. 46. doth he then constantly (unless in case of sickness, necessary absence, or other impediment) himself preach in your Church or Chappel, one Ser∣mon every Sunday, or if he be not a licensed Preacher, or being so licen∣sed, be hindred by sickness, or otherwise as aforesaid, doth he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, a licensed Preacher? or one of the Homilies set forth by Authority, to be there read by a Priest, or Deacon lawfully ordained? 7. Doth your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the Church-Catechisme?Can. 59.61. Can. 66. Injunct. Eliz. 44. and doth he prepare and present them being so instructed, to be confirmed by the Bishop? and doth he endeavour to re∣claim all Popish Recusants and other Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish to the true Religion established in the Church of Eng∣land, and to their bounden duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof. 8. Doth he refuse or neglect to visit the Sick,Can. 67.68.69. Rub. Com. Pra. Can. 29. or delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any Child past infancy, or other person of more years, through your Ministers default yet re∣maining unbaptized in your Parish? Doth he baptize any without God-fathers and God-mothers, or admit either of the Parents to be God-Fa¦ther or God-Mother to their own Children? 9. Hath he at any time (as you know,13 Eliz. 12 Injunct. Eliz. 31. or have heard) preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the people into Parties and Factions, to the disturbance of the publick peace and unity either of Church or State? 10. Hath your Minister taken upon him to appoint any publick or pri∣vate Fasts,Can. 72.73. Prophecyings, or Exercises not appointed by Authority? or doth he, or any other, either Minister or Lay-person, hold any Conventi∣cles, or Meetings in private houses within your Parish, for people of se∣veral Families to resort unto, under the pretence of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving, or Humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided? 11. Hath he presumed to marry any persons in private houses,Can. 62. Rub. Mar. or such as being under age, have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banes first published on three Sundays or Holidays in the Church? or at any other hours then between Eight and Twelve in the Morning, un∣less he had License or Dispensation so to do?
Titul. 4. Concerning Parishioners. 1. IS there any person in your Parish a known or reputed Heretick or Schismatick?Can. 110. any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that refuse to come unto the publick Assemblies, Prayers or Ser∣vices of the Church, or that make profession of any other Religion than what is established in the Church of England; and if there be any such, what are their Names? 2. Is there any person in your Parish that lieth under a common fame,Can. 109. or vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blas∣phemers of Gods Name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean and filthy Talkers or Sowers of Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their Neighbours? 3. Do any of your Parish upon the Sundays or Holidays follow their bodily and ordinary labours,Injunct. Eliz. 34. or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or Wares sold? or do any Vintners, Inn-keepers, or other Victuallers and Sellers of Beer or Ale suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those days? 4. Doth every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish du∣ly resort unto your Church,Injunct. Eliz. 33. 1. Eliz 2. Injunct. Eliz. 46. Injunct. Eliz. 52. Chappel, or Chappels, upon every Sunday, and Holiday appointed for Divine Service? Do they then and there abide quietly with reverence, order and decency, during all the whole time of Common-prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God there used? And are there any among you that come only to the Preaching, and not to the Common-prayer of the Church? 5. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant Chil∣dren to be baptized publickly in the Church,Rub. Bapt. unless in case of urgent dan∣ger; in which case the Child may be baptized at home by a lawful Mini∣ster, after the Forms and Rites appointeb in the Liturgy? or do they send them to be baptized in any other Parishes, or after other Forms than is appointed? or do they keep them unbaptized any longer time then the Church alloweth? and are there any Infants, or more aged persons in your Parish as yet unbaptized? 6. Doth every Housholder in your Parish cause their children and ser∣vants to learn their Catechism,Can. 59. and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sunday and Holidays, as in the Book of Common-prayer is appointed? that when they are well instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishop? 7. Is there any person in your Parish,Can. 114.21. Rub. Com. who being sixteen years of age, doth not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper at least three times in the year, of which Easter is alwayes to be one? Doth any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling; or from the hands of your own Mi∣nister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad?Can. 57. or are there
any strangers not of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it? 8 Have you any amongst you that be denounced and declared excom∣municate for any crime committed?Can. 65. how long have they been so excommu∣nicated; and do any of your Parish keep society with them, before they be reconciled to the Church and absolved? 9. Are there any living in your Parish as man and wife, who are with∣in the degrees prohibited, or any that being lawfully divorced,Can. 99. have mar∣ried again? or any that being lawfully married, and not separated, or di∣vorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together? 10. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who, after their delivery from the peril of Child-birth,Rub. refuse to make their publick Thanksgiving to God in the Church? and when they come so to do, do they come decently apparalled, and make their Offerings according to custom? 11. Do any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of England?Rub. Com. Pra. Can. 92. and are there any Wills and Testaments of persons dead in your Parish, that be yet umproved? or any Goods Administred without a due grant from the Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere leave any Legacy to your Church or Chappel? what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? Titul. 5. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons. 1. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappelry, a Parish-Clerk,Can. 91. a∣ged 20 years at the least? is he of honest life & conversation? and sufficent or able to perform his duty in Reading, Writing, Singing? Is he chosen by your Minister? and doth he duly attend him in all Divine Services in the Church? Are his Wages duly paid him? or who with∣holdeth the same from him? 2. Doth he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Pa∣rish) diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked,Can. 67. and opened at due time? and doth he keep the Church or Chappel clean from dust, Cobwebs, and other annoyance? Doth he toll or ring the Bell at the accustomed hours, before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of this life, doth he, upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as hath been accustomed, that the Neighbours may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the grace and favour of God? Quaeries to be put to the Minister. Titul. 6. Concerning the Church-wardens and Side-men. 1. ARe the Church-wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joynt consent of your Minister and Parishioners?Can. 89. or one of them by the Minister, and the other by the Parishioners?
2. Have the former and last Church-Wardens given up their due Ac¦compts to the Parish,Cap. 89. and delivered up to the succeeding Church-wardens the Moneys remaining in their Hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church, or Chappel? 3. Do the Church-wardens and Side-men take diligent care, and see, who of your Parishioners be absent from the Divine Service, and Ser∣mon in your Church,1 Eliz. 2. or Chappel, upon Sundays and Holidays? And if they find any to have absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do they by warrant from some of the Iustices of the Peace, Levy of them by way of Distress upon their Goods the sum of Twelve pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of Parliament in that case provided? And do they distribute the several sums so levied among the Poor of your Parish, according to the Law? 4. Do they note them,Can 90. that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun,Can. 19. or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to stand idle, or talk together in the Church-Porch, or to walk in the Church, or Church∣yard, during the time of Prayers, Preaching, or other sacred Offices? 5. Do they suffer no Mis-behaviour, or Disorder to be done by Men, Women,Can. 18. Servants or Children in your Church, or Chappel? Are they careful that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communi∣on Table? Do they permit no Dogs, or Hawks, to be brought, or come into your Church to the disturbance of the Congregation? 6. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel,Rub. Can. 20. provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine according to the number of Communicants? 7. Do they cause all Strangers,Can. 52 that Preach in your Church, or Chappel, to subscribe their Names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose, together with the Name of the Bishop, that Licensed them to preach in this Diocess? And do they permit no other to Preach? 8. Have they (the Church-wardens and Sidemen) now Sworn to give in a true answer unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their se∣veral Titles,Can. 119. taken sufficient time to draw up their Presentments, and therein consulted with you their Minister for your faithful assistance? TIT. VII. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physitians, Chyrurgions, and Midwives. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almes-house, or Free-School, not of the Kings Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Governors or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to
