C489 E1308_2 99859456 111539
The CARD OF Courtship: OR, The LANGUAGE OF LOVE; Fitted to the Humours of all Degrees, Sexes, and Conditions. Made up of all sorts of Curious and ingenious DIALOGUES, Pithy and pleasant DISCOURSES, Eloquent and winning LETTERS, Delicious SONGS and SONNETS, Fine FANCIES, Harmonious ODES & Sweet RHAPSODIES. LONDON, Printed by J. C. for Humphrey Moseley; and are to be sold at his shop, at the signe of the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Church-yard. 1653.
To the longing Virgins, amorous Batchelors, blithe Widows, kinde Wives, and flexible Husbands, of what Honour, Title, Calling, or Conversation soever, within the REALM of GREAT BRI∣TAIN. Soluble Souls, THey say, that Bacchus and Cupid, as they were one day going on hunting, took Minerva in a net; giving us to understand, that none so seemingly austere, but one time or other hath an itching desire to sport himself in Adonis
Grove. I confess it comes neer to a Syllogisme in these times (when Mars and Bellona sit as Rectors o're all hearts) to set Venus and her Son in opposition against them, as it were to thwart the current of the times: but I hope you (Gentlemen and Ladies, Citizens and Lasses) are not so far in love with the bellow∣ing of the Drum, or the clangor of the Trumpet, that the sweet and harmonious tunes of Love shall prove unacceptable unto you: for if so, my self, (who have been forc∣ed through whole Forests of bryars, by the malice of the times) of all men living, have the least reason to whisper these soft numbers in your eares. I dare not so much injure the ensuing work, as to crave pardon of the severest Stoick or austerest Cy∣nick for my wantonness, since not a loose line is scatter'd throughout this Volume, as also, because I know (in private) the curstest carper of them
all, will hug me for their pleasure (if not for their profit) For those nice Ig∣noramusses who slight all Courship as lascivious, al Complements as trivial and enormous, I shall onely say this unto them, that love (I mean not such as that of Semiramis, or Messalina) is the Author of all perfection: The greatest Doctors are but Dunces, till love hath refined them, and they know what his power is; they after that becoming witty and courtly In∣diters: for necessity findeth out the art, the lovers ardent affection com∣pelling him to finde out all waies for the attaining his Mistress love; dis∣coursing unto her his loyal affecti∣ons in smooth or pleasing termes, or else touching them sweetly or dainti∣ly in writing curiously, and with a courtlike phrase, which art because I here undertake to teach, I have nam∣ed my work The CARD of COURT∣SHIP; wherein are included such variety of conceited Courtships, that
(I dare boldly affirm it) you cannot wish for that favour, which you may not there gather. I beseech you crop them with a courteous hand, which shall for ever oblige me to impor∣tune for you at Loves footstool, be∣seeching him to use you according to your several constitutions, grant∣ing you the full fruition of your de∣sires in all afety and tranquillity, So wishes Your devoted servant, Musophilus.
The Card of COURTSHIP OR, The language of LOVE. To the Reader. Here Cupid, in a quaint disguise, Cover'd with leaves, in slumber lies: Yet doth he not himself so hide, But all thy spirits will be tride, If this Volume thou turn over, And he awake, wanting his cover. Here many hearts as victims stand: Here read, how beauy to command, Though rugged, like the Panthers skin; Here thou maist learne to love and win. Or if so happy's thy condition, Thou of thy love hast the fruition; Here such pleasures thou mayst find, So sweet, and of so various kind, That rockt into a pleasing dream, Thou'lt wish I'd had an ampler theam. The Arabian winde, that gently blows. Blushes to the bashful Rose, Yeilds not an odour of more price Then flowers set in this Paradise. Read: I am sure, thou'lt not repent thee; And I am happy to content thee.
Complemental Dialogues. A Virgin licensed by her Father to make choice of whom she likes best for her husband, Imagine you hear one who dearly affects her, courting her after this man∣ner: their names suppose to be AMANDUS, and JULIETTA. Aman. NOw, Lady, your Fathers goodness hath left you to your owne dispose; and I the admirer of your vertues, have free leave to present my best af∣fections: Then save that creature, whose life depends on you; whose every power ownes not himself, but you: you are that Deity to whom my heart presents its first devotion, and in a holy flame, remaines a Sacrifice, till you please to accept it. Juliet. I should prove to my self unjust, in the neglect of one that nobly loves me; therefore what affection I may bestow, and yet retain my freedome (I mean that freedom, by which I may on just occasion withdraw my heart) I were ingrate∣ful should I not present it. Aman. May I become the scorne of time, and all mens hate pursue me, when I prove so foul, to give occasion you call back your love.
Juliet. Cease these hasty protestations; I assure my self, the pureness of your soul is without spot or blemish; and while you so continue, I shall boast me happy, i'th' glory of such a choice. Aman. O let me fly into your bosome! on your lip confirm my happiness; there study some new way of number, to multiply my bliss. The treasu∣ries of grace and nature were quite exhausted, to accomplish your perfections. Juliet. Fie, fie; leave for shame. Aman. What, dearest? Juliet. This superfluous Language. I am none of those Ladies that are enamoured on Poetick rap∣tures, hugging the Verse, but spitting at the Au∣thor: none of those that are taken with flattering Acrosticks; and to have their names so disjoynted in an Anagram, that 'twould puzzle ten Magici∣ans to put them together againe. I esteem not Gol∣den Language, and I'll tell you why; because 'twas seldome bestowed on man, but to gild over a Copper Soul within him. Aman. Can you be so cruel, to deem my Language feign'd? Juliet. Nor am I. I grant you, Love and Poesie are divine, commonly infus'd together: yet ordi∣narily, 'tis ty'd to rules of flattery. Aman. Far be it from me, to speak a Language should displease your ear. Juliet. Well; more Oratory would but bring the rest into suspicion whether it be real: let it suffice I love you; and if all occurrents sute my expecta∣tion, it sha'n't be long ere Hymen seal the contract. Farewell. Aman. Farewell, excellent Mistress.
Eugenia, and Flavia, two neer neighbouring Damo∣sels, discourse of their loves; resolving not to marry old men for money. Eug. FLavia, I kiss your hands. Flav. Eugenia, I pray you pardon me; I saw you not. Eug. I saith you have fixt thoughts, draw your ys inward, that you see not your friends before you. Flav. True; and I think, the same that trouble you. Eug. Then 'tis the love of a young Gentleman, nd bitter hatred of an old dotard. Elav. 'Tis so, witness your brother Francisco, and e rotten carcass of old Rodorigo: had I a hundred earts, I should want room to entertain his love, nd the others hate. Eug. I could say as much, were't not sin to slan∣er the dead. Miserable wenches! how have we ffended our fathers, that they should make us the rice of their dotage, the medicines of their griefs, hat have more need of Physick our selves? I thank y dead mother that left me a womans will, in her ast Testament; that's all the weapons we poor Gyrles can use; and with that will I fight, against ather, friends, and kindred, and either injoy Foo osco, or die in the field in's quarrel. Flav. You are happy, that can withstand your ortune with so merry a resolution. Eug. Why? should I twine my armes to cables, t up all night like a watching Candle, and distill y brains, through my eye-lids. Your brother loves me and I love your brother; and where these two consent, I would fain see a third could hinder us. Fla. Alas, our sex is most wretched; no sooner born, ut nurs'd up from our Infancy in continual slave∣y; no sooner able to pray for our selves, but they
braile and hud us so with sowre awe of parents, that we dare not offer to bate our desires: and whereas it becomes men to vent their amorous passions at their pleasure, we (poor souls) must rake up our affections in the ashes of a burnt heart, not daring to sigh without excuse of the spleen, or fit of the mother Eug. I will plainly profess my love; 'tis honest, chaste, and staines not modesty Shall I be marri∣ed (by my fathers compulsion) to an old mandrake, who is able to beget nothing but groanes; a hunt∣ing-golding, a faln pack-horse? No, no; I'll see him freeze to crystal first. In other things, good Fa∣ther, I am your most obedient daughter; but in this, a pure woman. And in troth, the temper of my blood tells me, I was never born to so cold a misfortune: my Genius whispers me in the car, and sweares, We shall injoy our Loves; fear it not, wench: and so farewell, good Elavia, farewel, farewel. Fla. Farewel, merry-hearted Eugenia. Corvino, a rustisk clowne, complements with Beancha, a Kitchin-maid. Corv. HE that saies I am not in love, he lies de cap a pe: for I am Idle, choicely neat in my cloathes, valiant, and ex∣ream witty; my meditations are loaded with Me∣taphors; Songs and Sonnets flow from me as flu∣ently, as Heigh, gee; not one shakes his tail, but I igh out a passion: thus do I to my mistress; but las, I kiss the dog, and she kicks me. I never see a wanton Filly, but I say, There goes Beancha; nor a lusty strong Als, but I remember my self, and sit down to consider what a goodly race of Mules would inherit, if she were willing: onely I want atterance, and that's a main mark of love too.
Bean. Corvino, What price bear Wheat and Saffron, that your Band's so stiff and yellow? why Corvino, not a word! Prethee what business in Town? how do all at Totnam? Grown mute! what do you bring from the Country? Corv. There 'tis; now are my floud-gates drawn, and I'll surround her. What have I brought, sweet bit of beauty? a hundred thousand salutations o'the elder house, to your most Illustrious honour and worship. Bean. To me these Titles? is your basket full of nothing else? Corv. Full of the fruits of love, most resplendent Lady; a present to your worthiness, from your wor∣ships poor vassal Corvino. Bean. My life on't he scrap'd these Complements from his Cart, the last load he carried to the City. But what have you read, Corvino, that makes you grow thus eloquent? why, you talk nothing but warbling Rhapsodies! Corv. Sweet Madam, I read nothing, but the lines of your Ladiships countenance; and desire onely to kiss the skirts of your Garments, if you vouchsafe me not the happiness of your white hands. Bean. Come, give me your basket, and take it. Cor. O sweet! now will I never wash my mouth after, nor breath, but at my Nostrils, lest I lose the taste of her fingers. Beancha, I must tell you a secret, if you'l make much on't. Bean. As it deserves: what is't? Corv. I love you, dear morsel of modesty, I love, and so truly, that I'll make you mistress of my thoughts, Lady of my revenues, and commit all my moveables into your hands; that is, I give you an arnest kiss, in the high way of Matrimony. Bean. This the end of all the business?
Corv. Is this the end of all this business, most beau∣tiful, and most worthy to be most beautiful Lady? Bean. Hence fool, hence; farewel Coidon. Corv. Why now she knowes my business, she put up the fruit in her lap, and threw away the basket; 'tis a plain signe she abhors the words, and embra∣ces the meaning. O lips! no lips, but leaves be∣smear'd with Mildew. O dew! no dew, but drops of Honey-combs. 'Tis a rare morsel of dripping: O how happy shall I be to recreate my chine with her! I'll follow her, were I sure to be basted with Salt and Vinegar. A Citizens wife, in love with a Suburb-Gentleman, confers with a Curtizan how to obtain his love, and yet not purchase her husbands discontent. Their names suppose to be, ARMELINA, and DECOY. Arme. FAin would I meet the Gentleman. Dec. Pish, Faine would you meet him? why do you not take the course? Arme. The means is easily resolv'd, what thinkst thou? Dec. Thus: meet him at Mr. Strouds house, the Phenix; there's a Gossips feast to morrow-night. Arme. O but my husbands Jealous Eyes! Dec. When husbands in their rank'st suspitions dwell, Then 'tis our best art to dissemble Well, Put but these notes in use that I'll direct you, He'll curse himself that ere he did suspect you. Perhaps, he will sollicite you, as in tryal, To visite such, and such: still give denial; Let no Perswasions sway you; they are but fetches Set to betray you; Jealousies, slignts, and reaches
Seem in his sight, to endure the sight of no man: Put by all kisses, till you kiss in common. Neglect all entertainment: if he bring in Strangers, keep you your Chamber; be not seen. If he chance steal upon you, let him find Some book lie open, 'gainst an unchast mind. Manage these principles but with art and life, Welcome all Nations, thou'rt an honest wife. Arme. Here, Lady, convey my heart unto him in this Jewel: against you see me next, you shall per∣ceive I have profited: in the mean season, tell him I am a Prisoner yet on the Masters side, my husbands Jealousie, that masters him as he doth master me; and as a Keeper that locks Prisoners up, is himself prison'd under in his owne key, Even so my husband, in restraining me, With the same ward bais his own liberty. Dec. I'll tell him how you wisht it; and I'll weare My wits to nothing, but these clouds shall cleare. A young Citizen, Courting his Neighbours daughter. Their names ANTONIO, and BEATRICE. Ant. GOod morrow, sweet Beatrice; in ex∣change of this kiss, see what I have brought thee from thee from the Ex¦change. Beal. What mean you, Sir, by this? Ant. Ghess that by the circumstance: here's a Ring, wear't for my sake; twenty Angels, pocket them, you fool. Come, come, I know thou art a Maid: say nay, and take them. Bea. Sir, I beseech you, fasten no more upon mee, then I may at ease shake off. Your gift I re∣verence,
yet refuse: and I pray tell me, Why do do you make so many errands hither, send me so many Letters, fasten on me so many Favours? what's your meaning in't? Anto. Hark in thy car, I'll tell thee: Is't possi∣ble so soft a body should have so hard a soul? Nay now I know my penance; you will be angry and school me for tempting your modesty. A fig for this modesty; it hinders many a good man from many a good turne, and that's all the good it doth: but if thou but knewest, Beatrice, how I love thee, thou wouldst be far more tractable. Nay, I bar chiding when thou speakst: I'll stop thy lips if thou dost but offer an angry word: by this hand I'll do't, and with this hand too. Bea. Sir, if you love me, as you say you do, show me the fruits thereof. Ant. The stock I can; thou mayst see the fruits heare after. Bea. Can I believe you love me, when you seek the shipwrack of my honour? Anto. Honour! there's another word to flap in a mans mouth. Honour! why shouldest thou and I stand upon our honour, that were neither of us yet right worshipful? Bea. I am sorry, Sir, I have lent so large an ear to such a bad discourse; and I protest, after this hour, never to do the like. I must confess, of all the Gentlemen that ever courted me, you have possess'd the best part in my thoughts: but this course language exiles you quite from thence. Sir, had you come, instead of changing this my honest name into a Strumpet's, to have honour'd me with the chaste title of an honest wife, I had reserv'd an ear for all your suits; but since I see your rudeness finds no limit, I'll leave you to your lust.
Ant. You shall not, Beatrice. Bea. Then keep your tongue within more mode∣rate bounds. Ant. I will; as I am vertous, I will. I told you the second word would be a mariage: it makes a man forfeit his freedome, and walk up and down e∣ver after, with a chaine at his heels. Marriage is like Daedalus his Labyrinth; and being once in, there's no finding the way out. Well, I love this little property most intolerably; and I must set her on the last, though it cost me all the shooes in my shop. Well, Beatrice, thou seest my Stomach is come down: thou hast my heart already, there's my hand. Beat. But in what way? Ant. Nay I know not the way yet; but I hope to finde it hereafter, by your good direction. Bea. I mean, in what manner? in what way? Ant. In the way of Marriage, in the way of ho∣nesty. I hope thou art a maid, Beatrice. Bea. Yes Sir, and I accept it; in exchange of this, you shall receive my heart. Ant. A bargain, and there's earnest on thy lips. A courtship (eloquently carried on both sides) between a youth, and his formerly-sollicited fair one. Their names suppose to be RADOLPHUS, and TOMASO. Rad. WElcome, fair one; I hope my par¦don's seal'd, for this presum'ng on what you might call rudeness Toma. You have shap'd an Apology altogether needless, to excuse a guilt, when none appeares: I
owe much to your vertue; it doth command my thoughts. Rad. Which are so glorious, I must admire the actions that express them. I hope your judgement doth not call it ill, that my intemperate anger, be∣ing grounded on vertuous suspicion (last time I saw you) did transport me beyond a moderate passi∣on: I am satisfied; your innocence hath clear'd my jealousie. Toma. Sir, 'tis a noble resolution: pure love's a vertue Nature onely teacheth, and born with ge∣nerous spirits that distinguish the object truely; slighting those respects, that work on groster minds. Rad. Fairest, I shall use no other circumstance, or paint a passion my reasons eye allowes, though my first sense convey'd the knowledge of your out∣ward form and full perfections, which must needs contain a richer inside: Vertue seldome dwells, but in a glorious frame. I love your goodness, which outvies your beauty: in my new-born wishes, I have determin'd you the partner of all that's mine: my estate's not very mean; if it were, Zeal should sup∣ply: I'd strive to merit the free gift of your self; and in exchange, returne my self. Toma. Sir, I could answer you in your own words: for I presume your thoughts are noble, like your self, unmixt with flattery courtships insection, and the poisonous breath that makes pure love suspect∣ed, whether it be sound, or plaister'd, to deceive our credulous weakness, till it hath possest us with some foul leprosie. Your handmaid yeelds to what agrees with honour; if the meanness of her condition may presume to call her honest credit so. Rad. How do you bless me, as suddenly as my
desires could shape a means to work it! instantly the Church shall seal the bargain. Tom. Would you not deliberate? Those acts are lasting, and concern the being of all your after-life. Rad. 'Tis heavens providence that hath dispos'd it: thus I seal my vowes. The Lover having an hope now to attain his Mistress grant, presents her a Ring, with this Eulogy. WHile this involves your heart, and Master-vein, Imagine you are lost to your disdain: This mystically whispers in your ear, (With your strange coyness) I my doubts cashiere, Sweet, let it be so; do as I intend, And (like to this) our love shall have no end. The Persians, who adore the rising Sun, Will have each morn a Flamin for to run Six times about a circle, to content Great Jove, upon his Temples battlement; Thereby mythologizing (sure) that he Will love his creatures to Eternity. This typifies, we ought to love for ever, And that no harsh fate ought our loves to sever. But Rings are nothing: if true love we want, Our hearts must be hem'd round with Adamant Impregnable against assault and Batt'rie, Not to be ta'en by fear, or won by Flatt'rie. This seems to say, what songs heav'ns quire shal sing Whenas my arms shall be thy bodies Ring.
A pleaing Dialogue between a witty Lady, and a silly Gentleman: Their (supposed) names CRISPINO, and PAMELA. CRISPINO. I Sent you a Letter, Madam. Pam. I received it (Sir) to my great happi∣ness. Crip. How did you rellish it, Lady? Pam. Excellent well (Sir) you write most ele∣gantly. Oh that I had your Genius! Crisp. I have twenty as good as these lying by me; they shall be all at your service. Pam. You are too much a Courtier: I must chide you: I did never deserve those Epithets your Paper throwes upon me. Crisp. Epithets! I beseech you, Lady, to impute that to the fretfulness of my brain. If any thing rare slipt my pen, whereby I may incur your Ladi∣ships indignation, I'll recant it publikely. Pam. I will enjoyne you no such penance, for 'tis an injury easily remitted: 'tis the glory, they say, of Lovers, to Hyperbolize. Crisp. Hyperbolize! What's that? I have not the word yet in my Alphabet. I hope, Lady, you harbour a better opinion of me, then to imagine I would Hyperbolize with you; that were immo∣dest. Pam. Not at all (Sir) I think. Crisp. By my faith (Lady) but it is: do you think I know not what Hyperbolizing is? that were sim∣plicity. If any thing within my letters may be drawn within construction of Hyperbolizing, condemn not me for it: by my service, Lady, I had no in∣tention
to stretch so far to your dishonour; it shall each me wit to write my Letters hereafter. Pam. Sir, you do me too much satisfaction, your error being a smal one. Crisp. 'Tis your favour, when I commit a Pecca∣dille against your brightness: I confess I deserve to be extinguished your presence for it. I did love you, Lady, (as I remember) when I was an Infant. Pam. How (Sir!) I hardly understand you. Crisp. We are infants, you will grant, when we cannot speak; and I lov'd you full five months and a halfe ere I had power to tell you of it, I am cer∣tain. Pam. I was not worth so much (Sir.) Crisp. Nay, for that (Lady) I'll shew my self de∣serving: were you worthy, it were less art of mine to love you; that were a poor thing: I do not stand on worth, Lady; I would not have you think so ignobly of me, that I affect you for your worth; I had rather (upon my honour) have you in your smock, then all the Ladies in the world starke naked. Aam. Now your language is coarse. Crisp. My love is sure, and like the Sun transpa∣rent. Pam. Now you complement; I know you are ex∣cellent at it. Crisp. Troth not I, Lady; I cannot complement; I do but refulgent your beauty, whose mellifluous voice peirces the Air: 'faith, Lady, credit me, I ne'r could complement in my life. Let me see; Most fair, Whom young Apollo courted for her hair. There are Poetical furies in the City; but I con∣verse not with them.
Were ever checks of Roses, losks of Amber, Ordain'd to be imprison'd in a Chamber? Lady, I do but piddle, a pretender, I know nor how to complement. Pam. You now (Sir) complement unto the height. Crisp. Alas, not I, I cannot make verses neither. Thy dain'y seal of virgin-wax, That nothing but impression lacks. Pam. You are an excellent Poet, I perceive (Sir.) Crisp. I'll tell you, Lady, a strange thing; you see these trifles: before I was in love, I could not have made an Acrostick in a day, sometimes two. Pam. Now you can make Chronograms. Crisp. I think I can; and Anagrams, for a need. Pam. Sir, you are wondrously improv'd; Love has inspir'd you richly; I perceive Cupid is a mute too. Crisp. I cannot sleep anights, for the multitude of Verses that are capering in my skull. Pam. I wonder you are not mad. Crisp. You may, but I have a gift to help it; I al∣low my self set times to vent them, they would blow me up else. Pam. As how, I pray (Sir?) I long to hear this. Crisp. Why thus: in the morning, when I have said my prayers in verse (which fall from me, and I ne'r think on 'em) next my heart I scribble out an Ode: after my breakfast, I fall upon a Satyr: when I have rail'd my self into a fresh stomach (you understand me) a matter of two hours I dream, as it comports with our British Bards to sleep; then, I say, I dream familiarly an Heroick Po∣em. Pam. Dream! how mean you (Sir?)
Crisp. Lady, while you live, your dreaming Po∣es are the best, and have distilled raptures; I mean, spirits that converse with them, and reach them what to write. This I set down before I eat againe; after, I walk upon the strength of supper into the Park, and ruminate an Elegie: at return, I do discourse of Epigrams, and Epitaphs, upon some one or other of my kinred. Pam. 'Tis now your course for your Heroick Poem; 'twere best you slept (Sir:) I'll take my leave. A mrry Pastoral Dialogue, maintained between two Shepherds, viz. CLAIUS, and CLEOPHON. CLAIUS. WHich is she, among the Swains, On whom the gentle Claius dains To cast a sheeps-eye, nod, or wink, But does her self immortal think? Who, indeed, has such a face, So full of a bewitching grace? My head loves pillow where he does rest, As safe as Magpie in her nest: My sorehead sweetly is bespred With Violets, and Tulips blew and red: The amber Couslip, and th' coral Rose, Precious complexion of my sweeter nose: My eyes are elements from which fall showers That make my cheeks a spring of sev'ral flowers: So is my head a nosegay growing on one stalk; My body is the garden, though it walk; And there's no woman but may well To the worst part about it smell.
My armes are Dragons, that defend all these Now view'd in me, living Hesperides. CLEOPHON. Who looks on Claius, that will not suppose The blushing Piony growing on his nose? The yellow Primrose, that in woods had went To flourish, springs up in his amber front. CLAIUS. When they on Strephon will not gaze, On me they stare, with much amaze; And when on him, as on a clown, With lowring looks they scowle and frown; Let gentle Claius but vouchsafe To let them look on him, they laugh. CLEOPHON. And well they may; for when they look upon Thy face, they view all fools conjoyn'd in one. A Dialogue (for the recreation of the Reader) supposed between BOMBO, and JACOMO. BOMBO. I Tell thee, honest Jacomo, that I No more affect a woman, then the skie Does birds that soare in it; they are as vain, Inconstant as the flying show'rs of rain. JACOMO. And for my part (friend Bombo) there's no maid, Whether in home-spun gray, or silks arayd, But when she Jacomo doth view, Though I hye, but will pursue; Throw her eyes out on my shape, Call me Pigmey, pretty ape: Some there are that do suppose Loves hot fire is in my nose, With which they scorcht, for pitty cry,
Blow it out, Jacomo, or we die. Other say my head's a bell, My hair the ropes that ring the knell; Here's a Leg as neatly made, As any o're a woman layd; A thigh proportionable, I tak't; O the maids long to see it nak'd! A tayle, some say, does hang thereby, Which none must know but thee and I. I have a back too, though I say't That should not, can bear any weight: Full limbs, with sinews strong and plump; A lustie chine; and for my rump, 'Tis so well made, and firmly knit, The widows all are mad for it. BOMBO. Women are shadows, fly away, When follow'd, or desir'd to stay: But if you slight them, they will sue, Follow, intreat, nay fly to you: But if stiff and strong you stand, You may treat them at command; But lye down, the pretty Elves Will streight fall under you of themselves. Like my Spaniel, beaten, they Will lick your lips, and with you play. This is the sole reason why They love me so doggedly. Women are slippery as Eels; Their mindes are light as are their heels; And every one's for what she feels. JACOMO. Who would trust a woman, when They are the onely curse of men? Syrens sing but to entice The men to a fools paradice.
Hyenas spake but to betray To certain ruine; so do they. Crocodiles shed teares of slaughter; Women weep when they mean laughter. Inconstant, cruel, false, unkind, Are attributes that suit their mind. A Dialogue between GALFREDO, and ROSANA. ROSANA. SIr, I cannot sinde how I am guilty of any cause may prompt you to suspect either my love on duty. Gal. I believe thee (dear Rosana:) but this in∣junction is so severe and strange, it cannot chuse but puzzle thy consent at first. Ros. Sir, make it known; I cannot be so flow in the performance of your will, as you are to re∣veal it. Gal. Thy breath is far more sweeter then the smoak ascending from the Phenix funeral-pile; I could kiss thee, even engender on thy lips. Ros. You were not wont to be thus pleas'd: shew me, good Sir, which way I may require your passi∣on; speak the suit you talk on. Gal. Dear Rosana, I do love thee, love thee, and would enjoy thee. Ros. How (Sir) dare you divulge to me such bru∣tishness? indeed the beasts promiscuously do mix, but man made in the likeness of the Gods, orders his actions to a safer end. Fare you well (Sir) I dare not hear you further.
A Dialogue between DANDALO, and LAURIANA. DANDALO. DEarest Mistress, when shall my ardent love be made compleatly happy by the enjoying that, which it makes the object of desire? shall this fair morning be consecrated to Hymen? Lau. Worthy Sir, so great is the Antipathy be∣twixt your birth and fortune and my condition, whose inferiour aime dares not be levell'd higher then its equality, makes (cowards policy) fear to be sole and true excuse of my delay; for (Sir) were you once satiated with the thing you call pleasure, your edge taken off, I know not what there is in me can whet new appetite, or revive a dying love. Dan. Why? I'll keep thee like my wife; be con∣stant to my pleasure, be sure I'll serve thy will with full content: my credit 's safe: to keep a Mistress youths excuse may serve, but an inferiour match brands my posterity. Lau. Sir, I do hate your base desires; may your soul lusts still keep you companie, until abuse and shame teach you amendment; what a brave Ora∣tor is sin! how it can paint it self with golden words of pleasure and delight! Dan. I never could brook these women-preachers: Fare you well, Lady. Lau. Would you could (Sir) so soon take leave of Lust.
A rough Souldier, in discourse with a soft Lady. ALLINDRO, and IPHIGENIA. ALLINDRO. NOw, Lady, are you in hast? or do you slight a presence may challenge your observance? I am come confident of my merit, to inform you, you ought to yeild me the most strict regard your love can offer. Iphi. Sir, I am not (though I affect not self-con∣ceited boast) so ignorant of my worth, but I de∣serve from him who will enjoy me, a respect more fair and court like. Allin. The blunt phrase of war is my accustom'd language; yet I can tell you y'are very handsome, and direct your looks with a becoming posture; I must speak in the Heroick Dialect, as I use to court Bellona, when my desires aime at a glorious victo∣ry. Iphi. You'll scarce conquer a Lady with this stern discourse; Mars did not woo the Queen of love in armes, but wrapt his batter'd limbs in Persian silkes, or costly Tyrian purples, spoke in smiles to win her tempting beauty. Allin. I'll bring well-manag'd troops of Souldi∣ers to the fight, draw big battalia's like a moving field of standing corn blown one way by the winde, against the frighted enemy; the Van shall save the Rere a labour, and by me marshal'd shall fold bright conquest in the curles. Peneian Daphne, who did fly the Sun, shall give her boughes to me for ravishment, to invest my awful front; and this shall prostrate (spight of all opposition) your nice soul to my commanding merit.
Iphi. These high tearms were apt to fright an enemy, or beget terrour in flinty bosomes. Can you think a timerous Lady can affect her feare, yield the security of her peace and life to the pro∣tection of her horrour? you must not perswade my thoughts, that you who vary to the scene of love, can act it presently. Allin. Slighted (Lady!) 'tis a contempt inhumane, and deserves my utmost scorne: I must finde one more pliant. Some person of honour being enamoured on a country-Genilewoman, a dispute supposed between MONTALTO, and GENTILLA. MONTALTO. YOu have no fear (Gentilla) to trust your self with me. Gent. I can (Sir) forget my self so much, as to forget you are my Lord, &c. and in a wilderness could have no thought, with the least prejudice up∣on your vertue. Mon. You have the greater innocence at home; my intents are fair enough, and you may stand the danger of a question: pray how old are you? Gent. Although it be not held a welcome com∣plement to our sex, my duty bids me not dispute. I am Fifteen, my mother says, (my Lord.) Mon. And are you not in love? Gen. I must not charge my self with so much Ig∣norance, to answer that I understand not what it meanes. I know the word, but never could apply the sence, or finde in it a passion more then ordi∣nary. Mon. Cupid hath lost his quiver then; he could
not be arm'd, and let you scape, whose sole capti∣vity would be more glory then the conquest made, (as Poets feigne) upon the Gods. Gen. 'Tis language with which you are pleas'd to mock your humble hand-maid. Mon. But this assures him blind. Gen. He would deserve to lose his eyes indeed, if he should aime a shaft at me. Mon. Lady, you have a heart. Gen. To which no other flame can approach, then that which shall light it to obedience of your will, and my good mothers. Mon. Obedience to my will? what if it were my will that you should love? Gen. Sir, I do love. Mon. Love with the warm affection of a Mi∣stress? Gen. Him whom I affect (Sir) must not presume to fold me in his arms, till Hymens torches shall burn bright. Him whom I love, must be my hus∣band (Sir.) Mon. What if some great man court you for his friend? This age affords few women, but they will now and then hold up their laps, and let love en∣ter in a golden showre: But I shall take a fitter time for this—Your servitor. Gen. Your Hand-maid.
A rich, but simple Gentleman, thus wooes and wins a counterfeit Lady, who not unwillingly yeilds to his suit: their names suppose are PƲPILLƲS, and FLAVIA. Pupillus. HOw, and how stands the business? Flav. Nay, you know best. Pup. Perceive you not an alteration, or transmutation in my outward person? Flav. Methinks your words fall off your tongue with a more becoming grace. Pup. Think ye so? be wise and catch 'em as they fall; they may inspire you. Flav. you are strangely Metamorphos'd since I saw you. Pup. O Lady, If your heart be stone, I would it were broken. Flav. I have heard men wish their Mi∣stress heart wounded, never broke. Pup. P'shew, my love is not like other mens, that will whine, and cry, look pale, and wear night-caps; no, my love is a bouncing love, and makes no more of cracking a La∣dies heart, then a Squirrel of a nut: but hark you a word in you ear (for I would not have
any body know it) I am inspir'd. Flav. Now by Diana, is it true? Pup. I have said it; be wise, and have me. Flav. O you men have such strange waies to play upon poor women! Pup. Nay there's but one way I'd play upon you. Flav. And will dissemble most egregi∣ously. Pup. Who, I dissemble? why I'll be judg'd by all the world; yet all my acts are not sim∣ple. Flav. Nay, I almost believe you have not a thought but what is meerly innocent. Pup. If you'll but marry me, there is not that desire or inclination, which you shall have, but I will strive with my best part to satisfie; what would you more? Flav. I must confess you promise fair: Pup. And will perform as well. Flav. Alas! my Virgin-feares bid me I should not yeild. I know not what to do. Pup. Come, I know what to do, and you'll but say I once. Flav. Why then I wholly yeild me yours. Pup. That's well said, this kiss in earnest; come we'll not stand long upon the business, but be marryed presently: I must provide
Ribbond for the Courtiers; but that cost may be spar'd, now I think on't, for their Hats are so stuff'd with Favours already, they'll finde no room to wear 'em: come then march forwards. Hymen! O Hymen! snuff thy torch, and see, A pair of Lovers lead their way to thee. A Gentlewoman flattering her Suitor (who was none of the wisest) with hopes of en∣joying her, thus rccosts him: Their names suppose to be SYLLI, and CAMIOLA. Camiola. YOu see how tender I am of the quiet and peace of your affection, and what great ones I put off in your favour. Syl. You do wisely, exceeding wisely! and when I have said, I thank you for't, be happy. Com. And good reason, in having such a blessing. Syl. When you have it; but the Bait is not, yet ready; stay the time, while I triumph by my self. Rivals, by your leaves; I have wip'd all your noses, without a Napkin; you may
cry Willow, Willow; I'll onely say, Go by, go gaze now where you please: your lips may water, like a Puppies, over a Firmety-pot, while Sylli out of his two-leav'd Cherry∣stone-dish drinks Nectar. I cannot hold out any longer; Heaven forgive me, 'tis not the first Oath I have broke; Lady, I must take a kiss or two, onely for a preparative. Cam. By no means; if you forswear your self, we shall not prosper: I had rather lose my longing. Syl. Pretty soul, how careful it is of me! Let me buss yet thy little dainty foot for't: that I am sure is out of my Oath. Cam. Why? if thou canst dispence with it so far, I'll not be scrupulous; such a fa∣vour my amorous Shoomaker sometimes steales. Syl. O most rare Leather! I do begin at the lowest, but in time I may grow higher. Cam. Fie, you dwell too long there: rise, prethee rise. Syl. O I am up already.
A civil Complement, between a great Lord, and an honourable Lady: their names are GIOVANNI, and FIORINDA. Giovanni. Madam, THat without warrant I pre∣sume to trench upon your pri∣vacies, may argue rudeness of manners. But the free access your princely courtesie vouch∣safes to all that come to pay their services, gives me hope to finde a gracious pardon. Fio. If you please not to make that an Of∣fice in your construction, which I receive as a large favour from you, there needs not this A∣pology. Gio. You continue as you were ever, the greatest mystery of fair entertainment. Fio. You are, Sir, the Master, and in the Country have learnt to out-do all that in Court is practis'd; but why should we talke at such distance? Sir, give me leave to say you are too punctual: You are welcome, Sir; therefore sit and discourse as we here used, for we have been more familiar. Giov. Your Excellence knows so well how to command, that I can never erre when I o∣bey you.
A Gentleman, accidentally seeing a Gentlewoman whom on the sudden be exceedingly affects, thus courts her. Man. LEt me not be thought rude (beautious Mistress) that being altogether a stran∣ger to you, I dare assume such consi∣dence, as to proclaim my self your Votary, and without a blush say I love you. If you beheld your self with my eyes, or sympathized of my passion (which though young of growth, hath a firm fixed root) you would not (I presume) tax me of giddie rashness, that I suffer my self so soon to be bound in loves fetters. Wom. Sir, you are an over-hasty lover, to ima∣gine I can at first sight of your person be surpriz∣ed, and yield: they must be strong allurements, must rempt a bashful Virgin, still inur'd to no companion but her feares and blushes, to give her heart away, and live in thraldome to a stranger. Man. Love (bright Mistress) has Eagles eyes; it can beget aquaintance, even in a moment, sud∣denly as time, the time that does succeed it. Wom. Sir, it seems you have studied Complement. Man. Sweerest beauty, to make the addresses of my love-sick heart plain and apparent to you, that you may search through my soul, and find it all your creature, give me your patient hearing. Wom. 'Tis a request might tax my manners, should I deny it to one that 's noble (as your per∣on promises.) Use your pleasure. Man. Which consists in viewing your bright beau∣ty, the Idea of all perfections which the Jealous heavens durst ever lend to earths divinest Lady. Mine (Lady) is a holy intellectual zeal, past imita∣tion, should those who trace me take the constan∣ty of Swans, or never-changing Turtles.
Wom. Sir, he's a foolish lover, who, to gain his mistress, dares not promise what you have utter'd: but I must have more then verbal assurance of your love. Man. By your faire self, I am real; do intend what I have told you, with as much true zeal as An∣chorites, do their prayers; and do implore you, as you have mercy in you, to take pity upon my loves stern sufferings, and redress them, by your consent to take me for your husband. Wom. I dare not, Sir, to give away my self upon so slender arguments, as your owne bare report of true love: time and experience may produce, what yet I must not hope to hear on. Man. Honor me then so much, as to permit me wait you home: and when that task is done, and I must part from you, as exiles from their native soile, pray think on me, as one that has plac'd his full extent of bliss in your injoying: think you are the Landwrack, by which the brittle Vessel of my hopes must through loves swelling ocean be directed, to a safe harbour. Wom. You are too powerfull in your speech: you'l put your self unto a tedious trouble to gain a thing; which when you are possest of, you will re∣pent your travel. Instructions (directed by the Author primarily to the vulgar, yet he exempts not some Gentlemen) host to demean themselves to their Mistresses. YOu must not acoast her with shing, as you were so wzie, with your Lady, Sweet Lady, or most super-excellent Lady; nor in the Span∣ish garb, with a state-face, as you had been eating
of a Radish, and meant to swallow her for Mutton to't: nor let your words come rumbling forth, other'd with a good full-mouth'd Oath, I love you: but speak the language of overcomming Lovers; I do not mean that strange pedantick phrase us'd by some gallants who do aime at wit, and make themselves starke asses by't; praise their Mistresses by the Sun and Stars, while the poor Gyrles ima∣gine they mean the signes their Mercers or Perfu∣mers inhabit at: But you must in gentle, free, and genuine phrase, deliver your true affections; praise your Mistresses Eye, her Lip, her Nose, her Check, her Chin, her Neck, her Brest, her Hand, her Foot, her Leg, her every thing; and leave your Roses and your Lilies for your Country-Froes to make Nosegaies of. A gentleman sollicites a vertuous Gentlewoman to have the use of her body, onely to prove her: Their names suppose to be ROBERTUS, and LUCRETIA. Rob. ARe you still resolute (my dearest Mistress) to persist in your strange ty∣ranny, and scorne my constant love? Luc. Do not, Sir, abuse that sacred title which the powers celestial glory in, by ascribing it to your not desires; pray rather clothe them in their own attributes; term them your lust, Sir, you wild irre∣gular lust. Rob. This is coyness, a cunning coyness, to make me esteem at a high rate, that Jewel which you eem to part from so unwillingly: (Merchants use t, to put bad ware away:) think how much gold and silver thou shalt gain, in the exchange of one
poor trivial commodity: that thing call'd Honour, which you so much stand upon, is meerly an ima∣ginary voice, an unsubstantial essence; and yet for that thou shalt have real pleasures, such as Queens, prone to delicious Luxury, would cover, to sate their appetites. Lucr. Away, Sir, you have a canker'd soul; and know, Sir, not your estate (were you rich Croesus heire) shall buy my honour. Rob. Pray, sweet, forgive me; seal it with one chaste kiss, and henceforth let me adore you as the saver of my honour (had I meant as I said.) My truth and sames preserver, by heaven, I did but try you (I must confess) having a great amb't'on to prove them lyers, who extol'd your worth. Had you yelded to my desires (my looser heart by your consent extinquisht) I should have esteem'd (yea, divulg'd it to the world) that you were but a piece of counterfeit gold, a fair house haunted with Goblins, which none but a mad-man would enter to possess: but I have found your worth, and beg your pardon. Lucre. You have it, Sir, although 'twas not well done to tempt a womans weaknes. Fare you wel, Sir. Rob. Farewell, the best of women. The wooer (that he may the better facilitate his full to the mistress) thus enters into conserence with her maid. Wooer. SWeet Beancha, thou art entirely loved of her whom I love more then my own life; thou art present at all her critical minutes; rub'st her toes, and helpst to pull her smock ore her ears: prethee, when opportunity shall conspire with time, and thou hear'st thy Mistress praising or pitying her wooers (mentioning me amongst the rest) let me have thy applausive vote: I know thou art prevalent with her, 'bove all her other menials.
Maid. Sir, you have amply oblig'd my grati∣tude, and (indeed) have bought my suffrage. Sir, expect my utmost oratory on your behalf. Wooer. Sweetest Beancha, I am spaciously bound to thee, and shall ever continue thy beneficial friend: prethee wear this Diamond for luck-sake: there's twenty good Angels immur'd in that one stone; I give them as thy guard: take heed, Beancha, that thou prove true unto me, the stone wil lose its vertue else. Maid. Fear not my fidelity: Sir, did you but know how I sollicite for you— Wooer. Nay, my Beancha, do not think I have least doubt of thy past paines, or future perseverence. If I obtain this Gentlewoman, thou shalt have cause to thank that fate that destin'd thee for this employ∣ment. But prethee deal candidly with me; how stands the affections of thy mistress towards her fie∣ry suitor Mr. E.N? I fear, the vastness of his wealth will excuse the shallowness of his wit, and make him gratious in her eyes. Maid. Never doubt him, Sir: my Mistress, though she hold it not convenient quite to eject him from her presence, harbours not one good thought of him: she hath profest to me in private, that in her esteem he's a meer stick of sugar-candy; and indeed, she sees quite thorow him. But, if my desires do not delude my hopes, you are the Jason, Sir, that win this Medea, and the Golden Fleece to boot: nor do I doubt it. Wooer. Thou sing'st sweetly in my ears: touch but this string, and I could stand a frosty winters night, shrowded but with my shirt, to hear thy melody. If our united strength can but take in this fort, we'll mutually triumph, and share one happiness. Some two hours hence, I mean to view my goddess. Fare∣well, my best Beansha. Bean. Your best wishes wait on you, worthy Sir.
A Gentleman fired with the report of a rich (but nice widow) having abruptly forced himself into her company, thus sollicites her. Man. YOur pardon (lovely widow) for my bold intrusion. The blind boy hathwings, to signisie expedition; is ever arm'd, to show that he can make way (if need be) through the strictest opposition. The fame of your feature, & not the report of your wealthy possessions, hath put me upon this practice (I mean, this unexpected visiting you) which so many mortals (either funished with too much temerity, or else not qualified with suffi∣cient audacity) have (hitherto) feared to attempt, weakened (it seems) with a double wound; the austerity of your deportment, and the radiant re∣fulgencie of your Star-like eyes: the first more painfull then the latter; and the latter more in∣supportable then the first. Wid. Indeed, Sir, you have amply discovered your self to be more rash then wise, more giddy then grave, and more perverse then politick. What have you heard of me, that might incourage you to this supercilious sawciness? I must tell you, Sir, that you have proclaimed your owne unworthi∣ness, with your owne tongue, by this wayward way of wooing. Do you think, Sir, to ingratiate your self into my favour by your daring Impudence? He that prescribes himself the way to gain a good opinion from me, must win it by his obsequious care, not by his abrupt arrogancie. Man. Fair Widow, let me implore remission for this first fault; my future carriage towards you, shall be but one contiuned series, commixt of love
and service. When I first hearkned to the breath of Fame (too thrifty in divulging your rare feature) I felt the flames of true affection hovering about my heart: but this inch of time that my eyes have been so blest to gaze on your bright beauty, Cupid hath cast all Aeina in my bosome; and without you be pleas'd to afford me love, I shall expire in flames, and be converted to an heap of Cinders. Wid. You have the art for to paint out a passion: but were it granted Cupid thus hath caught you, count you me, Sir, so levious, as to returne a grant of what (perhaps) is not in me to give, unto a man meerly a stranger unto me (before this interview) an acquaintance of half an hours growth? Sir, I must know your breeding, and your worth; your substance, and the temper of your mind, ere I as∣sent unto a second marriage: but if heaven keep me sixt to my resolves, were there no better feed∣ers of Pedigrees, then I am like to prove, Nature will have no cause for to complain of her too nu∣merous breed. Man. Dear Widow, you shall have a full testi∣mony of me: my birth's not mean, my educa∣tion hath been vertuous; nor is my estate yet sunk beneath the degree of fear. But do not say, (nor for both the Indies think) you'l end your daies in solitude, and like the melancholy Phenix, ingender with your self; twill-give the babling vulgar cause to think, that your dead husband was no compleat man; or that your self, by some default in nature, takes no felicity in amorous acts. O slie this single life! Venus hath two Doves to draw her Chariot: Daphne was metamorphos'd to a tree; curel Anax∣eret, to a marble statue: but flexible Ariadne, con∣verted to a glorious Star, her browes ingirt with a bright wreathe of Saphires. Nor was there any
kind and gentle semale, propitious to her lover, or her wedded mate, but the all-powerful Ports have divulg'd them for eminent constellations, pleasant flowers, and mates for Goddesses. Wid. This is vain Poetry. But Sir, because I will not seem too rigid, or christen my self cruel; here∣after, when I know you better, have learnt what you have been, and what you are, you may expect as much as may be thought, from her who hugs her not proudly obstinate; must think him truly man, whom she can honour; hates not the poor, yet loves not beggery; and would in all things be a com∣pleat woman. Man. May I then have the promise of such happi∣ness, as in the mean time, til your doubts are solv'd, to have access unto you. By all things vertuous, no unbeseeming errand, unbecoming gesture, or di∣stasteful act, shall give you cause to hate, or me to fear: onely debar me not sometimes to see you. Wid. You have your wish, Sir: as you are a Gen∣tleman, I dare not to deny you such a favour; yet let not your visits be too frequent, too early in the morning, or too late at night. Sir, this large dispen∣sation had not been, were I not confident of your noble thoughts, and what you (seemingly) sincere∣ly promise. Man. You bless me above measure. A friend meeting an acquaintance of his accidentally at the Tavern. The fir. MR. E.D. Bacchus hath much befriended me, to guide my feet to such an happi∣ness as to imbrace you here, whose company I have
ever called, my chiefe solace. The sec. Sir, you are pleased to take notice of him, who is altogether unworthy your acquaintance, and whose utmost ambition is to be listed amongst the number of your humblest servants. The first. O friend! you strive to be acute in your responsions, and would fain oblige me your crea∣ture, by your voluntary submissiveness. With leave of your self, and this your worthy friend, let this room hold all three. But why, dear friend, have you so long absented your self from my dwelling? The sec. Sir, I hope you have not been in prison, or have commenc'd a suit in Law, or been visited with sickness, that swist time (in your opinion) seems to flag his wings, or to have sprain'd his feet. It is but six daies since (accompani'd with our loving mate Mr. I.R.) I supt with you and your fair wife, at your own mansion. The first. You have resolv'd my querie. Six daies (said you?) why to me (who love you) by computa∣tion it appeares six months. Pilades and Orestes slept beneath one roof; Damon and Pithius never took two waies: our friendship hath been long, let it be lasting. Do you not know my self? all my Deme∣sticks, whatever I call mine (my wife excepted) are at your command. The se. Sir, I have ever been beholding to you, and do confess your many bountious favours are far be∣yond the hope of my requital: I love not, Sir, to heap upon the tally. The first. Now you wrong your judgement, and desert, your first faire principles: this language doth imply, you dare not trust my goodness: this (dear friend) deserves severe amercement: I will prescribe your penance; you shall for one whole fortnight rest beneath my roof; nor
eat nor drink but in my company; this to begin from the first minute that we leave this place: and as a tye unto this stipulation, pledge me this bowl of sack. The second. You may command your creature; I'll pledge you, with a hearty zeal; although I fear you by this solemn contract have but found out a way to charge your self.— The first. No more of that (dear friend.) A young man who hath formerly sollicited, and receiv∣ed a repulse, thus renews the onset, and prevailes. Young man. SWeetest, I hope your late refusal of my love, is alter'd now, by your more gentle pity. My constancy carries more strength about it, then to be blasted with your first repulse. Forc'd forward by the cause of my affection, I must again be advocate, and hope my suit will be effected. Maid. Sir, I beseech you, make me not thus the subject of your mirth or complement: your soul is too secure (however you are pleas'd to talk) in its owne manly vertues, from surprize of weak af∣fection. Young man. Your bright eyes, like heavens blest light, when from a mist of clouds he peeps, and gilds the earth with brightness, can quicken and fire even marble hearts, with love; thaw souls of Ice. A malefactor's fears are more upon him ere he do come to his tryal, then when he hears the Judge pro∣nounce the sentence of his death; 'tis so with me; and I should be more blest, to hear that voice of yours, with a severe refusal strike me dead, then live tormented in a sad suspence, ignorant of my destinies
Maid. Sir, could I frame my Virgine-thoughts to love, they should be fix'd on you: but I am so well content and setled in a Virgin life, I cannot wish to change it. Young man. Alas, fair maid, Virg'nity is but a single good, a happiness which, like a Misers wealth, is as from others, so from your owne use, lockt up and closely cabin'd, since it admits no communication of its good. When you shall in the state of marriage freely taste Natures choice pleasures, you will repent you much you ere affect∣ed a single life. Maid. You have prevail'd: receive me freely. I am yours for ever. Young man. Let this kiss seal the contract. The parting of two friends. The first. SIr, I am infinitely sorry, that my e∣mergent business will not permit me yet longer to enjoy your company. The second. Sir, you best know your owne occasi∣ons; I shall not desire to detain you a minute lon∣ger then you may safely swear 'twill prove no de∣triment unto your state. The first. You are noble in all your deportments; and shall ingage me firmly, if you'll but please, about to morrow this time, to honour me with your person at my house. The sec. Sir, I shall wait on you the hour you wish; but with assured hope to find you no nonresident. The first. Else let me forfeit your fair friendship. Farewell, my worthy friend; I shall expect you. The second. Except great Jove once more con∣tract two nights in one, to sport with his Alemena, and Morpheus drive Sol's chariot, I will not fail. Much happiness wait on you, Sir.
An humorous conceited fellow meeting an old (but painted) Gentlewoman. Their names, CACADROMO, and Mistress FULSOME. Cac. Save thee, sweet parcel of paint; you come from the Oyl shop now. Ms. Fuls. How, Sirhah! from whence! Cac. Why, from your scurvy face-physick. I have met thee often in this angle of the City. To behold thee not painted, inclines somewhat near a miracle. These in thy face, were deep ruts, and foul sloughs, the last progress thou mad'st to thy suburb-bawd. There was a Lady in France, that having had the Small Pox, flea'd the skin off her face, to make it more level; and where before she look'd like a Nutmeg-grater, ever after she resembled an abor∣tive hedge-hog. Ms. Fuls. You are a soolish knave; do you call this painting? Cac. No, no; but you call it carreening of an old morphew'd Lady, to make her disimbogue again. There's rough-cast phrase, to your plastique. Fare∣well, old crone of Cappadocia. Ms. Fuls. Now the curse of Cuckolds light upon thee. A friend having brought one of his acquaintance home, thus entertains him. JULIO, COSMO. Jul. Sir, I have too much intrencht upon your patience, to bring you thus far, for so poor a wel∣come.
Cos. You have oblig'd my gratitude above thought: your heart I see's as fairly spacious, as this your well-built, richly surnisht fabrick. I am too poor in Courtship, to express how I accept this favour. Jul. You abound in all perfections. Please you sit, and taste those homely cates my house affords, which I present unto you with as awful love, as mortals offer incense to the Deities. Cosm. You prompt me what to say, Sir: those words transvers'd, would better fit my utterance. Jul. Pray, Sir, let this be but a formal entrance unto our future friendship: I am oblig'd to you for many favours; in the performance of which courtesies, you have shown your self the legitimate son of your most worthy father, aswell heire to his Vertues, as his Lands Cosm. Sir, Challenge all my services, as your owne; command whatere is mine: all my facul∣ties shall be imployed, to practise retribution. Jul. Sir, I thank you, and shall be ever prest to gratifie your goodness. Pray, Sir, eat; how rellish you this Greekish wine? Cosm. 'Tis pretious as the milk of Queens; I have not dranke the like: great Ottoman himself quaffs not a purer liquor. Sir, to our future a∣mity. Jul. I most cordially thank you. My house was never furnisht untill now, your presence makes me happy. Cosm. Sir, You too much grace your servant. Jul. Sir, you want what I wish, some choice dishes, which would perswade you feed more freely. Cosm. Lucullus, were he here himself, could not repine at this repast: I am no Gurmundizer, nor
yet am guilty of their ridiculous gestures, who must have every bit sawc'd with this word, Sir, I beseech you eate; and rise as hungry, but more fooles by far, then when they sat down. Jul. You are in all respects your self, Sir. But 'faith, since we're so opportunely met, let us not part so coolly. Though my owne wine be good, the mischiefe is, I have no bush hangs at my door, no li∣nen aprons to squeak Anon, Sir: the name of Tavern, adds to our desires. Me thinks absurdities dance round about me, when I drink healths at home. Cos. Sir, Bacchus will reward you for your cour∣tesie entail'd unto his Priest. My service waits upon you. Two Gentlemen (acquaintance) meet in the streets. VALASCO, PEDRO. Ped. MY dear friend Valasce, now in the name of good fellowship, what hath been the impe∣diment that hath hindered you from visiting me these many weeks? I hope you are not turn'd Stoick, nor in love with Cato's beard, or Dio∣genes his Tub. Are the Table-books, Bowling-al∣lies, and Taverns, now grown useless? Thou wert a Courtier, when there was a Court. I hope these dog-daies are not so dangerous, but we may sport and quaff with Imitation, and deal for wholesome flesh, without being at the charges to disburse to Panders and Porters, for a cloudy conveyance to our owne lodgings. Vala. Sir, You are mightily mistaken, if you conceit I am one of Chrysippus Scholars (Aristip∣pus I will allow to be my Master.) These froward times cannot transmigrate an Anchorites soul into
my brest; no, I retaine my merry temper still. I throw Size-ace, till I lose to my shirt; bowle away Crownes as Counters; not give ore till my pockets look like the picture of famine, leane and empty; and I walk after the bowles with my hands behind me, to denounce who plaies fairest, not daring to bet: there's a rub, you'll say. I am still the same I was when you saw me last, in feature, gesture demean∣our, and all other appurtenances; onely my will is not to you as formerly. I must tell you, Pedro, that you have forfeited the name of a friend: and by all my hopes, were it not that the thought of our former amity supprest those flames of fury in my brest, I now should kill thee. Ped. Valasco, I know you think I am so much a man, as not to fear your worst of anger, were you Alcides second, and grasp'd Joves thunder bolt; much less with supple hams, and suppliant hands, to creep to you, and beg your absolution. Had I been guilty of that breach of friendship, which you un∣kindly do suggest, I would maintaine and justifie my error, maugre your sword or buckler. But how, Sir, have I wrong'd you? Vala. The Blade Don Bombo, two hours since I met, who told me, eight daies ago you and he supt together at your Mistress Scorpiona's lodg∣ing; where, in discourse what truely-noble sparks the Inns of Court now yeilded, he rankt me 'mongst the rest; but you with scornes and taunts, before your Mistress, proclaim'd me nothing worth; a man of a dull sense, onely a valiant voice; with many other most unfriendly terms, so base, I hate to name them. Ped. Now by the Gods, Valasco, that Rogue Don Bombo hath abus'd us both: thee, by a false & slan∣derous information; me—But I'll not stand to talk;
I'll make cutworks in the villaines skin, and slice his throat so wide, next time he drinks his morn∣ings draught, he shall go near to spil his liquor; he shall confess before you, or else under his hand recant this lye, and eke record himself a branded Rascal. Will that atone you, and renew our loves? Val. I have ever harboured noble thoughts of you, and shall esteem your friendship ever preti∣ous, worthy the acceptance of a Deity. Chastise this Rascal till he cries peccavi; and, like to bro∣ken bones, which, distocated by some unhappy ac∣cident, set by a skilful hand, unite more firm then ever, our friendship shall take birth anew; we'll be another Pilades and Orestes. Ped. No more of this: my deeds shall speak my real thoughts: let's to the Tavern, Bully, and there, o're full-crown'd cups, joyn our right hands. Ho, Coach-man! hurry us, in thy four-wheel'd pouch, to that Argolian Bachanalian Clifton, who keeps the golden Fleece securely safe; yet hangs it as a signe, even at his door. His marble vault (a∣lone) includes Nepenthe: the Cosick-grape is onely his. Away, away. Two Merchants on the Exchange; Mr. Main Mast, and Mr. Topsaile. Main mast. MR. Topsaile, your best wishes nviron you; you see I keep my word. Top. Good faith I saw you not. All happiness wait on you, sweet Mr. Main Mast; you are a strict ob∣server of your time. Mainmast. I ever was so, Sir. Time's an old cross-penny father, and must be waited on obse∣quiously,
he fl es ye else. But what's the news from Neptune's Sea? how goes things in the great and watry world? are your ships rib'd with riches? is Aeolus propitious to your Vowes; his bag-cheek'd Boys not too robustious? Ha? I'm sure I find a great decay of Trade. Tritons, attended by a crew of Sword-fishes, are turn'd most desperate Pirates: no traffick, no commerce with forraigne Nations. Alas that ere I liv'd to see this day. Top. Had I had the sage Vlysses power, for to seclude all windes from Seas save Zephyrus, my forraigne trade could not have been more prospe∣rous, then till within these few years: but now, 'tis true (with storms on land) perpetual gusts at Sea shake all commerce to nothing; yet I bear up still, and as my name, Top and Top-gallant like, I plow on Neptune, and returne safely home, with all my purchases. Cesars motto's mine, man: next him, I sure shall be recorded t' have been dame Fortunes onely favourite. Veni: with English wares I did arrive in Spaine. Vidi; I had a rich return. Vici: I came home with a merry wind. Tityre tu patule quae nunc non est narrandi locus. Mainmast. Learned Mr. Topsaile, the Gods o'the seas befriend you marvellously. Top. I'm much bound indeed to the old blue-beard, Neptunus; to his Sons the Trytons, his Daughters the Mermaids, and his couzens the Whales. But no more of this: many words will not fill a mans belly: should we talk this two hours, there would be little use of a pick-tooth. My much-honour'd friend, Mr. Mainmast, shall I be so happifi'd this night, as to injoy your company at the carving out of a Shoulder of Mutton, cutting up of a paire of Coneys, and carbonadoing of a cold Capon? Mainmast. Sir, you shall command the exercise
of my teeth, and the silence of my tongue. I'll wait on you, Sir. Tops. O Sir, you teach me what to say: I am your humble ereature, and very happy in the soci∣ety of so worthy a friend. Nay, Sir, let me alone for complements, if I set upon't. Come, good Mr. Mainmast. The Wooer sending his Mistress a pair of white-frin'gd Gloves. WHen on your whiter hands these Gloves you draw, Remember Cupid, and his spotless law. Mortals do wrong him much, with sly pretence; And when they love, they Doctors do commence In Cunning's colledge, whenas love is free; There is no craft in perfect amity. These are fring'd round: Phylacteries were good, Till by the Pharisees dy'd deep in blood. The colour which Narcissus took, when he Converted to a Daffadil, here see; Which Hieroglyphically seems to tell, In hating me, you love your self too well. How happy are these skins, that may at pleasure Kiss your faire hands, and rifle all loves treasure! But these must be compell'd that thing to do, For which I sigh, and pray, and weep, and woo. But know (bright faire one) when my taske is don, You shall not need (like these) to draw me on.
Complemental LETTERS Fitted to all Humours and Inclinations; useful and delightful. To the Intelligent Reader. Cupid, here, hath taken wing (Larke-like) to the heavens doth sing. Peneian Daphne here displaies Her armes, and shrouds him with her bayes. A vast pile of Sabean gums, Smocking with fat Hecatoms, Thou mayst behold, and cheare thy sense With choice Idalian frankincense. Harmonious ecchoes do invite Thee to attention and delight. If Humours do not Judgement blind, A Zoylus I'll not fear to find.
One of a law and humble birth, falling in love with some great Lady, thus presents his service. Gratious Madam, YOu are a Lady in whom consists all that hea∣ven hath rais'd to perfection. I am too poor to enjoy so great a Treasure; and shall be e∣ver, till I grow immortal; which alone rests in your power to make me. 'Tis not your birth or fortune that I court, heavens witness with me: for had you been an humble shepherdess, and I a Monarch, this love had been, 'cause 'twas decreed by Fate. When I first saw you, methought my soul was forc'd to obey a Trance; and as a Vision, my amazed sight heheld you. The revolution of those Star-like eies deserves a new Astronomy, to contemplate it. I know I catch at a Star, and attempt to fathome Clouds; but it is not that thing call'd danger, that can affright me: Were you inclos'd with rocks of marble, whose lofty tops knew no distance betwixt the Skies and them, I would, with winged speed, seale those aspiring Walls; and, in despite of all that durst detaine you, bear you in my arms, beyond the reach of danger. You have been pleased, bright Anaxe∣rete, to smile upon your poor Iphis; the radiant lustre of your eyes hath exhal'd those dull and fog∣gy vapours, that clogg'd my soul with the contem∣plation of my great unworthiness: O continue those soul-reviving beams, since without their com∣fortable influence, I must freeze to Crystal, and perish more miserably then the wrath of Gods or
Men (united) can possibly showre upon the caytiff∣head of any desolate mortal. Bright Goddess, Your humble admirer, and sworne Servant, &c. An Amourist being forbidden by his Mistress any more to Court, by Epistle or otherwise, declareth himself thus. Dear Mistress, YOu have given me command not to love; which I confess I have ill obeyed: but you know, Mistress, that forbidden things are ever most coveted by mortals; which is the reason that I have not had the power, since your forbidding me to think of any other thought, but of loving you, Mistress, there is no kind of duty that I owe you not; there is no cruelty of chance or Fate, to which I shall not willingly expose my self, to obey you  but either cease you to forbid me love, or otherwise forbid your Image to pursue me; since that fol∣lows me everywhere, and leaves me not I berty or thought, but what it doth inspire. You ma as well forbid the water for to descend, and fire to mount on high, as command me to forbear to love you; which I must do, though in doing so, the fire of love parch me to cinders. Cruel Mistress, Your constant lover, not to be shaken off by frowns or threats, &c.
The Lover having received an utter denyal of his pro¦fer'd service, so that he is out of hope to accrue his de∣sired hapiness, takes his leave of his Lady thus morn∣fully. (Faire, faire one) CAn law or torture fright his soul, who is eve∣ry houre extended on the wrack? No: since you despise me, 'twill add unto my future happiness, when love shall know I'm one that di'd your martyr. And for my body, when intomb'd in earth, a Cypress-tree shall spring up from my grave, under whose shade such mournful lovers as are punisht with disdaine, shall come and pay sad tribute of their teares; which by that charitable ayr which doth convert the falling dew into a frost, shall be congeal'd, and raise to my sad me∣mory a lasting monument of transparent chrystal. So dies your distressed Martyr, R. H. The Lover being to pass beyond the seas, or otherwise to absent himself a while from his Mistress, takes leave of her, thus. My dear, SO leave the winter'd people of the North, the minutes of their summer, when the Sun de∣parting leaves them in cold walls of Ice, as I leave thee (my onely happiness on earth) com¦manded from thy presence by an irresistible Fate. But though we are sever'd for a time, a span o
time, 'twill increase our joyes, when next wee meet; when we shall joyne againe in a confirmed unity for ever: such will our next imbraces be (my dea∣rest) when the remembrance of former dangers (our parents angry frowns upon our loves) will fasten love in perpetuity, will force our sleeps to steal upon our stories. These daies must come, and shall, without a cloud or night of fear, or en∣vy: till when, keep warm my soul within thy bo∣some. Thy devoted servant, T. B. The Amourist having failed to meet his Mistress at a place appointed, thus excuseth himself. Mistress, I Attended in much fear, and with more patience, the space of three hours, this morning, in my chamber, expecting every minute some ominous embassy from you, to scourge me into a just pe∣nance, for neglect (as you may suppose) offered un∣to you yesterday, in not waiting on you according to my promise: but anxieties (to my great con∣tent) proving abortive, I have assumed the confi¦dence to apologize thus for my contempt. My hearts joy, I know you think that your self is the Loadstone that attracts my soul (though I confess I have hitherto found your heart like a peble, (mooth, but stony) and that when I am restrained from your sight, like a melancholy vegetive, in the absence of the Sun, I hang down my drooping head. Think not that I desire to withdraw from so worthy a servi
as I esteem yours; under whom I chuse rather to suffer extream tyranny, then elsewhere to live be∣neath the perfectest Empire. But so it hapned, that at the very hour when I was preparing to come and wait on you, a Messenger bathed in sweat, came to certifie me, that my Unkle (of whom I have receiv∣ed a large Legacy) lay even at the point of death, earnestly wishing to behold me ere his departure to the invisible land: the performance of whose de∣sire, was the onely occasion that impedited my at∣tendence on you. I humbly intreat you (Mistress) to accept of this true narration, as a sufficient ex∣cuse: which shall continue you in my opinion, The glory of my thoughts, soveraigne Good of my life, and extream felicity of my soul, R. T. The Lover having found his Mistress basely inconstant, takes his last farewell of her thus. Lost Love, SInce I must write to one that hath scorned to an∣swer my Epistles any time this month, take it not in favour of you; it is not to you, but to this pa∣per that I tell my thoughts; so to disburden my self of them, as that I may never more have them in minde, except to detest their causer. You have not deceived me: for I long since foresaw the in∣stability of your minde. If yet you did tell me the cause of this your infidelity, if not able to finde a just occasion, you took the pane but to search a pretence that were coloured with salfe appearance, I would herein excuse you against my
self. This then is my comfort, that you have no o∣ther reason for your change, then your owne in∣constancy: and though I have not ties enough to stay you, yet have I resolution enough to let you go; and have as much patience in your loss, as I ad contentment in your possession. Adien for ever. And because you shall be certainly assured, that I now as perfectly hate you, as heretofore I dotingly affected you (to perpetuate your memory) I will fix this Epitaph upon your Tombe. Epitaph. Here remains a piece, that Shame Does forbid to owne, or name: She was once as this a stone, Till conversion made her none: Then, her beauty stain'd her soul; Being fair, she was most foul: Lov'd, yet hated all; 'tis cross'd; Whom she lov'd, she hated most. She was skill'd in Language too; Every Nation did her woo. She could French interpret well, Till she fashion'd how to spell Through the Nose. If any pass On this tender yeilding grass, To view this piece, do not weep; 'Tis a passion they may keep. Onely Clarity bids us say, She is happy now she's clay.
The Lover being prohibited the sight of his Mistress, ei∣ther by the strictest opposition of her Parents, or the perswasive counsel of her guardian, sends her this Letter. Dearest Love, THere is no longer means of living absent from my life: since you are not with me, I am no more my self. I may be forbidden the seeing of you, but never the loving of you: or if they will for bid, yet they can never hinder me. Such as owe me most good will, do testifie the least unto me, and that by reason of my affection: but I chuse rather to be little obedient to them, to be the more faithful to you. Live you then in this assurance, if you will not that I die; and become assured likewise, that my life shall sooner be extinct, then that fair flame that dayly does consume it. Divine Mistress, your humble creature, happy to serve you, A. S. A Maid, or Widow, having afforded her Suiter a final answer (perhaps) contemned and affronted him, may upon change of thoughts, seek toregain his love, thus. (Worthy Sir) IF there be no greater Cor'sive unto the mind of one, then that which forceth us (despight of our selves) to seek to those whom we have before (and
that without just cause) notoriously offended, then certainly am I the most wretched creature living: for (as now) there is no means left for me to escape from ruine, but onely by thy help (sweet friend) alone, who hast more reason to wish my overthrow, then my good fortune or health any way at all, in that thou hast found such extream and barbarous discourtefie in me. Nevertheless, if thygenerous and gentle mind, cannot feel this injury (done unto thee by a silly Maid) then I beseech thee, think no more upon my offence; but burying it deep, under thy feet, do that for my sake, which the bearer hereof shall make thee privy to: and then shalt thou quickly perceive, what great satisfaction I will make thee, for my fault committed; granting unto thee that which thou shalt most desire. Give credit unto this Messenger; assuring thy self that I am Thine most obliged M. L. A Captain, Colonel, or common Souldier, falling in love with some gentlewoman, thus manifests his passions. (Fair gentlewoman) IF it be an irrevocable doom, that men, be they never so valiant or couragious, shall be sub∣ject unto a braver and more livelier force then their owne; I hope you will not marvel over∣much, that I humbly yeild to your divine graces; and, as a captive your to beauty, prostrate my self a prisoner at your feet. But as
mortal men deserve no countenance from the hea∣vens, until they have by many proofs testified their faithful and dutious service towards them; so, I will not presume to importune you to affect me at all, much less to yeild me any guerdon for my paines, until that by my dutious service I show my self (in some part) worthy your gratious smiles. Mine onely request to you is, that it would please you to have me in your lively remembrance; and not to entertaine another, as your loyal Servant, before you shall have just occasion to discard and give me over: for as (no doubt) it will be little pleasing unto you (hereafter) to repent you, that you have made a worse choice then of my self; so it will be far more bitter unto me, then a most des∣perate death, to be discharged from serving her, whom I love more then my owne heart, and che∣rish more then my owne life, yea then my owne soul, which is (now) wholly yours, seeing that he that is the owner of the same, is the inviolable slave to your incomparable self. A. R.
LETTERS in Verse: With other curious Conceits, and fine Fancies. To the Reader. Behold, Apollo doth invite thee, Yet a third time to delight thee: A pleasant Tempe, planted well With Flowers of odoriferous smell; In the midst whereof do chill Aganippe waters drill. The Muses, whose sweet melody Drawes Jove down from the arched Sky, Charm Pluto's self, and all the Fiends; To heaven climbes, to hell descends: Hand in hand, now in a Ring, Invite thee, for to hear them sing. Enter, and take thy free delight: And 'cause (perhaps) thy Appetite Cannot with one dish sated be I give thee, here, Varietie.
The Lover being forced from his Mistress presence. (Mistress) BAnisht from you, I charg'd the nimble wind, My unseen messenger, to speak my mind In am'rous whispers to you; but my Muse, Lest the unruly spirit should abuse The trust repos'd in him, said it was due To her alone, to sing my love to you. Hear her then speak, bright Lady, from whose eye Shot lightning to his heart; who joys to dye A Martyr in your flames: O let your love Be great, and firm as his! then nought shall move Your setled faiths, that both may grow together, Or (if by Fate divided) both may wither. Be constant, as y'are faire: for I foresee A glorious Triumph waits o'th' victorie Your love will purchase; shewing us to prize A true content; there onely love hath eyes. Divine Lady, yours more then his owne, &c. The Lover being anxious of his Mistress constancy. Faire, SWeet, if you like and love me still, And yeild me love for my good will, And do not from your promise start, When your fair hand gave me your heart;
If dear to you I be, As you are dear to me: Then your I am, and will be ever; Nor time, nor place, my love shall sever, But faithful still, I will persever, Like the constant marble-stone, Loving but you alone. But if you favour more then me (Who loves thee still, and none but thee) If others do the harvest gaine, That's due to me for all my paine, If that you love to range, And often for to change: Then get you some new-fangled mate; My doating love shall turne to hate; Esteeming you (though too too late) Not worth a pebble-stone, Loving not me alone. The Lover being transported in his fancy, complements in an high stile with his Mistress. FOrsake with me the earth, my fair, And travel nimbly through the aire, Till we have reacht th' admiring skies, Then lend sight to those heav'nly eyes Which blind themselves, make creatures see; And taking view of all. When we Shall find a pure and glorious sphere, We'll fix like stars for ever there: Nor will we still each other view; We'll gaze on lesser stars; then you
See how by their weak influence they The strongest of mens actions sway, In an inferiour orbe below: We'll see Calipso loosely throw Her hair abroad, as she did weare The self-same beauty in a Beare, As when she a cold Virgin stood, And yet inflam'd Joves lustful blood. Then look on Leda, whose faire beams By their reflection gild those streams, Where first (unhappy she) began To play the wanton with a Swan. If each of these loose beauties are Transform'd to a more beautious star By the adulterous lust of Jove; Why should not we, by purer love? Life of my life, a devoted servant to your excellent perfections, &c. Dearest, Let one griefe harme us, Let one joy fill us, Let one love warme us, Let one death kill us. A Maid, or widow, returnes this merry answer to her hot Lover whom she affect not. I See thee (gentle Franke) most merry, Though firm thy faith, and sound as berry: Love gave me joy, and fortune gave it As my desire could wish to have it.
What didst thou wish? tell me (sweet lover) Whereby thou mightst such joy recover, To love where love should be inspired, Since there's no more to be desired. In this great glory, and great gladness, Thinkst thou to have no touch of sadness? Good fortune gave me not such glory To mock my love, or make me sory. If my firm love I were denying, Tell me, with sighs wouldst thou bedying? Those words in jest to hear thee speaking, For very griefe, my heart is breaking. Yet wouldst thou change (I pray thee tell me) In seeing one that doth excell me? O no; for how canst thou aspire To more then to thy owne desire? Such great affection thou dost bear me, As, by thy words, thou seemst to swear me: Of thy desert, to which a Debter I am, thou maist demand this better. Sometimes (me thinks) that I should swear it, Sometimes me thinks thou shouldst not hear it: Onely in this, the pip doth greive me, And thy desire not to believe me. Sir, yours very dubiously affectionated, not to be cammanded, or waited on, by you, &c. The Lover being discontented at the absence of his Mi∣stress, he being in the City, she in the Countrcy. Dearest, THe lesser people of the aire conspire to kep thee from mee: Philomel with higher
And sweeter notes, wooes thee to weep her rape; Which would appease the gods, & change her shape: The early Larke, preferring, for soft rest, Obsequious duty, leaves his downy nest, And doth to thee harmonious duty pay, expecting from thy eyes the break of day; From which the Owle is frighted, and doth rove (As never having felt the warmth of love) In uncouth vaults, and the chill shades of night, Not 'biding the great lustre of thy sight. With him, my Fate agrees; not viewing thee, I'm lost in mists; at best, but Meteors see. Soul of sweetness, thy humble creature, &c. The Lover angry at his Mistress unsufferable contempt, may (if he will) thus vent himself, in an invective manner (Scornful Tit) SInce just disdaine began to rise, And cry revenge, for spiteful wrong; What once I prais'd, I now despise, And think my love was all too long. I tread to durt that scornful pride, Which in thy looks I have descride. Thy beauty is a painted skin, For fooles to see their faces in. Thy eyes, that some as stars esteeme, From whence themselves (they say) take light,
Like to the foolish fire I deeme, That leads men to their death by night. Thy Words and Oaths, are light as wind, And yet far lighter is thy mind. Thy friendship is a broken reed, And thou a gigling maukes indeed. My owne, and can command my self, H. D The Lover betwixt hope and despaire to attaine his Mistress love, she telling him she hath vowed never to marry. Dearest mistress, EVen as my hand my pen to paper laies, My trembling hand my pen from paper staies; Lest that thine eys, which shining, made me love you, Should, frowning on my suit, bid cease to love you: So that my nurfing murth'ring pen affords A grave, a cradle, to my new-born words. But whilst like clouds tofs'd up and down by aire I wracked hang, 'twixt hope and sad despaire; Dispaire is beaten, vanquisht from the feild, And unto conqu'ring hope my heart doth yeild. If of my eyes you also could bereave me, As you already of my heart deceive me; Or could shut up my ravisht ears through which You likewise did my inchanted heart bewitch; To root out love all means you can invent, Were all but labour lost, and time ill spent:
For as these sparks, being spent, which fire procure, The fire doth brightly burning still indure; Though absent, so, your sparkling eyes remove, My heart still burnes in endless flames of love. Then strive not gainst the stream to no effect, But let due love yeild love a due respect; Nor seek to ruine what your self begun, Or loose a knot that cannot be undon. Why were you fair, to be sought of so many, If you live chaste, not to be lov'd by any? For if that Nature love to Beauty offers, And Beauty shun the love that Nature proffers; Then either unjust Beauty is to blame, With scorne to quench a lawful kindled flame; Or else, unlawfully if love we must, And be unlov'd, then Nature is unjust. A marble heart, under an amorous look, Is of a flattering bait the murth'ring hook; For from a Ladies shining frowning eyes, Death's sable dart, with Cupids arrow flies. Since then from chastity and beauty spring Such various streams, where each a bide as kin; Let Tyrant Chastitie's usurped throne Be made the seat of beauties grace alone; And let your beauty be with this suffis'd That my heart's City is by it surpriz'd Raze not my heart, nor to your beauty raise Blood-gilded Trophies of your beauties praise. For wisest Conquerours do Towns desire, On honourable tearmes, and not with fire. Cruel faire one, thy bleeding servant, T. P.
The Lover having word brought him of his Mistress de∣parture. Dearest, I Am engag'd to sortow, and my heart Feels a distracted rage. Though you depart, And leave me to my feares, let love, in spight Of absence, our divided souls unite. But you must go: the me lancholy Doves Draw Venus chariot hence: the sportive loves That wont to wanton here, hence with you flie, And, like false friends, forsake me when I die. For, but a walking Tombe, what can he bee, Whose best of life is sorc'd to part with thee? Bright Goddess your humble admirer. The Lover absent from his Mistress beyond the Seas, sollicites her thus. My dearest Mistress, STar of my life, if these sad lines do hap The raging fury of the Sea to scape, O let your hand then be their blessed Port, From whence they may unto your cies resort. Fountain of bliss, yet well-spring of my wo; O would I might not justly tearm you so! My dearest dear, behold the portraicture Of him that doth all kind of woes indure;
Of him whose head is made a hive of woes, Whose swarming number dayly greater grows; Of him, whose senses like a rack are bent With divers motions, my poor heart to rent; Whose mind a mirrour is, which onely shows The ugly image of my present woes; Whose memory's a poyson'd knife to teare The ever-bleeding wound my brest doth bear: And that poor heart, so faithful, constant, true, That onely loves, and serves, and honours you, Is like a feeble Ship, which, toine and rent, The mast of hope being broke, and tackling spent; Reason the Pilot dead, the stars obscured, By which alone, to sail it was inured; No Port, No Land, no comfort once expected, All hope of safety utterly neglected; With dreadful terror tumbling up and down; Visions uncertain, waves to mountaines grown. I must confess, that when I do consider How ill, alas, how ill agree together, So peerless beauty, and so fierce a minde, So hard an inside, and so soft a rinde; A heart so bloody, and so white a brest; Such proud disdain, with so mild looks supprest; And how my dear (O would it had been never Accursed word! O would it had been ever) How once, I say, till your heart seem'd estranged (Alas) how soon my day to night was changed! You did vouchsafe my poor eyes so to grace, Freely to view the riches of your face; And (which was greatest bliss) did not dildaine, For boundless love, to yeild some love again. Despair it self cannot make me despaire But that you'll prove as kind as you are faire; And now at length, in lien of passed wo, Will pity, grace, and love, and favour show.
O spare, O spare my yeilding heart, and save Him whose chiefe glory is to be your slave: Make me the object of your clemency, And not the subject of your tyranny. So shall you restore a dying Lover to perfect health, fulfil the Decree of the Gods, and make him transcendently happy, who at present languisheth in a dying despaire, ready to bee offered up on the altar of your beauty. R. H. The Lover assuring his Mistress that her doubts are vain, and he is unmoveably constant. WHy dost thou (my dear mistress) doubt my love Which beauty bred, and vertue still doth nou∣rish That any other object can remove, Or faint with time, but still more freshly flourish? No; know, thy beauty is of such a force, The fancy cannot flit, that's with it taken; Thy vertue such, my heart doth hate divorce From thy sweet love, which ne'er shall be forsaken. So setled is my soul, in this resolve, That first the radiant stars from heaven shall fall; The heavens shall lose their influence, and dissolve; To the first Chaos shall be turn'd this all, Ere I from thee (dear mistress) do remove My true, my constant, and my sincere love. Thine while his owne, A D.
The Lover hearing of his Mistress departure, bewailes thus. Dear heart, WHat's death, more then departure? the dead go Like travelling exiles, are compell'd to know Those regions they heard mention'd oft; 'tis th'art Of sorrow, to say, who dies doth depart. Then weep thy funeral-tears, which heaven, t' a∣dorn The beauteous tresses of the weeping morn, Will rob me of; and thus my Tombe shall be As naked, as it had no obsequie. Know, in these lines sad musick to thy ear, (My sad dear Mistress) you the sermon hear Which I preach ore my herse and death: I tell My owne live's story, ring but my owne knell. But when I shall return, know, 'tis thy breath, In sighs divided, rescues me from death. Thy lamenting faithful Servant, E. D. Five Lyrick Pieces. To my noble friend, Mr. Theodor Loe. GO, pale-fac'd paper, to my dear, And whisper this into her ear: Though I absent am, yet she Keeping thee, embraces me.
Let no rude hand dare to touch thee; Care not, though a thousand grutch thee Of that bliss, which, in her hive, Thou enjoyst, till I arrive: And be sure, thou dost not flie From the glances of her eye: Where she goes, be thou about her; Gad not thou abroad without her. Let not any dare to see What's between my love and thee: Nay, and when she haps to sleep, Gently to her bosome creep; Where (I charge thee) rest till shee With her kisses waken thee. Go, and prosper for a space, Till I rob thee of thy place. The resolute Lover. WHat care I, though she be faire Hair, snow-like hand, or sun-like eye, If in that beauty I not share? Were shee deformed, what care I? What care I, though she be foul Haire, swarthy-hand, or sun-burnt eye. So long as I enjoy her soul? Let her be so, what care I? Dim sight is coz'ned with a gloss Of gawdy gown, or hum'rous haire; Such gold, in melting, leaves more dross Then some unpolisht prices share. Be she faire, or foul, or either, Or made up of both together: Be her heart mine, haire, hand, or eye, Be what it will; why, what care I?
The Lovers protestation. PRetty wanton, prethee say, Did you see my heart to day? Marks to know it you shall finde; Alwaies constant, true and kinde: Wounds about it, it doth bear; Drops are tricklig, here and there: In which wounds you'll find a dart Shot by you, into my heart. If you saw it, do not blush; The wounds are fresh, and bloud will gush Into your face; and you be known To cover more then is your own: Send it back; but let it be Sound, as when it came to thee. Do not think for to deny it; These are tokens will descry it. How can I subsist and live, When my owne you will not give? Yet if you will send to me Yours in faire exchange, I'll be Mute, and not report that I Suffer by your cruelty. Then I prethee, let me know, If you will exchange, or no. Question. WHat is that freedome which men call A blessedness to sport withall? Or what those joys, which Lovers deem To equalize their best esteem? I long to know, that I may see The difference 'twixt those joyes and me.
Answer. Then know, loves joies are such as still Are subject to Fates supream will; And every hour the Lover finds Cross friends, cross stars, and stormy winds; Till Seas grow calm, and we arrive At loves eternal peaceful hive. If patience then may bring me ease, Swell big, a while, you boyst'rous seas. Cupid, to an inexorable young man, disdaining his Deity. YOu, faire mortal, think not I Priviledge a star-like eye, Or the choicest faire on earth; I can blast them in their birth. Yet, that you might feel desires Quenching loves Idalian fires; 'Mongst a many young men more, I preserv'd thee, to adore My deity: but now I see Thou disdain'st my pow'r and me. Therefore, by my Paphian bow, My complaints must let you know That a strange complaint of late Beat a parly at my gate; And so ent'red, that the gods With that uproare grew at ods; Insomuch that they me sent Messenger of punishment, In my mothers sacred name, You a Traytor to proclaime,
'Gainst the Laws of love and beauty, And to what you owe by duty, To the Aethereal powers, and me Cancel'd by ubiquity. By my bow, and slaming dart; By the Lovers bleeding heart; By the hand, and by the glove; By the eye that captiv'd Jove; I command, and summon thee, At loves Bar to answer mee To what we shall there object 'Gainst thy scorne and base neglect. Fail not, mortal, as you will Answer your ensuing ill. Ad eundem. PAle-cheek'd mortal, now your eyes Return their lustre to the skies, No hue rosy-red doth guide The welcome Lilies, as a bride; Nor are the Lilies fresh and gay, As they were the other day. The present guilt doth make it known, Vigour lent is not your own. Venus, now, the Queen of Love, Is in presence, and must prove You a disobedient heire To her glorious hemisphere. Paphos Archer hates to owne You a brother to his throne, And must here a witness be To your inconstant constancy: Therefore, on this gold-leav'd book, In which Lovers oft do look, Lay your hand, if you be free; Swear, and damned ever be.
See, he's guilty; take him hence To a scorching residence. Hence to trial: Themis now 'Gainst thy guilt doth set her brow: And beauty calls; you must appeare At loves bar, and answer there. Empta poenitentia. IAck to his Jug, in feeling passion swore, He would approve her a polluted— Whose tempting outward look, & borrowed locks And inward filthiness gave him the— Thou ly'st (quoth Jug) 'twas what thy mony bought, How dear soere thou paid'st, I gave thee nought. Experto credentum. HOw durst Capritius call his wedlock whore, But that he speaks it plusquam per narratum? Nam ipso teste; what require you more, Unless you'ld have it, magis approbatum? Nequicquam verba. WIll woes his wench, with words of eloquence, Wishing he might her corps Enthalamize, And of his love impart that influence, Which with her liking best may sympathize. Shee, who regardless, at his speech doth spurn, Saith, 'tis not words of art must serve her turn.
An invective against my old she-enemy, my most auda∣cious Aunt, now very desirous to marry. Sweet Aunt, MOre rich then wise, and yet more wise then fair; years add gray Trophies, to inrich thy haire: Rather then live to love, dye with dispaire. Whenas sad comets in the skies appear, Some strange disaster then approacheth near; Which in our doubtful souls begots a fear. Thy nose is that disaster: for in thee No less then thousand comets we may see, As symptomes to ensuing misery. Below thy nose, an hill we may desery, Darkning the light appearing from thine eye, Within that hollow concave where they lye. Eye, Nose, and Chin, since you in darkness be, Premeditate before you visit me, And raise young cinders to your venery. And in night-shade, meet with your shadow, where Some Incubus, by chance, may get an heire, Making the world accurst with such a paire. Or if thy wither'd hand (begot by time) Should with thine eye, nose, chin, and face combine, Without discordant, to make some man thine; Know, gumless wooer, that diseases thirst To seize thy hand, where th' Apoplexy must Bring thee, ere long, unto thy neighbours dust.
Or if thy wither'd thigh desires to know The sweet content that in young men doth flow, Convert a tear into a flood below. So may some cripple, wanting Almes, supply Thy almost-desperate necessity. And please both nose, gums, chin, thigh, hands, & eye A Lovers passion, wanting the society of his Mistress. 1 DEare heart, remember the sad hour When we were fore'd to part; How on thy cheeks I wept a showr, With sad and heavy heart. About thy wast my arms did twist: Oh then I sigh'd, and then I kiss'd. 2 Ten thousand fears and joyes in one, Did such distraction frame, As if the liveless world would run To Chaos back again; Whilst my poor heart, amid these feares, Lay bathed in my milk-warm tears. 3 When I thought, and thinking wept, How friends and fate did lowre On thee Leander; how they kept Thee from thy Heroes Tower; While thunder groan'd, and heaven did weep, To rock thy sense in silent sleep. 4 The will of Fate must unresisted stand: O who can it oppose? "Necessitie's a Tyrant, and
"No mean in mischiefe knowes: Else might my fairer love and I Unsever'd live, till one did die. 5 Just so the hungry infant from His mothers duggs is ta'en, When his weak arms yet spread along, More dulcid milk to gain: And nothing brings the Babe to rest, Until he sleep upon her brest. 6 Thus being banisht from my love, And forc'd to leave her sight, No thought but those of her can move In me the least delight: But like true steel, my heart doth pant To touch the loug'd-for adamant. 7 Oh let no storme of discontent Be clouded in your browes: Dear friend that have my being sent, Give being to my vowes. You'll much engage my heart, if when I say she's mine, you'll say amen: Such kindness to our true-love showne, Shall binde us doubly then your owne. Loves inconveniencies. LOve is a sickness full of woes, All remedy refusing; A plant that with most cutting growes; Most barren, with best using: Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies; If not enjoy'd, it sighing cries: Heigh ho! Love is a torment of the mind, A tempest everlasting; And Jove hath made it of a kind Not well, nor full, nor fasting: Why so? More we enjoy it, more it dies; If not enjoy'd, it sighing cries, Heigh ho! A Diologue between a Shepherd and a Dam'sel. Shep. BOnny wight, whatere you be, Luck be in your companie: Are you Diana? say to me. Dam. None such, good Shepherd. Shep. Dest and trim one, mickle glee, Be ye what you please to bee; Some disaster's neer to yee. Dam. Never, never more. Shep. Welladay! now by my creed, And my merry oaten reed; Sike another rousing sigh Would well split me, gay and blith. Let a clowtish clown partake Why this sobbing dole you make. Dam. Ah me! unfortunate. Shep. Wonderment of wo, relate, If simpleness you might not scorn, How you hapt to be forlorne. Dam. The story would too tedious bee, Shepherd, to relate to thee.
Shep. Be not all too keen, bright star; If my pertness went-too far, Mercy is the doom I sue: Good things never meant more true Then the silly Shepherd did, Late when he your sorrow bid Discourse the means; Merry Pan, And the sagest Gods do scan Wherefore was it. Well a neare, Yon foul mucky cloud, I feare, Will besprint us, Phebus waine. If so list you but to daign A poor Shepherd's entertaine, Welcome should you be (my bliss) Nothing uncomely is, I wis, Though not courtly. Answer make; Will you my small feasting take? Dam. I'll go: for wheresoere I rest, Sorrow must be my onely feast. Shep. Welcome, Welcome, Welcome still: Never with a freer will Was welcome spoken: by the sky, Welcome, welcome, heartily. Alack, alack, the rotten South 'Gins to ope his dewy mouth; Time to hide you; maiden meek, Enter my cave, I you beseek; O thou white one, bonny gyrle, Welcomer then heaps of pearl. The Lovers alarm to his Mistress. RIse, Lady Mistress, rise; The night hath tedious bin; No sleep hath faln into my eyes, Nor slumber made me sin.
Is not she a Saint then, say, Thought of whom keeps sin away? Rise, Mistress, rise; and give me light, Whom darkness still will cover; And ignorance darker then night, Till thou smile on thy lover. All want day till thy beauty rise: For the gray morne breaks from thy eyes. A Supplantor. FAirest wilt thou still be true To a man so false to thee? Did he lend a husband due, Thou didst owe him loyalty. But will curses, wants, and blowes, Breed no change in thy white soul? Be not fool to thy first vowes, Since his first breach doth Fate controul; No beauty else could be so chaste. Think not thou honour'st women then, Since by thy conscience, all disgrac'd, Are rob'd of the dear loves of men. Then grant me my desire, that vow to prove A real husband his adult'rate love. The Shepherds complaint. NEighbour Swaines and Swainlins, hear me: It is Strephon bids you hear: Leave your pastures, and come neer me; Come away; you need not fear. By my soul, as I affect you, I have nought that can infect you:
O then come, Hear a tongue That in discord keeps a part, With a wo-surcharged heart. Ne'r was Swain on plain more loved, Or could do more feats then I; Yet one griefe hath now removed All my whilome Jollity: All my layes be quite forgotten; Sheep-hook broken, pipe, bag, rotten. O then come, Hear a tongue That with flatt'ring speech doth call, To take long farewel of all. I am not, as once I was, When my Chloris first did suite me; Nor when that same red-hair'd Lass, Fair Bellina, did invite me To a garden, there to play, Cull, kiss, clip, and toy all day. O then come, Hear a tongue That in wooing termes was flowing, But through wo, hath spoyl'd his wooing. All I can or will desire you, When my breath of life is spent, That in love, you would inter me (For it will my soul content) Near unto my Father herse, And bestow some comely verse On my Tombe; Then my tongue Shall throb out this last adieu, Ne'r were truer Swain then you.
A Dialogue between two Lovers. Question. WEre ever chaste and honest hearts Expos'd unto so great distresses? Answer. Yes: they that have the worthiest parts, Most commonly have worst successes Great fortunes follow not the best: It's Vertue that is most distrest. Then Fortune, why do we admire The glory of thy great excesses; Since by thee what men acquire, Thy works, and not their worths expresses? Nor dost thou raise them for their good, But t' have their ills more understood. The Authors suit, to Cupid. I Will not love; I love to rest: Cupid is an ungentle guest, Except without his weapon's he Will lodge in my tyr'd Phantasie. Better stand the shock of thunder, Which cleaves hardest Rocks in sunder, Then oppose the sturdy blow, When the blind Boy bends his Bow. Prethee Cupid, cease to smile; 'Tis a courtship base and vile, To laugh, and stab unto the heart. I will praise thee, and thy dart, While at others, thou dost throw it: I love to hear on 't, not to know it.
A Salyrical Description of Love. LOve is of man the fatal rock On which his ship of ease doth knock, And splits him with the sturdy shock. He never yet felt any pain, That hath not known the lovers vain, Whose greatest griefe is greatest gain. No Ill so nigh the heart doth sit, As doth this fierce tormenting fit: Death is more pleasing (far) then it. Our souls, with hope, it doth torment, Whilst nought but massacres are sent: To dye is better far content. Love then most cruel, void of grace, Ought to be curst in every place; No God, but Devil, in this case. The Changes: Or, all think not of love alike. Worthi's hee the bright of day, Who doth loyal love obey. CƲpid onely I do love; Him I worship still above. Happi's he, that by the same, Wisdome to himself doth gain. Worthi's he the bright of day, Who doth loyal love obey.
O how sweet is that warm fire, Which our hearts heats with desire! To our souls no sweetness is Halfe so dulcet as is this. Worthi's he, &c. Blessed love, without all crime, Two souls pleaseth at one time; Then doth love his lover right, When his love he doth requite. Worthi's he, &c. Of two souls, he makes but one, In two bodies all alone. Love more happy cannot bee, Then when we loving couples see. Worthi's he, &c. Pleasure none upon the ground, Like to love, is to be found: Pleasures pass as transitory; Love doth still remain in glory. Worthi's he, &c. The answer, being a contradiction of the former asser∣tion. Worthy is he of dark night, That in Cupid doth delight. NOthing in this world can be Sweeter then our libertie; Which love often takes away, And then all our joyes decay. Worthy is he of dark night, That in Cupid doth delight.
Love doth never sorrow miss, (Who grieves) male-contented is: But love (thus) doth Lovers sting; Doth not love then sorrow bring? Worthi's he, &c. Who that soul hath ere seen eas'd, Upon whom fierce love hath ceaz'd? The Mistress, and the Servant both, Oft through love their lives do loath. Worthi's he, &c. Gods from heaven have chas'd and sent This vile Boy, us to torment: Nor are we him to indure, That such plagues doth us procure. Worthi's he, &c. Then most wretched him I deem, That of this blind Boy doth esteem: Worser plague there's not of Ills, That consumes still, yet ne'er kills. Worthy is he of dark night That in Cupid takes delight. A Farewel to Love. To my most courteous Friend Mr. John Phillipson. Love fare thee well; live will I now Quiet, amongst the green-wood bow. ILl betide him, that love seeks; He shall live but with lean cheeks. He that fondly falls in love, A slave (still) to griefe shall prove.
Love fare thee well; live will I now Quiet, amongst the green-wood bow. What an Ass and fool is he, That may, and yet will not go free? I can love her that is fair; But so, as if I grasp'd the aire. Love fare thee well, &c. I like not these Dames so smooth, As would have men court and love: For as constant I them find, As the Sea is, or the wind. Love fare thee well, &c. Once I lov'd one, that was kind; But she did what pleas'd her mind. Better 'tis ne'r to be born, Then live as anothers scorn. Love fare thee well, &c. To lovers, what good doth the Sun, If by his beams they be undon? Love's as bitter as is Rue: Blest are those that ne'er it knew. Love fare thee well, &c. A fond Lover doth not merit Name, or fame, of man t' inherit; Since he is foe to his own health, And huggs diseases, as his wealth. Love fare thee well; live will I now Quiet, amongst the green-wood bow.
A Rhapsody. Now must the Gods above, And all the heavens that move, Of my Mistress praises sing, Such, as through the earth may ring. Now must we frame chaplets fine, And, with the Lawrel green, combine The fruitful Olive, that our haire May yeild a persume through the aire. My Love, maist thou alwaies flourish, Although my self do die and perish. To the same. If nothing faire I see, but what's thy face; If thy bright look is loadstone to my eyes: If thy rare parts (as blessings) I embrace, Have I not reason, then, in dutious wise, Thy gracious self for to implore? Since thee (a Goddess) I adore. He that finds salve to cure him of his griefe, By a fair hand; of that shall he not make Account; when he thereby may get reliefe, Whereby his sickness from him he may shake? The wounded Deer to herbs doth go: Love wounds us; love must cure our wo. So then, in this my worse then captive state, These lines I offer to thy deity; Not doubting, but, though hapless be my fate, I from my self shall find some remedy. Of thee I beg, some help to have: In thee it lies, to kill, or save.
The dying Lover. NOw that Boreas with his cold Doth this County round infold, And his Isicles displaies, Whilst the verdure green he slayes; I must end my life ere long, With a sad and mournsul song. Now that more then cruel pain Makes my hopes to be but vain, And that love makes me distil Salt tears (signes of my kind will) Needs now must my lives term end, Unto the heavens to ascend. Now that such is my sad care, That I'm droven to dispaire; That cross Fates me strive to greive, Why shòuld I desire to live? Better 'tis to dye, then still Follow us what works more ill. Now that sighs, and sobs, and teares, The subject of my verses bears; And whilst this plague usurps my heart, I'll try if I can make it smart, By a death that one day may Make me victor, every way. Now that skies, with lightning blast, Force my pleasures not to last; And that the sun no more doth shine, I must yeild to tempest Time: Loyally I lay me down, And go willing to my Tomb. Now that cold and chilly fear, Still doth dog me, everywhere;
Seek I must, by cruelty, For to end my misery: For an end to every thing, Gentle death (none else) doth bring. Now that burning fire (o'r-bright) Hath my sense consumed quite, Leaving nought with me but groanes; Thus I do rid all at once. The Lover to his Mistress. LUckloss, and lucky, both at once am I; With fear, and hope, I tremble as a reed: Luckless by beauty (thine by destiny) Lucky, because I am thy slave indeed. For (then thy face) there's nothing is more faire; Then thy sweet eyes, nought more divine or rare. One while I hope, another while I fear; Nor can there any thing my fancy please; It grieves me to see the heavens, though clear; So much I doubt thy favour to displease. Then thy fair face, there's nothing is more fair; Then thy sweet eyes, nought more divine or rare. The united Lovers. WHo ever saw so faire a sight, Love and Vertue met aright, And that wonder Constancy, Like a comet to the eye? Sound aloud so rare a thing, That all the Hills and Vales may ring.
Look, lovers, look, with passion see If that any such there be; As there cannot but be such, Who do feel this noble touch. Sound aloud so rare a thing, That all the hills and vales do ring. The Lover to his Mistress, upon her apparelling her self in black. SInce that thou hast victory Ore my dearest liberty; Why with black, that form of thine, Dost thou cloath so rich and fine? If thou wear'st it for to witness (As a friend) my sad distress, Happy I, since for my sake, Thou the colour sad dost take. Sweet, (my life) content be thou, That this black weed I bear now: Hapless was my life, and so Sad my life i' th' end should show: To me these sad cloaths alone Appertain, as signes of mone. Nature, in one body ne'r Black and white (at once) doth bear: From my black all hate be wide, With which I my crosses hide. He that in despair doth rest, Black doth bear for colour best. (Cruel) this not colour's thine, Since thine eyes bright and divine, Sacred as the hallowed day, Chase the gloomy night away.
My heart wounded thou dost make The habit of a conquerour take; And let me alone with this, Since my fitting colour 'tis. Live thou in eternal glory, While I dye (as desp'rate sory.) Whilst this dye thou put'st on thee, Thou depriv'st of comfort me. Change then this same weed of dole, Fit for a departing soul: Give to me the colour black, With it the flitting Ghosts to track. The forsaken Lovers complaint. 1 UNto the soundless vaults of hell below, I'll (with my greifes remediless) amaine; Whilst frighted Ghosts, as pitiful, shall show, And flinty rocks remorse take of my paine. Yea death it self my bitter paines shall know, To witness that my life in hell hath lame. For Lovers true can never dye indeed; Whose loyal hearts a heavenly fire doth feed. 2 My body laid along within my grave, Shall show its tears, its torment, and its love; And for my mind, did never change nor wave, Far brighter then the sun, the same shall prove. By me, my Ladies picture I will have, Which (though being dead) afresh will make me love. Like to the fire, in ashes covered; Which (though it show no flame) yet is not dead.
3 Love is not tam'd by death, but still doth live, Although that life doth flit and pass away: Then (Lady) think not though by death thou grieve My body that thou love canst make decay, As long as fancy doth by beauty drive Into my soul: no, this will 'bide for aye. Within my heart the beauty printed is: Love in my Tombe to harbour will not miss. 4 Thinkst thou I'll leave to love thee, being dead, When thy faire portraicture revives my sight? Voices from Tombs (they say) have some men lead, Restoring them unto their senses right. Then how much more, ought love be honoured, Whom (then the greatest Gods) is more of might? Then think not when my corps bury'd you see, That from thy love (as thou wouldst) I am free. 5 List to my monument, and thou shalt hear How I will sigh (for without soul) thy fire Shall hold me up, whilst living I appear (Being dead) as 'fore my death I did desire. Nor deadly pangs thereof, will I once fear, Nor part from thee, as thou wouldst fain require. For in thy life so cruel th' hast not been, But in my death as loyal I'll be seen. 6 Yet is my fortune better far, then thine; For without breach of saith (as thou hast done) I shall have leave to plaine those Ills of mine, Thou thinkst in killing me a martyrdome More tedious then before me to assigne: But th'art deceiv'd; a wrong race hast thou run: For whilst I liv'd, thy rigour was my bane; But being dead, I am freed from my pain.
The despairing Lover. ELsewhere declare Thy wosul care; And leave the skies: Thy wosul plaints Thy heart that taints, They do despise. See, they look red, With rage o'respread, And horror too. 'Tis they, in griefe, Without reliefe, That us undoo. He is a sot, That thinketh not That from that place, Through destiny, Most wretchedly, Comes our disgrace. Then better 'tis For death to wish, And end our daies, Then still in strife, Lead such a life, So plagu'd alwaies. For death's our friend, When he doth end Our bitter smart; And through the same, Doth rid our paine, With his keen dart.
A Knell. GOme list and hark; The bell doth toul For some but new Departing soul. And was not that Some ominous fowle, The Bat, the Night- Crow, or Skreech-owle? To these I hear The wild wolfe howle, In this black night, That seems to scowle. All these, my black- Book shall inrowle. For hark, still, still The bell doth towl For some but now Departing soul. A warning to the Grave. HArk now every think is still, The Skreech-owle, and the whistler shrill: Call upon our Dame aloud, And bid her quickly d'on her shrowd. Much you had of Land, and Rent; Your length in clay's now competent. A long war disturb'd your mind; Here, your perfect peace is sign'd. "Of what is't Fooles make such vain keeping? "Sin their conception, their birth weeping; "Their life a general mist of error, "Their death a hideous storm of terror.
Strew your haire with powder sweet; D'on clean linen; bathe your feet: 'Tis now full tide, tween night and day: End your groan, and come away. A mournful Ditty, on the death of a drowned friend. FLow streams of Equid salt, from my sad eyes, To celebrate his mournful obsequies: R. S. is dead; he's dead, and I remain, To draw my poor life in continual pain; Till it hath paid to his sad memory, Duty of love, O then most willingly, Drown'd with my teares, as he with waves, I dye. Of women in general. THere are some holy, but some apt to sin; Some tractable, but some that none can win. Such as are vertuous, gold nor wealth can move; Some vicious, of themselves are prone to love. Some grapes are sweet, and in the garden grow; Others unprun'd, turn wild; neglected so. The purest oare containes both gold and dross; The one all gain, the other nought but loss: The one disgrace, reproach, and scandal taints, The other Angels and sweet featur'd Saints. DUst is lighter then a feather, And the wind more light then either: But a womans fickle mind, More light then feater, dust, or wind.
A Dialogue between ENDYMION & EXPENDITION. Ex. WHat, ho, Endymion! how the Dormouse sleeps! A wake, for shame; open thy wink a peeps End. What stir you make? I come with speed I can; (And too much speed) for I have tyr'd my man. Expe. Who, Dulman? End. Yes. I thought the Knave would shame us, And play us one horse trick for Ignoramus. Anagrams. A good Patron's Anagram is, PATREN, Anag. PARENT. An evil ones, PATRONE, Anag. ROPEAN'T. CHEATER, Anag. TEACHER. Teacher you are, for you have taught me more Then I was taught in all my life before. Bliss or Bale: No medium in love. IF you reward my love with love again, My bliss, my life, my heaven I will deem you: But if for love, you render me disdain, My bale, my death, my hell, I must esteem you.
A Madrigal. WHosoever longs to try Both love and Jealousie; My fair unconstant Lady let him see, And he will soon a jealous lover bee. The Lovers Letany. FRom a fair face, and a false heart; From the force of Cupids forked dart; From a wagtail'd wench with an—wart, Libera me. From an oiled skin, and a false hair; From towsed, fullied, and o'er-jaded ware; From a painted Fro of St. James his faire, Libera me. From a wanton hag, and a noseless Jone; From ent'ring the pass a Frenchman has gon; From her that will for a shilling be won, Libera me. From a City-decoy, and a suburb-Bawd; From a Panders gripe, and a courtesans fraud; From a parcht Parachito, whose face is flau'd, Libera me. From a drunken female, who spreads her thies; From an old woman that hath lust in her eyes; From a common strumpet who seems to be nice, Libera me.
The Bride-maids Song. FRom the Temple to the Boord, From the Boord unto the Bed, We conduct your maidenhead; Wishing Hymen to afford All the pleasures that he can 'Twixt a woman and a man. A Song to be sung the marriage-night, by two, in parts. The first. THine, O Hymen, thine, O shee Whose beauties verse, Caliope, Sing to marriage-rites an Io. Io to Hymen. The second. To thee (Apollo) is my sute; Lend me, a while, thy silver Lute, O what a wo it is to bring A Bride to bed, and never sing Io to Hymen. Ambo. When she's old, still seem she young; When she's weak, to her be strong; Be Cyprus both, and Paplos here: Love sing with merry cheere, Io to Hymen.
Ad eundem; the bridegroom being wanting at bed∣time. DRop golden showers; gentle sleep, And all the Angels of the night, Which do us in protection keep, Make the Bride dream of delight. Morpheus, be kind a little, and be Deaths true Image; for 'twill prove To this poor bride, that then th art he: Her lord is absent from her love. Thus with sweet sweets can heaven mix gall; Come quickly, Bridegroom, or not at all. Song. SIng sweetly, that our notes may cause The heav'nly orbes themselves to pause, And at our musick stand as still As at Joves amorous will. So now release them, as before, Th'ave waited long enough: no more. The description of a matchless beauty, written at the request of the most brave and gallant Lady, the Lady L. S. during my residence at Win∣chester, 1648. HEr haire like hemlocks, careless fall, To deck her amorous eyes withall; As fiery as the evening, where We read the next day will be fair.
Her curious forehead well doth show Where Carbuncles in number grow. But the beauty of her nose Would fright a man out of his clothes, To dance a naked round-delay When on the tobacco-pipe you play; And the pale brightness of her lips, Doth force the Sun to an eclipse. Her cheeks of fat and soggy stuff, Like the running dropsey, swell and puff. But oh, the apples on them grow, I think were rotten long ago. Her precious neck and brests display Her skins antiquity: for they, Like a dri'd dunghil, chop and break, Until her snout begins to leak. Her parched fists defie the Sun; For all the malice he hath don Can't change her hide; nor any stain Corrupt it, for it's dy'd in grain. Her spacious belly, and her waste, Have grease sufficiently to baste A herd of swine: they have such store, A Shambles cannot purchase more. Her thighes like two Colossus seem, Proportion'd with her bodies teem: And those which bear her pond'rous betch, Are mighty columns full of itch.
But some, that have her hoofes espi'd, With fear the fooles fell down and di'd. Yet all this while, I have forgot Her tongue, as still as Cannon-shot. All parts of her, I can't display; The rest unseen, the Devil may. She is the wonder of our age; Nor lacks she ought but a large cage. Englands Elyzium. An Heroick Poem intended. THou fertil Island, seated in the sea; Whose waves do dance, by musick of the Moon; That on thy banks pretty Lavolta's play, As if they would intreat thee take a boon. Receive all fish that's food, and bless the store: For never monster shall come neer thy shore. Thou little world, yet all without the world; Thou second Eden, seated in the west: From thee thy fountains in seven mouths are hurl'd; Such as from Nile, the garden door so blest. Humber, ware, Tine, Dee, four so have their names; Severn, and Owze, the last and richest Thames. No beasts of danger live upon thy earth; No Panther, Tyger, ought procuring harms: To Lyons, Dragons, thou dost give no birth; Yet with them both, thou dost support thine arms. Lyons we have not, as in other parts; But we have men, with Beares and Lyons hearts.
A Song. FOolish I, why should I grieve To sustaine what others feel? What, suppose frail women leave Those they lov'd, should I conceal Comforts rest From my brest, For a fickle brittle woman? No, no, no; Let her go: Such as these be true to no man. 2. Long retired hast thou been, Sighing to the barren Rocks; Nor by sheep, nor Shepherd seen: Now returne unto thy flocks. For shame away; Do not stay With these moving loving women: They remove From their love; Such as these do oft undo men.
ODES. ODE I. A Dialogue between a Lover and his Mistress. Lov. HEnce loose alluring looks; no more of love; No more thy seeming vertues shall deceive Mis. I know my dearest speaks but this to prove me How well I love: thou thinkst it doth not grieve me. Lov. Thy beauty was a bait, to draw mine eye. Mis. And with thy look my heart was set on fire: Lov. I thought to find a suiting soul in thee: Mis. Thy love's the I mit that bounds my desire. Lo. Thy loosness makes my love's date now expire. Mis. Where then thy vowes? Lov. Gone with thy seeming worth. Mis. And made to me. Lov. no: vertue brought them forth, Which failing, now no fewel feeds my fire. Mis. My heart's the harbour, where thy hopes must stay. Lov. The ground not good, the Anchor draws away. ODE. 2. Adrastus, Clariana. Adrastus. Dost not thou, Clariana, read Am'rous volumes in my eyes? Doth not every motion plead, What I'd show, and yet disguise? Senses act each others part; Eyes, as tongues, reveal the heart.
Clariana. I saw love, as lightning, break From thy eyes, and was content Oft to hear thy silence speak: Silent love is eloquent. So the sense of learning hears The dumb musick of the sphears. Adrastus. Then there's mercy in your kind, Listning to an unfeign'd love: Or strives he to tame the wind, Who would your compassion move? No; y'are pitious, as y'are fair: Heaven relents, o'recome by pray'r. Clariana. But loose man's too prodigal In the expence of vowes; And thinks to him kingdoms fall, When the heart of women bowes. Frailty to your armes may yeild; Who resists you, win the field. Adrastus. Triumph not, to see me bleed: Let the Bore, chas'd from his den, On the wounds of mankind feed: Your soft Sex should pity men. "Malice well may practise art: "Love hath a transparent heart. Clariana. Yet is love all one deceit; A warm frost, a frozen fire: "She within her selfis great, "Who is slave to no desire. Let youth act, and age advise; And then love may find his eyes,
Adrastus. Hymen's Torch yeilds a dim light, When ambition joynes our hands. "A proud day, but mournful night, "She sustaines, who marries lands. "Wealth slaves man: but for their ore, "The Indians had been free, though poor. Clariana. And yet wealth the fuel is Which maintaines the Nuptial fire, And in honour there is bliss: They are immortal who aspire. But "Truth saies, No joyes are sweet, "But where united hearts do meet. Adrastus. Roses breath not such a sent, To persume the neighb'ring groves, As when you affirm, content In no spheare of glory moves. "Glory narrow souls combines; "Noble hearts love onely joynes. ODE 3. A Lover expecting his Mistress presence. BRight dew, which dost the field adorn, As the earth, to welcome in the morn, Would hang a jewel, on each corn, Did not the pitious night, whose eares Have oft been conscious of my feares, Distil you from her eyes as teares. Or that my Mistress for your zeal, When she her beauties shall reveal, Might you to Diamonds congeal.
If not your pity, yet howere Your care I praise, 'gainst she appear To make the wealthy Indies here. But see, shee comes: bright lamp o'th' skie, Put out thy light; the world shall spie A fairer Sun, in either eye; And liquid pearl hang heavy now On every grass, that it may bow, In veneration of her brow. Yet if the wind should curious be; And were I here should question thee: He's full of whispers, speak not me. But if the busie teltale day, Our happy enterview betray; Lest thou confess too, melt away. ODE. 4. 1. I Can love, and love entirely, And can prove a constant friend: But I must be lov'd as dearly, And as truly to the end. For her love no sooner slaketh, But my fancy farewell taketh. 2. I cannot indure delaying; I must have her quickly won: Be she nice (though not denaying) By her leave, I then have don. For I am not yet at leasure To wait for a doubtful pleasure.
3 With beauty I will not be blinded, Yet I will none foul affect: With wealth I will not be winded, If in behaviour be defect. Beauty stamed, such love dieth; Wealth decayed, such love flieth. 4 Gifts do good; yet he is silly That therein expendeth store: If he win not (tell me) will he Not be meerly mockt therefore? It is better to be keeping, Then to sow, not sure of reaping. 5 Be she rich, and fair, and gained, If I sickleness do find, My desires are quickly wained; I can steer with other wind. For vertue I have vow'd to chuse her: When that failes, I will refuse her. A Riddle. WHatBythebird, ones thought is un∣derstood; which flies with such swiftness, that it is not seen of any, but conjectured & known by the outward signes and gestures of body. Bird is that so light, Her place that never changeth? She flies by day and night; In all the world she rangeth. Over the Sea at once she flies, Mounting above the lofty skies; She's never seen by eyes: And who doth seek to show her, Hath been accounted wise; Yet sometimes we do know her, Onely the walls by viewing well Of her close house where she doth dwel.
Another. NOr life nor vertue haveThe corne; which being sown in the earth, and seeming dead, casteth forth a green blade, and in time groweth to be ripe in despight of all stormes and foul weather. It nourishetch mankind, and therefore is honoured by them as a father. I, lest I dye: I borrow of my buried Trunk chiefe strength: Though I am dead, ore time yet triumph I, Ore time, that every thing consumes at length. What's dead, disdained is; yet all afford Me honour, and their chiefe preserver name: All men may rightly call me their best Lord, Since (without me) the world they can't maintain. Yet though so much good doth from me proceed; Yet thankless worldlings do not stick at all To cut me off in summer with great speed, And beat me into little powder small. Yet had I rather cruelly thus perish, Then fail with my best strength mortals to cherish. Poesies for Rings. THou art my star; Be not irregular. Without thy love, I backward move. Thine eyes so bright Are my chiefe light.
This intimates True Lovers states. My life is done When thou art gone. A double Poesie. This hath no end, My sweetest friend. Our loves be so, No ending know. Poesies upon Bracelets. AS love gives life to every part, So this gives life unto my heart. This chastly lies, and lives with me: Oh that I might do so with thee! Another. How might I triumph in my bliss, If love were where my Bracelet is! For then should love do no such harm, To wring my heart, but wreath my arm. A wish. Eies hide my love, and do not show To any, but to her, my notes; Who onely doth that cypher know, Wherewith we pass our secret thoughts. Belye your looks in others sight; And wrong your selves, to do her right.
Songs and Sonnets. Song 1. TAke, O take those lips away, That so sweetly were forsworth; And those eyes, like break of day, Lights that do mislead the morn. But my kisses bring again; Seals of love, though seal'd in vain. 2. Hide, O hide those hills of snow, Which thy frozen blossoms beares; On whose tops, the pinks that grow Are of those that April weares. But first set my poor heart free, Bound in those joy-chaines by thee. Song 2. O for a Bow I of rich Canary, Fat Aristippus, sparkling Sherry, Some Nectar else, from June's dairy: O these draughts would make us merry! O for a wench! I deal in faces, And in other daintier things: Tickled am I, with her imbraces: Fine dancing in such fairy rings. O for a plump fat leg of Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Capon, Pig, and Coney: None is happy, but a Glutton; None an Ass, but who wants money.
Wines indeed, and Girles are good; But brave victuals seast the blood. For wenches, wine, and lusty cheere, Jove would come down, to surfeit here. Song 3. Tell me, Jove, should she disdain, Whether it were greater pain, Silent in thy flames to dye, Or say I love, and she deny? Flames supprest, do higher grow: Should she scorn, when she does know Thy affection, thou shalt prove A glorious martyrdom for love. Better to loves mercy bow; She may burn as well as thou. Oh then, tim'rous heart, proceed: For wounds are death, that inward bleed. Song 4. Charm, O charm, thou God of sleep, Her fair eyes, that waking mourn; Frightful visions from her keep, Such as are by sorrowes born. But let all the sweets that may Wait on rest, her thoughts obey. Fly, O fly, thou God of love, To that brest thy dart did wound: Draw thy shaft, the smart remove; Let her wonted joyes be found. Raise up pleasure to a flood Never ebbing; new joyes bud.
Song 5. When that I poor soul was borne, I was born unfortunate; Presently the Fates had sworne To foretel my hapless state. Titan his fair beams did hide; Phaebe clipt her Silver light: In my birth my mother dide, Young and fair, in heavy plight. And the nurse that gave me suck Hapless was, in all her life; And I never had good luck, Being maid, or married wife. I lov'd well, and was belov'd; And forgetting was forgot: This a hapless marriage mov'd; Greiving, that it kills me not. With the earth would I were wed, Then in such a grave of woes Daily to be buried, Which no end nor number knows. Song 6. The Fisher-mans Ditty. THough the weather jangles With our hooks and angles; Our nets be shaken, and no fish taken; Though fresh Cod and Whiting
Are not this day biting Gurnet nor Cunger, to satisfie hunger; Yet look to our draught. Hale the main bowling, The Seas have left their rowling, The waves their huffing, the winds their puffing; Up to the top-mast, Boy, And bring us news of joy! Here's no demurring; no fishes stirring; Yet something we have caught. Song 7. What motions, times, and changes? What waies? what uncouth ranges? What slights? what delusions? What gladness (in conclusions) Have risen of such sorrows? One faith yet all these borrowes; And one good love assureth, And all misfortune cureth. And since from griefe they vary, Good Fortune, come, and tarry. Song 8. My heart in flames do fry Of thy beauty, While I Dye: Fie; And why Shoulst thou deny Me thy sweet company?
My braines to teares do flow, While all below Doth glow: Foe; If so, How canst thou go About to say me no? Song 9. 1. THis Lady ripe, and calm, and fresh, As Eastern Summers are, Must now forsake both time and flesh, T'add light to some small star. 2. Whil'st that alive each star decay'd She may relieve with light; But death sends beauty to a shade More cold, more dark then night. 3. The sawcy faith of man doth blind His pride, till it conduce To destine all his abject-kind For some eternall use. 4. But ask not bodies doom'd to die, To what abode they go: Since knowledge is but sorrows Spy, It is not safe to know. Song 10. The constant Lover. TImes change, and shall (as we do see) And life shall have an end;
But yet my faith shall ever be Whereon mine eyes depend. The days and moments, and their scope; The hours, with their changes wrought, Are cruel enemies to hope, And friends unto a loving thought. Thoughts still remain, (as we do see) And hope shall have an end: But yet my Faith sha'n't wanting be, My hope for to defend. Sonnet I. Cupids craft. I Play'd with Love, Love play'd with me again; I mock'd at him, but he mock'd me indeed: He would not let my heart his art exceed; For (though a boy) yet mocks he doth disdain. A friend he is to those that do not fain. My jests (it seems) do true affection breed: And now if Love is not reveng'd with speed, My heart can witness it with earnest pain, That one may love, and jest it out again. Song II. Being a Pastoral Ditty. 1. IN this green mead, Mine eyes, what do you see; The Bagpipe of my Nymph, so passing fair? Unless my senses dream, so should it be; For sure this is the Oak, where, with despair, She lean'd unto; and here the grass yet lies, And field, which she did water with her eyes.
2. Jove, I thee pray, if this I do but fear, And if my dream do fall out sure or no, By all the love to Nympths that thou didst bear, Open mine eyes, the truth that I may know. Help me to pray him, green and flow'ry Mead; Help me to pray him, Oak, with branched head. 3. This Bagpipe of my Nymph I will devise, To hang it here (fair Oak) to honour thee: A worthy Trophee, though before mine eyes Lying disgrac'd; For tears they cannot see. If it be sure, or if I dream in vain, Spoil'd in this mead with parching sun and rain. 4. That gracious Nymph, who gave my heart the stroak, In this green Mead I saw (a heav'nly Prize) And (if I dream not) leaning to that Oak; Nay sure I did behold her with mine eyes. O that she had but seen me then again, Or that I had but seen, and dream'd in vain! Sonnet II. CƲpid was angry with my merry face, Because I ever laughed him to scorn; And all his followers (hapless and forlorn) I mockt in publike and in private place: Wherefore he arm'd himself to my disgrace, When time a fit occasion did suborn: But I despis'd his flames, his power did scorn. Nor did I any of his hests embrace: Who seeing that he built upon the sand; Since by a face he could me not devour, He shew'd me, then, a fine and dainty hand;
Which once beheld, it lay not in my power For to remaine unconquer'd; no, nor would I be deliver'd now, although I could. Song 12. An invitation to love. PLeasures, beauty, youth attend ye, Whiles the spring of nature lafteth: Love and melting thoughts befriend ye; Use the time, ere Winter hasteth. Active blood and free delight, Place, and privacie, invite: Do, do, be kind as fair; Loose not opportunity for air. She is cruel, that denies it: Bounty best appears in granting. Stealth of sport as soon supplies it, Whiles the dues of love are wanting. Here's the sweet exchange of bliss, When each whisper proves a kiss. In the game are felt no paines; For in all, the loser gaines. Sonnet III. THey say love sware, he never would be friend, If mortal jealousie were not in a place; And beauty never be in any face, Unless that pride did on her thoughts attend: These are two hags, which hideous hell doth send, Our sweet content to troube and disgrace: The one, the joy of love, to pain doth chase; The other pity from the heart defend.
Beauty, and love, were both forsworne by me And thee; my making my unsure estate In joy and happiness so fortunate; Because since first thy figure I did see, Being so faire, yet prouder wast thou never, Nor I in love, that could be jealous ever. Song 13. LOve, if a God thou art, Then evermore thou must Be mercifull and just. If thou be just, O wherefore doth thy dart Wound mine alone, and not my Mistress heart? If merciful, then why Am I to pain reserv'd? Who have thee truely serv'd, While she, that for thy power cares not a flie, Laughs thee to scorn, and lives in liberty. Then if a God thou woulst accounted be, Heal me like her, or else wound her like me. Sonnet IIII. THe Bat, that lurketh in a stony wall, Flies here and there, assured of her sight; When that the signes of darksome night she sees Approaching on; contented therewithall: But when she spies Apollo's beames so bright, Her fault she doth acknowledge, and recal. So now of late it did to me befal; And with my wandring mind it well agrees. For I did think there was no other light, Nor beauty, but in her who did invite
My senses first to love: but, to my thrall, When I beheld my Mirabel, bedight With beauties, and such grace angelical; Then by and by I knew that heretofore I plainly err'd, but never could do more. Song 14. ARe women fair? yes wond'rous fair to see too; Are women sweet? yea, passing sweet they be too. Most fair, and sweet, to them that inly love them; Chaste & discreet, to all save those that prove them Are women wise? not wise, but they be witty: Are women witty? yea, the more the pitty. They are so witty, and in wit so wily, That be you ne'er so wise, they will beguile ye. Are women fools? not fools, but fondlings many: Can women fond, be faithful unto any? When snow-white Swans do turn to colour sable, Then women fond will be both firm and stable. Are women Saints? no Saints, nor yet no Devils: Are women good? not good, but needful evils. So Angel-like, that Devils I do'n't doubt them; So needful Ills, that few can live without them. Are women proud? I, passing proud, & praise them: Are women kinde? I, wond'rous kind, & please them; Or so imperious, no man can endure them; Or so kind-hearted, any may procure them. Sonnet V. AS many stars as heav'n containeth, strive To frame my harm, and luckless hap to show; And in the earth, no grass nor green doth grow,
That to my grief the least of comfort gives. "Love unto fear subjected, ever drives "A soul to coldest ice. O bitter wo, That he whom Fortune contradicteth so, Continually, with Jealousie, must live! The fault (dear Mistress) I must lay on thee, And all my grief; on thee I do complain (O cruel soul) that pity dost disdain: For if thou hadst but taken part with me, I would not care, though 'gainst me did conspire Heav'n, Earth, and Love, and Fortune, in their ire. Song 15. All woman are not evil. 1. THey meet but with unwholesome Spring, And Summers, which infectious are: They hear, but when the Mer-maid sings, And onely see the falling star; Whoever dare Affirm no woman chaste and fair. 2. Go cure your Fevers, and you'll say The Dog-days scorch not all the yeer: In Copper-mynes no longer stay, But travel to the West, and there The right ones see, And grant all Gold's not Alchymie. 3. What mad-man (canse the glo-worm's flame Is cold, swears there's no warmth in fire? 'Cause some make forseit of their name, And slave themselves to mans desire; Shall the sex free From guilt, damn'd to the bondage be?
Sonnet. 6. Written to the Authors first Love. IS't, that my pocl-hol'd face doth beauty lack? No. Your sweet sex sweet beauty praiseth; Ours, wit and valour chiefly raiseth. Is't, that my muskless cloaths are plain and black? No. What wise Ladies love fine noddies, With poor-clad mindes, and rich-clad bodies? Is't, that no costly gifts mine Agents are? No. My free heart, which I present you, Should more then Gold or Peal content you. Is't, that my Verses want invention rare? No. I was never skilful Poet: I truly love, and plainly show it. Is't, that I vaunt, or am effiminate? O scornful Vices, I abhor you: Dwell still in Court, the place fit for you. Is't, that you fear my love soon turns to hate? No. Though disdain'd, I can hate never; But lov'd, where once I love, love ever. Song 16. A Pastoral Dialogue, Penned at the command of my noble freind, M. Theodo∣rus Loe Esquire, on the attaining his Mistress love. MELIBEUS, ERGASTUS Mel. SHepherd, why dost thou hold thy peace? Sing, and thy joy to us report. Erg. My joy (good Shepherd) would be less, If it were told in any sort.
Mel. Though such great savours thou dost win, Yet deigne thereof to tell some part. Erg. The hardest thing is to begin, In enter prises of such art. Mel. It is not just we should consent That thou should'st not thy joys recite. Erg. The soul that felt the punishment, Can onely feel this great delight. Mel. That joy is small, and doth not shine, That is not told abroad to many. Erg. If it be such a joy as mine, It cann't be pensill'd out by any. Mel. How can that heart of thine contain A joy that is of so great force? Erg. I have it, where I did retain My passions of so great remorse. Mel. So great and rare a joy as this, No man is able to withhold. Erg. But that the greatest pleasure is, That in low language cann't be told Mel. Yet I have heard thee heretofore, Thy joys in open songs report. Erg. I said I had of joy some store; But not how much, or in what sort. Mel. Yet when a joy is in excess, It self it will unfold. Erg. Thus then my joies I do express; I clip my Arnageld. Sonnet VII. SHe that denies me, I would have Who craves me, I despise: Venus hath power to rule my heart, But not to please my eyes.
Temptations offer'd, still I scorn; Deny'd I wish them still: I'll neither glut my appetite, Nor seek to starve my will. Diana double cloath'd, offends; So Venus naked quite: The last begers a surfet, and The other not delight. That crafty girl shall please me best, That No for Yea can say; And ev'ry wanton willing kiss Can season with a Nay. Song 17. 1. WHen to her Lute Althea sings, Her voice revives the leaden strings; And doth in highest notes appear, As any chaleng'd eccho clear. But when she doth of mourning speak, Ev'n then her sighs the strings do break. 2. And as her Lute doth live or die, (Led by her passions) so must I: For when of pleasure she doth sing, My thoughts enjoy a sudden spring. But if she do of sorrow speak, Ev'n fresh my heart the strangs do break. Sonnet VIII. 1. LIke the Violet, which alone Prospers in some happie shade,
My dear Mistress lives unknown, To no looser eye betray'd: "For she's to her self untrue, "Who delights i' th' publike view. 2. Such her beauty, as no arts Hath enrich'd with borrow'd grace: Her high birth no pride imparts; For she blushes in her place. Folly boasts a noble blood: She is noblest, being good. 3. She's cautious, and ne'er knew yet What a wanton courtship meant, Nor speaks loud, to boast her wit; In her silence eloquent. Of her self survey she takes; But 'tween men no diff'rence makes. Song 18. A Country-Courtship, written during my abode at S.r. E. D's house in Wilishire. 1. CHloris, my onely Goddess, and my good; Whiter then is th' untrodden snowie way, And redder then the rose but late a bud, Half blown, and pluckt with dew by break of day. To view, more comely then the Plane-tree's shape, And sweeter then the ripe and swelling grape; More pleasant then the shade in summer-time, Or the sun-beams in winters coldest prime. 2. More fresh then any cool and trembling winde, Morenoble then the fruit that Orchards yeeld;
More jocund then the tender Kid by kind, When full it skips, and traverseth the fields; More flowry then the rich and pleasant mead, With painted flowers in midst of May bespread; More sost then spotless down on Cygnets brest, Or the sweet milk, and cheese-curds yet unprest. 3. Clusters of Grapes do beautify my Vines, Some golden purple-red, all fair and full; Of part whereof I make most dainty wines, And part of them I keep for thee to pull: And with thy hands, most delicate and fair, Gather thou may'st ripe Plums, by goodly pairs, Under the shadow of thy boughes, to ease thee. 4. Here I have Damsens, Nuts, and colour'd Peares, With Peaches fine, that would each eye invite; And every tree, and fruit this Island bears, All for thy service, pleasure, and delight. And as my heart, to please thee, I have bowed; So have all these, the self-same office vowed, In Autumn (if thy husband I might be) Chesnuts and Medlers I would keep for thee. Sonnet. IX. The Lover imbracing his Mistress. A Bout the husband-Oak the Vine Thus wreaths to kiss his leavy face; Their streams thus Rivers joyn, And lose themselves in the mbrace: But Trees want sense, when they infold; And waters, when they meet, are cold. Thus Turtles, bill, and groan, Their loves into each others eare;
Two flames, thus burn in one, When their curl'd heads to heaven they reare: But Birds want soul, though not desire; And flames material, soon expire. Song 19. Sung by three Beggers. IRUS, BRUNELLO, FURBO. IRUS. BRight shines the Sun, play Beggers, play, Here's seraps enough to serve to day. What noise of Vials is so sweet, As when our merry clappers ring? What mirth doth want, where Beggers meet? A Beggers life is for a King. Eat, drink, and play, sleep when we list, Go where we will, so stocks be mist. Bright shines the Sun, play Beggers, play; Here's scraps enough to serve to day. BRUNELLO. The world is ours, and ours alone, For we alone have world at will; We purchase not, all is our own; Both fields and streets we Beggers fill. Nor care to get, nor fear to keep, Did ever break a Beggers sleep. Bright shines the Sun, &c. FURBO. A hundred head of black and white, Upon our downes securely feed; If any dare his Master bite, He dies therefore, as sure as creed:
Thus Beggers lord it as they please; And none but Beggers live at ease. Bright shines the Sun, &c. Sonnet X. DIsdain, that so doth fill me, Hath surely sworn to kill me; And I must die. Desire, that still doth burn me, To life again will turn me; And live must I. O kill me then, Disdain, That I may live again. 2. Thy looks are life unto me, And yet those looks undo me: O death and life. Thy smile some rest doth shew me, Thy frown doth soon o'erthrow me: O peace and strife. Nor life nor death is either; Then give me both, or neither. 3. Life onely, cannot please me; Death onely, cannot case me: Change is delight. I live, that death may kill me, And die that life may fill me Both day and night. If once Desire decay, Despair will wear away.
Song 20. Sung by a Shepherd and a Shepherdess: AMYNTAS, AMARILLIS. Amynt. THe cause why that thou dost deny To look on me, sweet Fo, impart. Amar. Because that doth not please the eye, Which doth offend and grieve the heart. Amynt. What woman is, or ever was That when she looketh, was not mov'd? Amar. She that resolves her life to pass, Neither to love, nor to be lov'd. Amynt. There is no heart so fierce or hard, That can so much torment a soul; Amar. Nor Shepherd of so small regard, That Reason will so much controul. Amynt. How falls it out, love doth not kill Thy Cruelty with some remorse? Amar. Because that Love is but a Will; And Free-will doth admit no force. Amynt. Behold what reason now thou hast To remedy my loving smart. Amar. The very same bindes me as fast To keep such danger from my heart. Amynt. Why dost thou thus torment my minde, And to what end thy beauty keep? Amar. Because thou call'st me still unkinde, And pitiless, when thou dost meet. Amynt. Is it because thy cruelty, In killing me, doth never end? Amar. No; but because I mean thereby My heart from sorrow to defend.
Sonnet XI. 1. Amphion, O thou holy shade, Bring Orpheus with thee; That wonder may you both invade, To hear my melody. You who are soul (not rudely made) Up with material ears, Are fit to hear the musick of these spheares. 2. Hark, when my Mistress Orbes do move, By my first moving eyes: How great's the Symphonie of love? But 'tis the destinie Will not so far my pray'rs approve, To bring you hither; here Is a true heaven, and Elizium there. Song 20. LOose your lids, unhappy eyes, From the sight of such a change; Love hath learned to despise; Self-conceit, hath made him strange: Inward now, his sight he turneth, With himself, in love he burneth. If abroad he beauty spie, As by chance he looks abroad; Or it is wrought by his eye, Or forc'd out by Painters fraud: Save himself, none fair he deemeth, That himself too much esteemeth.
Coy disdain, hath kindness place, Kindness forc'd to hide his head, True desire is counted base; Hope with hope, is hardly fed: Love is thought a fury needless; He that hath it, shall dye speedless. Then mine eyes, why gaze you so? Beauty scornes the tears you shed; Death you seek to end my woe; O that I of death were sped! But with love, hath death conspired, To kill none whom Love hath fired. Sonnet XII. LEt the silence of the night, At my will, her duty show, Harken to me, every wight, Or be still, or speak but low: Let no watching dog, with spight, Bark at any, to or fro, Nor the Cock (of Titan bright The foreteller) once to crow. Let no prying Goose excite All the Flock to squeak a-vow: Let the windes retain their might, Or a little while not blow, Whil'st all eares I do invite, To hear the Ditty I bestow; In the which, I nill recite Her deserts, which ever grow, Nor her beauties, so bedight, Fairer then the Rose, or snow; Nor her vertues exquisite, Which no man deserves to know;
For into Seas infinite, With a small Bark, it were to go. I will onely sing and write In what miseries I flow; That in sorrows I delight, Praising Love's all-conqu'ring bow: Wishing to eternal night, (To end my sorrows) I might go. Song 22. THine eyes so bright Bereft my sight, When first I view'd thy face: So now my light Is turn'd to night; I stray from place to place. Then guide me, of thy kindness; And I will bless my blindness. Sonnet XIII. NOw do the birds, in their warbling words, Welcome the year; With sugred notes, they chimup through their throtes, To win a Phear. Sweetly they breathe the wanton love That Nature in them warms; And each to gain a mate doth prove, With sweet inchanting charms. He sweetly sings, and stays the nimble wings Of her in the aire:
She hov'ring stays, to hear his loving lays, Which wooe her ther. She becomes willing, hears him woo; Gives ear unto his song: And doth (as Nature taught her) do; Yeelds, su'd unto not long. But my Dear stays, she feeds me with delays, Hears not my mone: She knows the smart, in time will kill my heart, To live alone. Learn of the birds, to chuse thee a Phear, But not like them to range. Have they their mate but for a year? Yet let us never change. Song 23. A Riddle. I Saw a hill upon a day, Lift up above the air; Which watered with blood alway, And tilled with great care. Herbs it brought forth, Of mickle worth. Pulling a handful from that ridge, And touching but the same; Which leaving neer unto a bridge, Doth cause much sport and game, (A thing scarce of belief) Lamenting without grief.
Sonnet XIIII. IN heav'n the blessed Angels have their being, In hell, the Fiends appointed to damnation; To men and beasts, earth yeilds firm habitation; The wing'd Musitians, in the aire are fleeing. With fins, the people gliding, Of water have th' enjoyning; In fire all else destroying, The Salamander findes a strange abiding; But I (O wretch) since I did first aspire, To love a beauty, beauties all excelling, Have my strange adverse dwelling, In heaven, hell, earth, water, aire, and fire. Song 25. Loves Labyrinth, to Mistress Mary Loe. LOvers do make themselves like conquer'd slaves; Sometimes themselves most valiant they do fain, Sometimes great Lords, with many other braves; Sometimes throwne down, and vanquished again. Their wounds, their joys, their pains their pleasures make: And happy comfort in their prisons take. A thousand times they curse their hapless stars, Despising life, and happy death Implore, Yet in the end, so valiant in those wars Of life and death, and other passions more, That thousand deaths, they say they pass and try, And yet they never make an end to dye. They give, They gain, They heal, They wound, They ply Their soul, Their life, Their harms, Their hearts, Their tears: They joy, They live, They burn, They plain, They dy With hap, With hope, With heat, With griefe, With fears.
And so in all their lives, and what they say, There is a strange confusion every day. Epithalamium, Or A nuptial-song. LEet now each field, with flowers be painted Of sundry colours, sweetest odours glowing; Roses yeild forth your smell, so finely tainted; Calm windes, the green leaves move, with gentle blowing. The Christal rivers flowing. With waters, be increased; And since each one, from sorrow now hath ceased, (From mournful plaints and sadness) Ring forth, fair Nimphs, your joyful songs for glad∣ness. Of that 'sweet joy, delight you with such measure, Between you both, fair issue to ingender; Longer then Nestor, may you live in pleasure, The Gods to you, such sweet content surrender, That may make milde and tender The Beasts in every mountain, And glad the fields, and woods, and every fountain, A bjuring former sadness. Ring forth fair Nymphs, your joyful songs for glad∣ness. Let amorous birds, with sweetest notes delight you; Let gentle winds refresh you, with their blowing; Let Ceres with her best of goods requite you, And Flora deck the ground where you are going; Roses and Lilies strowing, The Jasmine, and the Gillow-flower, With many more; and never in your bower Taste of houshold-sadness. Ring forth; fair Nymgps, your joyful songs for glad∣ness.
Sonnet XV. ANother Cupid raigns within my brest Then Venus son, that blind and frantick boy: Divers his work, intent, and interest; His fashions, sports, his pleasures, and his joy. No sleights, deceits, nor woes, he doth inspire; He burns not like to that unseemly fire. From Reason, Will cannot my love entice, Since that it is not pleased in this vice. Song 26. In praise of the Country-life, to my noble friend Mr. Jennings. AMbition here no snares nor nets regards, Nor Avarice for Crowns doth lay her baits: The people here aspire not to etates, Nor hunger after favours and rewards. From guile, and fraud, and passions, as we see, Their hearts are ever free. Their faith's not vain, Both good and plain: Their malice small, They just to all: Which makes them live in joy and quiet peace, And in a mean sufficient for their ease. Sonnet XVI. ONce early, as the ruddy bashful morn Did leave Apollo's Purple-streaming bed, And did with Scarlet-streams the East adorn; I unto my dear Mistress chamber sped:
She (Goddess-like) stood kombing of her hair, Which like a sable veil did cloathe her round: Her Iv'ry Komb was white, her hand more fair; She strait and tall, her tresses trail'd to ground. Amaz'd I stood, thinking my Dear had been Turn'd Goddess, ev'ry sense to Sight was gone. With bashful blush she fled, I once be'ng seen, Left me transformed (almost) into stone: Yet did I wish so ever t'have remained, Had she but stay'd, and I my sight retained. Song 27. The Insatiate Lover. AS soon may water wipe me dry, And fire my heat allay; As you with favour of your eye Make hot desire decay. The more I have, The more I crave: The more I crave, the more desire, As piles of wood increase the fire.
The Authors conclusion. REst, good my Muse, and give me leave to rest; We stive in vain; Conceal thy skill, within thy sacred brest; Though to thy pain. The honour great, which Poets wont to have, With worthy deeds, lye in oblivions grave: Each man will hide his name, Thereby to hide his shame; And silence is the praise their vertues crave. 2. To praise is flattery, malice to dispraise; Hard is the choice; What cause is left for thee, my Muse, to raise Thy heavenly voice? Delight thy self on sweet Pernassus hill, And for a better time reserve thy skill; There let thy silver sound, From Cyrrha-wood rebound, And all the vale, with pleasing musick fill. 3. Then shall those fools, that now preser each Rime, Before thy skill, With hand and foot, in vaine assay to clime Thy sacred hill: There shalt thou sit, and scorne them with disdain, To see their fruitless labour all in vain, And they shall fret with spight, To see thy glory bright, And know themselves thereto cannot attain.
EMBLEMATICAL FANTASTICKS; More emphatical and nu∣merous then all ever yet printed. To the Reader. Search thou all books upon earths globe Lee Heelme, and ride the Astrolobe; Such Fancies here I hold to view, Can nowhere else be seen by u. 2 2 1 is oddes, i c: 6 2 6 most even b. 1 2 2, and 2 2 6, At Barly-break may play fine tricks. 2 2 6, and 6 2 1, May b in hell, when u are gone.
two hearts joined in one Dis-joy'd can't be, If Love do say, Amen, I c. For where two hearts love mutually, There the Affections bb. pillory Put in thy foot Or pay ; 'tis no boot To strive, for u were drunk to day. Thus 'tis with cups & pipes to play. horns be his good luck, Well branched, such as wears a buck Whose eyes staring ever b Upon the crest of cuckoldry The Crest of Cuckoldry: A yl∣low field, a pair of horns, & a key a harp is Musick I would wish, A Carp me thinks is finest depiction of fish and a coney And good Canary for my money.
U Drawer wash the jugs & glasses So that each man may see two faces When he looks on them. Next bring hither Tobacco, and six pipes together. Beneath a tree 2 lovers sat: a hand from heaven pointed at three suns . U must imagine none But would have run, 'tis 10 2 1. But them I saw sit still & dally. 1000 kisses on the Tally They carv'd, and held hands rose up, Meaning to drink a spiced cup No sun or moon or stars can thwart Those hearts are slue'd by Cupids dart What bird that flies in heav'ns eye Whose beak chirps not Loves melody?
A Song. A Shepherd sat beneath a tree : Quoth he, My fears and doubts B, Lest Cupid with his bow and dart Should freshly wound my wounded heart Why should the lustre of a face eye hand or foot prevail, That I must doat, to my disgrace, While Cupid doth my force assail? His crook his & his bag His pipe lay broken at his feet: The birds that on the trees did wag, In mournful quires did sing full sweet. No snake nor toad durst there appear; Sylvanus did command them thence: No saucie Huntsman durst come there, To chase the coneys from their residence
The gods, by their almighty power, For this sweet Shepherd kept this Bower. O Why should u so captious b? No fault I would have lovers c In their beloveds. Those 2 nice Me thinks are still yy. Question. GOod Sir, how came you lose your nose Answer. With walking in those mists arose In Pric-ardy. Question. Indeed 'tis true, The French many makes to rue. Whenas thy once go down, Hold fast thy hair upon thy crown Answer. No matter, 'tis but a French Jig; And I can buy a wig a lover's knot untwin'd can't b. two hands two hearts make 1 i c.
r great brags deeds? or can he be True 2 1, hath broke with 3? He's knavish yy, and ne'er was true: Besides, in means he doubles u. An l of Pudding can't suffize His gut that is of III size. Ever in a wand'ring Maze Are those that do on Beautie gaze: Still perplexed, full of Feares; Their houres are months, their months are yeares.
concrete poem arranged as a maze Lovers see more wonders then Mad-men when they are alone: If once possest, fourty to ten, If love leav them til life is gone. concrete poem arranged in a spiral Round about all in a Ring A Lovers Obiit set us sing Strow red Roses Lillies Fine, The Hyacinth and Iassamine: Bring green Tyme and Eglansine yea and Vervain most Divine about about With nimble pace While This holy Ground We Trace lo Peans sing we all To Cupids bow Aeth.
concrete poem in the form of a door Broken sleeps, tormenting nights, Such as Death it self affrights; Leanness, roving, idle praises, Curses, blessings, strange Fantasies, Fevers, Agues, and Despair, First built Loves Castle in the Air. Foolish Mortals, do not post To enter here, unto your cost. Cupid's Messengers will come, DESIRE and INCLINATION, You need not fear, Will bring you here, To taste those Ills That thousands kills. Force not your selves, Yee foolish Elves, To dote Upon a Note is sung By her is yong. For know, one time or other you shall prove, (Maugre your wills) there is a god of love.
Additional amorous Dis∣courses, Poems, Dia∣logues, Letters, &c. A Young Gentleman being taken with the love of a La∣dy, thus accosteth her. Suppose the name to be FORTUNATUS, and ADRASTINA. For. ALl hail, thou model of divine perfecti∣ons: may all the blessings heavens can send to mortals, showre down upon your head. Vouchsafe to cast one favourable look upon a creature wholly devoted to your service; and let not rigour steer your actions, to play the tyrant over him, whose heart is vow'd a Sacrifice to your love. Adrast. Pardon, Sir, a womans weakness, if she take the boldness to say, her shallow capacity can∣not apprehend the height of your Oratory: yet must I render thanks for your wishes, and wish that I could be so thankful as to meet you in an e∣qual affection: but since affection cannot be forced, you must pardon me, if I say, I cannot love. Fortu. Not love? heavens forbid that so great cruelty should reside in so divinely faire a crea∣true.
Let not such harsh speeches proceed from so sweet a mouth, unless it be out of a Maiden bash∣fulness; whose very strongest negatives do but affirm a grant: such I both hope and wish is your denial. Adrast. I must confess, Sir, your thoughts I can∣not hinder; yet would I gladly perswade you to believe the truth, that my denial is unfeigned: how∣ever, I shall willingly submit my weaker judgment to the government of your better understand∣ing. Fortu. Divinest Lady, to whose beauty I am be holding for whatever I have; since you have been pleased to honour me with so high a title as is that of your governour, give me leave to command (but alas, 'tis impossible) or at least to beg (which is most sutable) one salve from those Srar-shining eyes, which have shot forth their conquering darts at my love-sick heart, making me acknowledge the con∣quest yours, my self happy in your being victorious. O heavenly Adrastina! govern and direct me; for I am wholly given over unto thee. Adra. Sir, Were I but ascertained of the truth and reality of your affection, I might perhaps meet your love with an equal burning; but— Fortu. Pardon, sweet soul, my interrupting you. If my love be not real, let me be an object of all mens scorn, and let the heavens, (as a just guerdon of my dissembling) showre down upon me their most horrible plagues: but if it be love, chaste and real love, let our souls meet in a reciprocal affecti∣on, and be imparadized into fruition of each o∣ther. Adrast. As far as a Virgins modesty will permit her, hereafter I shall be ever ready to accomplish your desires, and obey your commands; and in
the mean time be confident, that I am entirely yours. But time calls me away. All happiness at∣tend you. Fortu. And as in you all vertues shine, so upon you may all the blessings both of heaven and earth wait. A Letter to a Gentlewoman requesting Love. COnsidering with my self, most divine Lady, the many vertues wherewith nature hath in a su∣perabundant measure adorned you, and then weighing the insufficiency of any service I can do you; my trembling hand is scarce able to hold the pen, and my stammering tongue dare hardly ex∣press that which my afflicted heart desireth to ma∣nifest unto you: yet love, which holds in his domi∣nion my enflamed heart, forceth me to lay open to your sweetest self the secrets of my love-tor∣mented brest. Excuse then, I humbly beseech you, these humble lines, that invisibly present to your sair hands an humbler suit then can be expressed. I beseech you to extend a gratious hand, to stay a fainting soul from sinking, that without you is as nothing, whose worth and remembrance gives me being: for I desire not to be, where your being is not; It is that only that betters my joy, and makes me sensible of content, there being no content equal to the enjoying a companion of so great worth. To conclude, I shall expect the sentence of my life or death in your answer, and remain so perfectly yours, that I can say nothing neer it, when I say I am, Madam, your most faithful, most obedient, and most affectionate servant.
Another to a Gentlewoman desiring his forbearance to visit her, &c, WIth what words sufficiently to set forth my affection, and with what expressions high enough to manifest the constancy of my love, be∣cause I cannot tell; I shall appeal to your self, whether the sincerity of my actions, and the inte∣grity of my words, be not able to justify me. And I dare appeal to heaven, whether or no my words have in the least manner tended to dissimulation, swerving from professed truth, or my actions digres∣sed from nature: but since your rigor pleases to command, I shall withdraw my person; yet in lieu of return, will leave my heart with you; and maugre fate, subscribe my self, Mistress, ever thine, in an unalterable affection. A Gentleman debarred the society of his Mistress, thus writes to her. SInce my misfortunes are so great, that those most happy opportunities we formerly enjoy∣ed by a mutual intercourse and converse, are at present vanished, I cannot but by these manifest the constancy of my affection, which shall remain even to my latest gaspe. I hope, nay am confident, that you will not now, after the heaping on me so many and so great favours, estrange your self: and for my part, I am and even will be, wholly thine. And since my endeavours have been so happy to win your favour, they will double in length, and redouble in goodness, the remainder of my daies.
All my right in all things, is yours, and your demand my content: you are my joy; and my greatest height of happiness is to enjoy you. Your person is the food of my thoughts, the relief of my wishes, and the repast of my desires. Your love to me, is a continual hunger, after which I daily, earnestly, more and more long; your absence, my extreme famine, which makes me pine away with grief. And if any poor endeavours of mine may be but pleasing to your most vertuous self, I shall esteem my self most happie, when most serviceable to you: And, in the mean while, shall rest assured of your love, as you may of having his heart, who is Yours inseparably. A Gentleman having made his suit by speech, thus se∣conds it by writing. THat I should begin my Letter with the declara∣tion of my love, seems to me altogether prepo∣sterous and unnecessary, sith I manifested it to you so long since: But I may well bemoan my ill for∣tune, that cannot yet gain your good opinion of me, to credit your words, but that you still think me one of those who are altogether faithless. Is it my lot, for Love, to reap Disdain? Let me but know wherein I have offended, and my life shall an∣swer my misdemeanour. All I desire, is love, your love; because nothing can satisfie love, but love. I could enlarge: but, lest I be too troublesome, I will say no more, but that I am Your affectionate servant.
Her Answer. Sir, I Received a Paper from you, which I here answer, to clear my self of that accusation (of being scornful) which you cast upon me. That I do not forget you, witness this: but yet I am so far from being pleased with your Letters, that I can hardly bear the reading them, especially since they proceed from a deceitful heart, as I believe yours is. If then you love me, as you profess, shew it in this, That you trouble me no more with your Let∣ters; in hopes whereof, I remain, Sir, Your, &c. His Reply. My Dearest, THat you do not forget me, is my onely, my chief happiness; but, that to think of me, should move you to impatience, is my greatest misery. What greater torment, then to love, and not to be loved again? Heaven and earth are not able to parallel so great cruelty. But your words, that you cannot believe my seigned vows, carry with them a killing accent. O heavens! bear ye wit∣ness of my reality and sincere affection. I love you, as I profess: but by obeying your command, a breach might be made into the love of Yours while he lives, and even in death. Another. ACcording to my duty, and the obligements that lic upon me, for the manifestation of my loyal
constancie, I do hereby humbly kiss your hands. protesting that my love increases and renews, with the day, more and more. The Sun in its greatest splendor, hath been over-pow'red with clouds, and darkned with mists; and sometimes even the most constant affection has been scandalized with disloyalty. Let Envie then pine it self to death, and let Malice burst it self with rage; yet will I remain constant, yet will I be unremoveable, never to be altered from my setled resolution, which is to be Yours wholly and onely. A Gentleman to his Mistress, having won her consent to affection. THe thoughts of those many great favours I have received from you, especially your grant of af∣fection, drive me to so high a rapture of joy, that I am neither able to contain my self in any bounds, nor yet to express the ardencie of my affection. What shall I say? I am so full of love, that there is no room in my heart for any thought but of thee. Happie I, who am blessed with the love of so hea∣venly, so vertuous a companion. Now shall cu∣hearts seed on pleasures, and our eyes behold the bliss of each other in the full comfort of all con∣tent: we will sleep in love, and wake and walk in all sulness of joy; enjoying in our hearts more de∣lights, then either Nature affords, or Art can ex∣press: among which, this shall be chief, That thou art mine, and that I am Thine, &c,
A Gentleman crossed in his affection, thus writes to his Mistress. THere is no creature in this spacious fabrick of the whole world so wide, either of Sense or Reason, which being diseased or afflicted, but doth finde, by meer instinct of nature, some present remedy to help his infirmity, Man onely excepted, who can finde no medicine, by whose secret vertues he may allay his grief. This now I know by proof, and therefore speak by experience. But it is not to complain of you, that I now take pen in hand, but onely to lament my unfortunate birth, that has brought me into so unhappie a predicament, as to be contemned of you. And I protest, I have called my soul to an account for all her actions, but can∣not accuse any one of them. Go then, my Paper, and, in your Masters name, first humbly kiss her hands, then tell her she can never heal the wound she hath made in her Faith, and my Love; which I am resolved to carry with me to my grave; hoping that the heavens, moved at last, will, through my patient suffering, make me as dear to you, as you are now cruel to me. However, no earthly thing shall hinder me from serving you: for I will rather die, then be inconstant in my love; and will flee, with the hazard of my life, the reproach of disloyalty. A Gentleman going into the Country, after this manner writes his Adieu to his Mistress. TO tell you of my constancie, I think is unne∣cessary, since you finde it; and to declare in what
a continued course of perseverance, my faithful af∣fection has gone, from its very beginning to this present, would make my Letter swell to a Volume. Besides, so perfect a thing as my love to your di∣vine self, as it will suffer no question, so it seems to receive injury by addition of any words unto it. I could not but write to you, not knowing whether you would be pleased to grant me the favour to see you, or make me happie in the fruition of your com∣pany before my departure. And when I am abroad, my actions shall testifie that you are always in my heart. And if I can be so happie to keep a room in your thoughts and memory, it will be my greatest comfort in my loneliness, and my chief joy in my recess, &c. A Letter protesting love. WIth how great pleasure do I now, whilst I sit alone, recount my happiness in my love, which, in my greatest me lancholy, is my chiefest and most most pleasing comfort! If you knew but the de∣light that I take in the remembring your dear self, you would wonder at my felicity. I cannot tell how to express my affection. I love, I love you, yea you alone, with an everlasting and most vertuous affection. But this is too short: since then words sail, services and actions shall take their place; whose real performance shall prove a perfect de∣monstration of the never-altering, never-dying af∣fection of (My Dear) Yours devoted, to eternily.
A Gentleman in the Country writes to his Mistress in London. IT is not length of time, distance of place, or ab∣sence from you, can any whit lessen my love, or put the remembrance of your most dear self ei∣ther out of my minde or heart. And seriously, were it not for the want of your dear company, I could be content always to be here: but you are the Star on whom both my good fortune and wel∣fare depends; you are the Loadstone, whose ver∣tue attracts, keeps, possesses my heart and thoughts, where-ever my person is. This very thing makes this place tedious to me, in that I am debarred of your society: but if the place were sweetned with your presence, I should account every tree a Paradise, and every tree would seem an Elizium, &c. A Gentleman writes to his displeased Mistress. IF ever any man could on a sudden be thrown down from the highest pinacle of Joy, to the lowest gulf of infinite unsupportable miseries; certainly I am he: for your (causless) anger hath filled me with such a confusion of thoughts, that I know not which way to turn my self. But now at last I have got my pen to paper; which does in all humility crave pardon of you, if in any thing I have offended, or were guilty of what you mislike; and withal, promises such an amendment for the future, as shall never incur the danger of your dis∣like. And if ever my thoughts did receive so much as a fainting in their affections; if they have not
continually with more and more ardor from time to time pursued the possession of your favour, then let heavens most horrible plagues fall upon me. Do not then use him so hardly, who would for your sake hazard himself and all his future hopes. Nay, though you should be cruelly severe to me, yet let me say thus much; There is no one in the world that does, or shall more cordially affect your per∣son, or more really wish your good, then my deject∣ed self, and Your despised servant. A Letter requesting love. SEeing the many vertues that so resplendently shine in you, and that heavenly beauty where∣with Nature in an extraordinary measure hath eariched you; unless I were blotted with a stupid senslesness, I cannot but acknowledge you divine, and able to command Cupid to let flie a shaft where you please. Hoping therefore your ingenuity will admit my unpolished lines without a superficial complemental gloss, or the rich accent of a cere∣monial eloquence, (which could I use; I would not) yet censure me not to be altogether void of Orato∣ry, when my style is bound to be friendly; and the best lines are drawn from the centre of a strong af∣fection. Know, I love: nay, start not, Madam, at that word, since you can so easily prescribe a reme∣dy for my love-inflamed heart. Love is all I crave; which with modesty may be granted to (Madam) Yours to eternity.
A Letter from a Gentleman in the Country, to his sweet∣heart in the City. OF all earthly things, there is nothing wherein I take so much pleasure, or whence I receive so great content, as in the fulfilling your commands; which are so repleat with vertue, that I cannot but admire, nay adore the person in whom so much good resides. What then are all my services? even not worthy to be taken notice of by so great vertu∣ous deserts. Should I not adore, should I not serve, should I not with a most constant affection love your dear self, I might well be branded with the base stain of stupidity. I protest, were the place of my being a Paradise, and were my compa∣ny all Saints; yet, without you, should I receive little pleasure in the one, and less comfort in the society of the other. You are always present in my heart and thoughts; and as I walk alone in the fields, heaven can bear me witness how often it has heard me record your name; and with what joy I was wrapt, when the solitary woods with a pleasing eccho reiterated the same, &c. A Letter suing for Love. Dear Madam, I Cannot but in all humble reverence, by these, as much as they can, manifest that affection which my stammering tongue knows not how to ex∣press, nor my unable pen to delineate. Oh that my heart were transparent! there would you see a Seat ordained for your vertuous and sweetest self; a Palace of Love, where affection daily waits, to do
you service; a Castle altogether impregnable, till 'twas over-pow'red by darts of love, shot from your eyes, by the string of vertue. How then to express a gratitude sufficient to answer your good∣ness, is a thing altogether impossible, your vertue being as unlimitable as my affection: but such as I can, I willingly offer; my self, my love, yea my whole fortunes, I humbly present you withal. You have taken me out of my self; and my thoughts are not so often in mine own brest, as where you are. You are the Loadstar of my thoughts, and the life of my desires, with whom alone I desire to pass my life. No marvel, if all love, if all desire, if all affect you: for worth and desert cannot lie unregarded. I resigne my self as your prisoner, and as a Trophee of your victories, to remain Yours in life, and even in death. A Letter of complement from one friend to another. Sir, I Doubt not (nay, I am confident) that you will wonder, that after the ungrate silence of so ma∣ny by-past yeers, I should now begin to make an apologie: but, I hope, my negligence acknow∣ledged, will obtain a parden. Desiring therefore that you will think of me with favour, and impute my fault, not to a willing ingratitude, but to a too great distance. But why speak I of distance? it was not that could make me hold back my due re∣spects; but an incertainty, nay, I may truely say, an impossibility to send, was my chief, nay my one∣ly reason: yet I hope a good occasion will now ere long bring us together, and afford us that op∣portunity of renewing friendship, which I have
long wished, and shall in no mean measure rejoyce at last to enjoy: then shall be a time of more real and full expressions of my respects towards you, then can finde compass within this narrow page: then shall be a time, when, by a return of cour∣tesies for received obliging favours, I shall endea∣vour to repay that friendship which I well under∣stand I owe unto you. And till I can be happie in the fruition of this time, know that I study grati∣tude, and shall ever seriously endeavour to seem as I am, and be as I seem, SIR, Your most obliged servant. A Gentleman thus writes to his dispeased uncle. SUch and so great has been my former unhappi∣ness, that those which should have been the ten∣derers of my service and respects, could have no intercourse: but seeing that it hath pleased God that the mutual love (which should before have proceeded from one to another to the comfort of both) hath again received a new birth; I hope that all injuries and by-past discontents laid aside, you will look upon me with a favourable eye. You know, worthy Sir, that I have a long time sayled in a deep Sea of affliction and sorrow, which still has increased and flowed in upon me, and will continue, unless your love and favour ex∣tend it self not onely to the pacifying the impetu∣ousness of its waves, but also to the bringing it to so lowe an ebbe, as I may safely come to the so∣long-look'd for shore, &c.
To a friend, for a received courtesie. THere hath no one experiment or occurrence happened in my time, which hath more com∣mended and confirmed my judgement and skill of inspection into a man, then this performance of yours: for I must ingenuously confess, at the first acquaintance I had with you, I read that same re∣ality and civility in you, which now I see lively act∣ed by you: so that I know not whether I should applause my judgement more, or congratulate my happiness in your acquaintance, from whom I have received a courtesie of that nature, as cannot be expressed, without a due consideration of, and refle∣xion on the high consequence and concernment of it, together with a ready thankfulness to you the author thereof; of whom I may justly say, that it hath not been so truely occasioned by some, that Forgetfulness commonly waits upon Absence, but that you will have it falsified of your self: which not onely augments, but heightens the courtesie beyond the attempt of requital. And if you have any oc∣casions wherein I may serve you, command me free∣ly, as Your friend and servant. Another. I Have hourly before me so many Monitors and Remembrancers of my engagement to you, as is sufficient to convert Ingratitude: in which re∣spect, how am I troubled to discharge this debt! which is so great, that you must not expect an en∣tire payment, but to take it out in several acknow∣ledgements, as opportunity shall favour me. And
since the best way to cross out the score of your me∣rit, is to begin early to make payment, I cannot omit to give you hearty thanks for your favours, which have perpetually engaged Your very friend. A Letter of Complement. Sir, MY unwilling errour of not answering your Letter, I am confident your sweet indul∣gence will readily pardon. I could wish you were truely sensible, how happie I conceived my self in this fortunate opportunity, as literally to present you with these best of wishes I have oft (with no small ambition) sought personally to ne∣liver, That the choicest of all joy and happiness may be showred down upon you. And for that I yet remain in your remembrance, is my singular happiness, and your meer goodness: for, from my own worthlesness, and the strong conceit I had of your change, I could not but collect a total e∣clipse of your favourable aspect. And that you will be pleased to bear with this my conceited pro∣lixity, is the earnest desire of (Sir) Your very humble servant. A Letter to his Mistress. GO, happie Paper, by command; Take liberty to kiss a hand More white then any part of thee, Although with spots thou graced be.
The morning-air perfum'd in May, The glory of the clearest day; The first-born Rose of all the Spring; The Down beneath the Turtles wing; A Lute just reaching to the ear. Whatere is soft, or sweet, or fair, Are but her shreds, who fills the place And sum of every single grace. As in a childe the Nurse descries The mothers lips, the fathers eyes, The uncles nose, and doth apply An owner unto every part: so I In her could analyze the store Of all the choice ere Nature bore. Each private piece to minde may call Some worth, but none may match it all. Poor emblems! they can but express One element of Comeliness: None are so rich to shew in one All simples of perfection: Nor can the Pencil represent More then the outward lineament; Then who can limn the Portraicture Of Beauties live behaviour? Or what can figure ev'ry kinde Of Jewels that adorn her minde? Thought cannot draw her picture sull: Even thought, to her, is gross and dull. A Song. 1. KEep on your Mask, and hide your eye; For with beholding you, I die: Your fatal beauty, Gorgon-like, Dead with astonishment will strike.
Your piercing eyes (if them I see) Are worse then Basilisks to me. 2. Shut from mine eyes those hills of snow; Their melting valley do not show: Those Azure paths lead to despair. O vex me not: forbear, forbear. For while I thus in torments dwell, The sight of heav'n is worse then hell. 3. Your dainty voice, and warbling breath, Sounds like a sentence pass'd for death: Your dangling tresses are become Like Instruments of final doom. Oh, if an Angel torture so, When life is done, where shall I go? A Poet to his Mistress. THat I do love, it comes to me by kinde; That I love much, it much delights my minde: That I love you, it is my choice of heart; That I love you alone, 'tis your desert. I love, yea much, yea you, yea you alone; By kinde, minde, heart, desert, and all in one. Another. HEr Face, her Tongue, her Wit, So fair, so sweet, so sharp; First drew, then bent, last knit Mine eye, mine ear, my heart.
On his Mistress. IF any do desire to know Where the flow'rs of Vertue grow; Where content, delight, or mirth Doth inhabit upon earth: Let them resort to me, and I The place thereof will soon descry. Where's Piety without deceit, Where Love without Strife or debate; Where Beauty's mixt with comely grace, Vertue resideth in that place. And in my Love all these do meet; No marvel then if she be sweet. The Question. 1. I Ask thee, whence those ashes were, Which shrine themselves in plaits of hair? Unknown to me. Sure each morn dies A Phoenix for a Sacrifice. 2. I ask thee, whence those ruddy blooms Perch'd on her cheek in scarlet gowns? Unknown to me. Sure that which flies From fading Roses, her cheek dyes. 3. I ask thee, whence those Airs which flie From birds in sweetest harmony?
Unknown to me. But sure the choice Of accents ecchoes from her voice. 4. I ask thee of the Lily, whence It gain'd the type of innocence? Unknown to me. Sure Nature's deck Was ravisht from her snowie neck. 5. I ask thee, whence those active fires Take light, which glide through burnisht air? Unknown to me: unless there flies A flash of lightning from her eyes. The Answer explicatory. 1. O No; heav'n saw mens fancy stray To idolize but dust and clay: That embleme gave, that they might see, Your beauties date but dust should be. 2. O no; that Rose, when June is past, Looks pale, as with a poyson'd blast: And such your beauty, whenas time, Like winter, shall o'rtake your prime. 5. No; Philomel, when Summer's gone, Hasts to the woods, her rape to mone; (Unwilling hers) asham'd to see Your (unlike hers) unchastity.
4. O no; the Phoenix shuns that place, And fears the lustful sires embrace Of your hot brest and barren womb, As death, or some perpetual Tomb. 5. O no; those stars that flie but the sight Of what you act in dead of night: Asham'd themselves should Panders prove To your insatiate beastly love. The affirmative Answer. 1. ASk me no more, whither do stray The golden atomes of the day: For in pure love heav'n did prepare Those powders to enrich your hair. 2. Ask me no more, whither doth haste The Nightingal, when Summer's past: For in your sweet dividing throte She winters, and keeps warm her note. 3. Ask me no more, where those storms light, Which downward stoop in dead of night: For in your eyes they set, and there Fixed become, as in their Sphere. 4. Ask me no more, where Jove bestows (When June is past) the fading Rose:
For in your beauties orient deep, All flow'rs as in their beds do sleep. 5. Nor ask me more if East or West The Phoenix builds her spiced nest: For unto you at last she flies, And in your fragrant bosome dies. The Moderatrix. 1. I'Ll tell you where's another Sun That sets as rising it begun: It is my self, who keep one sphere, And were the same, if men so were. 2. What need I tell, that life and death May pass in sentence from one breath? So issue from mine equal heart Both love and scorn on mens desert. 3. I'll tell you in what heav'nly hell An angel and a fiend do dwell: It is mine eye, whose glassie book Sends back the gazers divers look. 4. I'll tell you, in a divers scale, One weight can up and downward hale. You call me Thistle, you a Rose; I neither am, yet both of those.
5. I'll tell you where both frost and fire, In peace of common seat conspire: My frozen brest the flint is like, Yet yeelds a spark, if well you strike. Conclusion. Then you that love, and you that loath, With one respect I answer both: For round about me glows a fire Can melt and harden cross desire. A Dialogue between a Maid and a young Youth. Maid. STay, lovely boy, why flee'st thou me, That languish in these flames for thee? I'm black, 'tis true, and so is Night; And Love doth in dark shades delight. The whole world, do but close thine eye, Will seem to thee as black as I: Or ope't, and view what a dark shade Is by thine own fair body made, That follows thee where-ere thou go: Ah, who (allow'd) would not do so! Let me for ever dwell so nigh, And thou shalt need no other shade but I. Boy. Black maid, complain not that I flie, Since Fate commands antipathie. Prodigious will that union prove, Where night and day together move.
And the conjunction of our lips, Not kisses make, but an eclips; In which the mixed black and white Portend more terrour then delight. Yet if my shadow thou wilt be, Enjoy thy dearest wish: but see Thou take my shadows property, Which hastes away when I come nigh: Else stay while death hath blinded me, And then I will bequeathe my self to thee. Epigram in Amorem. LOve is all eyes, admits of no delay, And th'row great hardships makes an easie way. Epigram in eundem. LOve, like a clouded star, does shine most bright, Where somewhat cover'd by misfortunes night. In praise of his Mistress. 1. I Have a Mistress for perfections rare In all men's eyes, but in my thoughts most fair. She is a model of divine perfections; Fortunes darling, Natures wonder: She is the sweetest of all sweet complexions, And of future joys the founder: In whose sweet looks are blessings three; Beauty, and Love, and Modestie.
2. Of all her sex, she is the onely splendor, And an ornament to Fame: For they are few can equal praises render To her more-then-matchless frame. Whhm if the Trojan Paris had but seen, Beauty had had no other Queen. 3. She is the onely Jewel I desire: I can but wonder at her beauty: She is the noble Lady I admire, To whom I owe submissive duty. Her modest comely shape it so exceeds, That (to her) sweetest Roses seem but weeds. Fair'st, to your praise, I dare affirm and tell, Some may come nigh, few match, but none excell. Epigram in Amorem. O Heav'nly Love, that canst without controul, In such a happie wo involve my soul! Who tells me that? Love wo? no; 'tis a stem Branching from Heav'ns Imperial Diadem. A roll of faults the greatTe∣vent. Comoedian brings, And says they are the meanest of Loves stings. TheOvid. & alii. Jove. Poet sings the Deity of Love, And its descent brings down from mighty Which shall I credit? (for they disagree) The Poets sung his divine Pedigree. Then all confess with me, infer hence even, All's throughly good that does come down from heaven. ThoughViz. Love. thou wert fatal, yet I still would cry, If Love be death, then let me ever die.
To his Mistress Fidelia. SHall I court Beauty of the richest dye, In fixing dimness on the clearest eye? Making spectators proud, if but one glance, Or smile from it, do on them wondering chance. Then blame me not; for my Fidelia's fair, Her beauty never sully'd by bold air. Shall I court riches, and account my self Well match'd, if wedded but to worldly pelf? Cease Envie then, and henceforth blame not me: For why? Fidelia is too rich for me. Shall I seek noble birth, and think't a grace To match my self with one of noble race; Hoping to be esteem'd, 'cause men may see The empty boast of a long Pedigree? Then come, Fidelia; for we will enlarge A Muster-roll more lasting, with less charge. Shall I court one that's chaste, who is as free From all black deeds as purest Lilies be From spots, before that ruder hands do smutch Their unstain'd beauty with a sordid touch? Such is Fidelia, whom the Tutle-dove Alone resembles in her chastest love. Shall I court Verrue, and account her best To be accepted as my constant guest? Come then, Fidelia, thou most blessed soul, Who dost all vertues in thy self inroul. Who'll blame me now? Fidelia's fair, chaste, good, Possest of riches, come of noble blood. And now, Fidelia, do'n't you think that I Have said ought here, that may be thought too high: Nor think I flatter, pray: for if you be Such to none else, by—y' are to me.
A SONG. His Mistress sad and grieved. 1. CAn any see my Mistress frown, And yet not with her be cast down? The Sun, as mourning, light withdrew; Day clouds it self in sable hue. I in her countenance did see How great a darkness soon would be. 2. The grief that did my Love annoy, Anticipates our next days joy: The heav'ns, with her, are sad, and cloud Their shining beauty in a cloud; Distilling down themselves in rain, That sorrow should such beauty stain. 3. Can I be merry, and she grieve? Shall I mine eyes from tears reprieve, Since melancholy has possest (My onely Joy) thy lovely brest? Oh no! her sadness I can'n't see, But with a loving sympathy. 4. See how her tears bedew her cheeks; Her sighs her inward sadness speaks. How can my joys increase or grow, Since you, my Sun, are clouded so? Help (Heav'ns) to chear her, or I die: Her grief's my endless misery.
A Song, out of my History of F. and A. A Gentlewoman singing to her Lute, sends forth this Ditty. 1. IS not (sweet Lute) my chaste life best? No foolish thoughts ever come neer My unpolluted maiden-brest, That make me either doubt or fear. Come then, my Lute, and help me with thy play, To pass some trifling idle hours away. 2. Poor silly souls! guided amiss Into belief by Poets tales, That such a thing as Cupid is, Whose arrow level'd never fails But I (my Lute) am free: help me to play, With thy sweet notes, some trifling hours away. 3. Thus will I keep my Virginity, Seeking to get no other mate, Whereon my bale or joy shall ly, Then thou my Lute, who first my state. Come then (Companion) help me with thy play, To pass some trifling idle hours away. Song 2. ex eadem. 1. IN setters bound, I freedom finde; And though I am with cares opprest, Yet have I now content in minde, And am from troubles quite releast.
How can this be? In Loves Gyves I am bound, Yet joy and freedom in my love have found. 2. Since Fortune then has rockt my sense Into a sleep which fancy pleases; I will not seek to give offence To her who thus my torment eases; But with a quiet silence will submit, Enforced by Love's power unto it. Song 3. ex eadem. COme, Philomel, thou messenger of Spring; Tune thy more pleasing notes, and to us sing; And of thy fellow-fingers get a Quire, To chant such consorts as exceeds desire. See! it is done: heark how the pretty birds Set out their notes; how freely they afford Their harmony, which with delight our souls Into a sweet felicity inrouls. See how the sportive windes, with gentle gales, On yond' bough kisses constantly entails; And they as 'twere with willing bendings meeting, His persever'd and constant profer'd greeting. Would you know why the birds so pleasant are? Why windes and trees such love t'each other bear? 'Tis this; That I should with a loving fear, As they me teach, know, Adrastina's here.
Certain Complemental Letters, and Forms both to begin and end all Epistles. A Letter of Love. IF I were to wish a titular happiness, it should onely be, now to know by what name, of some∣what more then ordinary neerness, I might ten∣der my best respects and affection towards you: but such is my unworthiness, as hath no such power in any small proportion to be endeared to your good∣ness; though, of all other earthly things, I most earnestly desire the accomplishment: it would make me, of now miserable, to approach to some possi∣bility of comfort. I confess I love you, first, in your person, whose feature merits beyond admira∣tion; secondly, your vertuous worth and unparal∣lell'd qualities, rarely found in these giddy times, (both suting in a fit way to imparadise the posses∣sor) hath forced many to attempt the attaining, and hath taken me, whose resolution was quite retired from such apprehensions, &c. Another. I Beseech you, Madam, excuse my boldness, in taking in hand to discover unto you the Mar∣tyrdom I suffer for your excellencie: which is so
much the more ardent, in that I keep it close and covert: yet cannot the reverence I bear you have so great a sway, but that my affection forces me to discover it self unto you. Be pleased then, in your most milde nature, and more temperate considera∣tion, to vouchsafe with patience to hear my humble suit, and to apply some Cordial to my wounded heart, which lies both hopeless and hapless, unless your mercy daign a cure. O bitter () con∣stant onely to aversness; in all that tends to my consolation, unconstant; One day promising suc∣cess to my well-cherished and aspiring hopes, the next day punishing my desires with cruelty: now wringing my hopes with a willing consent, and making my soul bathe in the stream of heavenly contentment; and immediately thrusting my heart out of Paradise, into the wilde desart of Discour∣tesie; thus continuing rather to kill, than cure the wound given by thy dear self, &c. A Letter from one friend to another. IF I had begun my friendship with thee for the increase of thy riches, it should now have vanish∣ed, because Fortune frowns on thee in the de∣cay of thy wealth: but such could never have been rightly called Friendship, but meer Flattery: but you know my heart is yours in a perpetual friend∣ship; insomuch that if there be any thing wherein I may employ my self to pleasure you, you may command me, as him who is gladly ready to ac∣complish your will, and to wait upon your com∣mands.
One writes after this manner to a Slander. UNto thee, which speakest evil of me, I intend not to answer evil, lest thereby thou shouldst be deterred from saying evil by me, that is to say, from praising me: for who is more rightly praised, then he of whom evil is spoken by an evil man? And be not angry that I call thee evil, since it is so far from being evil said, that nothing can be said better. A short and witty Letter to a friend. THou supposest thy self to be contemned, because I visit thee not by my Letters: I might despise, though I should write unto thee: for if I contemn∣ed thee, then durst I write unto these Answers, ei∣ther that I am busied, or that I cannot spare so much time for thee. Farewel. A Letter to a forgetful friend. I See in thee the old Proverb shall be verified: for thou hast sent me that, which, at my last being with thee, thou didst promise. I finde my self grieved, if thou hast forgotten it; but it increaseth my trouble, if thou hast not forgotten it. To for∣get, is the property scarce of a friend: but not to give according to promise, when it is remembred, is the known (or at least, suspected) badge of an enemy. Hereafter, either never promise, or perform better: for, much more friendly had it been, to have abso∣lutely denied that, which I so earnestly requested,
then not to perform that, which you so liberally promised: then had we still been pares, equal; for I had received no injury, in regard you owed me nothing: but now I take my self to be wronged, be∣cause you are and must be in my debt, seeing you promised it me. And yet it will not enter into my be∣lief, nay, nor into my thoughts, that you are of those people, whom their promises binde not. But that hereafter I may not have cause to believe it, I would wish you to keep such promises to your self. Onely this I request, that if you will perform unto me that benefit, yet leave off to be injurious, in forbidding me to hope any longer in vain. To conclude, I shall think my self obliged to you, if you give me that which I request; and shall greatly wonder, if you give it me not. Farewel. A Letter of Thanks for courtesies. Sir, I Had thought, by my Letters, several times, to have returned you thanks for those many favors I have and do daily receive from, your hands, lest I might have been thought ingrateful, or esteem∣ed rude: yet still deferred I the time, as not willing by my haste to trifle time from your more serious affairs. But now the thought of the greatness of your friendly love to me, makes me break my long∣kept silence (to avoid the stain of uncivil & proud, and to give you thanks not onely because you be∣stow on me so great commendations, but in regard of your friendship. To you ought I to make re∣compence, even above my power; for whose sake, no labour should be spared, but even the most diffi∣cult things atchieved, by (Sir) Your most affectionate friend.
A Letter to a friend, to put him in minde of some business. IT is very well known unto me, that no neglect hath at any time kept you back from satisfying my desires, which, through your innate good∣ness, you have ever reputed as your own. And now not onely the offer which with a willing minde you have many times made; but also the experience which I have had of you, emboldens my Pen to trou∣ble you. My business, therefore, and the urgency of mine occasions, constraining me to make use of that love and affection whick I know you bear me, in being mindful of those things whereof you know, that they may not fail for want of a manager; hoping to be pleasured of you, as of him in whose care I fix my trust in all things: in return whereof, you shall dispose of me, as of Your perfect and real friend. A Letter of request to a friend. THe hopes and fidelity which I have always had in you, and the offers which many times, with an affectionate minde, you have made unto me, doth comfort me in my affliction, and move me in this my necessity to have recourse unto you; re∣maining confident, that your deeds will be corre∣spondent unto your words, and that you will help me. Hoping therefore your willingness, and not doubting your ability, I desire that you would aid me against the contrarieties of my adverse fortune, whose impetuousness, without your assistance, will make me lose my self and you. Your ready friend to serve you.
A Letter to a friend. COnsidering with my self the small puissance of my weak Pen, and with what authorized elo∣quence it were necessary to fill my Letters to you; I am as it were astonished, and especially for the receipt of your copious Epistles: but my un∣able hand being unable that way, knows onely how to teach me to subscribe my self Yours, &c. The Answer. YOur phrase of speech is so neatly adorned, and so eloquently compacted, that it will ask much time of a knowing Pen to make a sufficient and sutable answer: therefore I, who am ignorant, must not think to do it. But though I have not that Oratory that were requisite, yet must I en∣force my self, for duty-sake, to write you some part of an Answer, that so you might rather blame me for insufficiency then ingratitude. Hoping there∣fore you will not so much look at the stile, as the hand; and pardon the failings, because your friend's, I remain, &c. A Letter of Thanks. THough at the present, through Fortunes uncon∣stancy, and the contrariety of the times, I finde my self unable to make a return sufficient for your deserts; yet I trust that you will so accept of my good will, as to esteem me thereby to have satisfied for every default of my unfortunate Fortune, taking
the will for the deed. But if ever Fortune, who is changeable, do again lay aside her cruelty, and smile upon me, blowing with the winde of Prosperi∣ty upon the sayls of mine honest intent; there is not a man in the whole world, that more largely shall dispose of me and all my possibilities, then shall your goodness, &c. Another. IF God had so enriched me with his favour, that I had been as able to have made a retaliation for so many your benefits, as I finde my self not one∣ly able and willing, but even desirous to render you infinite thanks; assure your self I would have been as ready to the satisfaction of the deed, as the good will. Therefore, as far as extendeth at this present my weak ability, I minde not to be ungrate∣ful to you. I give you therefore most hearty thanks for your courtesies to your undeserving servant; and offer my self always unto you, in all that shall be possible for me, &c. A Letter of News. Sir, I Hope you will pardon my silence hitherto, see∣ing these times befit none but Satyrists to write, who in their railing terms can best paint out mens actions, and give your ears better satisfacti∣on then our thred-bare Rhetorick, which becomes nothing so ill as News, especially if bad: there∣fore I could wish, that Feet as well as Hands might guide my Pen, that so I might become Satyrist, and better acquaint you with that of which I shall
speak a little in brief. We are here in a halting condition, by the loss of those members which were lately cut off; and expect every day a final ruine, unless, like the snake after dissection, we can as∣sume our own genuine parts, and so again become whole, &c. No more at present, but that I am SIR, Your assured friend. A Letter to a friend. Sir, THough I love to be free with a friend, yet am I ever loth to over-burden a free friend, and making Friendship my rule. I hope I shall not transgress, though I make bold to put you in minde of me: and seriously, had I not a present occasion, I should neither be so importunate nor trouble∣some. The performance of this, will adde a strong∣er tye to our friendship. And as I rejoyce in the happiness of my enjoying such a friend; so I will be bold to say, You shall never have cause to re∣pent or be ashamed of the friendship of SIR, Yours assuredly to serve you. A Letter of excuse for not writing. IF in times past I have not written unto you, as my duty was, it hath been for the urgent busi∣ness and great affairs that hindred me, and not
but that my whole trust and confidence hath al∣ways remained in you: And chiefly, when I record with my self the singular love which you have al∣ways with great reality expressed towards me. And because it is better to express some part of my duty late, then never; I am moved to write unto you these presents, that you may participate with me of my profit and prosperity, as you have formerly of my adversity; aiding, counselling, and favouring me, more then I could think to deserve of you, &c. A Letter of Thanks. ALthough I have no business whereof I may write unto you; yet nevertheless, the great love equal betwixt us, will not suffer me to let slip any messen∣ger that goes towards you, whereby I may testifie my thankfulness to you for the pains you have taken in my business: and know, that I confide so much in you, that I intrust and trouble you still further, desiring your assistance; and if you have any occasion to use me, I shall serve you most wil∣lingly: and if you will visit these parts, you cannot be more welcome to any friend, then you shall be to him, who rejoyces in the happiness of your acquain∣tance; the continuance whereof he as much desires. Yours, &c. A short Letter to all his friends. YOu are many, which at once demand Letter from me; and behold, I send unto you that are many, but one onely Letter: for it be hoveth to send one onely Epistle to many, whom
onely love: the which shall be as good as many, when many of you shall read it. Divers Forms of Subscribing and Superscribing Letters. Subscriptions. YOur most obedient son. Yours affectionately. Yours in a perpetual friendship. Yours to serve you in all things to his power. Your most humble, most obedient, and most affe∣ctionate servant. Yours living and dying. Yours in an unalterable affection. Yours inseparably. Your real and ready friend. Yours to be commanded. By yours assured. Your faithful friend for ever. Your loving father. Your very dutiful daughter. Your obliged kinsman. Your friend and master. Your trusty servant, to do your commands. Your Lordships humble honourer. Yours to my latest gasp. The humble admirer of your incomparable beauty. Yours faithfully, though neglected. Yours eternally, even in death. Yours sans complement.
Superscriptions. TO the high and mighty Lords, the States Ge∣neral of the United Provinces of the Nether∣lands. For the Right Honorable my very good Lord, R. Earl of Essex. For the high and mighty Prince, Lewis 12. King of France and Navar. For the Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount Say and Seal, &c. To the Right Worshipful, Sir P. R. Knight, of Eaton in Bedford-shire. For the Worshipful Master A. Merchant and Ci∣tizen of London. For his assured and trusty friend, Mr M. P. For his approved friend T. M. Esquire. For his most loving father Mr E. C. To his loving son C. L. at his chamber in Grays-Inne, these. For his trusty and faithful servant, D. E. For his desired friend M. T. aboard the Antilope i the Downs. For my very dutiful daughter E. M. To his loving Master, Mr. E. P. For the dearest to me of all earthly creatures, Mi∣stress M. K. these, with my love and service. To my best beloved choice, Mistress A. C. For my dear uncle, G. M. Esquire. For his hopeful kinsman, H. L. . FINIS.
