C5444A R223943 99896947 135666
THE Church-Catechism With a BRIEF and EASIE EXPLANATION THEREOF, For the help of the meanest Capacities and weakest Memories. By T. C. D. D. LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Henry Brome and Robert Clavel in S. Pauls Church-yard. MDCLXXXI.
An Advertisement. THE end of this short Explication is to render the Prin∣ciples of Christian Religion, comprized in the Church Catechism, plain and easie to the meanest capacities. And the method thereof is this, 1. The Catechism is printed in a dif∣ferent letter, on the left hand page, that it may be first learned by it self. 2. The several Questions of the Catechism, are put under a proper Title, containing the Subject of each Question, and the Answers to them are broken to pieces by a few brief and plain Explicatory Questions; so that ignorant Learners may easily understand the full meaning of them. And those who cannot read, or cannot get long Answers by heart (which want Instruction the most) need not be discouraged by this method, because they are not required hereby to Answer any more than Yes, or No, which will be no burthen to their memo∣ry, and yet will exercise their Judgment, and as well teach them to understand the sense of their Catechism, as try whe∣ther they do so or no. Yet those of better capacity may exercise their memory also, and by frequent reading the Explicatory Questions, will be able to repeat them after the Catechist, and turn them into an Affirmative or Negative Proposition, thus, Qu. Ought your name, &c. Answ. Yes, my name, &c. ought, &c. Qu. Are not Infants, &c. Answ. No, Infants are not, &c. Now this may be of use, as well to Parents in private, as to Ministers in Publick; who may first ask the Learners so many Questions of the Church Catechism, as they think fit for one time; and then beginning again, may first tell them the Title or Subject of each Question, and then examine them by the Explica∣tory Questions belonging thereunto. And if the Minister please to inlarge a little in a plain discourse upon every Explicatory Question, and also to shew unto what part of the Answer in the Church Catechism it doth refer, the Learner will better understand it, which will make the necessary duty of Catechi∣sing still more profitable, and will drop knowledg by degrees in∣to those narrow mouthed Vessels, for whose sake this method was contrived. And the success it hath had, on many very
young Children, and very ignorant Country people, hath incou∣raged the Publication thereof, in hopes it may be very servicea∣ble, not only for private Families, but also for Country Con∣gregations, as well to invite the Learners to come in greater numbers by its easiness, as to instruct them by its plainness. And the whole is no other than the Church Catechism injoyned by Law, briefly Explained, and no more imposed to be gotten by heart, than that which the Church requires, the rest being only contrived to make that understood and try if it be so, It is hoped the Right Reverend Governours of the Church, (to whose censure the whole is humbly submitted) will not dislike the publication thereof, in order to the sitting the more ignorant sort, for those great Duties of Confirmation and the Lords Supper. I need not here add any thing concerning the Divine Institution and Antiquity of Catechising; the Excellency of our Church Catechism, both for its agreeableness to Primi∣tive forms, and its exact Method, nor shall I now enlarge upon the necessity and use of this Profitable and Pious Duty, Having in a peculiar Discourse upon Catechising treated of these particulars, and exhorted, 1. Ministers to promote not only the learning the Catechism by rote, but the under∣standing thereof. 2. Parents and Masters both to instruct their Children and Servants in Private, and to bring them to Church to be publickly Catechised. 3. And excited the Younger and Ignorant people to come willingly. To which Discourse I refer the Reader, Companion to the Altar, page 451, 452, &c.
THE INTRODUCTION. §. ALmighty God having Created our first Pa∣rents after his own Image, did condescend to enter into a Covenant with them, wherein he promised life to them and their Posterity, upon condition of perfect and perpetual obedi∣ence, and threatned their disobedience with death. §. Our first Parents through the temptation of Sa∣tan, wilfully transgressed the Commandment of God in eating the forbidden fruit, and there∣by brought themselves, and all their posterity, into an estate of sin and misery. §. God hath not left mankind to perish in the e∣state of Sin and Misery, into which they fell by the breach of the first Covenant; But hath been pleased of his meer love and mercy to make a second Covenant of Grace, wherein he freely offereth pardon, and salvation, by Jesus Christ, to all those who shall truly repent, and believe in him. §. And seeing this Covenant is solemnly to be en∣ter'd into, in our infancy by Baptism, (which is the first benefit and favour we are capable of af∣ter we are born) It seemed good to the excel∣lent compilers of this Catechism, to begin it where we begin our Christianity; and by the mention of our name received in Baptism, to take occasion to mind us of our Obligations, and Priviledges thereby.
THE Church Catechism. Question 1. WHat is your Name? Answer. N. or M. Question 2. Who gave you that Name? Answer. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a member of Christ, the Child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. Question 3. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you? Answer. They did promise and vow three things in my Name. First, that I should renounce the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And Thirdly, that I should keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life.
Question 4. Dost thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do, as they have promised for thee? Answer. Yes verily; and by Gods help, so I will. And I hear∣tily thank our heavenly Father, that he hath called me to this state of salvation, through Iesus Christ our Sa∣viour. And I pray unto God is give me his grace, that I may continue in the same unto my lives end. Question 5. Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief. Answer. I. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth: II. And in Iesus Christ his only Son our Lord, III. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary. IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, He descended into Hell; V. The third day he rose again from the dead, VI. He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty; VII. From thence he shall come to judg the quick and the dead. VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost. IX. The Holy Catholick Church, the Communion of Saints. X. The forgiveness of Sins. XI. The resurrection of the body. XII. And the life everlasting. Amen.
Question 6. What dost thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy belief? Answer. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who hath made me and all the world. Secondly, in God the Son, who hath redeemed me, and all mankind. Thirdly, in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifieth me, and all the elect of God. Question 7. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that you should keep Gods Command∣ments. Tell me how many there be. Answer. Ten. Question 8. Which be they? Answer. The same which God spake in the twentieth Chap∣ter of Exodus, saying, I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage.
I. Thou shalt have none other Gods but me. II. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven a∣bove, or in the Earth beneath, or in the water un∣der the Earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord thy God am a Iealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Gene∣ration of them that hate me, and shew mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my Com∣mandments. III. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord will not hold him guilt∣less that taketh his Name in vain. IV. Remember that thou keep Holy the Sabbath day. Six days shalt thou labour, and do all that thou hast to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou and thy Son, and thy Daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid-servant, thy Cattel, and the stranger that is within thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hal∣lowed it. V. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God giv∣eth thee. VI Thou shalt do no murther. VII. Thou shalt not commit adultery. VIII. Thou shalt not steal. IX. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neigh∣bour. X. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.
Qu. 9. What dost thou chiefly learn by these Com∣mandments? Answ I learn two things: my duty towards God, and my duty towards my Neighbour. Qu. 10. What is thy duty towards God? Answ. My duty towards God is, I, II. To believe in him, to fear him, and to love him, with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength: to worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to call upon him. III. To honour his holy Name and his Word; IV. And to serve him truly all the days of my life. Qu. 11. What is thy duty towards thy Neighbour? Answ. My duty towards my Neighbour is, §. To love him as my self, and to do to all men, as I would they should do to me. V. To love, honour, and succour my Father and Mother. To honour and obey the King, and all that are put in authority under him. To submit my self to all my Governours, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors and Masters. To order my self lowly and reverently to all my betters. VI. To hurt no body by word or deed. VII. To be true and just in all my dealings. VIII. To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart. IX. To keep my hands from picking and stealing. X. And my tongue from evil speaking, lying and slan∣dering. XI. To keep my body in temperance, soberness, and chastity. XII. Not to covet and desire other mens goods, but to learn and labour truly to get mine own living, and to do my duty in that state of life, unto which it shall please God to call me. page 20. Catechist,
Catechist: My good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy self, nor to walk in the Command∣ments of God, and to serve him, without his special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent prayer. Question 12. Let me hear therefore, if thou canst say the Lords Prayer. Answer. OVr Father which art in Heaven. I. Hallowed be thy name, II. Thy Kingdom come, III. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. IV. Give us this day our daily bread. V. And forgive us our tres∣passes as we forgive them that trespass against us, VI. And lead us not into temptation. VII. But deliver us from evil. §. For thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glo∣ry, For ever, and ever. Amen. Question 13. What desirest thou of God in this prayer? Answer. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all goodness, to send his grace unto me, and to all people, I. That we may worship him, II. Serve him, III. And obey him as we ought to do: IV. And I pray unto God, that he will send us all things that be needful both for our souls and bodies, V. And that he will be mer∣ciful unto us and forgive us our sins. VI, VII. And that it will please him to save and de∣fend us, in all dangers, ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Iesus Christ, and therefore I say Amen. So be it.
Question 14. How many Sacraments hath Christ ordained in his Church? Answer. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. Question 15. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament? Answer. I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledg to assure us thereof. Question 16. How many parts are there in a Sacrament? Answer. Two: the outward visible sign, and the inward spiri∣tual grace. Question 17. What is the outward visible sign, or form in Baptism? Answer. Water: Wherein the person is baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy-Ghost. Question 18. What is the inward and spiritual grace? Answer. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, for being by nature born in Sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of grace.
Question 19. What is required of persons to be baptised? Answer. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin: and Faith whereby they stedfastly believe the promises of God, made to them in that Sacrament. Question 20. Why then are infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they cannot perform them? Answer. Because they promise them both by their sureties: which promise when they come to age themselves are bound to perform. Question 21. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper or∣dained? Answer. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of the benefits which we receive thereby. Question 22. What is the outward part of sign of the Lords Sup∣per? Answer. Bread and Wine, which the Lord hath commanded to be received.
Question 23. What is the inward part or thing signified? Answer. The Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the Lords Supper. Question 24. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers there∣by? Answer. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine. Question 25. What is required of them who come to the Lords Supper. Answer. To examin themselves, whether they repent them tru∣ly of their former sins, stedfastly purposing to lead a new life; have a lively faith in God's mercy through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death; and be in Charity with all men. The end of the Catechism.
THE EXPLANATION Of the CATHECHISM. Qu. 1, 2. Of the Benefits of Baptism. §. OUght your name recived in Baptism, to put you in mind of the Duties and Priviledges of the Covenant, into which you did then enter? Yes §. Are not Infants by reason of their tender age unca∣pable of receiving any benefit by Baptism? No §. Were you in your infancy thereby made and solemn∣ly admitted, 1. A Member of Christ, and of his Church? Yes 2. A Child of God by Adoption? Yes 3. And an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven? Yes Qu. 3. Of the Vow of Baptism. §. Were these great Benefits confer'd on you absolute∣ly, without any Conditions to be performed on your part? No §. Did not your Sureties who presented you to Baptism, then solemnly promise in your name and behalf, that you should, 1. Renounce the Temptations of the Devil, and the World; and mortifie the evil desires of your own corrupt heart? Yes 2. Believe the principles of the Christian Religi∣on, revealed by God in holy Scriptures, and briefly comprized in the Creed? Yes 3. Sincerely and constantly obey all Gods Com∣mandments. Yes
Qu. 4. Of our Professing to own, and pro∣mise to perform our Baptismal Vow. §. Do not you think your self ingaged in your own person, to perform that Promise and Vow which your sureties did make for you? Yes §. And do you now promise and resolve according to your bounden duty, to perform these your Baptismal in∣gagements? Yes §. Can you do this without Gods help and assistance? No §. Are you heartily thankful to God for bringing you into this Covenant of Faith and Repentance, and so into a capacity of Salvation? Yes §. And will you daily pray to God for Grace, to enable you ever to continue stedfast in this Covenant? Yes §. Shall those who perform these Conditions, fail to reap the blessings of their Baptism? No §. Or shall those who wilfully break them escape the wrath and curse of God? No Qu. 5. Of the Creed consisting of twelve Articles. §. Are not the twelve Articles of your belief contained in the Apostles Creed? Yes §. Is not that Creed a brief Summary of all the Articles of the Christian Faith necessary to Salvation? Yes §. Is there any Article therein, which cannot be proved by Holy Scripture? No §. Can he be a true Christian who denies any of them? No §. Are you not in this Creed taught to believe and con∣fess, that there is one only living and true God? Yes §. And doth it also teach you to believe, that in the uni∣ty of the God-head there be three persons of one Sub∣stance, Power, and Eternity? Yes §. And that these three Persons are, God the Father our Creator, God the Son our Redeemer, and God the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier? Yes Explicatory Questions on the several Articles, See page 8, 9, 10, 11.
Art. 1. Of God and his Attributes. §. Hath God a body, parts, or passions, as men have? No §. Is he then a most pure invisible Spirit? Yes §. And is he not Infinite in Being and Perfection? Yes §. Is he Eternal without beginning, ending, or any change? Yes §. Is there any place where God is not present? No §. Is there any thing past, present, or to come, which he doth not perfectly see and know? No §. Is there any person too strong, or any thing too hard for him? No §. Is He so perfectly good that he cannot do, cause, or allow, any thing that is evil or unjust? Yes Particularly, Of the Father, his Works of Creation and Providence. §. Is not the work of Creation principally attributed to God the Father? Yes §. Did not He by his word alone make all things, in heaven and earth, of nothing? And every thing very good? Yes §. Is there any Creature which can preserve it self with∣out Gods Providence? No §. Is there and Person, or thing, which is not under Gods Rule and Government? No §. And doth not God order all things most wisely? Yes §. Did not God at first make Man after his own Image, in a holy and happy condition? Yes Art. II. Of Jesus Christ, his Divine Na∣ture, Person, and Offices. §. Are not you and all Mankind since Adam's fall born in a very sinful and miserable condition? Yes §. Can any but He who is called Jesus save you out of it? No §. And was he also called Christ, because he was anointed to Execute the Offices of a Prophet, Priest, and King? Yes §. Is not this Jesus Christ the Eternal & only Son of God? Yes §. Could we have been redeemed unless the Son of God had taken mans Nature upon Him? No §. Is Jesus Christ then both God and Man, in two distinct Natures, and one Person? Yes
Art. III. Of the manner of Christs Incar∣nation. §. Had Christ when he took our Nature, any Father up∣on earth? No §. Was He as man, conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary, of her sub∣stance; and born without Sin? Yes §. Was the birth of Christ stained with Original, or his life with any Actual Sin? No Art. IV. Of the sufferings of Christ. §. Was Christ (though innocent) condemned to die, by Pontius Pilate, the Roman Governour of Judea? Yes §. Did Christ undergo for us the wrath of God, and the cursed Death of the Cross? Yes §. Could nothing satisfie Gods Justice for our Sins, but the sufferings and death of Jesus Christ? No §. Was He also buried? and did he continue in the State of the dead for a time? Yes Art. V. of Christs Resurrection. §. Doth Christ still remain under the power of death? No §. Did He by his own power, rise from the dead on the third day, and become alive again? Yes §. And did He thereby declare himself to have fully sa∣tisfied Gods Justice? Yes Art. VI. Of Christs Ascension, and Inter∣cession. §. Was Christ always to continue on earth after his Re∣surrection? No §. Did He (forty days after) in our nature, and as our Head ascend up into Heaven? Yes §. Is He now at Gods right hand, in fulness of glory, with power over all things? Yes §. Doth He there make Intercession for us to his Father, by pleading the merits of His Obedience and Sacrifice on earth, for the acceptance of our persons and ser∣vices? Yes
Art. VII. Of Christs coming to Judgment. §. Shall not Christ come again from Heaven at the last day in great glory and power, to judg all the World in righteousness. Yes §. Shall every one at that day (both those that shall then be found alive, and those that have been dead) give an account to Him of all their thoughts, words, and actions? Yes §. Can any escape this Judgment? No §. Or hide their Sins from this Judg? No Art. VIII. Of the Holy-Ghost, his Divi∣nity and Office. §. Is not the Holy-Ghost God equal with the Father and the Son? Yes §. Is it not the work principally of the Holy-Ghost, to apply unto us the benefits which Christ hath purcha∣sed for us? Yes §. Hath He in order thereunto, revealed the will of God for our Salvation, in the Holy Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament? Yes §. Was the same delivered to the Church to be the only rule of our Faith and Life? Yes §. And doth He by the Ministry of this his word, in∣lighten, convert, sanctifie and comfort us? Yes Art. IX. Of the Church. §. Is the whole company of believers in all ages and pla∣ces, (united into one body under Christ their head) called the holy Catholick Church? Yes §. Can any particular company of Christians properly call themselves the Catholick Church? No §. Or can any one Man pretend to be the Head thereof? No §. Had God a Church in all Ages to worship Him? Yes §. Can the Gates of Hell ever prevail, to destroy Gods Church upon earth? No
And of the Communion of Saints. §. Are there any priviledges belong to us, as members of the Church? Yes §. Have all the true Members thereof Communion,Yes 1. With one another in all offices of Piety and Charity? Yes 2. And with Christ their Head, in grace and glo∣ry here and hereafter? Yes Art. X. Of Remission of Sins. §. Is there forgiveness of Sin to be had in the true Church? Yes §. Doth our meer being of the Church intitle us thereto? No §. Shall all and only those, who truly repent and believe, have all their Sins for Christs sake freely pardoned? Yes §. And shall all others, (though in the Church) remain under the guilt of Sin, and wrath of God? No yes Art. XI. Of the Resurrection of the Dead. §. Shall the bodies of those that die, remain always in the grave? No §. Shall all the dead be raised up at the last day? Yes §. And shall their bodies be inseparably united again to their Souls which never die? Yes Art. XII. Of Life Everlasting. §. Shall every one at the Resurrection, receive according to their works done in the body? Yes §. Shall the Righteous live for ever with God in heaven, in unconceivable glory and happiness? Yes §. And shall the wicked endure intolerable and conti∣nual torments, both in soul and body, in hell for ever? Yes §. Amen. §. Do you by the word, Amen, testifie, 1. Your stedfast belief of all this? Yes 2. And your desire ro live accordingly? Yes
Qu. 6. Of the practical belief of these Articles. §. Are not the belief of the holy Trinity, and of what the several persons have done for you, the chief funda∣mental Articles of your faith? Yes §. Is it sufficient to Salvation barely to know these fun∣damentals, and to assent to them as true? No §. Is it further necessary to Salvation, that you sincerely pay that duty to every person, which his proper work for you doth peculiarly challenge? Yes §. Do they rightly believe in God the Father, who do not love Him, fear Him, and serve Him, as their great Creator, and merciful Preserver. No §. Do they believe aright in God the Son, who do not submit to Him, trust in Him, and obey Him, as their only Lord and Saviour? No §. Do they rightly believe in God the Holy Ghost, who do not follow His direction, and make use of his assi∣stance, as their Guide, Sanctifier and Comforter? No Qu. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Of the Ten Com∣mandments. §. Are any in this life freed from their Obligation to o∣bey the Moral Law? No §. Is not the Moral Law (which is the Rule of our Obe∣dience) summarily comprehended in the Ten Com∣mandments. Yes Preface. Of the Motives to Obedience. §. Should not [1.] Gods Soveraignty over us [2.] His relation to us, [3.] and his delivering, (as Israel of old from Egyptian bondage, so) us from our spiritual thraldom, ingage us to keep all his Commandments. Yes Explicatory Questions on the several Commandments, See page 16, 17, 18, 19.
Of our Duty to God contained in the four first Commandments. §. Is it not the sum of our duty to God to love Him, with all our heart; with all our mind, with all our soul, and with all our strength? Yes §. Can we keep any of these Commandments aright, un∣less we thus love God above all? No Com. I. Of the right Object of our worship. §. Doth not the first Commandment enjoyn us, 1. To take the true God for our only God? Yes 2. And to worship and glorifie Him accordingly? Yes †. Do not they then break this Commandment, 1. Who forsake and fall away from the true Reli∣gion? Yes 2. Or who (though they continue in it, yet) do not know the true God, or not glorifie Him as God? Yes §. May we believe in, fear, or love, any so much as God? No §. Or give Religious Worship to any but God alone? No Com. II. Of the right means, or matter of our Worship. §. Doth not the second Commandment require, that we should Worship God, with such Worship, as He hath appointed in his word? Yes §. Hath not God there appointed us to worship Him, by 1. Daily prayer and thanksgiving in the name of Christ? Yes 2. Frequent reading, hearing, and meditating on his Word? Yes 3. And by the due use of his Sacraments? Yes †. Do not they sin against this Commandment? 1. Who worship God by Images, or any other way contrary to his Word? Yes 2. Or who corrupt, neglect, or oppose any of Gods Ordinances. Yes §. Is it unlawful for the Church to appoint decent Cere∣monies? No *. Will not the Lord who is jealous for his own Worship, punish those as haters of him, who break this Com∣mandment? Yes
Com. III. Of the right manner of our Worship. §. Doth not the third Commandment require us, devout∣ly to perform every part of Divine Worship; and re∣verently to use every thing which nearly relates to God? Yes †. Do not they break this Commandment, who pro∣phanely or irreverently use Gods Holy Name, Titles, Attributes, Ordinances, Word, or Works? Yes §. Are not Blasphemy and Cursing; vain and false swear∣ing, and also taking unlawful, or breaking our awful Oaths and Vows; heinous sins against this Command∣ment? Yes *. Will the Lord suffer them to escape his righteous judgment, who wilfully break this Commandment? No Com. IV. Of the solemn time of our Worship. §. Dot not the fourth Commandment enjoyn us, to keep Holy the Sabbath day; by spending it, 1. In worshiping God, both in public and private? Yes 2. Or in the works of necessity and mercy? Yes †. Do not they sin against this Commandment, 1. Who spend the Sabbath Day in idleness? Yes 2. Or about their worldly business, or recreati∣ons? Yes §. May Masters command or permit these things to those who are under their charge? No *. Should not [1.] Gods allowing us six days for our own imployment [2.] and his challenging a special propriety in the seventh: [3.] His own Example; [4.] and his blessing and sanctifying the Sabbath Day; move us to obey his Commandment? Yes §. Is it sufficient to worship God on the Sabbath Day only? No §. Ought we to set apart some time for it every day? Yes §. And must we religiously observe the Fasts and Festi∣vals of the Church? Yes
Of our duty to man, contained in the six last Commandments. §. Is it not the sum of our duty to our neighbour, to love him as our selves? Yes §. Do we thus love our neighbour, unless we do to others what we would have them do to us? No Com. V. Of the duties to our Relations. §. Doth not the fifth Commandment enjoyn us to per∣form the duties we owe to our several Relations; espe∣cially to our Superiors? Yes †. Is not this Commandment broken, 1. By Children who are undutiful, irreverent, or unkind to their Parents or Guardians?Yes 2. By Subjects, who dishonour, disobey, or rebel against the King, or those in Authority under Him?Yes 3. By People, who despise their Minister, resist his Do∣ctrine, or withold his Dues?Yes 4. By Servants, who are stubborn, slothful, or unfaithful to their Masters?Yes 5. By any other Inferiors, who behave themselves proudly, and scornfully towards their Betters, in Age, Gifts, or Estate?Yes *. Can they expect long life or prosperity who break this Commandment? No Com. VI. Of Humanity. §. Doth not the sixth Commandment require, all lawful endeavours to preserve our own, and our neighbours life and health? Yes †. Do not they sin against this Commandment, who hurt their own, or their neighbours life or health? Yes §. May we be intemperate, or urge others to be so? No §. May we use angry or provoking words? No Or bear malice, or desire of revenge in our hearts? No Com. VII. Of Chastity. §. Doth not the seventh Commandment enjoyn Chastity in heart, speech, and behaviour? Yes
†. Do not they break this Commandment, 1. Who admit of any unclean thoughts and desires? Yes 2. Or use any filthy or unchast words, or gestures? Yes 3. Especially who commit Fornication, Adultery, or any other Acts of uncleanness? Yes §. May we use any provocations thereunto? No Com. VIII. Of Justice. §. Doth not the eighth Commandment require the law∣ful furthering of our own, and our neighbours wealth, and outward estate? Yes †. Do not they sin against this Commandment, 1. Who wrong others in their estates; by stealing, oppression, deceit, or any other unjust taking, or with-holding what is anothers? Yes 2. Or by Idleness or Prodigality wast their own? Yes §. May we steal small things, because we are poor? No §. May we keep from the owner what is found by us? No Com. IX. Of Veracity. §. Doth not the ninth Commandment enjoyn the speak∣ing of truth, and the promoting our own and others good name? Yes †. Do not they break this Commandment, 1. Who deny, conceal, or oppose the Truth? Yes 2. Or injure their own, or neighbours good name? Yes 3. Especially who bear false witness in publick? Yes §. May we in any case tell any manner of Lye? No §. May we slander, or flatter others? No Or vainly boast of our selves? No Com. X. of Contentation. §. Doth not the tenth Commandment require, 1. Our being content with our own Condition? Yes 2. And rejoicing at our neighbours welfare? Yes †. Do not they sin against this Commandment, 1. Who are discontent with their own estate? Yes 2. Or who envy or grieve at their neighbours good? Yes 3. Or inordinately desire any thing that is his? Yes
Catech. Of our need of Gods grace, and of the means to obtain it. §. Are we able of our selves to believe and to do, all these things which we have promised, and are inga∣ged to? No §. Is not prayer a special means to obtain the assistance of Gods grace, to enable us hereto? Yes §. Ought we therefore daily, and upon all occasions, to pray unto God for it? Yes §. May we pray less than twice every day? No §. And will our prayers be acceptable to God, unless our minds and hearts go along with our words? No Qu. 12, 13. Of the Lords Prayer, consist∣ing of a Preface, seven Petitions, and a Conclusion. §. May we pray for any thing but what is agreeable to the will of God? No §. Is not the Lords Prayer both a most perfect Form, and also a Pattern of Prayer? Yes The Preface. Doth not the Preface direct us, 1. To pray unto God 1. As our Father in Christ, and therefore willing to help us? Yes 2. As in Heaven, and therefore a∣ble to help us? Yes 2. And to Pray with, and for others? Yes I. Petition. §. Ought we not chiefly to aim at Gods Glory in every thing? Yes §. Are we able of our selves to honour God aright? No *. Do we therefore in the first Petition pray, That God would enable us and others, in every thing, to glorifie and honour Him above all, in heart, word, and deed? Yes
II. Petition. §. Are not we and all men by nature, under the domini∣on of Sin and Satan? Yes §. Can we rescue our selves from that slavery? No *. Do we therefore in the second Petition pray, 1. That Satans Kingdom may be destroyed? Yes 2. That Gods Kingdom of Grace may be advanced, by bringing us, and others into it; and by keep∣ing us all in it? Yes 3. And that his Kingdom of Glory may be hastened? Yes III. Petition. §. Are not we naturally prone to rebel against Gods Com∣mands, and to murmur at his Providence? Yes §. And inclined to do the will of the Flesh and the Devil? Yes *. Do we therefore in the third Petition pray, 1. That God would make us and others, able and willing to obey his word, and submit to his will in all things? Yes 2. And both these, with the like chearfulness, since∣rity and constancy, as the Angels do in Heaven? Yes IV. Petition. §. Can we by our own Industry procure the outward comforts of this life, or can they of themselves sustain us, without Gods blessing? No *. Do we therefore in the fourth Petition pray, 1. That upon our lawful endeavours, we may of Gods free gift, receive a competent portion of the good things of this life? Yes 2. And may enjoy Gods blessing with them? Yes V. Petition. §. Are we not by our sins become debtors to the Justice of God, and liable to Condemnation? Yes §. Can we or any other Creature make any satisfaction for that Debt? No
*. Do we therefore in the fifth Petition pray, That through the satisfaction of Christ, we and o∣thers may be acquitted, both from the guilt and punishment of Sin? Yes §. Can we expect forgiveness from God, unless we from our heart forgive others their offences against us? No VI. Petition. §. Are not Satan, the World and the Flesh, always rea∣dy by their Temptations, to draw us to Sin? Yes §. Are we of our selves willing to resist, or able to over∣come them? No *. Do we therefore in the sixth Petition pray, §. That God would so subdue the Flesh, over-rule the World, and restrain Satan, that we and others, 1. May not be tempted to Sin? Yes 2. However may not fall into it? Yes 3. Especially not live impenitently in it? Yes VII. Petition. §. Can we hope to escape the evil of punishment, if we so yield to temptation as to commit Sin, or continue in it? No *. Do we therefore in the seventh Petition pray, That we and others may not provoke God by our sinning and impenitence, to punish us with Evils, and miseries, temporal, spiritual, or eternal? Yes The Conclusion. §. Ought we in our Prayers to praise God? Yes Ascribing to Him, eternal Soveraignty over all, Power to do all, and Glory from all? Yes §. And should we take our encouragement in Prayer, from these Attributes of God? Yes Amen. §. Do you by the word, Amen, declare your belief that God can, your hope that he will, and desire that he may grant your requests? Yes
§. Of the Sacraments. Qu. 14. Of their Author, number and necessity. §. Hath God (besides prayer) appointed his word, and Sacraments, to be the ordinary outwards means of grace? Yes §. Hath Christ ordained any more Sacraments in his Church besides Baptism, and the Lords Supper? No §. Doth not the wilful neglect of these, highly offend God, and indanger our Salvation? Yes Qu. 15, 16. Of their nature, use, and parts. §. Hath not Christ ordained the outward parts of a Sa∣crament to be, 1. Signs of inward and spiritual grace? Yes 2. Means to convey grace to the soul? Yes 3. Pledges to assure us that the graces signified shall be conveyed to believers? Yes §. Is there not then in every Sacrament, 1. An outward part to be seen by the eye? Yes 2. And an inward part to be discerned, and recei∣ved by faith? Yes Qu. 17. Of the outward part of Baptism. §. Hath Christ instituted any outward matter besides water, to be used in Baptism? No OR any outward form but dipping, or sprinkling In the Name, &c. No Qu. 18. Of the inward grace of Baptism. §. Are we not by nature guilty of Original Sin, and lia∣ble to Gods wrath? Yes §. Is not the pardoning of this Original guilt, the sub∣duing our natural Corruption, and the restoring us to Gods favour, the inward grace of Baptism? Yes
Qu. 19, 20. Of the Subject qualified for Baptism. §. May persons of riper years be admitted to Baptism, till they profess their Repentance, Faith in Christ, and obedience to him? No §. Ought not Infants to be Baptised who are presented by such as profess and engage these things? Yes §. Will the profession and ingagement of your Sureties suffice for you any longer, than till you come of age to take it upon your self? No §. Do not those who then live in impenitence, and unbe∣lief, forfeit the benefits of their Baptism? Yes Qu. 21. Of the end and use of the Lords Supper. §. Is no  Lords Supper often to be administred? Yes §. Is  theein offered up a sacrifice to his Fa∣ther? No §. Is ere not in it a lively representation of that sa∣crifice of himself offered upon the Cross once for all? Yes §. AND was it ordained to revive in us the memory of Christ death, and of the benefits purchased for us thereby? Yes Qu. 22. Of the outward part of the Lords Supper. §. Are not both Bread and Wine the outward matter of the Lords Supper? Yes §. Is the substance of the Bread and Wine, by conse∣cration changed into the substance of the body and blood of Christ? No §. Will it suffice to look only on the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, unless we also take, eat, and drink of them? No
Qu. 23. Of the Inward part of the Lords Supper. §. Doth not the bread broken in the Lords Supper, sig∣nifie the body of Christ broken upon the Cross for us? Yes §. And doth not the wine poured out represent his blood shed for us? Yes §. Do Believers feed on the body and blood of Christ in the Lords Supper, as truly and really as they do on the bread and wine? Yes §. Is this done after a Corporal and Carnal manner? No §. Or is it done after a Spiritual manner, while by faith they apply to themselves the benefits of Christs death? Yes Qu. 24. Of Benefits of the Lords Supper. §. Doth not this spirirual feeding on the body and blood of Christ in the Lords Supper, 1. Nourish and strengthen our Souls? Yes 2. And also comfort and refresh them? Yes §. Are our souls as truly and really hereby strengthened and refreshed, as our bodies are by bread and wine? Yes Qu. 25. Of Preparation to the Lords Supper. §. Can any expect to receive these benefits in the Lords Supper, but those who come to it duly prepared, and receive it worthily? No §. Can we prepare our selves aright unless we strictly examin our selves before we come? No §. Must we especially examin our selves of the truth of our [1.] Repentance, and new Obedience [2.] Faith, [3.] Thankfulness, [4.] and Charity? Yes [1.] May notorious and customary Sinners presume to come without Repentance, to this holy Sacrament?No §. Ought every one who would come duly prepared, 1. To examin their hearts and lives by Gods Law? Yes 2. To bewail and abhor, confess and forsake all their Sins? Yes 3. And stedfastly to purpose, and constantly to en∣deavour after a holy life? Yes
[2, and 3.] Can those who are ignorant, unbelieving, or unthankful, partake of the comforts of this spiritual food?No §. Must every one that would spiritually feed on Christ in this Sacrament, understand and believe, 1. Their own Misery by sin, Original and Actual? Yes 2. The sufficiency of Christs death, to satisfie Di∣vine Justice for all their sins? Yes 3. And Gods willingness for Christs sake, to seal a pardon to all true Believers in this Sacrament? Yes §. And ought they also thankfully to commemorate the wonderful love of Christ in dying to purchase such great benefits? Yes [4.] Shall injurious, malicious, and uncharitable persons receive pardon or grace from God in this Sacrament?No §. Must every one who would be a welcom guest at this Feast of Charity, 1. Be sorry for the injuries they have done to others and ready to make them satisfaction? Yes 2. Forgive heartily, and be willing to be reconciled to those who have offended them? Yes 3. And also give according to their ability to those who are in necessity? Yes The Conclusion. §. Is it a very heinous sin in any, either to receive unwor∣thily; or not to receive at all, upon pretence of unfit∣ness, while they never indeavour to prepare them∣selves? Yes §. Is it therefore the duty of every man that is of com∣petent age and discretion, 1. Seriously to prepare themselves for this Ordinance, by self-examination, sincere Repentance, and fer∣vent prayer? Yes 2. Diligently upon every fit Opportunity, to partake of it, with due Reverence, heedful Attention, a lively Faith, and devout Affections suitable thereto? Yes 3. And carefully ever after, to fulfil their Vows then made and renewed? Yes FINIS. Price stitcht 2 d.
