C613 E1369_5 R209319 99868202 169862
PSEUCHOGRAPHIA ANTHROPOMAGICA: OR, A Magicall Description OF THE SOUL: Wherein is set forth The Nature, Genesis and Exodus of it. By Agricola Carpenter, Vivitur ingenio. LONDON, Printed for John Browne, at the Sign of the guilded Acorn in Pauls Church-yard. 1652.
depiction of Apollo and the labour of the author Apollo Redit Agricolae labor actus in Orbem. Spes alit Agricolam. Non est e Terris Mollis ad astra Via
The Authors EPISTLE to his Honoured Friend TEM. Hermophrod. THis imperfect brat and Embryo of my brain was dedicated thine in its first con∣ception; it hath not been the la∣bour of many dayes, or the product of serious hours, but the repose of my minutiall vacancies; therefore as its travail hath been but short, and its birth basty, so it cannot evade the greatest monstrosity without the largest candor, which
as it cannot hope for from the world, whose eyes behold with pre∣judice, so this is not intended for it, but thee, who knows to enter∣tain a Truth though it cannot plead prescription, and embrace a veritie without a Panceroll. Su∣perstitious credulity will condemn me as a heretick, and by the world (whose native dialect is reproach) I stand excommunicated; I walk secure while Truth is my passport, and as long as I enjoy her for my gantlet, my station is above the reach of envy. If I have failed in my relation, I hope that Ingenuitie will extenuate the lapses of my minoritie, and I promise my more mature judgement shall correct what my flexible infancy hath un∣warily
imbibed. I cannot contest with Calumnies, nor know I for the stile of heretick, to return my ad∣versaries the name of Antichrist: that devotion I owe to knowledg, engageth me upon conviction to repeal by Writ of Errour what they accuse as heresie: till then my zeal must crave its libertie (the end being knowledge) cannot be suppressed; it hath many heads, which if it lose its current in one place, it will break forth into some other; thus Truth can triumph in its martyrdom, and being naked can best defend it self. Since the depravitie of the protoplast distraction hath been imposed upon the weal of know∣ledg, and the obstinacy of posterity
hath encreased it to a paroxysme of madness beyond the power of Hel∣lebore, unless the discretion and policie of future ages coerce cre∣dulitie, and commit to flames what our stubborn parents have obtru∣ded upon the tender infancie of their successours: Lame knowledge that expects no Cure Till books confess a Calenture. Every mans soul is his living li∣brary, whose activity must needs flagg in the channels of an other body, and whose wings are clipt whilst its nature is confined to a Ne plus ultra, and thus to ex∣pire in the arms of our fathers, is a slavery equalizing the torment of Mezentius. Dear Friend, that ingenuity I
alwaies found in thee whilst we were Chamber fellowes, doth pro∣mise to me thy connivance at those errours that shall occur, and a mi∣noration of grosser crimes to ve∣nial peccadilloes, and likewise an entertainment of the cradle-ser∣vice of this disguised brat, whose little desert, though it cannot ex∣pect thy perusall, yet its diligence to kiss thy hands, may merit thy acceptance, whereby he shall be en∣couraged to higher designes, whose highest ambition is to be. thy Friend to serve thee AG. CARPENTER. An Antidote Rideo. Fortiter contemno.
To Mr A. C. My much to be admired Friend, I Sufficiently know that these dropps of mine cannot add to that stream of Elo∣quence which hath such a cur∣rent through the veins of that little Book of thine; I pro∣nounce to the world that I am none of the least Travellers, neither have I so much de∣lighted in the smoak of my own chimney, as not to seek out the society of the most learned men: to finde thy se∣cond I despair; Epictetus Lan∣thorn
is superannuate: to rob the world of thy invention, were to degenerate and anti∣cipate the end of thy creation, which after-service to a diety is to gratifie thy friend. It is not the first favour I have begged, nor the greatest courtesie which I have received, if you honour the Press, and inform the World with your Soul, it will be enough for your Apologie to insert this unworthy paper, which will be sufficient testi∣mony that it was the impor∣tunate entreaty of Your Friend and servant HOGLANDUS de BOYS. Paris, May 3. 1652.
To Mr A. C. FEar not to let thy active spirit flie, 'Tis not thy own but others destinie; If Carpers carp, or rusticks keep a coile, The fairest face seems fairer for a foile. H. B.
In Pseuchographiam Anthropomagicam, . ABdit a mellipluis funduntur dicta labellis, O qui Paeoniaem demereare chelyn! Nil pareas populo reserans penetralia rerum, Ne fias rabidi praeda lupina chori? Siccine vecordis fugias suffragia plausûs, Dum cupis acclivem doctus inire viam? Non tibi polliceor fundos, viridaria, gemmas, Praemia nec rutuli fulgida vota Tagi. Hoc speres lectura tuos Philomuse, labores, Te decus Aurorae secula sera putent. Seria graendaevus tractet, juvenilia quisquis Se delirantem non cupit esse senem. Lusit sub trino annis eo. T.M.
To His much admired Friend, A. C. Upon the Publishing of that Ingenuous Peece, PSEƲCHOGRAPHIA ANTHROPOMAGICA. OThers on stilts may curvet out thy praise, My hiccop Muse can only belch out Lays: Her Sacrifice (brave Aesculape) I pray, Accept as Cocks to usher in thy day. Whilst others Volumes write, thou picklest here, Like Archimedes the Heavens in a Sphere: Their Elephantine Books will now want joynts To go, since thou hast cramped all their points: Such Iliads in a Nut-shell we may pent, So little kernell have they being all Lent: Here every word's Elixar, and our sense, In every phrase perceives a Quintessence: Giants no wonders are, thy Book's a Flag, Whose Pygmie stature will all others gag: Geryon's so admir'd, Triumvirate Is made by thee to be a common State. The Soul that Ile of man shewn us by thee, Enlargeth Learnings Maps, th' arts Heptarchee: A second Drake whose searches have at last, Put Girdles to the lesser worlds wide waste; Here's no Coranting, no Strapado phrase, Thy bays preserv'd thee from those thundring lays:
But words are weigh'd, and decently annext, Things as their natures are so well exprest: That this Topick an argument doth give, Thou truly hast a soul intuitive: Thou scorn'st those cripple Scholars which do rest In others words, swear Aristotles Text; Their steps do not thee fit, the childrens threes, Make no Cothurnus for a Sophocles: Charleton's translated Paradoxes three, Give way to thy mans Compound Ternaree; And though some think him worthy to be hist, Yet from these three we count thee Trismegist. G. Scot.
To the no lesse Honoured then Ingennuous Authour, A. C. WHat stupefactive Opium did infect The Protoplasts intuitive Intellect? Sure th' Apple was Narcotick, or some charm, Whose Magick did so powerfully transform The Microcosme, that it hath seem'd a dark And indigested Hylas, till this spark Of thy Impregnate spirit drives away That mist obscured the Tria omnia, Thou mak'st us know our selves, who untill now, Thought only we were men, not knowing how: Go on, (brave youth) let thy sublimed strains Inform th' Mercuriall moysture of those brains, Whose ruder apprehensions nere could fix yet, 'Bove Entelecheie's or an Ipse dixit: Sure, thy mere Divine Spirit was created, Whereas that others are but propagated; Which blessing that it may extend to thee, (Whereby Cognition might ebetter'd be) We could wish thee to some Heroick Madam, Unlesse thou art design'd to be the Adam. J. M.
PSEVCHOGRAPHIA ANTHROPOMAGICA. THat the nature of se∣verall species had their existence by creation is undeniable, and the humble concession of all ages, yet how inconsistent with their definition will easily be evi∣denced upon indifferent arbitra∣tion; for if the latitude of creation as they suppose consist in the pro∣duction of a thing whose tearm from which is nothing, then they must ampliate their vocabularie, and coyn some exotick name for mans production, whose principle was an entity, and his materials a subject consentaneous, of its own nature capable of that composure; for if the body of man be reducible to those originals by naturall chymi∣stry,
the law of contraries knows no naturall incapacity to its return, or inhability reopposing its regres∣sion: else our hopes of reviving a plant out of its ashes, would be as frivolous as our endeavours fruit∣less: and therefore Paracelsus opi∣nion of composing man in his A∣lembeck (though his insuccedable undertaking anticipated by the de∣stinies, and determined by the strength of Saturn, did not conclude directly,) yet his attempts herein were not unwarrantable, nor his conceit ridiculous: for the possibi∣lity of production not transcending the manuall contrivance of art, the effect had been no artificiall impo∣sture, we rather suppose creation to be terminated to the production of a new species, which before in na∣ture had no existence and genera∣tion: to challenge the successive con∣tinuation of those beings, each pri∣vate species were the reall effect of creation, but their succession knows
no other means but generation; for since the protoplast, the manner of our fouls production cannot be christened creation without a cata∣chreese, neither have we an alledg∣ment of reason for their exile from encrease and multiply, or a confine∣ment of the blessing to a limitation of the body. The essence of the soul as it fell not within the cognition of the Graecians, so it exceeded the nicest Mathematicks of the Arabians, and antidated the demonstration of later age, whose Opticks not reach∣ing beyond its operations, pitching upon its praecincts and bordering on the confines, do peremptorily determine its nature beyond dis∣pute, so that those honest endea∣vours at any time in the scrutiny of its nature, as they cannot evade the sentence of singularity, so they must expect the censure of curiosity, and their ingenuous imployments stand condemned by whole Councels as
not reaching beyond punctillioes. Surely posterity cannot but con∣demn the poverty of our concep∣tions, and admire the barrenness of our inventions, whose satisfied rea∣sons as far below the sublimed thoughts of antiquity, as coming short of the verity of its nature, sit down in an ignorant acquiescence and an implicit faith of obtruded opinion, & though the positions of heathens run not parallel with the nature of their souls, yet their ad∣vanced thoughts therein (which hi∣therto have degenerated into a sen∣sible imparement) have been so far from detracting from its dignity, that some thereto have not stuck to levell their devotions, who knew no other diety. And therefore the Caballists have defined it to be Lumen dei & ad imaginem verbi, Causa causarum primi exemplaris cre∣ata substantia, Dei sigillo{que} figurata, cujus character est verbum aeternum: this hath had patrons of later times
but surreptitiously fathered upon Predecessors: As Trismegist, (whose Antiquity is pretended, & the num∣ber of whose years is farre exceed∣ed by the usurped date of his Book) who derives its Pedigree from the highest Principle, Cap. 12. Poemand. conceives the Soul a drop of Gods Essence and an invisible Ray of the first Lumi∣narie. Aristotle confuted no lesse then a whole Jurie of Philosophers with an , and his Dixit, be∣ing evidence sufficient to prevail up∣on Posterity; whereto the Schools having prostituted their Reason by slavish Adherence, and engaged their Faith beyond Belief, intro∣duce his , to confute Expe∣rience, and controul Verity in her best Apparell. I am a Free-born Subject; and the Law of Nature which is indis∣pensible knows no slaverie: and therefore I shall now think it a breach of Devotion in suspecting
the truth of our Parents naked Po∣sitions, being not back'd with the infallible Testimony of Reason or Experience, and dissenting from them by adherence to more ratio∣nall probations, and more unde∣nyable principles; for none (I think) since the Magick of the Apple, could challenge to themselves the Popes Chair: as knowledge is not by Propagation, so infallibility (which requires the industry of ma∣ny Ages) is not by a Natural Suc∣cession or Inheritance. I could ne∣ver resolve my Reason into the Opi∣nion of Antiquity, or surrender my Experience upon a different deter∣mination; the bare assertions of the most Authentick have never been embraced by me as Oracles: there∣fore I shall assume the liberty a lit∣tle to unmask the Nature of the soul; an ample discovery whereof would deride the insufficiency of Galilaeus perspective. The Spirit Soul and Body are the
Tria omnia, the three Ingredients in the Composition of man: (had the Philosophers been sensible of the diversity of Soul and Spirit confounded by the Doctrine of A∣ristotle) and considered an alteriety of Nature in those two principles, their friendly society had not been impossible, nor their Opposition excluding reconcilement. The Spirit is the breath of God, which being at first the effect of Creation, hath been observant of the blessing, and successively con∣tinued by Propagation, and parti∣cipating of the nature of its prin∣ciple knowes not Mortality beyond a Metaphor: therefore the Primi∣tive Transgression did not induce a reall death, but a deperdition of happinesse, and a degeneration of the Spirit from a State as desi∣rable, as the present is deplor∣able. The Rational Soul being a Cor∣poreal Extract and disliged from its
grosser materials by the Chymi∣strie of Nature, derives its Original from the Seminal Emission of both Individuals; and by its essential heat doth Ferment the Coagulum, which receiving its vitality from the irradiating Archaeus, cannot dis∣semble that impresse whereby its suppositum is determined, which being the fertile effect of both Ge∣nitors will easily admit an united society with the soul of bruit, whose natures knowing no incompossibili∣ty, doe not exclude a Composition; and therefore will perform the con∣sequent effects of both Natures, which falls within the experience of those . In particular, of one Drinking Cats Blood, a pre∣scription for the Epilepsie, the Pa∣tient had his Paroxysmes; that as he imitated their cryes, so would catch at their preyes: and pursue the fortuitous evasion of the frisking Mouse: these Miscellaneous prin∣ciples ingrossing the radicality of
different forms, and meeting with Convenient promotion, their natu∣rall Consequences cannot be pre∣vented, without an induction of Cadmus Conflict, and an Hostile Subversion of both principles. Now to oppose the soul of our Saviour wanting a Coadjuvancy of both Sexes, is too weak to baffle so∣lid Reason, whose whole life as it was miraculous, so the Manner of his Production supernatural. The Rational soul is the Mercu∣rial moisture that marries the two extreams of Spirit and Body; Whose Affections are as Contrary as their natures are different; which after is remunerated with Vitality. For souls in their own Essence are insensible, till they be rowzed by the energie of the Spirit. And therefore the souls of Bruits being the same in Nature with that of man, but actuated with that more ignoble Spirit that moved upon the face of the waters, they come short
of mans perfections, and cannot de∣liver their Conceptions in verbal Expressions. There are no Essential differen∣ces in the souls of Creatures, being but attenuated bodies by effectual Calidity. Which according to the Efficacie of heat may move in a higher Orb of Perfection, and by vertue of the impregnating Spi∣rit may be raised an Animal; which without this subtiliating heat had rested in a lower Degree of Vegetation: and therefore the souls of Plants may challenge fra∣ternity with that of Bruits; and Verity will admit no other diffe∣rence but what is gradual, corre∣sponding the intensnesse of lumi∣nous Rayes. For Vegetables peep∣ing out of the pores of the earth the third day, when the Universe was equally sensible of the disper∣sed Rayes, which after being Con∣tracted to a Solary body, with greater Energie ferments the fuli∣ginous
Hylas: Which being sepa∣rated from those grosser Adherents, whose Entertainments impede the reception of Vitality, by this Mun∣dane Spirit have their Materials advanced to an animation: and therefore a more noble existence, as first of Fishes, did issue the con∣finement of these wandring Rayes. This Mercurial Moysture being but an Analogicall Spirit, cannot claim immortality without en∣croachment on higher Priviledges, and usurping the property of high∣er Natures; and therefore being onely sublimed by the Chymistrie of irregular intellectuals, whose truth knowes no Foundation in na∣ture, may enter the grave with the more unrefined Masse, and admit of a Resurrection, which being the immediate Recipient of life, is ter∣med life it self. We cannot define that Resurrection to whose exi∣stence immortality is appendant: as to the Spirit I am a Saducy, which
being incapable of a lapse, cannot be restaurable by a Rise, and never dying cannot be said to live again; yet to believe the Resurrection of the Body, and the life, is part of my Creed; and thus as the souls Mor∣tality is no impiety in sober Theo∣logie; so it is no riddle in judicious Philosophy: for he that shall but taste the strongest Spirits acquir∣able by naturall Chymistrie, may easily be convinced of the perfor∣mance of noble operations by ma∣terial principles, and its permeating each particular of the body in a time so imperceptible, as might ea∣sily impose that fallacy upon our sense, to determine its motion in∣stantaneous. The Rational soul is determined to the visible Masse, commonly so called the body: whose too contra∣cted nature cannot confine the Spi∣rit; (hence was it that the Platonists conceded to it a kind of Ubiquity) for reason will not admit of any
operation, where we deny the Es∣sential presence of the Agent: and that there are extrinsecal effects, appears in the formation of the Em∣bryo; and in fascination performed beyond the visible body, and Or∣ganical circumscription; which can∣not be executed by Mediation of qualities; for nature knows no such Deputy; 'tis ignorance that first gave the name of Accident. That there are Effluviums stee∣ming from every visible Body, must be conceded, as falling under the demonstration of Experience, and prostituted by later invention of Perspectives. These Effluviums being the Badgers of heat, (desert the cum∣bersome society of Reason) which flying in the Aire, may occur their Assimilables; and by the pregnan∣cy of the Spirit may attain a visi∣bility issuing from the union of hose dis-joynted peeces, as appear at the instance of death; for those
Spectrums and Wafts are but the Effect of the Spirits fertility co∣operating with the heat and Re∣liques of moysture; the Emission of particles at that time being most copious. For Death (being to de∣cide the Controversie, and to deter∣mine the Combate of the disease and nature) encreaseth the heat, and agitating those corporeal Par∣ticles into Atomical Interstitiums, accompanyeth them into the Aire; where meeting with a proportion∣able number, salute each other; the Particles in this confused medley being not unmindful of their Of∣fice and Nature, seek out their pro∣per situation, mould themselves in∣to such a Method as not to dissem∣ble their former shape; but meet∣ing with something dismembring its imperfect reunition, or wanting Cement to retain them in this posi∣tion, are presently shattered into invisible Existencies. Yet the Spi∣rit as before Death, so after associ∣ates
these divided Emissions till their heat confesse a period: so af∣ter bodies are interred, the Reliques of heat (which as it is well nigh insensible, so the operations are more feeble) doth excite a conti∣nued succession of these Atoms: which being as formerly ferment∣ed, and united by a Mummial Bal∣some, are those Noctambuloes that hover about the Cenotaphes, and haunt the Dormitures of the dead: but the Spirit sensible of a perpe∣tuated impairment of heat in those Particles, and their invitation being too weak to obtain a grant of con∣tinuance from the Spirit, they dis∣lodge their society; and the Spirit returns to him that gave it; where the sentence of their future condi∣on, as it is infallible, so their hopes confirmed in the Center of happi∣nesse knowes no stagger to the cir∣cumference, or their wavering fears confined unto despair, are freed from that possibility, which is at∣tendant
on its adlidgements. Thus our Saviour as he envies not the happines of Saints, so he is not inju∣rious to the Justice of his Father, to gratifie the Conceit of Origen, and sue for a release from hell, or ob∣tain a Parole from the second Death: and therefore the raising of Lazarus, probably, was but the determining of his Spirit to the visible Masse; which otherwise was levaltoing in the scattered pieces. So the Spirits of wicked men (ac∣companying the steeming Emissi∣ons, being wanderers in the Aery Region, and their continuance there being determined by the du∣ration of heat in those Particles. Which truth, excluding Conceal∣ment from Satans Opticks, knows not retirement from his Cogniti∣on, is waiting the Confinement of their Pilgrimage to a condition as immutable as their punishment in∣conceiveable; and hence he receives the Baptism of the Prince of the air.
Reason and Memory are not es∣sential to the Soul but the purchase of man, and the deplorable effect of his own invention, which af∣ter that Theomachy and con∣test with Heaven was obtruded up∣on posterity, and must be embra∣ced as a penalty; and though we concede to Adam this continuating Mercuriall moysture, yet as he was the proper product of his Creator, his perfection was as ignorant of reason, as his innocency should have known no punishment, and there∣fore whilst he retained his primi∣tive station, his knowledg (as being little beholden to this torturing rea∣son which after obscured those clearer apprehensions of his intel∣lect) was intuitive, whereby inferi∣our beings received their names not different from their natures, where if he had remained he had not stood in need of Logick, or bin beholden to a Syllogisme; his essence being the rule of proportion to determine,
conclusions are the effect of sin, whose truth have their foundation in the spirit, which being there sim∣ply apprehended as they are in themselves, have the same verity as in divine essence, and therefore the things themselves owe their errours and misconceptions to the extrava∣gant exorbitancies of reason. So Memory an attendant of Rea∣son, which being a superinduction of the same cause imposed upon the soul, and arresting inferiour brutali∣ty, could not reach the spirit with∣out impeachment of its priviled∣ges, and subverting the nature of its essence, which being framed accor∣ding to the first Idaea, must needs exclude the impossible society of imperfection: fo in a sleep the ra∣tional soul involving matter, re∣quires this refreshment, and then being insensible of the spirits ope∣rations, acts in the organs, as with in∣dependency of reason so of memo∣ry, oft delivers in vocall expressions
which exceeds the record of the actor, and is recited by some diffe∣rent auditor: Thus Amorists are their own betrayers, and malefa∣ctors expose themselves beyond suspition, and in such extaticall conditions we approximate primi∣tive integrity, and seem to antici∣pate the malice of the Serpent; for thus the spirit being sequestered from the obscurements of reason, is presently rapt into a third Heaven: whose essence being as immateriall as its nature is indefatigable, needs no such refreshment, nor can it sleep without a miracle, and some opium from its Creator: therefore we do not read that Adam slept, but that God cast him into a deep sleep, that he might be insensible of his hel∣pers production; So Adams sleep was not true sleep, as not proceed∣ing from nature for his proper con∣servation, but from an externall Narcotick, for the production of a second, the ruine of his posterity.
After this divorce betwixt the Spirit and its adherents, there is no immediate possession of Beatificall Vision, nor actuall enjoyment of happinesse beyond a sentence, but are detained in a middle Mansion, till the Resurrection, which then shall be compleated when our Sa∣viour's intercession shall terminate in that heavenly , Come you blessed of my Father. So the dam∣ned in this Condition fore-sees the futurity of his punishment, from which there is no reprieve or release till Eternity be con∣tracted, and Ubiquity confesse a Circumscription: and therefore from the Moment of Separation, (the unalterable Decree being ushered in with final Despair) their being is a torment, and the time of Death their Criticall day: which at the Resurrection ends in a Pa∣roxysm, when hopes of Declinati∣on shall be as fruitlesse as its period is impossible.
For I do not conceive the infli∣ction of a positive torment, either on the damned Spirits, or the De∣vils themselves, till the day of judg∣ment; and that the Devil knew the designation of time for punishment, appears upon his Expostulation with our Saviour: Why art thou come to torment us before the time? They have only now restraining shackles, which Eternity will advance to bonds of punishment. I doe not mean any Purgatorie by this middle Mansion, where there is a possibility of Repentance or Redemption; but a higher Court of Gods Justice and mercy; where the unalterable Decree of the Synod of Trinity is Declared; where the Spirits in this Condition wait till the Resurrection, when as the Blessed shall possesse their Ju∣bilee; so the damned shall enjoy their Vulture. Thus being not tyed to the wheel of Authority, I am not sworn to
maintain their motion: but being hurried by the Primum Mobile of my private reason, I become irre∣gular, yet shall not repine at the Name of Heretick: I am not mar∣ried to any opinion, whereby I of∣ten make rubs in the levelled axi∣oms of Predecessors, and disturb the tranquillity of those unlimitted Oracles of Antiquity. Intellectual Slaveries have too much anticipa∣ted Geniall Dispositions; and an Implicit faith of obtruded opini∣on have debarred them the ambiti∣on of Discoverers. Much Faith makes Truth despair, Salvation, see, Comes ushered in with Infidelitie. An Infidel is the best Proficient in the School of Nature, whose Inquisition is not measured by the Endeavours of his Fathers, nor can his Free-born soul brook those Ma∣nacles whereby its power is re∣strained, and its devotion limited. Me think it is an ingenuous cruelty
whereby we may bring our Mo∣ther Nature to a Confession of her Secrets, though she run the hazard of embowelling, or the most bloo∣dy exenteration, and an act of Cha∣rity be a more direct line or clew of improved Reason to free our Ancestors treading in this Tract; but lost (by a weary pursuit of the cold sent of truth) in her labyrinths: I honour the Ashes of our Prede∣cessors, yet cannot dispence with that Superstition of Devotion or Adherence: where truth looks two wayes, to pin our credulous souls upon their sleeves, would deprive us of our Infranchisement we ob∣tained by the right of our Creati∣on; the very end whereof doth en∣title us to knowledge: and there∣fore a soul that is not tyed to in∣tellectuall slaveries, in the Geogra∣phy of knowledge will confute that conceit of Hercules Pillars, and a Ne plus ultra is but fantastical Dream to his more nice and subtle
scrutinies; therefore I could exte∣nuate that imputed crime of Nero's Matricide, the improvement of of his knowledge being the end of his ingenuous cruelty, to determine the Cabinet of his Conception. Truth is not ingrossed by aged Pa∣rents; there is an America of know∣ledge yet unfound out, discoverable by the endeavours of some wiser Columbus, and the promised fertili∣ty of succeeding Ages. Those un∣succedable attempts of our inculti∣vated Intellectuals, must needs stand condemned by the more sublimed Reason and acute Phi∣losophy of Posterity: Whereby our Primitive imparement by additio∣nal Degrees of a betterment may obtain a parole from ignorance, and procure a Reverse to the first perfection. For if this be true, that the order and course of Na∣ture is Circular, and that souls in Revolution of time receive a
sensible improvement in their Cog∣nition. Then surely succession in Nature must needs carry De∣grees of Perfection, and the last man must be an Adam. FINIS.
