D527 e536_15 99864735 164831
The Declaration AND ENGAGEMENT OF THE Commanders, Officers, and Seamen in the Shippes, under the Command of the Right Honourable the EARLE of Warwicke in the Downes, declaring their free concurrence in the Remonstrance of the Lord Fairfax, and the Army under his Command. ALSO, A Representation of the Forces under the Command of the Honourable Sir Mi∣chaell Livesey, Commander in Chiefe in the County of KENT: Declaring their free Concurrence in the Re∣monstrance of the Lord Generall FAIRFAX, and the Army under his Command. Decemb. 28 LONDON, Printed for John Playford at his shop in the Inner-Temple. Decem. 28. 1648.
DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM depiction of a device consisting of an open book with a swword, scepter, and surrounding motto To the Right Honourable Thomas Lord Fairfax, Generall over all the Parlia∣ments Forces at the Head-quarters London, these present. Right Honourable, WE have had the honour late∣ly to receive foure Letters, with the Armies Remonstrance, all from your Excellencies Councel, with which our hearts and Affections doe freely con∣curre as well as any, know ing the things therein expressed are just and good, for we doe verily beleeve the bloud of these precious ones which hath been spilt since this warre, even like water on the ground, cryeth aloud for the speed y execution of justice upon all such who shall be found guilty hereof: And as the bloud of the Innocent cryeth loud for justice,
so we are confident that many thousands oppressed, groane under their intollerable burthens, having long expected to be eased thereof, which God in mercy give deliverance to all. We are sorry the said Letters came no sooner to our hands before our Fleet was dispersts, which if they had, God permitting, we should cheerfully have improved our inrerest to the utmost to have answered your Excellency, with the Honourable Councels present expectations. But now we are but foure Ships here in the Downes; The St George, Vnicorne, Mary-rose, and Fellowship. The reasons of our not declaring at present, is namely the Lord Admirals absence from us, for that we thinke our selves obliged in duty to his Lordship, as our Head, to motion the same first to his Honour, hoping to have his concurrence therein, knowing we are bound in Conscience acting under his Lordships power to observe all his just and lawfull Commands. We doe heartily wish and desire there may be a faire correspondency between his Lord∣ship and your Excellencie: That as the Lord hath been pleased to use both your Honours as instruments of much good to these poore distracted shaken Kingdomes; so our prayers shall be, that God Almighty from that fulnesse which is in himselfe, would fill you more and more with himselfe: whereby your Honours hearts, together with all the faithfull, may be united as one man, to live and dye to∣gether in the Cause of God and peoples Liberties, against all oppositions whatsoever. Now as God hath been plea∣sed to set this upon our hearts, so we may confidently assure your Excellency the same hath root in the hearts of many other the Commanders of our Fleet, and not only in us and them, but in many other the Officers and Sea-men
under our Respective Commands. Thus much we humbly thought our selves obliged to hint forth to your Excellency in answer to these received; and we hope so long (by Gods assistance) as we have hearts and hands, they shall be lift up for Gods glory, and the Kingdomes good, being confident God will perfect his owne worke in his time to his owne glory: for we have had many pledges of his favour and goodnesse in owning your Excellency and that Army, against all the opposition of yours and our enemies. We have likewise seen his power, Love and Goodnesse, to the Fleet under our Generall the Lord Admirall in the late Expedition, even to the Admi∣ration of men, and astonishment of our enemies. Now the God of Heaven, who is wisedome it selfe, fill your Coun∣cels with the wisedome that is from above, which is first pure, then peaceable. We shall now humbly beg leave of your Excellency to subscribe our selves as we desire to be, St George in the Downes, Decem. 24. 1648. Your Excellencies most humble servants to command, Robert Moulton. Richard Haddocke. Thomas Harrison. Fra: Penne.
The engagement of the Commanders, Officers and Seamen of the Ship Vnicorne, under the Command of Captain Richard Haddock Vice-Admirall for the Fleet Commanded by Robert Earle of Warwick, Lord High Admirall of England, against the revolted Ships, and all adhering to them now in Hostility against the Parliament. WHereas it hath pleased the Honourable Houses of Parliament in consideration of the late revolt of divers Ships of the Navy, and their desperate designes against the Cause of God, which the the Parlia∣ment (we do assured beleeve) doth maintain, and do afford the Navie divers weighty and worthy motives and incou∣ragements to oppose that parts, and from the bloudy and barbarous of the Apostate Ships, so especially from the worth of our Liberties as Subjects, and Religion as Christians; We the Commanders, Officers, and Seamen in the Ship Vnicorne, do not from any slavish Principles of Respects, feare, or credit, but voluntarily and freely from the bottome of our hearts and consciences subscribe to live and die with the Honourable Earle of Warwick, now Lord High Admirall of England, in this present engage∣ment, for the preservation of the publique good, and the maintenance of that Covenant which we have formerly taken: testimony whereof we subscribe our hands. Subscribed by above 350.
To His Excellency Tho: Lord Fairfax, Lord Generall of all the Forces raised in the Kingdome of ENGLAND, and Dominion of WALES. The humble Representation of us the Officers of the Forces under the Command of the Honourable Sir Michael Liuesey, Commander in Chiefe in the County of Kent, in the behalfe of our selves and the Souldiers under our Com∣mand. Sheweth, THat we have as deep, and large a sense as any sort of men whatsoever of the blessings of God going along with your Excellency in your just and righteous undertakings, wading through so ma∣ny Seas, and passing over so many Mountaines of difficul∣ties, in regard of the many bloudy designes, and contrive∣ments, and the cruell, implacable, and restlesse rage of the open Enemy; as also, the odious A postacy of seem∣ing friends; yet through the exceeding mercy of God towards you, and the Army under your Command, in bearing up, and incouraging your Hosts, even to admira∣tion, and all honest hearts rejoicing, the Lord hath crow∣ned you and the Army with many great and glorious vi∣ctories and successes, both in the first and late Wars: And when as the Lord was pleased to determine the quarrell of the enemy against them in their subversion, and vouch∣safing you once more an opportunity, and put it into your hearts to thinke of, and to endeavour after such things as might conduce and lead unto a happy settlement of this poore distressed, and almost dying Nation, (occasioned by
a bloudy, treacherous, and wilfull enemy,) Your Excel∣lency and Councell of War were pleased in order here∣unto lately to present unto the house of Commons a Re∣monstrance, and latter Declarations, which we having se∣riously weighed, and considered of the excellency, just∣nesse, and reasonablenesse thereof, we do fully correspond, and give our hearts approbation thereunto: And in an especiall manner, in order to your desires therein, We earnestly desire that justice may impartially be executed on all offendors, from the greatest to the least, as well upon the Person of the King, as others; And that the prosecu∣tion thereof may be vigorous and without delay, for de∣laies (by sad and frequent experience) have proved to be of a very dangerous nature, and pernicious consequence and tendency; And thereby have rarely recovered, or gained the like, or same opportunity. In order to the prosecution of all which, we do jointly and unanimosly declare unto your Excellency, that we both are, and shall he ready (as God shall enable us) to engage our selves as your Excellency shall command, and direct us, that these things may be effected. And we professe we shall not judge or account our lives, or derest injoyments neare unto us, so that our deare and native Countrey may live, and be delivered out of those miseries and calamities that have so often, and so long threatned its ruine and destruction; And that Tyranny, Oppression, and injustice might be removed and supplanted, and the just, deare bought Liberties and Freedomes of the Commoners of England may re∣turne unto them; That this Nation may once more be happy, and crowned with blessednesse, which shall be the earnest, cordiall, and constant breathings and desires of we, who do subscribe our selves the Petitioners, and your Excellencies most humble and faithfull servants. FINIS.
