D647 e452_39 99864344 161976
THE DECLARATION Of the Citizens of LONDON, In Answr To the Demands and Proposals of the Committee of the House of COMMONS, conerning a Personall Treaty with the KINGS MAJSTY. And their Resolution touching the dispo∣sing of H MAESTIE Royall Person, in case the King and Parliament doth not agree. Likewise, the Acts and Resolutions of the Honourabe Cout a Guil-Hall, cncerning the Cities Engagement to preserve and defend the Kings Majesties Royall Person. REad in the Honorable Court at Guild-Hall, and appointed to be forthwith prited and publshed. MICHEL. blazon of the City of London, consisting of a shield bearing the cross of St. George (patron saint of England) with a sword (emblem of the martyrdom of St. Paul, patron saint of London) in the first quarter of the shield July 15 London, Printed for G. HORTON, MDCXLVIII.
The Declaration & Propositions in the name of the Commons of England, to the Com∣mittee of the Common-Councell of the Ci∣ty of London, concerning an Agreement between the King, Parliament, City, and Kingdome. THe Commons of England assembled at West∣minster, having received several Petitions from the City of London, and the Counties adjacent, for a safe and wel-grounded peace between the King and His People; for the effecting whereof a Committee was appointed to treat with a Committee of the Common-Councell of the City of London, for bringing of the Kings Majesty to a Personall Treaty, to the end, that all differences may be composed, and this distracted and lan∣guishing kingdom, setled in a peaceable and flourishing con∣dition; the Debates, Results, and proceedings at Guild-hall, between the Members of the House of Commons, and the Common-Councell of the City of London, are here inserted verbatim, Viz. The said honourable Committee did desire that the Mili∣tary Forces, and the Court of Common-Councel, would sa∣tisfie them what they intend and meane by those words in the Petition of the Military-Officers, wherein the petition
of the Common councel to the Parliament do concur, viz. That the King and Parl. may meet and treat with honour, freedom honour, and safety, according to the ancient fundamentall consti∣tutions of this Kingdome. To this the Committee of the Common councel made an∣swer as followeth, viz. By these words, we man, That the King and Parliament may meet and treat free from force or violence, which we conceive to be according to the ancient Fundamental constitutions of this kingdom. The said honorable Committee did further desire, that he Committee of Common councel would satisfie them, what is meant by these words, viz. That they wil defend His Maj. Royal Person and the Parl. during the Treaty, according to the Covenant. The Committee of Common councell did give Answer thereunto as followeth, viz. By those words To defend the King and Parl. according to the Covenant) we meane, That during the Treaty, we will defend the King and Parliament (as much as in us lieth free from all force and violence. The said honorbl Committee did further desire, that the Committee of Common councel should satisfie them what they intend and man in the petition of the Military Offi∣cers, by the word [Freedom] in the last clause, and likewise what they mean by these words otherwise interrupt.) To this the Committee of the Comon councell gave the severall answers following, viz. By the word (Freedome) we understand free from force and violence, and by the words (otherwise interrupt) we mean all hostile forces what; soever; the which answers were approved of by this Court. The said honorable Committee did further propound, that in case the Parliam. shall make choice of this City to be the place of the Treaty, and that the Common councell on the behalf of the City, do ingage themselves to defend both King
and Parl. from violence during the Treaty, Whether the City will maintain their Guards at their own charge. To which the Comittee of Common-councel did an∣swer, that the same being a matter of charge, must bee resol∣ved by Common councel, and that they would acquaint the Common-councell therewith; concerning this question, this Court did take the same into their serious considerati∣on, and after some debate had thereupon, this Court decla∣red, that if the said intended Treaty be in London, that then the City will for the present defray the charge for the main∣taining of the Military Guards for the purpose aforesaid, duing the Treaty, and afterwards refer themselves to the King and Parliament for satisfaction thereof. The said Hnourble Committee did further propose, that in case the King shall not consent and agree to such things as shall be propounded and insisted on by both Houses of Par∣liament, in this Treaty for a sa e and wel grounded Peace, [whether they will undertke and engage that the Person of the King shall be disposed of, as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.] To which the said Committee of Common Councel did answer as followeth, viz. Uder the favour of this Honoura∣ble Committee, we cnnot understand by the Order of the Honorable Huse of Commons, which was deliveed unto us for this Treaty that there is any thing theein menioned, tending to that which is by this Honorabl Committee pro∣pounded, concerning the delivery up of the King in case the King and Parliament did not agree. And the said Honorable Committee did further declare, That they were not satisfied with this answer concerning the dis∣posing of the Kings person in case the King and Parliament did not agree; and did expect a further answer. To which the Committee of Common councel did an∣swer
and say, That they would acquaint the Common coun∣cell therewith; concerning which propsiion, this Court did take the same into their serious consideration, and upon a full and large debate thereupon, did declare, that in case the said intended Treaty shall be in Lodon, and that His Majesty and His Parliament should not agree (which God forbid) then they conceive themselves bound to submit to the wis∣dom of both Houses of Parliament. The said honorable Committee did likewise desire, That the Committee of Common Councell, and the Military Officers, should satisfie them in what manner, and by what meanes they wil make good their engagement, by defending the King and Parlia∣ment against all violence. To which the Committee of Common-councel made an∣swer and propoundeth as followeth, viz. We do declare, & we are ready according to our Engagement, (as much as in us lyeth) by the Trained Bands of the City, and the late Lines of Communication to guard and defend the King and Par∣liament from all force and violence. And to the end that we may be inabled to perform the same, wee do humbly offer, That the Ordinance for the uniting of the Military Forces within the late Lines of Communication, and the Parishes of the Weekly Bills of Mortality, to the Forces of the City, to be one intire Militia, may be speedily passed. That the Militia may be enabled to raise such other for∣ces as they shall find needfull, to carry them through this service; And that no other forces may be raised, or made use of within this City and late Lines of Communication, but by Authority of the said Militia by consent of Common-Councell. To consider that our dangers are either from without or within, and therefore propounded, viz. For those without,
that for our better security in guarding the King and Parlia∣ment, we desire that some course may be taken as shall be thought fit by Wisdom of Parliament, that no Forces in Armes may come within 30. miles of London during the time of the Treaty; And for those within, that what prson or persons soever shall make any Tumult, Insurrect on or disturbance, during the time of this Treaty, after Proclama∣tion made, it shall be death. That if the wisdom of Parliament shall think fit, that none that have born Armes against the Parliament, or have or shall contribute thereunto, shall be permitted during the said Treaty to come within 30. miles of London, without leave of the Parliament had or to be had. Concerning this desie or proposition of the said Honou∣rable Committee, this Court doth approve of the Answers thereunto and Propositions made touching the same, And this Court doth Order that the said Committee of Com∣mon councell shall communicate unto the said Honorable Committee, the aforesaid Answers and Propositions of this Court to be by them presented unto both Houses of Parlia∣ment. And also to dclare unto them, that it it is the humble desire of this Court, that the said Treaty may be with all ex∣pedition, for the preventing of further inconveniencies. And likewise that this Court will do their endeavours (if the sid Treaty be in London) for the finding out of some conveni∣ent place within the City for that purpose, and such other ac∣comodations as shall be fitting. It is ordered by this Common councel, That the Com∣mon-councel-men and Commanders, or such as they shall appoint, shall within their several Precincts, either by calling all the Inhabitants before them, or by going from houe to house receive their concurrence to the said Engagement by subscription of their Names. MICHEL.
Commune Concilium tent. in camera Guildhald. civit. London, duodecimo die Julii, 1648. An∣no{que} Regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae, &c. Vicesimo quarto. IT is Ordered by this Court, That the Com∣mittee appointed by the Common Councell the 6 day of this instant Juy, to confer with the Commite assigned by Order of the House of Commons, concerning the ingagement of this City for the safey of King and Parliament, during the intended Traty, shall forthwith take care to disperse unto the Aldermen, De∣puties, Common-councel men, and Commanders in the respective Wards within this City, the Acts and Resolutions of this Court touching the same Engagement passed the 11. day of this Moneth, &c. Michel. FINIS.
