D611 e436_19 99871413 161617
A DECLARATION OF HIS Highnesse the DUKE OF YORKE His going away from St. JAMSES. AND Concerning the Right Honourable the Earle of NORTHƲMBERLAND, from whom he went. April 22. 1648. Imprimatur Gil. Mabbot. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, neere the Queens-head Tavern. 1648.
A DECLARATION OF His HIGHNESSE the DUKE OF YORKE His going away from St. Jamses. ON Friday night, April 21. 1648. The Right Honourable the Earl of Northum∣berland, having been forth, returned to Saint Jamses about eight a Clocke at night, and found the Duke of York with his Brother in his chamber. His Lordship waiting upon his High∣nesse, entertained some discourse with him
for a time; and afterwards withdrew. The Duke (after that) went into his sisters chamber, and spent some time in mirth with the young Ladies. Betweene nine and ten of the clocke, The Earle of Northumberland went to his highnesse Chamber, to see him go to bed ac∣cording as his Lordship used to doe about that time. And finding the Duke not there, suppos∣ing that hee might bee playing with the Gentlewomen, as he used to doe His Lord∣ship sent Mr. Sammon to see for the Duke. But His Highnesse not comming, The Earle sent another Messenger, and a third, and so more, to looke in all places, suppos∣ing that he might perhaps have hid himselfe somewhere; as he had often done in sport, to make them looke for him. Yet after all this no news could be brought to certifie where the Duke was, Then his Lordship made strict inquiry who had seene him last, and where hee was. And is was advertised that he was within
little more then halfe an houre before, with the Gentlewomen playing and very mer∣ry. It was also further certified, That a little before that time hee had gone downe the backe staires, and was passing the entry to∣wards the garden, where Mr. Howard, and Mr. Owen, two of his Gentlemen that wait∣ed on him, then were talking. And that the Duke seeing of them there did presently returne up the staires againe. Whereby it was (after he was gone) sup∣posed that he came then downe with an in∣tent to have gone away, but finding those Gentlemen there, was prevented. It was also advertized that the Duke had that evening called to the Gardenner for the key of a backe door, that was a private way into the Garden, very seldome known to be openned, whereupon it was supposed that he went away that way. Hereupon search was made in the Gar∣dens, and all about the Parke, but none could give any Intelligence at all concerning him. But in the Garden, by the said private
doore, There were the prints of mens feete which seemed to have lately troden there, And there were some of the feete seemed ve∣ry small, which they supposed to bee the Dukes treading. These feetings were trased through the Garden, and every way over the Parke, And on the other side of the parke towards the Cherry-garden, And they found on the other side of the Parke (against the Garden) the like prints of such feetings as were at the first door which was suspected in the Gar∣den. But they could here no further which way His Highnesse should be gone. Then the Earle of Northumberland sent that night to all places from whence he could suppose hee might expect assistance, to the finding and bringing of the Duke back. His Lordship sent a Messenger to the Speaker of the House of Commons, and another Messenger to the Lord Generall; He sent also to the Earle of Warwick, To the Lord Mayor of the City of London, And to Collonell Barkestead, And Colonell Rich, That so hee might have all the assistance
which might bee for the looking after him His Lordship (also) caused a search to be made of his Servants, and the Gentlemen, and all persons of the house to see who were missing, but found not one wanting. The Groome was called and search of the Horses made, and there were not one Horse missing, but all safe in the Stables. Also concerning the Duke, It was found that Hee went away without Cloake, or Coate, and in His Hose and Shooes. And although His Lordship had had as much strictnesse as could be, to keep suspect∣ed persons from comming to the Duke, yet he made inquiry what persons they could thinke of that might be suspected, that had lately beene with Him some few dayes be∣fore. And upon inquiry, no account could be given of any that they could suspect. Yet His Lordship was acquainted that there were (the day before) as the Duke was crossing the way, two poor men that had kis∣sed his highnes hand, seeming to be very poor
mean fellowes; But they had not time to speak much to him; only some few words, the discourse being so short, that (it was thought) they could not have time to doe a∣ny thing in relation to this design, but what those men were it is not known. Herein his Lordship endeavoured all that possibly he could for finding out the busines, but could not be satisfied in any thing. Now it is so, that the Earl of Northumber∣land did never undertake to be answerable for the Duke; And so much his Lordship did declare to the Parliament, upon the former intercepted Letters, which discovered his in∣tentions to make an escape before. But according to the desires of the Houses his Lordship hath used the utmost of his en∣deavours to prevent it. FINIS
