E2367B E419_32 R204655 99899983 132711
THREE ORDINANCES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: 1 For defraying the Sallaries and Charges of the Committee, and Sub-Committees of Ac∣compts. 2 Appointing the Committees of Sequestrations in the severall Counties of England and Wales, spee∣dily to deliver in an Accompt of all the sequestra∣ted Lands and Goods, and how they have been dis∣posed of. 3 Of the names of the Peers added to the Committee of the Navy and Customs. Die Veneris, 17 Decemb. 1647. ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That these Ordinances be forthwith printed and published. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.
Die Veneris, 17 Decemb. 1647. An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament, for defraying the Salaries of the Officers, and necessary incident charges of the Committee, and Sub-Committees for taking the Accompts of the whole Kingdome. VVHereas the Arrears due unto the State upon severall Accompts out of which the salaries of the severall Registers, Accomptants, and other Offi∣cers of the Committee, and Sub-Committees for taking the Accompts of the whole Kingdom, and the necessary incident Charges of the said Committee, and Sub-Committees for House Rent where they fit for that Service, Books, Pa∣per, and the like, should be defrayed, have been by divers late Ordinances of Parliament dispo∣sed of in most Counties to the use of the said Counties, or otherwise, or else are payable to
proper Treasurers formerly appointed by Order or Ordinance of Parliament, whereby the taking of the said Accompts is much obstructed; and like to fall to the ground for want of Monies to defray the Officers salaries, and the necessary incident charges of the said Committee, and Sub-Committees; Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Chamberlain of London for the time being, shall have power to receive Arrears due upon any Accompt taken before the Commit∣tee for taking the Accompts of the whole King∣dom. And that the severall Treasurers appoint∣ed by the Committee, and Sub-Committees of Accompts in any County, to receive the Arrears due upon Accompts within the said County, shall have power and authority by vertue of this present Ordinance to receive all Arrears, discovered, and found by them to be due upon any Accompt taken by them in those respective Counties, notwithstanding any former Ordi∣nance, or Ordinances to the contrary. And the said Chamberlaine of London, and the said Trea∣surers, shall from time to time out of the said Arrears pay unto the severall Officers, and
other persons imployed by the said Committee, and respective Sub-Committees, such summe or summes of money for their Salary and pains, as have or shall be allowed them according to the Ordinance of the 26. of June, 1645. and to defray the necessary incident Charges of the said Committee, and Sub-Committees for House Rent where they sit for that Service, Books, Paper, &c. and shall pay all the overplus of the said arrears (if any be) unto the proper Treasurers appointed by any Act or Ordinance yet in force to the uses therein limited. And that in case the Arreares due upon Ac∣compts payable to the Chamberlaine of London, shall not be sufficient to defray the said Salaries and necessary incident charges of the Officers of the Committee for taking the Accompts of the whole Kingdome; That then the fifteene hun∣dred pounds formerly appointed to be paid unto them out of the Excise, by an Ordinance of the fifth day of June last past, shall be paid to them accordingly, otherwise the said Ordinance for the said fifteen hundred pounds shall be void and null.
Provided that the severall summes of money to be issued out for the payment of the Salaries of the Officers of the Committee and Sub-Com∣mittees for taking the Accompts and the incident Charges aforesaid, shall be from time to time is∣sued out by the said Chamberlaine of London, and the severall respective Treasurers aforesaid, by Warrant under the hands of the Committee for taking the Accompts of the whole Kingdom, or any five of them, to such person or persons as shall be comprised in the said Warrants; And that the said Warrant or Warrants, together with the Acquittances of the said person or per∣sons therein comprised, shall be a sufficient dis∣charge unto the said Chamberlaine and Treasu∣rers for the severall summes so issued. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Veneris, 17 Decemb. 1647. IT is Ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the Earl of Northumberland, Earl of Kent, Earl of Rut∣land, Earl of Pembrook, Earl of Nottingham, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Denbigh, Earl of Manchester, Earl of Mulgrave, Earl of Stanford, Lord Viscount Say & Seal, Lord Dacres, Lord La-Warr, Lord Wharton, Lord North, Lord Montigue, Lord Gray de Warke, Lord Howard of Estrick, Lord Herbert, and Lord Bruce, and the Committee for the Navy and Customs, already constituted and appointed, or any five or more of them, shall be a Committee for the Navy and Customes, and are hereby authorized to doe all such Act or Acts, and execute all such power as is, or hath been formerly granted to the Committee of the Navy and Customes, by any Order or Ordinance of both Houses of Parlia∣ment. Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Veneris, 17 Decemb. 1647. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That all Committees of Sequestrations in the se∣verall Counties of England and Wales, do take care that all sequestrated Lands in the said seve∣rall Counties be improved to the utmost values, and that they put in execution the former Or∣ders made by both or either of the Houses of Parliament concerning the same, and that they speedily deliver in an Accompt of all the seque∣stred Lands and Goods within the said Coun∣ties, and what hath been made thereof, and how the same have been disposed, according to the Ordinances made for Accompts unto the severall Sub-Committees of Accompts in the said seve∣rall Counties, before the first day of March next ensuing, or otherwise deliver in all their Ac∣compts aforesaid unto the Committee for taking the Accompts of the whole Kingdome, before the five and twenty day of March next com∣ming. Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliament. FINIS.
