E2548 38875608 152258
The Declaration agreed upon by the Committee of the House of Commons appointed to sit in the Guildhall in London, to consider of the safety of the Kingdom, and of the City of London. And of the preserving the Priviledges of Parliament. Master Wilde Serjeant at Law, sitting in the Chaire of that Committee. 6. Jan. 1641. WHereas the Chambers▪ Studies, and Truncks of M. Hollis, Sir Arthur Hasle∣rige, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, Members of the House of Com∣mons, upon Munday the 3. of this instant January, by colour of His Majesties Warrant have been sealed up by Sir William Kilegrey, and Sir William Flemen and others; which is not only against the Priviledge of Parliament, but the common Liberty of e∣very Subject: Which said Members afterwards, the same day were under the like colour, by Serjeant Frances, one of His Majesties Serjeants at Arms, contrary to all former Pre∣sidents and Priviledges of Parliaments demanded of the Speaker, sitting in the House of Commons to be delivered unto him, that he might Arrest them of High Treason: And whereas afterwards the next day His Majesty in His Royall Person came to the said House attended with a great multitude of men armed in warlike manner, with Halberts, Swords, and Pistolls, who came up to the very door of the house, and placed themselves there, and in other places and passages neer to the said house, to the great terrour and disturbance of the Members thereof, then sitting, and according to their dutie, in a peaceable and or∣derly manner, treating of the great Affairs of England and Ireland: And his Majesty having placed himself in the Speakers Chair, demanded of them the Persons of the said Members to be delivered unto him, which is a high Breach of the Rights and Privi∣ledges of Parliament, and inconsistent with the Liberties, and Freedom thereof. And whereas afterwards his Majesty did issue forth severall Warrants to divers Officers, under his own hand, for the apprehension of the Persons of the said Members, which by Law he cannot do, there being not all this time, any Legall charge or Accusation, or due Processes of Law issued against them, nor any pretence of charge made known to that house; all which are against the Fundamentall Liberties of the Subject, and the Rights of Parlia∣ment. Whereupon we are necessitated, according to our duty, to declare, That if any Person shall arrest M. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerige, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, or any of them, or any other Member of Parliament, by pretence or colour of any Warrant issuing out from the King only, is guilty of the Breach of the Liberties of the Subject, and of the Priviledge of Parliament, and a publike enemy to the Common-wealth. And that the Arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or of any othér Member of Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a Legall proceeding against them, and without consent of that house, whereof such Person is a Member, is against the Liberty of the Subject, and a Breach of Priviledge of Parliament; And the Person which shall Arrest any of these Persons, or any other Member of the Parliament, is declared a publike enemy of the Common-wealth. Notwithstanding all which we think fit further to declare, that we are so farre from any endeavour to protect any of our Members, that shall be in due manner prosecuted according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament for Treason, or any other misdemeanor, That none shall be more ready and willing then we our selves, to bring them to their speedy, and due tryall, Being sensible that it e∣qually imports us, as well to see Justice done against them that are criminous, as to de∣fend the just Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, and Parliament of England. This is the true Copy which was sent from the Committee, to Joseph Hunscott for to print.
