E3313 669.f.5[85] 99869855 160798
THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN FROM HIS EXCELLENCY, TO THE COUNTY OF WARWICK. Gentlemen, I Have advise that the Kings Forces are upon their March towards Coven∣try, I need not minde you of the lamentable distresses which must at∣tend every man which falls into their hands, and the particular danger, if the City of Coventry be taken; therefore that all the Kingdome may know that the professions of your love to Religion, Liberty, and Coun∣trey are not in vaine, be now encouraged to shew your selves gallantly for the defence thereof, and raise all the Trained Bands and Voluntiers of your County to defend the City of Coventry, and your County from any violence by opposing their comming thither: I have also written to raise up the County of Northampton for your defence; I have also written Letters to the Counties of Leicester and Darby, to advise them also to gather head, to hinder their passage into your countrey: And now being confident that upon the receipt hereof, that you will instantly fall upon the worke, lest delayes herein may become your owne prejudice, I bid you Farewell, resting Worcester, October 2. 1642. Your most assured Friend,ESSEX. Gentl: If upon your rising I may perceive your carefulness for your own preservation, and give me intimation thereof, I shall doe my part to give you such assistance as shall become me, and may be sutable to the occasion. October 10. 1642. SIR, I Received your Letter the last weeke, and I blesse God for the good newes that it brought with it, concerning  Victory of Manchester men, which shewes that the cause, and not the strength of Armes must winne the day. VVee have Intelligence here, that to morrow both the Armies pitch for Battell, I should be glad to heare of peace; But if His Majesties heart be so hardened, that we must have VVar, I pray God that the right side may bring away the Trophy. I have inclosed a true Copy of a Letter that his Excellency writ to the coun∣ties of Darby, and Warwicke; My Lord Say sent it to our Quarter Sessions, with a Let∣ter of his owne, to advise the Countrey to be ready in Armes to hinder their comming amongst us, for it is their constant course every night, to ride out by two or three hun∣dreds, and to pillage and plunder Townes and Villages. London Printed for H. Blunden, October 13. 1642.
