E3592 e53_12 99860155 155223
Exact and certaine NEWES From the Siege at YORKE. And of many remarkable passa∣ges of our Armys in those parts, extracted out of diverse Letters which were sent by this last Post from Hull, to a Gentle∣man of Grayes-Inne. As also the taking of Mulgrave Castle, and in it Sir Walter Ʋavasour, Sir Peter Middletons eldest Sonne, and other Gentlemen of quality. Together with the Relation of the Scots second Army, advanced to Blithenooke in Northumberland, and their taking of Morpeth Castle. With many other remarkable Observations▪ Iuly 3. London, Printed for Mathew Walbanke. 1644.
AN EXTRACT OF Foure severall Letters written from HULL, and sent by this Post to a Gentleman of Grayes-Inne, by a prudentiall friend of his, newly returned thither from the Leaguer before YORKE. 1MY Lord of Manchesters Forces are daily in action, straitning the besieged in their quarters; and bat∣tering about Bowdan-Barre and the Mannor, and the besieged frequent∣ly issuing forth, and skirmishing. Iune 24, there were about 20 taken, and as many slaine on the Kings party, and two or three hurt and slaine on my Lord of Manchesters, but this is re∣ported something diversly.
2. The Scots Forces for the most part stirre not, by reason the Enemie sallied not out so oft against their quarters. 3. My Lord Fairfax and his quar∣ter is also often in action, about and against Monck-Barre. 4. Prince Ruperts Army, especi∣ally in horse, is reported to be great, and a great part of brave horse and good foo, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Major Ge∣nerall Lesley, are gone forth towards Rippon and those parts, to meet and fight with them. 5. I beleeve (so far as I can conje∣cture) the Yorkists are neither quick∣ly nor easily to be conquered, but are resolved to try all extremity in ex∣pectation of the comming and ayde of Prince Rupert; God turne all to the good of the Church and
Common-wealth. 6. All the great and vast dales in the North-riding of Yorkeshire, toge∣ther with their two strong Castles of Midlan and Bolton, stand still as formerly, to wit, in a neutrall po∣sture, and to this day would never beare Armes, or pay Contributions, notwithstanding all their severall summons, threats, propositions sent unto them. 7. Colonell Charles Fairfax, a pru∣dent & valiant Gentleman, hath again reduced most of the Bishopricke of Durham to the obedience of the King and Parliament, and are now with about 1200. horse about Dur∣ham and Sunderland. 8. Last night newes came hither, (believed true and certaine) that a new Armie of Scots is come into Northumberland to Blythenooke, of a∣bout
ten or twelve thousand, and that they have already taken Morpeth-Castle, and that Colonell Clavering and the Scottish Lords with him, have rested themselves in New∣castle. 9. These seas heere are full of danger and robberie. Out of another Letter. 10. Wee hold our siege yet, but are so prepared, that if Prince Rupert doe come, we are ready to meet him, we heare much of his advance this way, but no certainty which way he will fall into the Country. 11. Mulgrave Castle is taken, Sir Walter Vavasor, Sir Peter Middle∣tons eldest sonne, and divers others.
Out of another Letter. 12. There is about Whitby some Ordnance landed for us, of which Colonell Bointon having notice, did prepare Forces to conveigh them to Mulgrave Castle, (now in our hands) and had sent Letters to some Troops in Holdernesse to assist him: which Letters Sir Hugh Cholmley in∣tercepting: and understanding ther∣by the designe, makes his strength, & goes and skirmisheth with our For∣ces, which a Master of a Ship on our side perceiving, sent a shoare a Drake and 20 Musquetiers which by a mis∣take came to Sir Hugh Cholmley, and so were surprised, but we heard this day that Whitby is taken by Colonell Bointon, and that Drake, with 40 men and Armes taken, and one
Newton is left Governour in it. 13. Wee now heare also from Sir Thomas Fairfax, who is about Rippon with his Army, that he cannot heare or learne that Prince Rupert is ap∣proaching any thing nearer Yorke, yet they are very cautious, and pre∣pare for him, least that Vbiquita∣rian steale on them unawares. 14. Our hopes are rather to starve then storme Yorke, but our desire is to have it by composition and yeel∣dance. 15. Cawood Castle had like to have beene surprised, by a partie of Horse from Pomfret, but was prevented by the vigilancie of the Guards, though some Prisoners escaped. 1. July 1644. Jmprimatur, JO. RUSHWORTH. FINIS.
