E3833A 99897072 133269
ellent New SONG: OR e Loyal Tory's Delight. LOndon Ladds be Merry, your Parliament-Friends are gean, Which made you all so merry, but never wou'd let us alean; They peach'd us every ean, both Papist and Protestant too; Now they all for Tyburn run, and the De'l run with 'em I trow. II. Our Good K. Charles, Heav'n bless Him, Protector of Albany's Right, Receiv'd from the House sike a Lesson, had like to set us at strife. But Charles he Swore by his Life, he'd ha' no mere sike a doo; He packt 'em off by the Light, and the De'l gang with 'em I trow. III. There's Armstrong, and Jemmy the Cully, were muckle to blame, I read; And Shaftsbury that States-Bully, who awes the Factious Breed: And wittal Grey (good-deed) who Pimp'd while his Wife did Mow▪ And held the De'r for a need, how the De'l rewards him I trow. IV. De'l speed 'em Trencher and Hambden, foul Members of the Rotten Rump; And goggle-ey'd Fly-catching Branden, his Head's grown all on a lump: And Oats the Socket o'th Pump, his Mouth Close-Stool to the Saints; He Buggers his Man with the stump, while the Whiggs at Tyburn Cants. V. E'ne Hang up the Three Bloody Brewers, that are in the Cupboard for Jack; For they can be no Sons of Whores, that drapt out of Oliver's Tap: They're all of the Green Ribbond Club, both Inglesby, Loveless, and Booth,— Reformed all in a Tub; they'd better have been in a Stove. VI. Then Breeman, an Old Rumping Round-Head, and Wildman with his Roring Guns; By Rumsey all are Consounded, both Forbus and Wood with their Funs: Four more, their Marshals and King, with one sweet Sister of Hope; They've left the smaller to Swing, while they're Converting the Pope. VII. There's Blunderbush, West, and such num∣bers; they Croud all the Goals in the Town; They pray that the Turks may do won∣ders, and cut all the Christians down: Should I insist on their Shames, and sing till to Morrow at Noon: I'm as like to number their Names, as to make a Smock for the Moon, Printed for J. Dean, Book-seller in Cranborn-Street, in Leicester-Fields near Newport-House, 1683.
