E3769 E121_33 99871802 156136
EXCEEDING True And Happy NEWES FROM POMFRET CASTLE. Beeing a perfect description of a great Battaile, fought by Mr. Hotham, Sonne to Sr Iohn Hotham, with 300. Horse and 500. Foote, against the Lord Savill, and Sir Francis Nevill, With 1500. Horse and Foot, before the walls of Pomfret Castle. oct. 7. Also declaring how the Lord Savill was wounded and above 200. of his men slaine in the fight. printer's or publisher's device London, Printed for THO: Rider Octob. 11. 1642.
True and happy Newes from Pom∣fret Castle in Yorkeshire, beeing a per∣fect discription of a great and wonderfull Batrtaile fought by Mr. Hotham, sonne of Sr. Iohn Hotham. THe noble and he∣roicke Acts that hath oftentimes been performed & put in Execution by that thrice wor∣thy and undaunted souldier Sr. Iohn Hotham, whose name together with his prowes, is blazed through our wholl King∣dome, for performing that charge and trust which was reposed in him by the great Assembly of Parliament, at Hull, when his enemies spleen and invetterate
mallice burst forth, thirsting after his bloud, likewise that noble and heroicke spiit Mr. Hotham, sonne to Sr. Iohn Ho∣tham doth follow his fathers Steps, bearing the same mind and constant resolution that his Prececessors hath done, for when that he beard say that the Lord Savill and Sr. Jervis Nevill, with divers others of their confederates, had taken Sanctuary in Pomfret Castle, in Yorkeshire, he humbly desired his fathers consent that he might march out of Hull with some certain num∣ber of Forces, and to advance toward the said Castle, and after sometime spent in contemplation thereupon, Sr. John Ho∣tham gave consent to his Sonnes desires, and ordered that he should have 500. Foote, and 300. Horse and by his command to march against the disturbers of the peace of the Kingdome, which was immediate∣ly performed, and when Mr. Hotham was in readinesse to set forth, he propounded divers propositions to his Soldiers, which was as followeth. 1. To know whether they were willing to
serve under him, and to hazard their lives with him in defence of he true protestant Reli∣gion, the Laws of the Land, and liberty of the Subject, in which he had no sooner expres∣sed himselfe, bu they all with loud accla∣mations cryed out, and declared unto him that they would loose their dearest lives with him then Mr. Hotham with his com∣pany immediatlly marched from Hull, ta∣king his leave or his Father, towards Key∣wood Castle, not farre from the City of Yorke, when after some shot spent for the space of two houres, they obtaind the same. Then be set downe his resolution to march towards Pomfret Castle, where in∣deed he found great opposition. For this newes beeing with all hast and possible expedition carried to the Lord Savill, who was within the said Castle, giving him notice that he would be besie∣ged by the Parliament Forces, if not spee∣dily prevented, whereupon be orpered his men, beeing neere upon a thousand, to march forth and to meet the said Mr. Ho∣tham, which they did accordingly.
At their first greeting master Hotham let sly a messenger to him from one of his Cannons, where upon the Lord Savill sent a Herrauld of armes to master Hotham, to desire to know what was the cause of his comming in that hostile manner, who im∣mediately rendered him an answer to this or the like effect. That he came to pre∣serve the peace of the County, and to ex∣ecute the orders of Parliament, and to ap∣prehend all such as are delinquents to ei∣ther one or both Houses of Parliament. Vpon which answer the Lord Savill presently sent to the Earle of Cumberland, requiring him to assist him with all expe∣dition, but before that he could come in, Mr Hotham joyned battaile with the said Sr. John Savill, playing with his Ordnance with such furious courage, and also assaul∣ting of him with his Horse and foot both in the Front and Reare, and wing, inso∣much that he was forced soon to retreate, to the Castle, but the blades of Hull pur∣suing them so close that they killed 300. of his men before they could get into the
Castle, and wounded Sr. Francis Nevill of Cheate, with the losse of very few men. But the Lord Savill having gotten in∣to the Castle with his Forces, immediate∣ly shut the gates and began to make use of his Ordnance that were mounted upon the wals of the Castle, shooting and dis∣charging very furiously against Mr. Ho∣thams men, but lying under shoot, in re∣gard they were so neare the walls of the Castle, Mr. Hotham presently commanded two of his greatest pieces of Ordnance to be planted against the port of the Castle, on the south side, which speedily made entrance for his men, where fourthwith they entered not doing of the least injury that night, such was the care and charge of Mr. Hotham, in preserving mens lives and shedding of blood, untill such time as the Lord Savill with his complices be∣gan to oppose them, which Mr. Hotham seting, forthwith commanded all his men to make ready and to give Fire upon them insomuch that Skirmish in the Castle be∣gan to grow hot, continuing for the space
of one houre, but at the last they in the Castle began to yeeld to Mr. Hothams mer∣cy, and some of them seeking to save them∣selves by flight, also it is credibly report∣ed that the Lord Savill is very dangerous∣ly wounded, thus hath Mr. Hotham wonne the Castle of Pomfret, which he now hold∣eth and maintaineth for the use of the King and Parliament, cleering the Coast thereabouts, of all evill affected persons to both. FINIS.
