E3742 E123_13 99859814 111913
Exceeding Joyfull NEWES FROM COVENTRY Declaring the happy Successe of Col. Hambden, Col. Goodwyn, and the Citisens of Coventry, against Prince Robert and his forces, who besieged Coventry on Friday-last. With the number of them that were slain, and the taking of Cap. Iohnson and many other prisoners. Also the victorious Proceedings of the Earle of Argile against the Earl of Derbie, who while the E. of Derby besieged Manchester the second time, and was from thence repulsed, seized upon the Ile of Man, the antient Inheritance of the Earls of Derby, and hath there placed many strong Garrisons. With exceeding good News from Holland, ex∣pressed in the fidelity of the States to the Parliament of England, who made stay of four great Vessels laden with men and Ammunition to assist the King against the Parliament. Printed for Richard West, October 19, 1642.
Exceeding Joyfull Newes from Worster. SInce Prince Robert had those most hap∣py Defeats given to him at Worster and Ludlow, wherein the malignant party for a season something weakned, he hath since marched and lay with his forces within two miles of Burmegum, with a Resolution to make a second attempt up∣on the City of Coventry. And upon Tuesday last he advanced his Forces, and upon Friday notwithstanding the violence of the weather, his Forces ly before the City, but according to the old Proverbe, He that is fore-warned, is fore∣armed. The Citisens of Corentry having intel∣ligence of his determination, did so streng∣then and prepared themselves for  com∣ming, that his attempts will be frustrated:
For besides other provision which was abundant, and strong they had planted 26 pieces of Ordnance, with which they could play upon his forces which way soever he should assault them. Upon Satterday according to his Reso∣lution he made an attempt upon the City but he found opposition to be beyond ex∣pectation, and all his Assaults and Onsets were in vain and he not only was repulsed from his purpose, but with a great losse and much hurt done to his forces he was con∣strained to retreat. For the Citisens of Coventry besides the help and assistance of the Inhabitants round about them were assisted with other po∣wer and Forces. For Collonell Hambden and Collonell Goodwyn, and some other Troopes which lay near Banbury side came in, and so vio∣lently set upon the Cavaleirs, that with a great losse they gave of their attempt, their were very many of them slain, some taken prisoners. The Number of them that were slain is
not certainly known, for they buried them in the place where they fell, and among many others one Captain Johnson was ta∣ken prisoner, a man very active in the pr∣motion of this their cause. The said Captain is now in the Goal at Coventry, and with the rest that were taken prisoners with him will be sent up to London, so soon as those places are secured from the Cavaleers. The Earl of Derby hath lately made a second assault upon Manchester, but with as much discredit, and as small successe as his first was. For he was beaten back with great losse and hazard of himselfe, and al∣though he escaped with life, yet that was also in great hazard, for he was shot in the shoulder from the Town, and with much difficulty he got away, while the Earl did busie himself in those tumultuous ways a∣broad, he little dreamed how his owne e∣state lay at stake at home, neither did hee conceive the least fuspition of any forrein enemy, but delighting himself with the publique distractions, he neglected his own estate.
For while he did molest the Countries of Chester, and Lancaster, the Earl of Argile a man full of conscience and valour wit ten thousand men did besiege the Ile o Man, which is the Inheritance belonging to the Earls of Derby, and the siege was nei∣ther tedious nor dangerous. For he got the Iland almost without a∣ny opposition, and hath there placed in di∣vers places very strong Garrisons. He hath expelled the Country of all those whose integrity he doth suspect, and whom he doth not find to be for the King and Parliament. He hath enriched himself with great store of treasure, and other necessary pro∣vision for War, which the Earls Father, and he that now is Earl had laid up there, this Earl intending that if his purposes should not take effect, that then he would fly into the Iland, and with that provision that he had sent thither, and was there treasured up, and with the assistance of the Inhabi∣tants of the Iland, of whose faith and con∣stancie he seemed to be confident, to defend
and secure himself from any power that should pursue him, and that he was resol∣ved there to stand upon his guard. But this his design is frustrate, for he is not like to regain it again, by reason that the Earl of Argile hath placed such strong Forces there. There were lately in Holland, by meanes of the Queen 4. great Vessels provided, rig'd and laden with great store of Ammunition and Arms. But the States according to their for∣merly promised fidelity did make stay of the shipping and all the rest of the provi∣sion, and caused the ships to be unladen, and have also taken such order, that if any Com∣manders whatsoever who are imployed in the service of the States, under the Com∣mand of the Prince of Orange, shall at any time come away, and leave their present service to assist the King against his Par∣liament, that they shall for ever be ca∣sheerd of their places, and be made unca∣pable hereafter of the same office and place again.
And they did also by a Message sent to the House, intimate their good affection which they bear to the Parliament, and although there hath bin very many plots and designs both there, and also in divers other places set on foot to promote the cause of the disturbers of the peace and quiet df this Kingdome, yet that they hi∣ther have, and hereafter will, be vigilant to prevent all such attempts whatsoever, and that they will not admit as neer as possi∣bly they can, that any plot or conspiracie whatsoever shall take effect in those Coun∣tryes, that might any wayes seeme preju∣diciall to the present Proceedings of the Parliament of England. FINIS.
