E99aA R230984 99899707 134653
A GUIDE TO SALVATION, Bequeathed to a Person of HONOUR, By his Dying-Friend The R. F. Br. Laurence Eason, Ord. S. Franc. S. Th. L. Seek, first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all other things else shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. ver. 33. BRƲGES, By Luke Kerchove, 1673.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HENRY Earl of Norwich, and Earl Marshal of England; Baron HOWARD of Castlerising, &c. My Lord, I purpose not, in this my Preliminary E∣pistle, to publish un∣to the World, the large Catalogue of your Charitable Works, and your other Christian Virtues,
Et laudent eam in porta opera e∣jus: These without Flattery commend better than I am able. My design is, to express here, some small Testimony of my ma∣ny great Obligations for those large favours I have, and still do receive from your Bountiful and Generous Heart: This I presume, I can no way better perform, than by endeavouring to promote the eternal Well-fare of your Soul, that grand Duty you ought most to mind in this World, as being the only end of your Beeing therein. For I am not of Cicero's opini∣nion, That we are born, partly for our Country, partly for our Pa∣rents, partly for our Friends; but rather, That we are All born for
our selves; not but that we have many high Obligations besides, which in Conscience we are to dis∣charge; but that the End of all is, The good of our own Souls, in or∣der to eternal Salvation, which I conceive to be the meaning of that of the Apostle, Whither you Eat, or Drink, or whatsoever else ye do, let All be done to the Glory of God. Wherefore, if you desire Riches, what greater can you have, than the Treasures of Heaven? of which, none can deprive you, without your own consent. If you Aspire to Honours, what higher can there be, than to be a Servant, a Friend, a Child of a most Glorious God? Nimis ho∣norati sunt amicitui Deus: And if you affect Pleasures, there are
none so True, so Permanent, so Satisfying, as the joys of an up∣right Conscience; to drink of the indeficient Torrents of Pleasure, and to be inebriated with the ful∣ness of Gods House. The greatest Plenty this World can afford to and earthly Heart, is extream Poverty, accor∣ding to St. Augustine, if it be without God; and what-ever Pleasures or Honours may be en∣joyed in this Life, will still end in Misery and Confusion, if they advance not the good of the Soul, in order to its endless bless∣ed Life with God in Heaven; Ʋbi salutis damnum, ibi luerum nulium, saith Eucherius; there is no gain to be valued, if there∣with our Salvation be endam∣maged;
for, if this miscarries, all is lost, for an Eternity. My Lord, Heavens Providence hath placed you in a very emi∣nent Condition amongst Men, as well by your Noble Extracti∣on, as by the propitious influen∣ces of a Gracious Princes Fa∣vours; That your High Rank of Nobility should powerfully bend your vast Soul to the per∣formance of such Heroick Acti∣ons of Virtue, as may befit a per∣son of your Illstrous Rise and Endowmen God hath ed you by his grace, to be a mber of the Ho∣ly Catholick Church; this emi∣nent Prerogative amongst True Believers, should oblidge you to
glorifie God in that saving Profession; that (as our Blessed Saviour adviseth) your Light may so shine before Men, that they seeing your good Works, may be moved thereby to give glory to your Heavenly Father, in the same Profession with you. God hath moreover blessed you with a hopeful Issue; advance them by a Vertuous Education, and your own fore-running good Examples; for, the holy lives of Christian Parents are over the most powerful Attractives, where∣by Children are induced to compose theirs to the Love of God, and the Rules of Morality. Thus doing, you will pur∣chase to your self and Posterity, the blessings of this Li  the next, that which is aymed a  small Treatise, and shall ever be th rnest Petition of your dying Friend Right Honorable, Your Honours most devoted Servant, Laurence Eason.
A GUIDE TO SALVATION. FIRST PART. The Importance of Mans Salvati∣on, manifested by divers Mo∣tives and Considerations. IT is an observation of St. Bonaventure, that there are two things which God doth allow, which are the Creation and Conserva∣tion of the world; there is one, which is the work of Man alone, and that is Sin; to the production of which, God doth not formally concur, as the
Psalmist affirms of him [Psal. 44] in these words, He loves Justice, and detesteth Ini∣quity, and therefore is far from being the Author and cause of it; There is yet a third thing which God and Man work to∣gether, which is our Salvation; for the obtaining of which, to his Grace we must joyn our endeavour, according to that common saying of St. Augustine, Qui fecit te sine te, non salvabit te, sine te. He who made thee without thee, will not save thee without thee; this is the work of Grace and our Will together, as the Apostle affirms of himself; Non ego sed gratia Deimecum; not I alone, but the grace of God with me; and therefore we are stiled by him Coadjutors and fellow-Labourers with God in this work. Hence is that of St. Augustine, [St. Aug. lib. Hypog. c. 3.] Nec gratia sine libero arbitrio facit hominem habere vitam beatam, nec liberum arbitrium si∣ne gratia. Grace without our free will cannot make us blessed, nor our free will without grace, though it be true
what the Prophet said of the Son of God; operatus est salutem in medio terrae; he wrought Salvation in the mid'st of the Earth. Yet it is as true, that he re∣quires, that we should deny our selves, and assist him in carrying his Cross, the instrument of our Redemption; and so fulfil, as the Apostle speaks of himself, In our flesh, those things which are want∣ing of the Passion of Christ; that is, we should apply his merits and benefit of his Passion, and render them efficatious to us by our cooperation: Wherefore it highly concerns us seriously to consi∣der this grand affair of our Salvation, that we become not deficient in our en∣deavours concerning it.
CHAP. I. Containing divers Considerations and Motives concerning the Importance of this Affair. The first Consideration and Motive. THe important Consequence of this, first appears, in that it seems to be the greatest of Gods works, and the end of all the rest. This our blessed Saviour insinuated in his Answer to the people, when they thus demanded of him in St. John, [John 8. 9.] what shall we do, ut operemur opera Dei? to perform the works of God? he replyes, Hoc est opus Dei, this is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he sent.
As if he should have said unto them, you demand what are the works of God? in the Plural number. I answer you in the Singular number, that there is but One, for which he doth all the rest, and that is the Salvation of man. Hence Tertullian considering all things in this world, said, Horum bono∣rum unus est titulus, salus hominis: they all carry this Title upon them, The Sal∣vation of man. When God had Cre∣ated this sensible world with the Hea∣vens, Elements, and all Creatures in it, he put this Title upon them, Salus ho∣minis; this was the end of their being, to which they were ordered; when he Created the Angels, he placed this as a Frontisepiece upon them, Salus homi∣nis, The Salvation of man; this is the affair in which they are imployed, as the Apostle [Heb. 1.] informes us, Om∣nes administratores Spiritus; All of them are administrating Spirits, sent for those who are to receive the inheritance of Sal∣vation. They labour incessantly in this affair, knowing it is the greatest work
of God, in which they can be imploy∣ed. If God became Man, if he Preached, gave us examples of all Vertues, insti∣tuted the Sacraments, these and the like Marvels, have this Inscription upon them, Salus hominis, having no other end but this. If he dyed on the Cross, it was for this design, he suffered Death to give us Life. It was from this consideration that Tertullian said, Nihil tam dignum Deo, quam salus hominis; nothing so worthy, or beseeming God, as the Salva∣tion of man: and St. Thomas gives this Reason of it; because the whole Uni∣verse, with all the Orders, Dispositions, and Marvels in it, do not so clearly and fully manifest his grandeurs as the Salva∣tion of man; for here he makes appear his Attributes and Perfections, which are his Power, Wisdome, Love, in a most eminent manner; which caused the holy Doctor to affirm, In rebus creatis nihil potest esse majus quam salus rationalis creaturae; In all Created things, there
is not any greater than mans Salvation. God could have Created Heavens more extended, and more richly adorned, than those which now rowl over our heads; an Earth more fruitful, than that which now supports us: Angels more intelligent, than those which now sing his Praises in Heaven; but he could not do any thing more Great, Noble, and Divine, than the Salvation of man: this is it, which after a soveraign manner, manifests his Attributes and Perfections. This consideration should cause us high∣ly to esteem, & incessantly to endeavour our Salvation which concerns so much the glory of God, which we are obliged to advance to our power. And seeing that God, on his part, so really and seri∣ously desires our Salvation, and so high∣ly esteems it, that he Created and Or∣dered all things in this universe for it; surely, by our neglecting it, we frustrate as much as in us lyes, all his designes, and dissolve and reduce to nothing the Creation of the world, with all things in it; for all things have their being, and
conservation, for no other end but this; what a stupendious ingratitude and con∣tempt of God and his benefits are invol∣ved in this neglect, who is so blind as not to discern it; and therefore most incon∣siderate and insensible to be guilty of such a crime. The second Consideration and Motive. The second is taken from our own proper Interests, which is no less than our Salvation; the loss of which, ren∣ders us miserable for all Eternity. We will begin this consideration with those remarkable words, with which the Wise man concluded his Ecclesiastes, Deum time; fear God and observe his Commandements: hoc est omnis homo; for this is every man; or as St. Jerome translates it, This is the end of every mans Birth and Being; from which St. Ber∣nard draws this Consequence, Ergo absque hoc nihil est homo; then without this, man is nothing: Popes are not in the world to be Popes, nor Kings to be
Kings, nor Wise men to be Learned, and the like; but all universally to be saved. All the conditions and employ∣ments which possess the Spirits of men, ought to give place to this, and aime at it, as their proper object and end, without which they are in vain. This our Blessed Saviour affirms in those words of St. Matthew, [cap. 16.] quid prodest ho∣mini; what will it advantage a man, to gain the whole world, and to suffer detri∣ment in his Soul? what will it profit a man to have all the pleasures of the vo∣luptuous? all the riches the world can afford him? all the honours that men can confer upon him? if he were abso∣lute Monarck of the whole world, if at last he loseth his Soul. If he had all the knowledg of things natural and Divine; all the beauty that the body is capable of, such health for so long a time as he could desire, all the advantages of the world which men so ardently thirst after; all these, in the judgment of Christ, the Divine Wisdome of his Father, will be unprofitable if he comes not only to
lose, but to suffer detriment in his Soul: For this reason, the Royal Prophet stiles his Soul, his Darling, or his One; Erue a framea Deus animam meam, & de manu canis unicam meam: Deliver my Soul from the power of the Sword, and my One from the hand of the Dog: He calls his Soul his One, not only because as o∣ther men, he had but one Soul, but be∣cause it was most dear unto him, he lo∣ved it, and procured the conservation of it with all the care and diligence; which one imploys to preserve things; the rarity and worth of which, renders them preti∣ous and amiable. This caused St. Chry∣sostome [Hom. 12. de po.] to say, God hath given us two Eyes, two Ears, two Hands, two Feet, that if any Misfortune deprive us of the use of one, we may help our selves by the use of the other. Animam vero unam dedit nobis; but he hath given us but one Soul; if we lose this, we lose all irrevocably. The Prophet David [Psal. 116.] well considered this, when he said Ani∣ma mea in manibus meis semper; my
Soul is always in my hands, to hold it fast, that I might not lose it, but exercise it in good works, defend it from all Enemies who would ruine it, and always consider the condition of it, according to that of St. Bernard, Non facile obliviscimur; We do not easily forget those things which we hold in our hands: the care of our Souls should always thus be present to us. That Holy Father thus continues his discourse about this subject; If thou art so sollicitous as not to neglect small things, so vigilant to preserve thy Corn, thy Cattel, thy Money, thy Earthly possessi∣ons, such inferiour and transitory things; art thou not then foolish and unreasonable to neglect the Salvation of thy Soul, which is thy true treasure? This as St. Gregory speaks, is to pervert Reason into extream Folly. The excellence of true reason and judgment consists, in discerning the price of things, and esteeming them ac∣cording to their worth, and consequent∣ly to make more acccount incomparably of the Soul than of the Body; of things
Eternal than Temporal; of the affair of his Salvation, than of all other things; and he who doth not do this, is as one without sence and judgment, seeing he judgeth so ill of things, which with such an excess are disproportionable in va∣lue. Plato said true, that the effect of true Wisdom, is, to be Wise for one's own good. Solomon affirmed [Pro. 9. 12.] as much before him, Si sapiens fueris, tibimetipsi eris; true Wisdom consists in being Wise to ones self. The Devil hath more knowledg than all the Learn∣ed men on Earth, but not one grain of true Wisdom, being miserable for E∣ternity, and so infinitely distant from essential Wisdom, which is God himself. For this reason, Sinners unmindful of their Salvation, of what spirit and know∣ledg soever they be, are stiled in sacred Scripture, Fools and Insensible Creatures; so great is the concern for the Salvation of our Souls, that it is stiled by the A∣postle, and commended by him to the Thessalonians [1 Thes. 4.] as properly and particularly our affair; ut vestrum
negotium agatis, that you may do your work: as though we had but only this to attend to; for other things, about which we employ our labour and care, deserve not this name; they are affairs in which the success oftentimes doth not corres∣pond with our designs; affairs which pass away with little profit, and often contrary to the grand affair of our Sal∣vation. This great affair of our Salvation would make us admire that manner of speech so frequent amongst us, when seeing any one busied amongst the intri∣gues of Courts, in the commerce of Mer∣chandize, in the negotiation of treaties and alliances, and the like; we use or∣dinarily to say, that he is a man of great businesse and affairs; it is an improper speech to give this name to imploy∣ments, which are but petite amusements, in which one for the most part loses his time, and often Heaven. We do not give the name of affairs to the employ∣ments of Children; as when they build their little houses of dirt, when they
ride upon a stick, and contend with such earnestness to carry away the glory, and to be Kings in their sports; these pueri∣lities and pastimes deserve not the name of affairs, being in themselves so little, and so momentary: In like manner the enterprises of men, to build houses, to purchase honours, to amass riches and the like; being not much more greater and durable than those of Children, de∣serve not the name of affairs: All men in the world have but one affair, about which they ought continually to imploy themselves, which is their Salvation; and if they mind this, then one may say, they are wise and able men, and busied about a grand affair. This Tertullian well considered, when he said, In me unicum negotium: I have but one business in the world to at∣tend unto, which is the Salvation of my Soul: I abandon what the world calls af∣fairs, I decline the intrigues of the Court, the School of Philosophy, the company of Friends, to be vacant to this one affair, which I treat of with my self, and con∣cerning
which I am interessed. Our Blessed Saviour confirms all this, in call∣ing the young man in the Gospel to follow him; for when he required leave, first to go bury his Father, our Blessed Savi∣our replyed, Dimitte mortuous sepelire mortuos; let the dead bury the dead: as if he should have said, as St. Peter Chry∣sogolus observes, to bury the body of your Father, is not the most important affair you have to do; it is to follow me, and to look after your Salvation, which ought to be the first in execution, as it is in worth and merit; Terrenus pater post ponendus est patri coelesti, as that Holy Father concludes, The care of a Tempo∣ral Father is to come after that of our Heavenly. The third Consideration and Motive. We may discern the importance of our Salvation, by the many crafts and endeavours the Devil useth to hinder it, which are so many and so great, that he hath his name given him from them, be∣ing
called the Tempter; and as Tertullian speaks, Eversio hominis, operatio ejus; his only work is the ruine of man. The Prophet Hab. saith, that cibus ejus e∣lectus; his food is very choice, he desires to devour the Elect: he loves these deli∣cate morsels; he labours not, but to re∣sist the Salvation of men, and to procure their Damnation; this is his joy and triumph: And in the estate of misery, in which he is plunged, if he be capable of any satisfaction, it is the Damnation of man; for which reason, he is stiled by our Blessed Saviour in the Gospel, Inimi∣cus hominis, the Enemy of man; for be∣ing not able to revenge himself on God, he turns his fury against his Servants; and thinks he commits a great outrage against him, if he can reverse the design he hath for the Salvation of man, and de∣face Gods Image in our Soul. He is the Enemy of man, because he knows man is to possess the place he left vacant by his revolt. He is the Enemy of man, because by this, he thinks to find some solace in his misery, having Compani∣ons
with him in his sufferings, and sub∣jects upon which to exercise his fury; he useth all artifices, employs all his po∣wer; he is Prodigal in promises to com∣pass this, and to be an Usurper of Souls. He speaks as the King of Sodom did to Abraham, Da mihi animas, caetera tolle tibi; Give me the Souls, and take all the rest. The pleasures of the Flesh are not for me; I misprise Riches, I leave Honours to the Ambitious; but for Souls, I con∣tinually thirst, and can never be satisfied. He was so bold, as to attempt against our Blessed Saviour himself, and to perswade him to adore him; he promised to give him Honours, Riches, Pleasures, all the Kingdoms of the Earth to do it; haec om∣nia tibi dabo; All these will I give thee if thou wilt fall down and worship me. See here the esteem he makes of one Soul, from which Salvianus takes an oc∣casion to condemn the stupidity of men, who truly consider not the price of their Souls; Quis furor? viles habere ani∣mas, quas diabolus putat esse pretiosas?
What madness, to have a vile esteem of our Souls, which in the opinion of the Devil are judged so pretious? To sell that for a little money, for a momentary pleasure, for a blast of Honour, which the proper Enemy of it, valued above the whole world, seeing he presented that to pur∣chase it. This extream folly moved the said Salvianus, thus to exclaim, No∣vum genus emptionis & venditionis! A strange kind of buying and selling! the Devil gives nothing, and takes all! man receives nothing, and parts with all! When a Merchant contracts for any Ware, he receives the price agreed up∣on for it, and the buyer receives the Mer∣chandize: But here is the contrary. See the foolish traffick of Sinners, the Devil sells them the pleasures of the sences, he promiseth them Honours, which are but smoak; Riches, which a Theif, a Violence, an Injustice may de∣prive them of; and in selling these, he gives them nothing, because these are not at his disposal, he being not Lord of them; and for these, he receives from
us all the pretious things which concerns our Salvation. What a deplorable blind∣ness is this of Sinners, to esteem so lit∣tle of their Souls? I earnestly desire, that every one of them would follow that Counsel of the Wise man, [Eccles. 10. 31.] Serva animam tuam & da illi honorem secundum meritum suum: Save thy Soul, and give it that honour which is due unto it, according to its worth and dignity. And he adds, Quis honorifica∣bit? Who shall honour him, who dishonours his Soul? and who can defend or excuse him against the justice of God, who offends against his own Soul? The last Consideration and Motive. We may clearly discern the worth of our Soul, and the esteem and care we ought to have of the Salvation of it, by what Christ did do, and suffer, for this end. The Salvation of our Soul avails as much as it cost; but it cost the Blood, the Merits, the Life of Christ, which are in∣finite;
from which we must necessarily conclude, that it is of an infinite value. I advance in this further; for ordinarily we value a thing, more than the price we paid to make it ours, if we be not de∣ceived in it; but the Son of God, who hath an infinite Wisdome, and so cannot be deceived in the esteem and valuing of things, gave his Life and Merits to purchase the Salvation of our Souls; may we not then say, that in some man∣ner, he esteemed them more than the price he gave for them. I can declare unto you a clearer mani∣festation of this; Having redeemed our Souls with his pretious Blood and Mer∣rits, he esteemed this infinite price so little, as he esteemed them given him gratis by his Heavenly Father, Quos dedisti mihi, [John 10] whom thou hast given me. Again, to know what e∣steem the Son of God had of our Souls, after having purchased them with so great a price, he calls the Angels o Feast and Congratulate, not only man, but himself, as St. Thomas observes,
[Opusc. c. 63.] and to speak with him, as if man were the God of God, and that the felicity of the Soveraign Majesty de∣pended on the Salvation of man; as if he could not be happy, if man were mi∣serable. Having shewed the price of thy Sal∣vation, the great esteem the Son of God had of it, that as St. Chrysostom speaks, Nihil indignum se putat, quod nobis pro∣ficiat ad salutem; He thought not any thing unworthy of him, which might con∣duce to our Salvation. If thou comest now to neglect this, by this Crime thou committest two grand outrages, One a∣gainst the Son of God, the Other against thy self: for the first St. Augustine observes, [St. Aug. Sermo. 37. de temp.] qui dat pro modica delectatione: He who gives to the Devil for a short pleasure or transitory satisfaction, that, for which Christ gave no less than himself. Stultum reputat Christum mercatorem; By that very acti∣on, condemns Christ as a foolish and ig∣norant Merchant. Who hath not light to discover, nor wisdome to esteem the
true value of Souls, seeing he did give an infinite price for the Salvation of them, which thou esteemest as a thing of nothing. What an affront is this offered to Christ? it is no less, as the Apostle affirms, than to trample his sa∣cred Blood under our feet; of which he complained by the Psalmist, Sicut aqua effusus sum; I am poured out as water: as a thing of no esteem, trampled under the feet of all. Ah Sinner! this outrage against the Son of God will fall heavy upon thy self, when thou comest to lose thy soul, and to sell it to the Devil for a transitory pleasure: Hast thou any thing so preti∣ous wherewith to purchase it again, as the price that was given for it, and is so contemned by thee? St. Chrysologus assures thee, no. Quando eam tanti emptam perdideris, quomodo poteris eam deinceps emere? When thou losest that which was bought with so great a price, how can'st thou purchase it again? O Christians! after we have seen the esteem that God makes of our Salvation, the
price he hath given for it, the labours and sufferings that his only Beloved Son did undergo to procure it for us; the crafts and endeavours the Devil useth to deprive us of it, what remains but to conclude? that this is the only thing in which you should be employed; the grand affair which deserves the applicati∣on of your Spirits; the affections of your wills, the force of your bodies: when you have effected this, you have done all; if you miscarry in this, all is lost though you should gain the whole world by it.
CHAP. II. Containing the Manner, how we must behave our selves in pro∣curing our Salvation. HE who desires any thing efficaci∣ously, labours to obtain it seriously, diligently, and with perseverance; which are the three Conditions to be ob∣served in this work of our Salvation. The first Manner or Condition. We must labour in it seriously, accor∣ding to the example of our Blessed Savi∣our, who out of zeal to convert the Sa∣maritan Woman, travelled half a day in the heats of the Sun, with great wea∣riness
and thirst to be at the place whi∣ther she was to come, to meet with an opportune occasion for her Conversion: To make, of another Sinner, a Peni∣tent, he went to a banquet, and expected there her coming; and he travelled up and down, and frequented the company of sinners to effect this great business, which was the end of his coming into the world. St. Paul had the perfect knowledg and practice of this truth, and therefore travelled seriously with the whole application of his Spirit, for the Salvation of his Brethren. Hear how he speaks unto them, [2 Corinth. 12.] Ego autem libentissime impendam, & su∣perimpendar, pro animabus vestris; I will gladly spend, and be spent for your Souls sake: There is not any thing which I will not do, to advance your Salvati∣on, which is so dear and pretious to me, that I am ready to give my self to pro∣cure it. Upon which, is that of St. Am∣brose; Non solum sua, pro eis impendere paratum se dicit, sed etiam seipsum pro sa∣lute animarum: He is not only content to
give those things which are his, but also to expose and give himself for the salvation of their Souls. This Zeal of his, he more fully expressed in that to the Ro∣mans, [Cap. 9.] Optabam, ego ipse, Anathemaesse a Christo, pro fratribus meis. I did desire to be separated from Christ, for the Salvation of my Brethren. His own interests drew him to be with Christ as his Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved, sufficiently testifies; but for the Salvation of his Brethren, he was content for a time, to be separated from the glory of Christ, and to remain here on Earth, to labour in this work. By this we may easily apprehend how we ought to employ the things of this world, and expose our life too, if it be necessary for our Salvation, our great af∣fair in this world. But this which con∣cerns us so much is so slightly passed o∣ver, that we may justly complain with those Prophets, [Jerem. Daniel. Osee.] Desolatione desolata est omnis terra, quia non est qui recogitet corde; The whole Earth is become desolate, because there is not any
one who seriously considers in his heart. We may find many who think of their Salvation, but it is only superficially, not with the heart, and so their thoughts are cold and barren; cold, because they produce not an ardent desire to execute what they think; they are barren, be∣cause they produce not holy motions and actions. The Devil and Reprobate have the like; the thought of their Beauti∣tude lost, is continually present to them, they know the excellency of it, by suf∣fering the privation thereof; but this is not with the heart, with a consideration which is affective, ardent, effective: When we Will a thing efficatiously, it doth not only busie our thoughts, but employs our hands, and industry, to la∣bour, our tongues frequently to speak of it; the heart, the hand, the tongue, are joyned in this work; the heart to medi∣tate, the hand to execute, the tongue to publish it. Ex abundantia cordis os lo∣quitur: Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh.
The second Manner or Condition requisite in this work. From the Zeal and serious considera∣tion of our Salvation, ordinarily pro∣ceeds an exquisite diligence for the pro∣curing of it; which is the second Conditi∣on necessarily required in this work. Our B. Saviour hath given us an ad∣mirable example in this kind; the sa∣cred Scripture [Heb. 10.] saith of him, that entring into the world by the miste∣ry of his Incarnation, he said unto his Heavenly Father, You Will not the Sacrifices of the Law, therefore I offer up the body you have given me for a Victime, to honour your Majesty, to satisfie your Justice, to appease your Anger. He did not delay his sufferings to the end of this life, but the first moment he entered in∣to the world as Man, he presented him∣self as a Victime. And when he was then adored by the Angels, at the command of his Heavenly Father, even then he would honour him as his Servant and
Victime. In the whole course of his life, he travelled in this affair with such diligence, as the Psalmist resembles him to a Gyant exulting to run his course, with an incredible vigour in all the wayes, wherein he might work our Salvation. His Espouse admiring this in her Canti∣cles, [Cant. 2.] compares this course of his to the swiftness of a Roe and Hart. The Angels descended and ascended in Jacobs Ladder without repose, in the ex∣ercise which they continue indefatigably for the Salvation of men. Job by his own example shewed us with what fer∣vour and diligence we should proceed in this affair, [Job 29.] Causam quam ignorabam diligentissime investigabam: If I did not understand the rights between parties to accord them, I used most exqui∣site diligence to understand it. I did not defer till to morrow what I could do to day, but apply'd my self with∣out delay to all the good works I could perform for the advance of my Salvati∣on. Tobias did often rise from the Table,
left his refection, quitted the Company of his Friends; to bury the dead, and to exercise works of mercy towards the poor and needy. Abraham stood in the common ways, to find and invite Pil∣grims to his house, where his Wife and Domesticks were busied in preparing a refection for them. St. Paul [Acts 5.] protested to the faithful, that he used all possible diligence in his Apostolical function. That which the examples of the Saints inform us, the Wise man Councelled in his Proverbs, Diligenter exerce agrum tuum; diligently cultivate thy field. We must not imagine that he speaks here of good Husbandry, but un∣der the symbol of a field, he insinuates that we should labour with diligence to extirpate vices, to acquire vertues; to increase in grace which God bestows up∣on us, to work out our Salvation by: Besides the Examples and Instructions of the Saints for our diligence in this af∣fair, reason perswades also this truth; we see that a man applyes himself with diligence, to affairs of importance, and
to things of consequence, which have an indeterminate and uncertain time, of which he knows not the length or short∣ness: Our Salvation hath these two cir∣cumstances, the thing is most pretious, and of the greatest concern; the time to compass it, is altogether uncertain; Death, after which we cannot work, often steals upon us, as a Thief in the Night, when we think our selves most secure of life; and therefore it concerns us to attend to our Salvation with all di∣ligence, lest we be surprised unexpect∣edly, as the foolish Virgins were, and the rich Glutton in the Gospel. If we have a Suit in Law, for the gain∣ing of a possession, for the reparation of an injury, or the like, we apply all our endeavours, we regard not the rigour of the seasons, nor the suffering of our bo∣dies, nor length of ways; we move e∣very stone that might obstruct or further our designs; but for our Salvation, which is the greatest concern we have in the world, we think much to spend an hour at a Sermon, where we may be in∣structed
in this, and the means to obtain it; to spend half an hour in a day to hear Mass, or to Pray where we may re∣ceive grace to carry on this affair with fervour; we are loath to give an Alms to a poor body, to merit the divine suc∣cours; such is our blindness and stupidi∣ty. When we suffer any maladies in our bodies, as St. Chrysostom [Hom. 22. ad pop.] affirms, we presently send for Physitians, we think no cost much for the cure of them, Animam vero vitiis laborantem negligimus; But we suffer our Souls to corrupt and putrifie in sin. To procure a remedy, and to purchase an immortal life, for them we are ex∣tream negligent. This unreasonable preferring of the Body before the Soul, the immortal and divine part of us ought to cover us with Confusion in this world, where we would appear judicious & wise; & in the mean time, we shew our selves to be un∣reasonable and senceless. It was a complaint of St. Bernard, A∣spicio genus humanum; I behold mankind
walking from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of it, through the spatious Mart and Market of the world, where some hunt after Riches, others gape for Honours, many pursue Pleasures, most spend their time in Vanities and Imperti∣nencies; few mind the eternal good of their Souls, for which they came into the World. Seneca discovered this truth, si volueris attendere; if thou wilt consider, thou maist discern that a great part of mens lives pass away in doing Ill, the greatest part in Idleness and nothing, the Image of Death, and pomp of Vices; the whole in minding and doing another thing than which they came for. We read of a Phylosopher, who busied himself thirty years in observing the Oe∣conomie of Bees, of a Graver who spent his whole life in Carving and Pollishing one Statue of Isocrates, who studied ten years to compose an Oration which he was to pronounce at the Olympick Exer∣cises; of many Phylosophers, who Tra∣velled divers Countries, with many dangers and inconveniences to acquire
humane knowledg and experience; shall not these rise up in judgment and con∣demn us, if we think any time tedious to imploy in the affair of our Salvation? The third and last Condition, necessary for this work. If we desire efficatiously to be saved, we must labour with perseverance, accor∣ding to the example of our B. Saviour on the Cross, who would not descend from thence to put an end to his sufferings, and to the incredulity of the people who de∣sired it; but as he says himself, he would there finish and consummate the work his Father had recommended to him; which was the Salvation of men for his glory. The Wise-man said, that omnia tempus habent, there is a time for all things; a time to Sow, and a time to Reap, and the like; and out of these Seasons, they are not to be done. But the affair of our Salvation hath no certain time assigned for it; but the whole course of our life, from the first
moment that we have the use of reason, to the last, is to be employed in it. Rea∣son perswades us this truth, and gives us to understand of what importance the assiduity of this work is; because our Salvation depends on the last action of our life; if that be good, meritorious and agreeable to God, it will save us; if bad, sure enough we shall be damned, for as the Tree falls, so it shall lie: But here our death is uncertain, and every moment of our life may be the last, and the fatal stroke may surprise us when we think least of it: have we not reason then to travel incessantly in the affair of our Salvation, to secure it as much as possi∣bly we can? for unless we persevere unto the end in it, we cannot be saved. And the breaking off this work, and declining out of the right way, though it be but for a time, may be the cause of our not persevering to the end, and consequent∣ly of our eternal perdition.
Many examples in this kind, Sa∣cred and Ecclesiastical History afford us; and happy are we, if we become so wise by them, as at all times to be vigilant about this affair.
The Manner of Life to obtain Salvation. SECOND PART. CHAP. I. Of the divers Lives of Chri∣stians. ST. Augustine speaking of the An∣tient Patriarks and Prophets, sayes, Re, non nomine Christiani; they were not Christians in Name, but in effect and action. But we may affirm the contrary of many in our times, who stile themselves Christians; they are not such really and in effect, but only by Baptisme and Name.
To discover fully this truth unto you, I shall shew you the divers lives of Chri∣stians; and what is the true one necessa∣rily required to obtain Salvation. For we be such, as the lives are we lead; good, if they be such; bad, if they be bad. To have life, saith St. Thomas, is to have in one the principle and cause of Motion; when a Woman with Child perceives the fruit she bears in her, begin to move, she sayes, I know well my Infant is alive; when one is on his Death-bed, if we see he hath not any more motion, neither in hands, eyes, lips, or pulse, we say, he hath no life in him. From hence we give by a Metaphor, the name of Life; to a running water; to a flame as∣cending in the Air; not that they have properly life in them, but because they move, being not in their Center, but tending to it. We find in the world four sorts of Lives, according to four divers principles, which give motion to all the actions of living Creatures. The Vege∣tative Life, which is that of Plants, which is imployed to nourish and in∣crease.
The Sensitive Life, that of Beasts and Animals, which conduct themselves by sence. The Rational Life, which is guided only by Natural Reason. The true Christian Life, which is governed by Faith. If we look amongst Christi∣ans and Catholicks with the true eye of the Spirit, we may discover many fair Plants, good Beasts, and honest Men, as the world stiles them; but few true Christians. Of the Vegetative Life of Christians. We may begin this with the saying of the blind Man in St. Mark; when Christ had open his eyes, he said, Video homines sicut arbores ambulantes; I see men walking as Trees. Many persons who are in esteem in the world, have no other Life but that of Plants; no other principle of their actions, than that of Trees. Behold a Merchant, who with care and diligence Travelleth by Sea and Land, coucheth late, riseth early; what is the principle of this Motion? why
doth he all this? to purchase a House, a Farm, a Possession, or the like; to e∣stablish himself on Earth, as a Tree which spreads its Roots on every side, to encrease and fix it self deeper and firmer in the Earth; and so, of a petty Mercer at the first, in time become a rich Mer∣chant; as a Plant, which of a petty Shrub at the first, grows up into a great Tree in time. See here again, Parents of no great extraction, and of small revenue at the first, but so vigilant and active in managing their affairs, that they come to be a great Family, and Marry their Children to persons of honour and qua∣lity▪ One may say here, behold an ex∣cellent and fruitful Tree, which pro∣duceth so many fair graffs to propagate withal; what is this, but the life of a Plant? and in the mean time, have no more spirit in them, than a Plant, nay in some respect, far worse: See a Tree placed by a Wall, it doth not extend its branches on that side where the Wall casteth its shadow, but which is warmed
and heated most by the comfortable and cherishing beams of the Sun: You breed up, and dispose of your Children, which are your branches, Quorum filii sicut no∣vellae plantationes: [Psal. 144.] Whose Children as young Plants, amongst the Grandeurs of the world, which are but shadows of true greatness, and less re∣garded, and visited by the Sun of Justice, and gratious influence of Heaven, and not on the side of Humility and Vertue, which God most willingly respects; for which, many of them thrive so ill. The like Errour we may discover in multi∣tudes, whose aime and endeavour here, is only to advance themselves and their Families in worldly wealth and great∣ness; to extend and dilate themselves and their Posterity on Earth; do not Trees do the like? and can we esteem better of the life of such, than of that of Plants, which naturally covet a deeper root and greater growth in the Earth. Give me leave to say, that such are worse than Trees and Plants, which at last come to a term and stand in their growth
and extent: but these worldlings are without bounds and limits in their de∣sires and endeavours, never satisfied with the earth, till they be buryed in it. O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of our Lord, as the Prophet Jeremy ad∣monisheth, [Jerem. 22. 29.] and fol∣low that advice of the Apostle, Seek and savour those things which are above, and not those things which are on Earth; for which you were not Created, nor have your being here. Of the Sensitive lives of many Christians. Many others lead only a sensitive life, and in the judgment of God are esteem∣ed no better than Beasts, conducted only by sence; of such a one, the Psalmist thus speaks, Comparatus est jumentis in∣sipientibus: He is compared to the foolish Beasts. A Labourer works couragi∣ously, because he is well fed and re∣warded, he doth no more than a Horse; your Servant is faithful to you in his im∣ployment, because you are a good Ma∣ster to him; so will your Dog be for a
piece of bread. A young man spends his whole Morning in Combing, Curl∣ing, Powdering his Hair; in composing himself according to the Mode; and one praiseth him, saying, See what a fine head of hair he hath, what a handsome body, how neatly adorned; one may give the like commendations to a Horse which is well Limb'd, Curried and Dressed. You may see a young Virgin, or Wo∣man vainly attired and trickt up, and set out exactly to the fashion, by these allu∣ring charms to draw the eyes of others to behold her, having no spirit of Vertue or Prudence to be commended or de∣sired with judgment or reason; such a one in the judgment of the Psalmist, is to be no more esteemed than a Horse or a Mule, & by the Wise man in Ecclesiasticus, is compared to a fair & fat-body'd Bullock. what reproach shal such have in the judg∣ment of God? what Shame & Confusi∣on? when they shall see, that being en∣dued with Reason; & further, that being Christians & Catholicks, they have fol∣lowed nothing but the conduct of sence.
In fine, consider the resort of the thoughts of most, and the motive of their actions, and you shall find them to be nothing but the contentment of the sences, the ease and conveniency of their bodies. They labour, eat, drink, sleep, sport for their sensual pleasures; Lyons, Bears, Bruits do the like: They go to rest at Night to repose their bodies, because they are weary; so doth a Horse after a hard Journey, or labour, if he finds good Litter: They eat, because they are hun∣gry; so will an Ass if you give him Provender: They breed up their In∣fants and Children because they are theirs, so do Beasts and Birds; We are such as our lives are; if the principle of our actions is properly our life; if the Motive, out of which we act, is the prin∣ciple of our actions, then, if we do our actions out of no other Motive, but that of Beasts, without doubt in the judg∣ment of God, and men of Reason, we are no other than Beasts. Hence is that Councel of St. Ambrose; Tibi ergo attende: Mind and know thy self, not
what body, power, dignities, possessions thou hast; sed qualem animam & men∣tem: but what manner of Soul and mind, from which thy Consults proceed, and the fruits of them are to be referred. The Apostle councelleth men, not to be de∣ceived and deluded in this kind of life, [Gal. 6.] Que semina verit homo: That which a man sows he shall Reap. He who sowes in the flesh, from it, shall reap Cor∣ruption and Death. Of the meer Moral lives of Christians. We find others, not so brutish as the former, but yet far from true and good Christians. They think they are per∣fect, because rational, humane Reason, Prudence, natural and moral Vertues are the principle of their Actions. They do hold aright the Ballance of Justice, they will do no injury, be∣cause naturally they love Equity; They assist the afflicted, because they think it reason to relieve their like, and they desire to be assisted in the like Conditi∣on. They abstain from sensual Plea∣sures,
from carnal Contents, because they are Noble, and aspire to greater Things, than to be slaves to their Bo∣dies. Major sum, & ad majora natus, quam ut corpori me Servitutem exhibe∣am. Said a Moral Pagan, I am born to greater things than to be a drudg to my Body. They patiently endure the injuries and affronts offered, because they esteem it proper to a generous Courage, to misprise feeble Spirits, and to esteem them not worthy their Choller; As a Lyon and Elephant con∣temn the barking of little Doggs. All this is, to be but an honest Man, and one of Honour, but far from a good Chri∣stan; a true Disciple of Christ and Faith. Dorotheus one time visited the Sick of his Monastery of which he was Abbot; The Informarian addressing himself to him, said Father, I have a great Tempta∣tion of vain Glory, considering that you admire my diligence, seeing all the Rooms and Beds so clean and orderly composed: The Saint thus replyed, Brother, one may affirm, that you are a good Ʋalet and
Groom of the Chamber, but one cannot say, for all this, that you are a good Reli∣gious. So if you are a man of honour; just, zealous for the common good, out of a natural inclination only, or out of a moral and philosophical Probity, one may say, that you are a good justice of Peace, a good States-man, Wise, Poli∣tick; but for all this, a man cannot say, that you are a good Christian. I do not condemn this morral Life as bad, but I rather commend it, as laudable to be Practised. Because it hinders a man from committing many Evils; it affords good examples to others, and renders a man less indisposed for further helps: And God of his mercy will sooner have com∣passion on such, then on those that are vitious, and corrupt in naturalls, and offend against the manifest light of Rea∣son: but I only affirm this kind of life to be Insufficient for the obtaining of Salvation. Because man is ordained to a Supernatural end, to which nature can∣not reach, nor discover the means which God hath ordained to obtain this
end by, nor the manner how he will be worshipped or served in order to it. The greatest importance of this life is to serve God in a manner agreeable to himself; which a man cannot do, unless God ma∣nifest his Will to him by Divine Reve∣lations, which Pagans endeavouring to do by their natural judgment commit∣ted unsupportable extravagancies, and monstrous errours in the manner of their Worship. Aristotle generally estee∣med the greatest man for humane lear∣ning, and one who penetrated further the secrets of nature, then others; yet as Theodoret relates of him, [Theod. lib. 8. de cura graec. affect.] He was so deplo∣rably blind in the conduct of his Con∣science, that he Sacrificed to his de∣ceased Woman, who had been a Servant to a Tyrant; and that not once, but of∣ten is his life, and in that manner that the Athenians sacrificed to Ceres, which was with the most Religious Ceremonies, which were used in the superstions of the Gentiles; And therefore he said truly, that natural reason is as weak
and blind towards divine things, as the eyes of a Batt or Owl are to behold the brightness of the clear Sun. And do we not manifestly see the truth of this now amongst us, by the diversity of Sects and Opinions in Religion, every one fol∣lowing the dictamen of their natural reason, and so run into many absurdi∣ties in this kind, and are continually changeing their judgments, without certainty in any thing. And we see that natural reason is weak and de∣fective, even in things within its own Sphear, as appears in the divers and contrary Opinions among Philosophers and Scholastick Divines, and in the differences in the judgments of men in ordinary occurrences; what a blind Guide then must this needs be in divine and sublimer things? From this then we must necessarily conclude, that the light of Faith is required to direct us without errour in these Affaires. The Apostle affirms, that Fedes est substan∣tia rerum sperandarum: That Faith is the ground of things we hope for in the next
Life, and the foundation of our Spiritu∣al Edifice; if that be wanting, there can be no building; if that be not sound, all must fall to the ground. And the Apostle further declares the necessity of this. Accedentem ad deum oportet crede∣re; he that will come to God he must be∣lieve aright: And captivate his under∣standing and reason to the obedience of Faith; to which Reason must be a Hand∣maid not a Mistris. And our Blessed Saviour tels us, that he who doth not be∣leeve is condemned. And this Faith can be but one; so the Apostle affirms Una fi∣des: One Faith, one Baptism, one Lord of all. Hence is that of St. Fulgentius [lib. de fide c 38.] omni enim homini &c. to a man that holds not firmly the faith and unity of the Catholick Church, neither his Baptism, nor Alms, nor Death for the name of Christ, will profit him to Salvation. And St. Athanatius informs us in his Creed, that he who will be Sa∣ved, above all things, must hold the Ca∣tholick Faith, entirely and inviolably; From hence it necessarily follows, that
a man, though our Politicians imagine the contrary, cannot be Saved in any sort of Religion, for all these cannot be the only true one, necessarily required to Salvation. I will conclude this discourse concerning a meer honest Life, with the judgment of St. Augustine; [Serm. 13. de verb. Apost.] The Epicurian Phi∣losophers, saith he, practised vertue, for the conveniency of the Body; useing mo∣deration in their eating and drinking, in their prosperities and adversities, and in their whole conduct, for the welfare of their body, that it may in no man∣ner suffer dammage. The Stoick Phi∣losophers, being more Spiritual, practi∣sed Vertue for the natural good of the Soul, and Reason; to which Vertue is conformable and agreeable; in fine, he blameth them both, that their ver∣tues were defective; and as the first were Sensual in their moderation and temperance, so the second were proud in their Vertue, which they practised for it self, and the good of reason to which they ordred it. The first, saith he,
lived according to the flesh, the second according to the reason of the Soul, but neither according to God. So according to St. Augustine, one is not to rest in the utility and honesty of vertue; but he will, that a Christian Soul should raise it self higher, to practise Vertue for God, to glorify him by it; So that the body should not be the end, nor also the ra∣tional Soul, but only God, to whom it must be ordered and referred, He on∣ly being our soveraign good, and so a∣lone deserves to be desired and searched for himself, and in that manner as he hath prescribed, without which there can be no true Vertue acceptable to him; and the light of Faith is necessary to direct us in this, seeing humane rea∣son cannot do it. Therefore Christ sends us to his Church, to receave from her his Doctrine and Instructions, and com∣mands us to obey her, under the penal∣ty of being rejected as Heathens and Pub∣licans, which he Incurs, who makes his imagination his Oracle, his proper sence his Doctor, and himself the Church he followes.
CHAP. II. The true Life of a Christian, which is that of Faith. JUstus autem meus ex fide vivit; my just one (saith God by the Prophet) shall live by faith. There are too Sorts of just men, one according to the world, the other according to God; the just according to the world are those, who are so by Humane reason, maxims of Estate, or temporal Interest. The just according to God are those, who have Faith for the Principle of their actions, and rule of their lives. A just man according to the world doth not injury to any, because the light of reason dictates to him, what he would
not have done to himself, that he should not do to another; one just according to God, doth no injury to any, out of a further motive, which is because Jesus Christ commanded and practised it, for our example. A just man ac∣cording to the world gives alms to an indigent person, out of a natural com∣passion and tenderness of heart; A just man according to God doth it, be∣cause Jesus Christ saith, What you shall do to one of these little ones, you shall do to me, because they are members of Christ. Whosoever gives a cup of could water, shall not lose his reward; it is the promise of Christ; but he doth not promise this reward, if you give an alms to one, because he is one of the same country, condition, or nature you are of; but if you give it to him, because he is a Christian, a disciple of Christ, because he required it of you, & you gave it in the name of Christ; or because he is ordain'd as a companion to glorify God with you in heaven. A good Servant according to the world,
serves his master faithfully, because he expects a reward from him for it: a good servant according to God doth it because St. Paul exhorts servants, to obey theirs Masters, as Jesus Christ, and for conscience sake. One just according to the world nourisheth and brings up his children, because they are his: A just parent according to God, doth it because they are members of Christ, creatures ordained for his glory. The reason of this truth is evident, The life of a true Christian is a Supernaturall life; faith is more above reason, then reason above sence; and as one who lives as a man, is not go∣verned by his sence as beasts, but by reason; so he who will live as a true Christian, must not follow the con∣duct of naturall reason only, as men do, but he must be directed in his life by faith and Evangelicall maxims; The glorious name we carry, obligeth us to this; The name of Christians comes from Christ, and by it we pro∣fess to be disciples and followers of
him; and he who belongs to Christ, ought to live and walk as he did; so the Apostle informs us. Platonists and Epicurians were so called, because they were disciples of Plato, and of the school of Epicurus. We say one is a Ciceronian, because he imitates Cicero in writing and speaking. St. Ma∣thew called those souldiers Herodians, who belonged to Herod: we are called Christians, and if we will be such in effect, we must be true disciples of Christ; enter into his school, study his doctrine, obey his commands, pra∣ctice his maxims; so his heavenly Fa∣ther commands, Ipsum audite; hear and obey him. In my Judgment, the best reason, the rightest intention, the holyest disposition, we can have in our acti∣ons, is to practice them, because Christ taught them, recommended and practiced the like, for our example. When the disciples of Pythagoras ad∣vanced any proposition, they allead∣ged no proof for it, nor gave any o∣ther
reason then, ipse dixit; he said it; ought not the word, and the au∣thority of Christ, to prevail as much with us Christians? sure it ought, if we had but such an esteem and respect for him, as they had for their Master. If you ask a Schollar in paynting or writing, having a modell before his eyes, why he paints this visage so, or frames that letter after such a man∣ner? he will answer you, because his pattern and example is so. If you de∣mand of a Souldier, why he goes on this side, or that; sometimes in the wing, sometimes in the reer; he will reply, because his Ensign makes the like martches. So he who is a true Christian, a disciple, and Souldier of Christ, practiseth this or that Vertue, not as Philosophers, because it is excel∣lent and befeeming a great courage, but because Jesus Christ, his pattern, example and captain, taught it, com∣manded it, practised it; some are of∣tentimes in care, to know what is the will of God, what most pleasing
to him, and what to do most for his honour and glory? no man knew bet∣ter the will of God, then Christ, who obeyed it, and fulfilled it in every thing; no man knew so well as he, what most conduced to the glory of God, seeing (as he testifieth of himself) he did not seek his own glory, but his Fathers in every thing; we have then no more to do in this affair, then to consider, what Jesus Christ did teach, command and practice, for our exam∣ple? For God hath made him the pattern and example, of all the pre∣destinate, as the Apostle informs us [Rom. 8.] in these words, Whom he did foresee to be his, he did predestinate them: conformes fieri imagini filii sui; to become conformable to the image of his Sonn. God hath called us of his mercy to be Christians, we are not such by generation, but by regeneration; nature, by all its power, cannot make a good Christian; it is a work of grace: let not a day pass without praising God for this benefit, and let us often
demand of him, ardently and humbly, his grace, to become good Christians; without which, the benefitts of our creation, conservation, redemption, and of the Sacraments, will not pro∣fit us. What profit, to beleeve God, and what he sayes, if we do not do his Will? to consent to his Word, if we obey not his command? to pro∣fess his verities, if in practice we fol∣low our vanities? By this doctrine delivered, we may discover the errour of many mistakes, who speak of Christs humanity, in the like manner as they do, of other in∣firm creatures; affirming, that the consideration of it, obscures the bright rayes of the Divinity in Contempla∣tion; and therefore to become a per∣fect contemplative, a man must ab∣stract from that and transcend it, as he would do from that of other crea∣tures. This mistake of theirs, they ground upon the doctrine of St. Denys, not well understood by them; that H. Father affirms it necessary, to the
perfect Contemplation of the Divini∣ty, to transcend all Creatures, either by denying them, or adding somthing, to shew that they are not God, and so that we ought not to rest in them, if we seek God. But this reason holds not good in Christ, who is both God and Man; and so as St. Augustine speaks, by the same pace we go to him as Man, we as∣cend to him as God: And by the same act, we love him as Man, we love him too as God. But it is not so in the love of other Creatures; for here is necessa∣ry, a reflection, and an affirmation, that I love them not for themselves, but for God, because they contain not God in∣timately in them; and so in loving them, my mind directly by this tends not God. But when I love Christ, who is perso∣nally God and Man, that act tends to him as God and Man, because he is both, inseparably. Hence saith St. Bernard, The Divinity shadowed it self in a body, the better to be seen. So though the humanity of Christ is
not a pure spirit, yet it is not so flesh, as to be an impediment to the spirit. This is the Doctrine of St. Augustine, [Lib. 9. de civit. c. 15.] who says, that God being made partaker of our huma∣nity, Compendium praebuit participandae divinitatis suae; shewed a compendious way to become partakers of his Divinity, is that by touching him man, we touch also God; what more compendious? Christ inform'd us as much in his Trans∣figuration on the Mount, where he did speak of his excess which he was to accomplish at Hierusalem, [Luc. 9.] seeing in such a Splendour, Majesty, and Glory, he would solemnly mention his Death and Passion; Moses and Elias would not be amid'st the rayes of Divi∣nity, without the meditation of Christ Crucified; glory became more pleasing to them by it, and that most resplendant Vision was thereby the more easily sup∣ported, without fear of being oppressed by the ravishing violence of its delight∣fulness.
And hence is that of St. Bernard, Marcessit divinitatis contemplatio, ubi languit passionis meditatio; The con∣templation of the Divinity will soon fail, when the Meditation of the Passion languisheth and decays.
CHAP. III. The Lives of the Primitive Chri∣stians propounded, as an Ex∣ample in this kind of Life. TErtullian affirms, that the Christi∣ans in his time, were of such an innocent Life, that they had no other crime pretended against them by their Enemies, than their Religion; And he gives the Pagans the defiance, if they say, they have Christians in their Prisons amongst them for any thing else but for their Religion. Athenagoras sayes in his Apology, Nullus Christianus malus; There is not any Christian bad, unless he dissembles his Religion. Eu∣sebius relates, that in the time of Diocle∣sian, the Oracle of Apollo answered, that
the Just had hindered him from speak∣ing; Dioclesian demanding who these Just were, the Idolatrous Priests replyed, that they were the Christians, who led an Innocent life. Pliny Junior, writing to Trajan, sayes, that he had no Crime to object a∣gainst Christians, but their Superstition. If he had known the Truth, he would have said, then their Devotion; we have the same Faith, the same Ceremonies, the same Mysteries which the Primitive Christians had; but their interiour dis∣positions, their substantial devotions, their solid virtues are so ecclipsed in our time, that scarce any thing of them ap∣pears amongst us; so that we seem in re∣spect of them, to be Christians only in Name. When St. Hierome was called before Christ his Judg in a Vision, and the Judg asking him, who he was, he replyed, I am a Christian; the Judg said unto him, thou lyest, Ciceronianus es, non Christianus: Thou art a Cicero∣nian, not Christian; thou takest more delight in reading the works of Cicero,
than books of Piety & Devotion; and the Judg commanded an Angel to scourge him severely for it; the marks of which remained for a long time in his body, as he writes of himself to Eustochium. Are they then to be esteemed true Christians, who spend most of their time in reading frivolous Romances, idle Play∣books, and such fopperies? Voluptuous Man, if God should demand of thee, what art thou? as sure enough he will one day; if thou sayest unto him, thou art a Christian, he will give you the lye; and say, you are not a Christian, but an Epicurian; you observe the pre∣cepts of Epicurus, not of Jesus Christ; you have made a God of your belly, and your chiefest pleasure hath been to satisfie your bruitish passions. Vindica∣tive person, if God should demand of thee, who art thou? darest thou say, thou art a Christian? God will con∣found thee presently, in saying, thou art not a Disciple of Jesus Christ, but rather of Cicero or Demosthenes; to re∣pel injury with injustice; to curse them,
who curse you; to take Revenge for words spoken amiss, are the maxims of Cicero, or of Demosthenes, or other Pa∣gans; not of Jesus Christ, who taught and practised the quite contrary; as to forget Injuries, to pray for our Persecu∣tors, or render good for evil. What will your Vain Dame answer at the hour of Death, which may happen sooner than she expects, when God will demand of her what she is? will she have the bold∣ness to answer, she is a Christian? no sure, she knows too well in her Con∣science, that she is a Worldling, that she lived according to the Laws and Mode of the World; that she hath a heart plunged in vanities; and that she feared more to displease a person of the world, than to offend God; that she thought it not te∣dious to spend every day, three or four hours to adorn and compose her self, to appear grateful; I know not to whom, and thought much, even on a day of Communion, to spend one hour, to pre∣pare her self to appear agreeable unto God. In fine, many persons amongst
us, who make profession of the true Faith, will appear then to be no true Christians, but rather Antichrists, having lived contrary to the Evangelical Rules and Maxims delivered to us by Christ, and faithfully practised by the Primitive Christians, his true followers, and whom we challenge for our Predecessors in Re∣ligion. Habentes Igitur, [Hebr. 12.] having such a Cloud of Witnesses put upon us, let us lay aside every weight that cloggs us, and sin that beset us, and let us with Patience, run the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith. It is the admonition of the Apostle: such a Cloud of Witnesses, who shew to us by their lives, how we ought to live, to obtain Salvation. An antient Monk, called Machaire, having visited the Cells of other Religious, who lived in great perfection, returning from thence with great Confusion, humbly said, vidi Mo∣nachos: I have seen true Monks and Religious, in comparison of whom, I am not one, I deserve not to carry that name.
When I consider the lives of the an∣tient Christians, I cannot but say, vidi Christianos: I have seen true Christians, in respect of whom, we are but such in name and appearance only, not in effect, in manners and life. But as St. Chry∣sostom adviseth, if that we cannot arrive to so high a perfection, as the antients did, yet at least let us do what we can to imitate and follow them; talem nubem, such a Cloud; If we endeavour to imi∣tate them to our power, they will be Clouds which will distill down upon us, benigne influences, refreshing dews from Heaven; otherwise, they will be Clouds, which at the day of Judgment will cast forth against us Thunder-bolts of Ven∣geance; they will Accuse, Confound, and Condemn us by the opposition of their former Lives and Vertues. Were they not frail, as we are? composed of the same matter? clogged and oppressed with the same flesh? as sensible and de∣licate as we? have we not the same God? the same Jesus Crucified? Have we not the same Sacraments? Are we not in
the same Church? And yet we expect the same Paradice for a little, which cost them so dear. Is there any reason, that without a lawful Fight and Victory, we should possess the same Kingdom which they Conquered by so many Combats, and possessed by so holy a Violence: Curramus ad propositum certamen: Let us run to the Fight set before us; The A∣postle doth not say, Ad coronam, To the Crown proposed; for if there were no Crown to be obtained, no Sallary to be received, yet it would be highly honou∣rable for us to Combate in the cause of God. How many generous Spirits are in the world, who hold it glorious to be em∣ployed in the occasion of venturing their blood and lives without any other re∣ward, than to have the honour of serving their Prince and Country? and can we be of so base and servile a Spirit, as to be inferiour to them, in order to God, in whom we move and have our being? Let us cast our eyes on Jesus Christ, Aspicientes in Authorem fidei; He is the
Authour of our Faith, and ought to be the Idea and Model of our life; let us look upon him, not only to imitate him, but to implore his ayde and succours; that as he is the Authour of our Faith, he may be also the Finisher of our Hopes; as he is the Alpha and first principle, he may be also the Omega and last end; as he is our liberal Saviour by grace, he may be our full recompence by glory.
This Treatise, Containing the Principal means of Preser∣ving and Encreasing this Life of a True Christian. THIRD PART. CHAP. I. The first Means is, the Mortifica∣on of the Principal Powers and Faculties of the Soul, with the Passions of the sensitive Appe∣tite. THe greatest Impediment in the affair of our Salvation, is inte∣riour, which consists in the dis∣order of the powers and facul∣ties of the Soul and Passions, Rebellion
of the flesh, & infidelity of our Sences; all which enemies seem to conspire to our Perdition, & to destroy all Spiritual Life in us. For the preserving of which, a∣gainst them, we must practise Mortifica∣tion; by this means to subdue and regu∣late them, that we be not carried head∣long by their violence to our utter ru∣ine. In the first place it is necessary, to reform the three Spiritual Powers of the Soul, which are the Intellect, Will, and Memory, which are the principles and origine of humane Acts, from which they proceed and depend, if they be done knowingly and voluntarily; if these be infected and corrupted as ordinarily they are, no good can be expected to proceed from them. Concerning the Intellect, we ought to esteem the purga∣tion of it, as St. Augustine informs us. [St. Aug. lib. 1. de doctrin. Christ.] Quasi ambulationem & navigationem: As a walking and navigation to our Heaven∣ly Country. For it is the guide of the will which in it self is a blind power, and being troubled and disordered, causeth
an irregularity in all the other faculties. In the Intellect one may discover many faults to be reformed, as ignorance of things, one is obliged to know: Incon∣sideration and imprudence in executing; Errour, by which one apprehends whats false, for a truth: obstinacy, to defend and persevere in a mistake, after good infor∣mation and instruction, to which one ought to Acquiess; Temerity, to judg of the intentions, actions and designs of another; Carnal and sensual Pru∣dence and Craft, to circumvent others, and contrive (by ill expedients) worldly affaires. Curiosity, to know things, which it were more profitable to us to be ignorant of. The Intellect vitiated by these and the like faults, ought dili∣gently to be mortified and reformed, or els it will be the cause of many defor∣med humane Acts; This reformation may be made by divers means; the chief is, a diligent practise of Vertue, which produceth true intelligence, as the Pro∣phet David affirms [Psal. 128.] Man∣datis tuis intellexi: I got understanding
by observing thy Commands. The cu∣stome of doing well, and experience in Devotion, is the best Mistress, by which one apprehends and profits most. A∣nother means is, reading Spiritual Books, with an intention to obtain Purity of Mind, interposing Affective Prayers. A third means may be, conferrence with Illuminated Persons, from whom, they may receave good instructions of Salva∣tion, and directions for their conduct in all Doubts, Temptations, & ocurring Difficulties. As for the Memory, it ought to be reformed about the variety of I∣mages and Representations of terrene and vain objects, by which it is often soiled; and in pusuit of which, it im∣portunes the Will to evil desires and actions; one must labour in this Refor∣mation, by exercising himself in the frequent meditation of Divine things; which if a man exercise constantly, he will in time deface and race out the Phantasies and imaginations of vain Objects: so that after a faithful labour in this, the Soul will find it self, as it
were absorpt in God, and will entertain and delight it self in nothing so much, and so often, as in God. The Will pur∣chaseth it self proper satisfactions and in∣terests by the motive of self-Love, with which it is dangerously impoysoned, and which is the Mother and Nurse of all Sin and Vices; it perverts the recti∣tude of intentions, Rebells against the commands of God and Superiours; it is the Enemy of perfection, the Mur∣derer of an interiour and Spiritual Life. This Mortification and Reformation must be affected by a Dolorous Con∣trition for Sin, by Acts of Abnegation, by a total Submission and Conformity to the divine Will: In fine, the practise of all moral Vertues, with purity of in∣tention, embellisheth it, as Stars do the Firmament. Next, the sensual Appe∣tite (which is the inferiour portion of the Soul inclin'd to the commodities of the body) is to be mortified, with its Pas∣sions; which in the estate of corrupt Nature ordinarily are culpable: they are not to be condemned in Beasts, because
they are not governed by Reason; but it is far otherwise in Man, endued with a rational Spirit, able to discern between good and evill, and to unite himself to God his Soveraign good, whom he ought to prefer above all Created things; and by his superiour Reason, imploy and order all the powers and faculties of his Body, to attain this Good. But we see the contrary arrive to man, by means of his passions which turn him from the true love of God, replenish him with impetuous Solitudes, for the pur∣chasing of terrene things, and with fears and anxieties, for the loss of them. They fill him with impure phantasies, Imaginations and Delights, precipi∣tate him into many Errours and Irregu∣larities, employ him more for the cor∣ruptible Body, which is meat for Worms, then for his immortal Soul, the Divine Particle in him; causeing con∣tinually Rebellions in the interiour Ap∣petite, against the Superiour, preventing Reason and Judgment, and tyrannizing over the Spirit; so that they are the
source and origine of Sins, which ruine our Salvation, and further a Soul towards her Damnation; and as Lactantius speaks [Lactan. lib. 6. Institut. c. 5.] Omnia fere, quae improbe fiunt, ab his af∣fectibus oriuntur: Almost all evils com∣mitted, proceed from these passions and affections. If one would repress the im∣petuosity of choller, all clamours and contentions would be appeased, not any one would endamage an other; if one would moderate the desire of having, there would be no Theeves by land, no Pyrates on Sea, no Arms taken up to in∣vade others Dominions; if one would mortify the concupiscence of the flesh, every Age and Sex would be Holy; no person would do, or suffer, what is in∣famous in this kind; all these and the like discords come from the passions, not mortified and regulated according to reason. Passions thus ordered, are good, and about lawful Objects. Thus they are Souldiers, which Se∣cond the endeavours of their cheif, the Spirit: they are Ornaments of ver∣tuous
actions; Ardours of the heart, without which it would languish. But the most part of men, by the corrup∣tion from original sin, follow their naturall inclinations and passions, by which they are hurryed into many disorders and damages, irreparably; therefore a strict mortification of these, is necessary to a good and well ordered life, and to conserve the in∣teriour state of the soul entire: with∣out the regulating of these, a man is so far from tending to perfection, that at last he will find himself, to become uncivil, barbarous, brutish, wholly governed by humours and phantasies, without repose in his Soul; continual∣ly agitated by disquiets, caused by his sensual affections, to which he hath resigned the dominion and empire of his affairs, not capable to govern them with any order. For which the An∣tients compared such a man unto an uncultivated field, over-run with weeds, thorns, bryars; as such a one or∣dinarily is, with sins and vices. These
passions and affections may often be hindred, from riseing and breaking forth, by a prudent foresight and pre∣vention of the occasions of them; for oftentimes when they seem to be mor∣tified in us, they lurk Secretly in the heart as fire under ashes, which will break forth, with a violence upon oc∣casions presented, if there be not a strong and vigilant guard set over them; for which reason St. Gregory Nazianzen ascribes the destruction of Saul, to one spark of his former pas∣sions, stirred and blowed up by occa∣sions: In this we should imitate a cunning Pylot, who shuns a tempest, when he sees he cannot easily resist it. Again, one may Suppress these passi∣ons, by combating generously against them, not once or twice, but as often as these assault us; for this reitera∣tion of resistance, will moderate and debilitate their violence and forces, according to that advice of St Augu∣stine, that we must frustrate by this means their attempts, that they may
not presume any more to rise; having so often assaulted us in vain. One may mortify and moderate passions and af∣fections, by yeilding something to them, and by making use of them a∣gainst themselves; which is done, by giving them supernaturall and right objects. This course our Blessed Sa∣viour took; St. Paul was of a choler∣rick-hot humour, but our Saviour Jesus converted it, he turned this fire into a flame of Apostolical Zeal; he did not Suppress this passion, but changed its object; so that by the same arms with which he persecuted his Name, he preached his Gospel; St. Mary Magdalen's passion was Love, he did not destroy it, but converted it, presenting himself to be the object of it; this is an easy cure, & an admirable triumph, to use passions themselves, for an instrument, whereby to gain a con∣quest over them. St. Augustine teach∣eth us this Art, councelling us, to over∣come fear by fear; the fear of the evills of the world, by fear of offend∣ing
God, of incurring hell, and losing Heaven. St. Isidore affirms the same, ex∣plicating those words of the Psalmist Irascimini, et nolite peccare: be angry, but Sin not: overcome (saith he) choller by choller it self; give somthing to this passion, but to the end to delude it; turn thy choller against thy bro∣ther, to a hatred against your self, and your passion; this was the advice of St. Basil, saying, Turn thy anger against the devil the destroyer of Souls, but have mercy upon thy Brother offending thee. Some hold, that the greatest expe∣dient to mortify these passions is, to Chastice the body, by fasting and rigo∣rous austerities; for which reason many of the Saints treated their bodies very rudely, that by this means, they being debilitated, their Souls might be more vigorous in their functions, and the flesh less rebellious & refractory to the decrees of reason. From hence proceed the austere Vows of religious, crucifying our carnal af∣fections, thereby to chastise the inso∣lencies
of the sensuall appetite, and to render the body a slave to the spirit. However, not to condemn corporall mortifications, if used with discretion, according to the Custom of all an∣tiquity, and not takeing Christ down from the Cross: In my judgment, the best and most efficatious means, is not to tame the spirit by the body, but to subject the body by the spirit; for the flesh is not the only and principal criminal to be thus handled; wherefore it is more ex∣pedient, to mortify these passions by the Superiour part of reason and the spirit; which, considering what is pro∣fitable, and what hurtful to its salva∣tion, from generous resolutions of pursuing the former, and declining the latter, and so sweetly draws the sensitive appetite after it, and forceth it to desist from following its vitious inclinations. For example, a man re∣flecting upon the motions of the sen∣sitive appetite, and perceiving it en∣gaged in the desire of things super∣fluous, and troubled about them, dis∣approoving
such a conduct; flyes to interiour repressions, considering that we were created for paradice; not inordinatly to desire and pursue tem∣poralls, but covet and seek eternalls; and that it is to little purpose, to dis∣quiet ones self, for the transitory af∣fairs of this world, but that rather we ought to possess our souls in peace and patience. After such considerations and interiour repressions, the soul with a great resolution frames desires of spiritualls, and forceth it self to re∣main in peace and silence; by which it attracts after it the sensitive appetite, and rationally orders the passions of it, at least as long as it remains in that condition. O my Soul, thou hast a difficulty to Suffer a disgrace, thy passions spur thee forward to reveng; consider with thy self, that it is far more reasonable for a Christian to imitate the clemency of his Saviour, and benignity of the same God. By the like considerations, according to the diversity of passions, a man will
become more vigilant over them, and more powerfull to suppress and mor∣tify them. This methode is more sweet and humane, more generall and easie for a good regimen of life, and is also a moderate chastisement for the body. I will conclude this first means with that of the Apostle [Rom ch. 8.] If you live according to the flesh, you shall dye; but if by Spirit, you morti∣fy the deeds of the flesh, you shall live.
CHAP. II. Of Interiour and Affective Prayer. BY speaking here of Interiour and Mental Prayer, I intend not to exclude Vocal, if it be performed with the attention of the mind, and the affection of the heart; for if these be wanting to it, I esteem it not worthy the name of Prayer. The necessity of Pray∣er, to sustain this spiritual life of ours, appears by this, That in Sacred Writ there is not any precept so often repeat∣ed, nor so seriously recommended to us, as this, Non impediaris orare semper; [Eccles. 18. 22.] Be not hindred from Praying alwayes. It is the Councel of
the Wise Man; no business howsoever profitable or necessary should hinder thee from the assiduity in this exercise. The Prophet David in many places of his Psalms, commends to us not any thing more than the study of Prayer, and praising God; our B. Saviour often and carefully puts us in mind of this, Oporter semper orare: [Luc. 18.] Ye ought alwayes to Pray; there is a necessi∣ty of it, not some time, not often, but you must alwayes Pray: And again, Vi∣gilate semper orantes, [Luc. 21.] Watch, alwayes Praying. He did not only teach us the necessity of Prayer, by words, but also by his own example; he often as∣cended Mountains, and retyred into de∣sert places to be more vacant to Prayer; and as St. Luke testifies, he often spent whole nights in Prayer; not for his own necessities, but for our instruction. St. Paul seriously commends and com∣mands this: [1 Thes. 1.] Be instant in Prayer, pray without intermission. And a∣gain, [1 Tim. 2.] Volo vos orare, &c. I will that you pray in every place.
But some may scruple here, how this precept of alwayes praying can be obser∣ved and practised? some expound it, that we ought to be always employed in some good, to the honour of God; eve∣ry good work, as they say, being a kind of Prayer: But this cannot be the true sence of it, because Christ maketh a difference between prayer and good works, and maketh Alms, Prayer, and Fasting, distinct things; therefore there is some other way how this may be un∣derstood. St. Augustine [St. Aug. E∣pist. 112. c. 9.] expounds it thus, To pray without intermission: what other thing doth it mean, then to desire without inter∣mission, Eternal Life? Let us desire this of our Lord, and we always pray; and by this we may easily conceive any man al∣ways to pray, and to spend both day and night in Prayer: And this desire in the heart of the godly doth never cease, but they alwayes seek and implore the Di∣vine assistance, whether they eat or drink, or what else soever they do; as a man in Prison clogg'd with Irons, al∣wayes
desires his Freedom. Others an∣swer to this doubt in this manner; we must not understand this so strictly, that we should not in a moment of time cease from prayer, but that very often and di∣ligently we should employ our selves in it, nor for other works less necessary, o∣mit it; as if a Physitian should say to his Patient, see that you always eat this kind of dyet, and never intermit it; he doth not mean by this manner of speech, that he should sit day and night at the Table eating; but that at convenient times, as at Dinner and Supper, he should not ab∣stain from it: So he is said always to pray, who every day hath set-times con∣secrated to prayer, and permits not him∣self to be called or hindred from thence. We may easily continue this exercise all the day, by the help of jaculatory prayers, which we may use at all times, in all places and company; for which St. Au∣gustine commended certain Monks in Egypt. What work or company can hinder thee from lifting up thy heart to God, with
the Psalmist [Ps. 37] in these few words, Intend unto my aid O Lord God of my Salvation. Which words Cassianus affirms to bemost powerful & efficatious; or one may use a variety of such short speeches. This thou maist do saith St. Chrysostom, wheresoever thou art, no place can hin∣der thee from lifting up thy heart to God; if thou wert dressing meat, wash∣ing dishes, sweeping the house, or the like, thou may'st thus pray. I could wish that they who are delighted in pray∣er, and willingly spend their time in it, would not burden themselves with a multitude of Vocal prayers, and discour∣sive Meditations; but give more to the affection of the Will, than to the specu∣lation of the understanding; spending most of that time in setting their affecti∣ons on fire towards God, which is the true end of prayer. A man may understand the necessity of prayer, who truly considers the mise∣rable estate of man, reduced to such a misery and poverty in spirituals, that he cannot of himself act, speak, or think a∣ny
thing that is grateful to God, unless assisted by his holy Spirit. What re∣mains for an infirm Beggar, who hath no art, no patrimony, nor strength to labour for his being? What remedy in this condition, but to beg, or else to perish? Doth not then our condition, like to this, enforce us continually to fly to God by prayer, and by this means to beg of him (who is rich in mercies) a supply of all necessaries for this our life, as we are instructed in the Pater Noster, by asking our daily bread? The Salvation of every Christian depends on God, whom we must daily implore for the ob∣taining of it, and because this Salvation of ours is in continual danger, and that every one is bound to procure it with all care and diligence he can; hence it is, that always we are bound to pray to God for it, seeing it is not to be obtained by any other means, than from him, and by him. Again, there is no man, who hath not somtimes sinned, nor that hath any warrant or security hereafter not to sin; and in this respect, it is most necessary
for us, by daily prayer, not only to seek that he would gratiously pardon and for∣give our former sins; but also that he would be pleased to prevent with his grace, lest we fall again into other sins, through which we may incur eternal Damnation. We have a continual War, as the Apostle informs us, with in∣visible and powerful Enemies, and of our selves we are weak and unable to resist and conquer; how can we be for a mo∣ment secure, if we neglect to implore aid and assistance from God? this St. Chry∣sostom sets out to us by that of Exodus; [Exod. c. 17.] where it is said, that when Moses lifted up his hands in prayer, Israel did overcome: but when he was remiss in it, the Amalekites his Enemies did prevail; from hence that Holy Fa∣ther concludes, that he is not to be ex∣cused, who would not have his Enemy o∣vercome, and yet ceaseth from prayer; O∣ratio jugis, infirmitas hostis, as he speaks, Continual Prayer is a weakning & worst∣ing of our Enemy. He affords weapons against himself, who ceaseth to weary his
Enemy by the instancy of prayer: and lastly, he concludes with this exhortati∣on; If thou desirest to be freed from dan∣gers, to overcome the Devil, to subdue the Flesh, to suppress the sensual Appe∣tites, to root out Vices, to procure Vertues, to contemn Temporals, to love and possess Eternals, give thy self seriously to Pray∣er. But prayer, to be powerful and efficatious, for a supply of all necessaries, must be qualified with these two conditi∣ons especially: First, it must be done with attention and recollection of Spirit; Christ by his own example in the Prayer he made in the Garden, immediately before his Passion, taught us this; he would not prostrate himself there to his Heavenly Father, before he was abstract∣ed and separated from his Disciples there with him, Quantum jact us est lapidis, [Luc. 22.] as far as the cast of a stone; to inform us, that in this exercise of prayer, we should abstract our selves from all Creatures. This at the first was a defect in St. Au∣gustine, as he confesseth, [Lib. 10.
Conf. c. 27.] Mecumeras, & tecum non eram: Thou wert with me, but I was not with thee. God was with him by his immensity, but he was not with him, by reason of his Distractions. St. Chrysostom Councelleth that our prayer ought to be Mysterium, a Mistery; so secret and intimate, as known only to God, and not so much as to our selves. Cassianus affirms, that not to be a per∣fect prayer, in which a man reflects up∣on what he prays, he should be not only distracted, but also so retired and ab∣stracted, as to be, not only seperated from others, but even from himself by Union with Gods will; and such a pray∣er is a true Mistery and secret. It is the advice of Origen, that the Soul should have always a fixed Altar in it self, in which it should offer up unto God the Sacrifices and Victims of praises and prayer: It is the admonition of our B. Saviour in the Gospel, that when thou prayest, Intra in cubiculum, Enter into thy Chamber or Closet; which is not only to be understood of a
material Chamber, or place of Retire∣ment, but of entering into the Heart, & remaining inclosed there from all the World, as St. Chrysostom Expounds it, In cubitulo orat: He prays in his Chamber, though it be in the Church. Qui Solum Deum attendit: who there only attends to God. St. Ambrose renders the same sence of our Saviours words, Habes ubi{que} cubi∣culum: Thou hast thy Chamber, which is thy Heart, every where; into that thou must Retire, and remaine there∣in inclosed, in the time of Prayer; the doors of the Sences being shut, and all distracted occasions and imaginations Excluded. This Chamber hath three Cells, into which thou must enter; these are the three Powers, Memory, Intellect, and Will: enter into the Memory, being only mindful of God, and what thou art to meditate of; into thy Intellect, con∣sidering God present in thy Soul, and contemplating those things only, which belong unto him, and being very atten∣tive what he speaks there, to thy Soul: into thy Will, produceing there, Acts
of Affection towards God. True Devo∣tion is of the nature of a Turtle, which seeketh solitary places, that there she may not be interrupted in her amorous Sighes and Languishings; which one should principally practise in Domestick and ordinary Prayers, not as many do, who say their Prayers in dressing them∣selves or by the fire-side in hast, and so their Prayers vanish as Smoak. As for Prayers in publick, as in Churches, where one cannot enjoy the retreat of a place, they must retyre the so much the more, to the retreat of their Heart, as the Alcyons, which in their little Nests injoy a calm in the midst of Waves, a repose in the Sea, tranqui∣lity in an Element troubled with Winds and Storms: which we may do, if we shut our Eyes, and regard not the objects which inviron us; our Ears by not hearkning to the discourses of o∣thers; our Mouths in talking only with God, our Imagination chasing away vain and imperfect Thoughts, by which we shall enjoy Peace and Retyrement in
the midst of Assemblies. Joseph would not manifest himself to his Brethren, till all the Aegyptians were out of the place, neither will Christ communicate his Comforts and Sweetness to a Soul, if Aegyptians be present, vain imagina∣tions and distractions, which disturbs the Peace of it. The second condition Required to the efficacy of Prayer, is purity of Mind, from the affection of Sin, as Women who go to fetch clean Wa∣ter, are careful to carry Pots or Ves∣sels cleansed from other Liquors. This God required of his People, by the Prophet Isay [C. 1.] Lavimini, mundi estote. Wash, and be clean. remove the evil of your thoughts, from my Eyes; Luxurious, remove thy im∣purity. Vindicative, thy Anger and Choller; Malitious, thy Envy; Proud, thy Arrogance; Covetous, thy Ava∣rice; Sinner, thy Abominations; for if thou come thus defyled and polluted before the face of God, he will reject your Prayers, as he assures you by his Prophet, Cum multiplicaveris orationes.
When you shall multiply your Pray∣ers, I will not hear you; Manus enim vestrae Sanguine sunt plenae. Because your Hands are full of Blood; your Hands are defiled with the Blood of your Neighbours by many injustices; with your own Blood, by Sin, which Murders your Souls. By the Blood of Christ, so unprised by you: and thus you presume to present your Prayers to me, with bloody Hearts and Hands, full of iniquity, without having clean∣sed them by the waters of true Contri∣tion, I will turn my Eyes from your de∣filed Hands, my Ears from your im∣pure Prayers, my Heart from your polluted Hearts; I will not hear you. This informs us, that we must come to prayer with contrition for our sins, with hearts pure from affection to e∣vill. As they report of the Viper, that when she goes to the fountain to drink, she vomits up her poyson, that she may not be endangered by it; or as the Oyster casteth our the salt water,
when she will open her shell, to re∣ceive the celestial dew, to conceive pearls: or as the place on which man∣na was to fall, was first purged from dust and filth by a precedent blast of wind; or as the victims which the an∣tient Jews offered to God, were wash∣ed in a cistern of water, placed at the port of the temple, for that use. In like manner, Wash, and be clean, before you come to pray, if you will have your prayers gratefull to God, and be∣neficiall to your Souls. This is the ground of that incou∣ragement, in holy Job. [c. 11.] si ini∣quitatem abstuleris à te; if thou wilt remove from thee thy iniquity, then thou mayst lift thy face to God boldly, without offence. The conditions requisite to prayer are comprehended in those few words of our Blessed Saviour to the Samaritan woman, Spiritus est Deus; God is a spirit, and ought to be adored in spirit and truth: in Spirit, by the interiour affection; in truth and verity, by the
purity of mind and intention; in spirit, without voluntary distractions; in truth, without hypocrisie; in Spirit, fervently and humbly; in truth, sin∣cerely and cordially. O Soul! if thou didst but consider the benefit of spirituall prayer, how rich and liberall God is towards them, who truly invocate him, then would'st thou be diligent, fervent, per∣severant to knock at the door of his mercy; thou wouldst not permit whole dayes to pass without pray∣er: this would be thy exercise in morning, mid-day and night; pray∣er would open the begining, con∣duct the progress, conclude the end of all thy enterprises. The reason, why most people in the world, are plunged in a carnal, and sensuall life, is the defect of In∣ternal and spirituall prayer, by the exer∣cise of which they would enter into their hearts, to discover the true causes of their distempers, and so be excited to apply convenient re∣medies
against them. If every one would be solicitous, to demand of God all graces necessary, for his souls conduct in his vocation and condition, it is impossible that God should re∣fuse him, or that he should suffer shipwrack of his Salvation; because God cannot lye, because he is enga∣ged by his word to give his grace; and his light, to conduct those, who demand it of him; if their prayers be accompanied with requisite con∣ditions, with confusion for their sins, a desire of his grace; with interiour attention, humility, perseverance. Dabit Spiritum bonum; he will give his good spirit, to those that demand it, and every one who seeks, shall find, si petiisses; if thou hadst asked, he would have given thee the water of life. But many spend whole days entirely, without thinking that there is a God, or that they have a soul to save, riseing and lying down with∣out once lifting their hearts to hea∣ven, Sicut equus et mulus; as horses and
beasts: others come to Church, to see and be seen, to prattle rather then to pray; others for the most part, pray for temporalls, as honours, riches, health and conveniences of the body, rather then for the grace and light of Gods spirit, to enable and direct them, in the affairs of their Souls Sal∣vation; The prayers of others, are ac∣companied with such distractions, ima∣ginations, and negligence, that we must conclude with St. James, [cap. 6.] petitis, et non accipitis; ye pray, and receave not, because you ask not as you ought. Of all prayers, all things equally considered, the morning pray∣ers are most profitable; and the earlyer, the better. It is a reprehension of St. Chrysostome [St. Chrisost. deoran∣do Deo] qua fronte: with what face do'st thou behold the riseing Sun, un∣less thou first adore God, who sends thee that gratefull light? Hence in the primitive times, the Christians, resorted to the Churches early in the morning, before day-light, as Ter∣tullian
and Eusebius relate; conforma∣ble to which, is that exhortation of St. Athanasius [St. Athana. do virg.] Oriens sol videat: let the rising Sun behold a prayer-book in thy hand. St. Basill informs us, it was the custome of Christians in his time, to prevent the rising Sun in their prayers. The Gentiles and Pagans, by the light of reason, did thus adore their Gods. Vergil [Li. 11. Aen.] relates of Aeneas, that first of all he did pay his vows to God; we read in Exodus [c. 7.] that God thus commanded Moses, vade; Go to Pharaoh early in the morning: behold, he goes then forth unto the waters, to perform some kind of a∣doration to them, as Abulensis and o∣thers affirm, upon that place: this Pagan understood, that morning ado∣ration was most proper for God. Elias [Reg. 3. 18.] granted to the prophets of Baal, the morning to sacrifice to him, for this reason, as Theodoret ob∣serves, left being confounded by his not hearing them, they might excuse
themselves, by saying that he did not first of all in the Morning receive a Sacrifice from them. The Prophet David found the benefit of this Morning Prayer, when he said, Domine mane: Lord in the Morning thou shalt hear my Prayer; this may be one Reason why these Prayers are most grateful to God; Because the first fruits, by all right, are due to him: so he offends against this, who gives them to another. Is it not a perversity in Christians to invert this order, to be intent and busied about o∣ther things? St. Chryfost. confounds Christians, negligent in this, by this Ex∣ample: A King comes into a place, and men think it honour to prevent others, and to be the first in rendring homage to him, and think it a neglect to suffer In∣feriours to go before them in it: But this diligence, saith he, is wanting in Christians, in rendring their Devotions and Service to God: they do not care if they be prevented in it, even by unrea∣sonable and inanimate Creatures: what is this but to prefer, and esteem more of
an Earthly King, than of the King of Heaven; but many here, saith the Ho∣ly Father, pretend excuses, by reason of necessary employments; but if the love of God were fervent, and the esteem of him the chiefest above all, such frivolous and cold excuses would not prevail: who more employed in necessary af∣fairs than King David was? and yet in the Morning he did consecrate the first∣fruits to God; lay thou aside all ex∣cuses, and cease to palliate Sloath and Tepidity under the Cloak of Necessity, which is so displeasing to God, that he is, as it were streightned and oblidged by it, to be sparing in bestowing bene∣fits, as he speaks by his Prophet Za∣chary, [c. 11.] Contracta est anima mea in eis; My Soul is streightned in them. Another reason, why these morning and early prayers are so grate∣ful to God, may be this; Because it is the proper Office of the Angels; and God, to render us like unto them, would have us joyn with them in praising him in this manner. That this
is proper to Angels, holy Job [Job 38. 7] informs us, calling the Angels Morning Stars, Cum me laudarent; when the Morning Stars did praise me together, and all the Sons of God exulted for joy. SSt. Hierome, Gregory, Bede, and others, by the Morning Stars understand the Angels which are said to be Morning Stars, because from the very beginning, as soon as they were Created, the first thing they performed, was to praise God. A last reason of these Morning prayers may be, because they are not so subject to distractions, being performed before we be ingaged in other things; and pre∣venting all affairs, they have a gratious influence upon all the good we do the day following, to direct it aright to the honour and glory of God; And thus every good work may be stiled a Prayer when it is done, in vertue of precedent Prayer; and so one may pray all the day long, by doing some good or other in vertue of his former Prayers. I will conclude this with that of So∣lomon, [Eccles. 39.] The just man will
give his heart, to resort early to our Lord that made him, and will pray before the most high. I have been somthing tedious about this Interiour and Spiritual Prayer, be∣cause of the great necessity of it, to re∣gulate and preserve a spiritual life, and because it is so much neglected in these times. The last Means to Preserve and En∣crease a Christian Life in us, is a Devout Frequenting of the Sacred Eucharist. This appears clearly by the Words of our Blessed Saviour in St. John, [C. 6.] Qui manducat me, ipse vivet propter me; he who eats me, shall live by me; for which Reason the Anti∣ent Affrican Christians called this Mistery Life; as St. Augustin relates of them. [S. Aug. de pec. merit. lib. 1. c. 24.] because he gives himself here to every one in particular, to render him Partaker of his Divine Life. For
this reason Paschacius compares this Sacrament, to the Tree of Life, planted in Paradice, to preserve and prolong the Life of Man. And to signifie thus much, it is instituted under the forms of Bread and Wine; to inform us, that it produceth the same effects, in order to a Spiritual Life, as these Elements do, about the Corporal Life of Man; for which, it is stiled by St. Cyprian [St. Cypr. Ser. de laps. de coena dom. Ep. 54.] a Celestial Viand, the aliment of Immor∣tality, a Divine Nourishment: So the grace of the Eucharist, is properly nou∣rishing Grace, because this Sacrament is instituted and ordained, to augment, for∣tifie and conserve the Spiritual Life of the Soul. It is an observation of St. Cyril [Cyril. Alexand. lib. 4. in Joan.] that our Blessed Saviour ordinarily in work∣ing of Miracles, used the Application of his Sacred Body; as when he would cure the infirm, or raise the Dead, he touched them with his Hands, to shew that his Flesh united with the Divinity Vivifica esset: had a vivificative Vertue
in it. That which he did visibly in the world, he doth invisibly by Grace in this Sacrament; and by the Real Pre∣sence of his Body in this Mistery. By which Union with him, we receive in a most excellent and abundant man∣ner, the communication of his Life and Spirit. We are incorporate here, and made one Body with him, to the end that we live by him, as St. Au∣gustine affirms, [St. Aug. tract. 26 in Joan.] This Sacred Eucharist renders us strong in Dangers, constant in La∣bours, patient in Afflictions; it expels humane Fears, and exceedingly con∣firms the Heart of Man; and was live∣ly represented by the Bread which Elias received from the Angel; by the vertue of which, he walked through the de∣sert to Oreb, the Mount of God. David shadowed it out, in that of the 22. Psalm, parasti mensam: thou hast pre∣pared a Table before me, against all that trouble me; and what other Table can he mean, but this, which Christ hath set before all his faithful? What o∣ther
Table can fortify him against all his Enemies, but this, wherein is eaten Fortitudo Gentium, the Fortitude of the Gentiles? hence St. Chrysostome saith, that we should depart from this Table, Tanquam leones, as generous Lyons brea∣thing Flames of Fire, and become ter∣rible unto the Devils. The reason why this Celestial Food, Armeth our Souls against all the assaults of our Enemies, may be easily conceived by this; for it would little avail a Souldier Armed without, if he were destitute of natural Force and Strength of Body to man∣nage his Weapons; if for Hunger his Vital Spirits failed, if he were so weak that he could not strike a Blow: there∣fore Meat is necessary to restore his lost Forces, and consequently to Arm him within, against the Troops of his Ene∣mies: So likewise Internally, doth this Holy Eucharist fortify us by Spiritual nutrition and vital Sustentation, against our ghostly Foes; therefore Christ saith, Caro mea vere est cibus, my Flesh is Meat indeed. To signifie this, the Coun∣cell
of Trent [Sess. 13. c. 2.] would have this Sacrament receaved, as Spiritual Food, to Nourish and strengthen the Soul; and as an Antidote, to free us from venial Sins, and preserve us from Mortals. Hence the Affrican Council, as St. Cyprian relates, though it had de∣termined, the Eucharist not to be given to those, who had denyed their Faith in Persecution, unless it were in case of Necessity or Infirmity; yet a new Persecution arising, they Decreed it to be Administred to such, lest they should fail in the profession of their Faith, by Torments. Such fortifying Ver∣tue they attributed to it, as St. Cyprian Affirms, that he is not sufficiently pre∣pared to suffer Martyrdom, Qui ab Ec∣clesia non armatur ad praelium; who by this means, is not Armed by the Church to Combate against the Ene∣mies of it. In this Sacrament, we do not not only receave an encrease of Sancti∣fying grace, but in consequence of our communions, the Divine providence is, as it were obliged, to give us ac∣tuall
graces, lights, motives, inspira∣tions to assist us, and further us in good, for the future; why so? be∣cause this Sacrament is instituted to conserve, and encrease the Spiritual life of the soul; And because, the means necessary to make this encreas, and establish perseverance, is the exer∣cise of holy actions, and the practise of good works; of which succours we have assurance, by vertue of this Sa∣crament, if we will worthily cooperate with them, and conserve them in our hearts, to make them eternally pro∣fitable: for which reason, it is Stiled by our B. Saviour, Food, qui permanet in vitam aeternam, which remains to life eternal. Do not think therefore, that the Blood of Christ works only in our hearts, in time of Communion, or whilst it remains in us really, un∣der the form of the Sacrament, but that it also presents us an eternall fecundity and motive to good works, which St. Augustine expresseth by this similitude; The command which God
gave to the earth in the begining, to produce herbs and fruits, was not only operative for then, but that same im∣pression works, for all ensuing Ages; in so much, that the productions, which we see in order of the Nature, are but Explications of that first Word Germinet terra, Let the Earth bring forth: [Gen. 1.] So the Communion we Receive, is a Secret impression, and tacite Command, which Jesus Christ made, to produce the Fruits of good Works in us; Germinet ter∣ra: Let the Earth, watered and made Fruitful, by my Blood, thus bring forth; nor do these impressions only work, during these pretious Mo∣ments of his Reall Presence in us, but they extend their Activity, through the rest of our Life; so that all the actions of a Christian, ought to be explications, and living inter∣pretations, of this Subsistant Word, and Life, which Jesus Christ leaves in us. This is the opinion of St. Ber∣nard, saying, Siquis vestrum; if any
one of you finds not in himself, such violent motions of Anger, Envy, Lust, & the like, let him give thanks to the Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ, because the vertue of the Sacrament works in him. Is it not now reasonable that you live and work as true Christians, after having recei∣ved in you, such a fruitful principle, cause and root of good. Radicati in ipso: [Col. 2.] rooted thus in him? If there be any thing, can give us assurance of the efficacy of this Sacrament in us, it is the exercise of good works and a ver∣tuous life; one knows a tree by the fruit of it; and you know, if you have effective∣ly received this Sacrament, by the works it causeth you to produce in your Lives; so you may therefore suspect your Communions, when they produce not such Fruits in you. Upon which St. Peter [Ep. 1. 2.] Exhorts us, to assure our Vocation by good Works, which parti∣cularly is understood of the grace of this Mistery. Receiving in our hearts the Life of our Saviour, being assured of His Pre∣sence,
and of our Obligations to do good works, which answers the fecundity of this Cause, the power of Succours, the efficacity of Motives here, which we have in this Mistery; is it not strange to see so little fruit produced by this a∣mongst Christians? There is nothing so common as the use of the Eucharist; Priests say Mass every day; a great part of Christians Communicate once a Month, many oftner. And notwith∣standing this, where is the Sanctity of Manners which should follow this ope∣rative Life received, this powerful principle and cause of Grace? you may see Dames, who make profession, often to approach this Holy Mystery, and yet they are not by this less violent in their passions, or less vain in their Conversations; nor are they more de∣vout, or more charitable; which gives occasion to Hereticks to judg amiss of our Faith; and to Libertines, to blame the frequent use of this Sacrament; from whence then proceeds this pro∣digious sterility amongst Christians in a
Sacrament so fruitful and operative? It is not the fault of the vertue of it, be∣cause we received the self-same, which produced the courage of Martyrs and Sanctity of the Church. Sure we ought to accuse our selves as defective causes, by putting obstacles to the effects of it; for we have free liberty to render un∣profitable all the causes of good, pre∣sented unto us. The precious Body and Blood of Christ have an extream in∣clination to save us, an infinite Vertue to confer Graces and Succours; and in the mean while, we oppose Obstacles to them, and offer violence to Christ himself in this Mistery: This may hap∣pen divers ways: First, it may be, we bring not necessary dispositions to render this Sacrament efficatious; but rather we receive it in the state of Mortal Sin, and thus trample the preti∣ous Body and Blood of Christ under our feet; he gives us his Sacred Body to be the Means and Cause of Grace, and we by a Sacrilegious Communion make the same Body the Instrument of our Sin;
and so change the Sacrament of Love, into a Sacrament of our Rage and Ma∣lice; and as the Apostle says, we be∣come Guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ. But suppose we come fee from Mortal Sin, and in the estate of Grace, as much as we can assure our selves, yet we come with a certain tepidity and negligence which hinder us from re∣ceiving the fervour of Charity, and the active quality of Grace, which gives not only the Power, but the Inclinations and Motions to good works. And a∣gain, If we are well disposed, and re∣ceive an encrease of Sanctifying Grace, and by the vertue of our Communions, God gives us the Succours of actual Gra∣ces; we may put another Obstacle to their efficacy, in not cooperating with them, by not seconding their influen∣ces, but rather refusing their impressi∣ons; and therefore no wonder if our Communions are so unprofitable. And thus truly one may say of us in this con∣dition, as St. Paul said of the Infidels, Veritatem dei in injustitia detinent,
[Rom. 1.] they detain the truth of God in injustice. Jesus Christ, the Truth, which we have received in Communi∣on, his Grace, his Lights, and his Inspi∣rations, we hold Captives in our hearts; and commit a high injustice by hindring them from produceing their effects in us. A Last Reason of this sterility may be, because we consider not the Commu∣nion we have made, nor the Obligati∣ons it imposeth on us, to render them efficatious. After the use of Commu∣nion, we should often think of it, and a∣mongst the occasions of sin, or doing of good, we should receive this Sacrament Spiritually, in our minds; saying, be pleased my Saviour, that I do not any thing unworthy your Pretious Blood; Live in me continually by your holy Operations, that I may one day receive from your hands, the recompence of it in glory. It is St. Chrysostom's Advice and Councel, [Hom. 60. ad pop.] to consider this our dignity in the occasions of sin, to the end that such a consideration may serve us as
a Bridle to Curb our Passions, and as a Spur and excellent Motive to excite us to good; Quaenam erit nobis excusatio; what excuse can we have, that being partakers of such Mysteries, we commit such Crimes? So the Holy Father far∣ther especially exhorts, that we ought to be Good and Vertuous before and af∣ter Communion; before, to render us worthy to receive the Sacrament; after, not to appear unworthy of having re∣ceived it; And by this means, our Communions will produce in us Perse∣verance in Grace, and Consummation of a Spiritual Life, which is the last end of the Sacrament, and the Object of our Hopes. FINIS.
ERRATA. Page. Line. Read. 1 12 alone. 10 16 Ad Pop. 26 6 anathema esse 29 10 on 33 14 pimp. 45 5 preferred 46 5 meo   17 Christian   20 Infirmaian 49 24 fides 62 3 languet 71 1 A Treatice 93 1 Mecum era 94 5 cubiculo   13 retire so 97 9 dispised 101 19 De Orando 110 22 do not only.
