F1559 45097785 171373
The Forlorn Damsel. Well, since there's neither Old nor Young, will pitty on me take, My passion now doth grow so strong, I fear my heart will break. The Tune is, Moggy's Jealousie. COme pitty a Damsel distressed, all you that have tasted the bliss, For while you with favours are blessed, I hardly can meet with a kiss: Which makes me resolve in my anguish, in Desarts to take my abode, For I now in my sorrows do languish, my Maiden-head is such a load. Oh! why was I born to such fortune, as makes me so sadly repine, There is no Young-man so improtune, as to pitty these sorrows of mine: Now must I be forc'd to complain, to some stranger that travels the Road, To ease all my sorrow and pain, since my Maiden-head is such a load. By night I with dreams am tormented, supposing I am at the Game, But waking am so discontented, that I my hard fortune do blame: O then I sit sighing and sobbing, and send forth my wishes abroad, My heart is e'ne broken with throbbing, since, &c.
ALL you that are happy by tasting, that which I do so much desire, See how I lye panting and wasting; consuming by amorous fire: There's none that is moved with pitty, while plainly my folly is show'd, And I sing this sorrowful Ditty, That my Maiden-head is a great load This burthen cannot be endured, but under it sadly I groan, Yet little hope have to be cured, since I am distressed alone: There's many that never saw twenty, that in pleasure live in their abode, Who say to me, do not torment me, though your Maiden-head be a great load. But by them I cannot be ruled, my passion's so violent strong, For never was any so fooled, that lived a Maiden so long; But I must and I will have a man, that with me shall make his abode, For let me do all that I can, still my Maiden-head, &c. How happy are you that are Married, and taste of Loves joys when you please, With patience too long have I tarry'd, till longing hath bred a Disease: More loathsome to me then the Venom, of Serpent or poysonous Toad, The Young-men, the Devil is in 'um, to let me lye under this load. And now to conclude my sad Ditty, some lusty young Lad come away, And a poor Maid take some pitty, whose Vitals begin to decay: For want of those pleasant delights, that to others are commonly show'd, I pine both by days and by nights, since my Maiden-head is such a load. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Gol∣den-Ball, near the Hospital-gate, in West-Smithfield.
