F1653 E516_5 99865332 117571
FOVRE Deliberate, and Solid QVERIES Of State, Resolved to the three KINGDOMES. 1. What is the chiefe and principall cause of the distempers and de∣structive differences now on foote, and possible or likely to be? 2. What is the most proper and speedy remedy to remove or take away that disease, with the cause thereof the stopping or obstruction in the cause of Iustice in matters of humanity, and which ought to be between man, and man? 3. What is or may be the best meanes to prevent such distempers as are now on foot in this Kingdome, or their like which may happen in future time? 4. How may this remedy for the present distemper and meanes of preven∣tion against the same or the like for future be administred or ap∣plyed for the releife and preservation of humanity and Conscience, when the head by much corruption from within, and without, is seduced and made uncapabable of performing its of fice, the course of Government, and execution of Iustice issuing from thence? With a discovery of a true Church and the discipline, and Government thereof. LONDON Printed in the Yeare 1647.
TO discover the Mysterie of divine and devilish policie, that men may know when in Ecclesiasticall Government they are really subject under God, or the Devill, and which they doe actually worship, let it be considered. 1. That the same spirit that ruleth in any naturall body, ruleth in the policie thereto belonging. 2. That the humane part of man is subjected by the curse; and redemption to the predomination of a spirituall substance issuing from God or the Devill, by which men are ruled and governed personally, and politiquely as hath been expressed. 3. That these predominating spirits in man, are point blanke contrary in their nature and qua∣lity as the fountains and fathers thereof, and by the quality and disposition of the ruling spirit in state personall, or politicall, tis to be judged in the present condition whether it be of God, or not: to this purpose is the Counsell of the Holy Ghost, saying, beleeve not every Spirit, but try the Spi∣rits whether they be of God for &c. Iohn 4.1. and it is a positive way of distintion used in Scrip∣ture, in determining truths, as in Rom. 8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his. Verse 14. and as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God; and the like must needs be of the contrary part, herein the discoveries of policies and natures both gives large satisfaction, but that men may see to purpose, or appeare willingly ignorant, take notice. God for the nature or quality of his spirit is called Love, 1 Iohn 4.8. and 16. 2 Cor. 13.11. he is called the God of love, &c. the same spirit or quality which ruleth in, or is the life of the Father of Spirits, is the like, of his naturall for, and of his adopted sons, as former Scriptures and essentiall reason plainely prove, and in all beareth the same fruit, Gal. 5.22 23.24. Likewise the nature or quality of the spirit of the politique power of the visible Church of Christ the new Ierusalem, the Kingdome of King; and Priests, is the same with that of God and all his Children, even of love as the Treatise of policies proveth to the full, but for farther proofe observe. 1. Every thing that is God, as participating of his nature, or representing the same in police, must needs be the same with his owne, or contrary to him, and its apparent in all the Churches up∣on record in the new Testament there was no exercise or practise of any violence used to bring, or keep in or to cast people out of the Church, nor in that way was the performance of any act in∣joyned, but reproved 3. Iohn 1.9.10. and in that way also God may soone have more then h requireth of worship in spirit and truth. Likewise to prove the quality of the Spirit of the politique power of Christs Church, to be of love, every office of administration therein is of service, not of command, there is no authority above the Church, and this appeares in Christs advise of remedy for trespass done by a brother, wishing upon neglect of former meanes, to complaine to the Church, Mat. 18.17. and in his appeasing the indignation of the ten moved by the request of the Mother of Zebedees Children, hee saith unto them, ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, &c. but it shall not be so among you, &c. and whosoever will be chiefe among you let him be your servant, Mat. 20.2.
25, 26, 27. and to the same purpose read Luke 22.25. And further consider the quality of the spirit or disposition of the Lawes and ordinances thereof, and it will be found sutble to that of God, the builder and maker of the whole, together with that of the chiefe corner stone, and the matter and forme of the Kingdome of the Gospell, even of divine love, which the Holy Ghost approveth by Gal. 5.13.14. in these words, but by love serve one another, for all the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, thou shalt love thy Neighbour, &c. love covereth all sins, Prov. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.8. and what is the Christian course or law of the Sanctuary in case of offence done, but forgiveness untill 70. times 7. yea as we desire God to forgive us, we are to forgive, Mat. 18.21, 22. v. 35. here∣by its clearely evident, that the quality of the spirit of the Church of Christ, throughout every part thereof is divine love, which also is testified in the said foregoing Treatises, and the very titles by which the Holy Ghost styleth it, significantly confirmeth the same, as the body of Christ the  of Christ, the Bridegroome, &c. Every truth discovereth its opposite in the nature thereof, and so what hath been said of the ∣lity of the spirit of God and all that is of him, naturally and politiquely, and in speciall of the ∣sible Church of Christ, tis sufficient to set forth the nature and quality of the spirit of the  Antichrist, and all that is of him, and especially, that of the false ecclesiasticall state, the false  which is called Christs, but in spirit and truth is not, and is indeed the Mysticall body of Anti-christ: but that men may winck and see, let the nature and quality of the sprit of the man of sin, the My∣stery of iniquity, be presented to consideration also, and as it issueth from the old Serpeat the Dragon, the man-destroyer, the old lyer, the deluder of the world, and as it agreeth with the spirit of the false Church, in matter and forme of it, in the state and lawes thereof, even through∣out the whole, will appeare to be of violence and compulsion, as hath been proved in the former discoveries, but to revive and enlarge the proofes, can be but necessary paines for all sides, and the better to cleare this point, it will be good to distinguish of violence and compulsion, whereof there is two sorts. 1. Is humane, which tendeth to the preservation of the nature and being of men, which is practi∣sed or used by the civill Majestrate, in cases between man and man, in prevention of mens destroy∣ing or murthering each other, or counting actions leading and tending thereunto, and this is was Gods allowance, as the Holy Ghost justifieth, Rom. 3.4. 1 Tim. 1.9.10. 2. Is inhumane, or devilish, which causeth mans destruction without just cause of offence given in any case depending between man and man, such Caine used to Abell, such the Iewes to Gods Prophets, such was used to Christ and his Saints, as the Scriptures Prophetically and Historically abundantly declare, which people cannot be ignorant of, that any jot use them. And that this inhumane, or divilish violence and compulsion, is the quality or nature of the ruling spirit of the false Church, twill appeare two wayes. First, By charging and snaring men unnaturally and causelelly, with criminall injunctions and impositions, in matters of conscience [which in no respect is under the command of humane power, much less under what is devilish] after the manner of Aegypt and Babilon. Secondly, By killing, or causing men to be killed for refusing subjection in conscience, without any civill transgression, as in former presidents, and herein the Holy Ghost setteth forth the man of sinne, sitting and ruling over conscience, in a higher way then ever the sonne of God did. 2 Thes, .4. Christ seeketh not subjection of conscience, but the obedience of faith, which worketh by love, he craveth not the use of any externall power to effect it, but useth only the Doctrine of salvation; he proclaimes no service for slaves but Volunteeres, but Antichrist seeketh all subjection of conscience: after the manner of Sathan, with all power, and signes, and lying wonders. 2. Thes. 2.9.10. the Kingdome of heaven, for perfection of whose quality of spirit, of love and salvation, of soul and bo∣dy all humane service is due unto it, yet therein, and therewith, was no power of violence given or used, to make men tender it whether they would or no, neither in abuse, or disrespect of it to bekilled
or spoiled in body, goods, or liberty, the Beast which did arise out of the Sea or the earth, the King∣dome from beneath, I meane of Hell although the profession of Trany, and to be abhorred of all men for destruction in soule and body, and all that apertaine to both, receiveth power and State, and great authority from the Dragon, which the world wondereth after, and worshipeth, and hath power which causeth all small, and great, rich and poore, bound, and free to receive a marke, or be subject to it, and that none should buy or sell, save he that did, or doth so, Revel. 13. Such as are no able to deserne any politique body by the essentiall parts of it, the matter and forme, nor the necessary circumstantiall parts there unto belonging, as the meanes of it, the state or manner, and the lawes and Ordinances thereof, yet they cannot be so simple, or ignorant, but to deserne and distinguish of the quality of the spirit and the life thereof, whether it tendeth to com∣fort of love and preservation of the nature of man, or to a slavish and fearefull liveing in bondage (the way of the destruction of humane nature) it were convenient also to relate the severall sorts of Anti-Christe, but it will be tedious, there be many. 1 Ioh. 2.18. 2 Ioh. 1.17. but they are all of one spirit, and though verbally, and deceivably, yet not really consessing Christ, to become in the flesh, so as to yeeld him the Throne of his Father David, and to hold him as sole head of the Church, and this is that Spirit of Anti-Christ. 1 Ioh. 4.3. But if Christ be allowed the name of of an head, (which is monsterous for a body to have two heads,) yet the Pope in the Sea, or a spi∣rituall Court, (his Image) in the earth, the King also it may be, wearing the Title, as a Chipher likewise) carrieth the office of a head, together with the powre and priviledge, in whose name power and authority, all the Church service is performed, this is effected, and contrived in practice withall deceivablenesse of uprightnesse. 2 Thess. 2.10. undoing the world in these last times, as in the begining with Divellishnes, through faire promising Guile, and deceipt. And now O Civell state, both head and foote, trie the Spirit of the Church of England and of o∣ther Nations under the same head of government, and instead of the spirit so qualified, as to bring forth the fruits of love, joy peace long suffering gentlnesse, goodnesse, &c. which are belonging and proper to the spirit of God, Gall. 5.22.23. which should extend to all in the true Church, and without it, Gall. 6.10. and instead thereof doth appeare a ruling spirit qualified with a clean con∣trary working in our civell head with his whole state, and estate, both subjects, sword and mainte∣nance, the service of the false Prophet the second beast, spirituall courts of power the Image of the first beast, with powre to kill and slay such as cannot do any thing in conscience, in way of confor∣mity, in matters of Church worship, witnes the truth of this, mens sufferings (when there be enough ould and new, and publique also) under the sperit of the power of the Ecclesiasticall Courts, when there hath been no injurie don in any Civill respect at all, whereby the power of common Courts of justice, could take any hould Civillity if thou hast any sence of the judgments denounced against Egipt and Babilon, put away from thee the spirit thereof in all respects, bondage and oppression of all sorts, especially foule Tyrany, and slavery, and looke to your charge the drift and end of your calling even the preservation of one another in all civill maner, and leave conscience in govern∣ment to God, who alone hath the power and disposition of sperits and soules and let people besafe and quiet in the use thereof which will prove if the truth be in them or not, for the supporting of accomplish power, our conscience and the use of it presenteth all a like, and filleth the world with his pocrisie, and a way of excuse therein, which God in all his wayes abhorreth if the highest in ci∣vell state were as Adam in his innocencie (which cannot be since the cursse) yet he might be re∣membered to be wise (as Adams case proveth) and to beware, least the tempter by his spirit in his Instruments be too hard for him, and couzen him of his Paradice, even by listing him a bove the go∣vernment of humane nature, and lift him out of all, consider violence is no right way in conjuncti∣on of spirits, Christ, did not so reconcile and reunit God, and man, that is proper to course, dressit, and earthey compositions, wherein is confusion, the finer, and pure substance suppressed by that which is worse, and therefore God in these substantiall times of worship, in spirituall matters, (men keeping the maine bounds of civillity) leaveth them free in the use of their sonles, and spirits, to serve under
that spirituall head from whence they are, and to whch they belong and incline, and likewise that men in civill command might be without excuse, for serving a false Church state, and further you may call to mind, how subject you are to be deluded, being Adams Sons, and be drawne by mock∣ers and scoffers of these last times, to put such unreasonable gulls, for true service upon God, which in your owne case your selves cannot swallow, or digest as good and right in your owne judge∣ment, any power interposing in civill policie, notwithstanding all faire pretences, is held to bee depriving and entercepting the Soveraignty of the head, and loyalty of the body, and so high Treason, which also can be no lesse; thinke of this States-men and Subjects, & what can it be other∣wise, then the like against God and Heaven, when all worship and Church service must passe tho∣rough the power and pleasure of men rulers, and such as take upon them to dispose of Gods people, and their affaires; and let it please you to deale with God, as with reasonable men, in way of Govern∣ment, without usurpation and interposition of power, or supporting any which cannot stand by it selfe, and be satisfied with the onely use of civill command, and power in earth other, which endeth in the peace and safety of all, confined within the bounds of humanity, then shall you be a refuge to the innocent, and a terrour to the wicked, as is the will of God, Rom. 13.4. The Questions and Answers follow. 1. Quest. WHat is the chiefe and principall cause of the distempers and distructive differences now on foote and possible or likely to be in this or any other humane Civill politique State and Kingdome? Answ. It is an obstruction, or stoppage in the veines or passages of justice, and equity, in matters be∣tweene man, and man, which also is the gate or meanes of passage from mercy, and equity, to cruel∣ty, and oppression. The truth of this answer, will appeare to be without contradiction, by considering from the light and rule of Gods word and humane reason. 1. What the nature, or spirit, and use of humane, and civill Governement is, which is given by way of allowance and approbation by the Trinity, to the Kings and Nations of the Earth. 2. What the nature or spirit and use of the true Church-State, the true Ecclesiasticall Governe∣ment is, which is given to Christ and his redeemed ones by his Father. 3. What the nature or spirit and use of the false Ecclesiasticall Governement is, which is given to the sonne and children of Pride, by their father the Devill, through the patience and long suffering of the blessed Trinity. In the foregoing Treatise is discovered the knowledge of the Three States, by the Spirit of them, and now by the knowledge of the nature and use of them, when any Nation or part of the world is in violent distempers, the highway of distruction, it will bee easie to consider what is the most chiefe and eminent cause thereof, and therefore in these times of great distractions, you shall finde by examination. First, Of the nature of civill or humane Governement, it is, and ought to be, in quality according to the second Table of the Morall Law of God, without all, or any exceptions, preserving mankind in generall, in all respects, only betweene man, and man, harmelesse, and from wrong, as well the stranger as the neighbour, and the poore, as the rich, without partiality; wisedome is expressed assuredly by the greatest and most assentiall commandements of God, tending to the being, and wel∣being of mankind, and those are summed up in two great Commandements, upon which hangs all the Law and the Prophets, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy, &c. and thy neighbour as &c. and by the same wisedome, doe Kings raigne, and Princes decree justice; By mee Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Iudges of the Earth, Prov. 8.15.16. If this Scripture be not full enough to prove, that the nature of the Governement of the Kings of the earth, the state of the Magistracie is in the highest pitch, or largest extent of it, the administration of justice meerely in matters be∣tweene man, and man, before Christs time, and since common reason in the judgement of a sparke of
humanlty will doe the worke, tis most apparent there are but two kindes of policie in the wold, and they are Ecclesiasticall, or Divine, and Civill or Humane, all politique States, whe∣ther true, or false, are under one of these titles: I neede not stand to proove tis day when the Sunne shineth, before Christs time that which was Ecclesiasticall or Divine, it was peculiarly by speciall commission given to the Iewes and their Governours, excluding the Gentiles, in generall all the Na∣tions thereof, and their Governours. Deut. 7.6.14.2.26.18.19 sinee Christs comming who brake downe the partition wall, paying the price of Redemption, and privildged the Gentiles as well as the Iew, in the state of Christianity, hee hath received the power and Kingdome Ecclesiasticall from his Father, by commission it is given him, and Christians excluding all of every nation, not so qua∣lified both Iew, and Gentile, and high, and low, Luke 1.32.33. Mat. 28.18. Such as worship God in spirit and truth (not externally, and in shew onely) doth he allow to worship him) Iohn 4.23, 24. God respecteth not persons for Nation, Tribe, Art, or civill degree, but in every Nation he that feareth him and worketh righteousnesse is excepted of him. Acts 10.34, 35. to the company of them that are so qualified in spirit as aforesaid, belongs that spiritual kingdom or Government Eccle∣siasticall, which Christ saith, is not of this world, & they are now the chosen, generation, the holy nati∣on, which in time past, were not a people, but are now the people of God, 1 Pet. 2.8 9 10. Tit. 2.14. Further proofe hereof, you will finde the use of civill Governement to bee, which also upon exa∣mination will appeare to be meerely for the maintenance and preservation of justice in matters be∣tweene man, and man, which common reason affords from truths of former consideration, but full to prove the use of it to be as aforesaid, take the words of the holy Scriptures, and the impossi∣bility of any Farther extent, speaking of Majestracie, it is said Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evill, wilt thou not then be afraid of the power, doe that which is good, and thou shal have praise of the same, for he is the Minister of God to thee for good, but if thou dost that which i evill, be afraid for he beareth not the sword in vaine for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to ex∣ecute wrath upon him that doth evill, Rom. 13.3, 4. now by all rules, and principles, in divine and humaine nature and policie, the Minister and his sword must relate and belong in use onely to ju∣stice in humaine affaires, for no man is, or can bee a Christian in spirit and truth by compulsion, and farther, if he were so, he could not live without doing evill against God, and in such case, what is du pennance, yea how should the Minister or Subject live, neither hath any Christian Ministers an sword to revenge or to execute Iustice; they use onely (by allowance) the sword of the spirit, th word of God; the highest penalty that the Scripture records, which Christ advised his Disciple when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel, if people of any place received them not, they wer to shake off the dust under their feete in testimony against them, for any other punishment was t remaine in the hand of God to be excuted in the time of his Iudgement. Marke 6.11. and this wa the practise in case of opposition, Acts 13.51. The use of civill Governement is also set forth by th Apostle, shewing the use of the Law, 1 Tim. 1.8, 9, 10 the Governement, of Christ Iesus, which is his by Birth-right & Commission, Isa. 9.6, 7. Luk 1.32, 33. Mat. 28.18. is that only which is tru Ecclesiasticall or Divine, higher and greater in nature then that which is civill & including the same as every greater doth the lesse no waies repugnante thereunto, but in his policie as in his persona nature, advancing the same for a more speciall service, the spirit thereof is divine Love, enjoynin men through redemption and sanctity, the service of the Trinity, in as free a way as members of  naturall body serve their head & one another in the sence thereof: Of this Governement, are not un∣reasonable men, which have not faith, whose unruly dispositions require the use of the Civill sword,  prevent inhumane passages, but the meeke, the mercifull, the pure in heart, with all the blessed men∣tioned, Mat. 5. those that neede none but the sword of the spirit, the word of God, the holy seri∣tures (which are able to make wise unto salvation through faith whch is in Christ Iesus, all which a given by inspiration of God, and are profitable in Divine Governement, for Doctrine, for reproof for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse, 2 Tim. 3.15, 16.) hereof I have spoken largely former passages, and the foregoing Ttreatise; This Governement hath no touch in nature of a
externall violence in gathering to geather into fellowship, formalizeing any therein, in any mea∣sure or casting out any, but such who by their impenitent wickednesse despise their ealling, and by continuing in lewde lusts exclud themselves. The use of this government, is to make happy the life of the faithfull, Gods chosen; by liveing in visible fellowship with him in the Kingdome, and Government, of his deare Sun (who is made unto them, Righteousnesse, Sanctification, and Redemption,) Cor. 1.30, and that they by a Christ like Spirit (who without any compulsion in uprightnesse to God and man, in a free, and loveing, yea a liveing way of life, shewed forth the vertues of his Father, even him that sent him) even his chosen generation, his royall Preist-hood, his holy Nation, his peculiar people should shew forth the prayses of him, who hath called them out of darknesse, into his merveilous Light. 1 Pet. 2.9. and walke as not resraained from evill by the terror of the Law, and sword of justice, but ready to do good unto all, and suffer for well doing if need be, which government in use, can no way wrong that of Civility, but rather of due, may have service from it. The Government of Anti-Christ which is against, and contrary to the nature and Spirit of that of Christ (wherein is accepted only those of every Nation, which feare God, and worke righteous∣nesse, not any compelled) and which also is deceiving, and undoing civill Government in saluation both of life, and estate, tis in nature and spirit of violence and compulsion, forceing holinesse and sanctity, or as it may be justly said externall formallity, in an externall way of worship, upon Na∣tions, People, and Languages, a sort of service, which men of common reason, despise in compa∣rison of any issuing from naturall affection much more doth God abhorr it, although performed with the leas measure and manifestation, of Hipocracie, and wherein is either greater or more e∣minent, then in acting any thing by compulsion, which should issue from the utmost freedom of the spirit, the nature of this violence and compulsion, is contrary to that of Civility, which preserveth humanity, keeping Civill bends, for this without breach of humanity (forcing the shew of consci∣ence where is none, or making men act against conscience both which are contrary to Christianity) depriveth people without spirituall subjection of naturall life, and lively hood, liberty, and estate, and destroyeth the life of Christianity, and this must needs be the nature of the man of sin, the son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth him selfe above all that is called God, or is worshiped, 2. Thes. 2, 3, 4 this is the discription which the Holy Ghost giveth of the first and second Beast, Revel. 13 16, the false Ecclesiasticall State which the world doth so much wonder after and worship, the use hereof doth also helpe to set forth the nature and spirit of it, togeather with former passages in the foregoing Treatises. &c. The use of it is contrary to that of Christianity, and humanity, to curse the upright in conscience and to sanctifie rude Nations, and multitudes, whereby the beast, the false statetis kept alive, for if light be not put and kept out, darkenesse cannot remaine, the Divell cannot have his forth upon the world in deluding the posterity as the first Parents, and since Christs time, as before, in Egipt and Babilon, wherein mens soules and consciences, slavuized to most foolish and divelish wayes of worship, but the old serpent is not to learne how to keepe his Kingdome, and Government one foote, he knows how to make mankind his owne, fron the begining, although it were with giving God the Lye, Goddifie man with a litle flatery, and lying, and foole him out of all hapinesse, and so hath he dealt with the world in these later times since Christs comming, set up a state of false ho∣inesse, by slatering Nations, with Lyes, which with a hisse of the false Prophet raise warr against the Saints, and blaspheming against God, his name, his Tabernacle, and them which dwelt in heaven, as you may read, Revel. 13. at large for the state of humanity, the use of this state of An∣ti-Christ, is contrary to it with a witnesse, but if one tell it the truth of it, humane policie, (which was erected since the curse) doth so much exceed Adams, strength and wisdome, which he had in innocency, that it will presently fall foule, with truth and plaine dealing, tell her of sheding inno∣rent blood, in subjecting her sword, and powre, to such as call for it, to kill men for maters of con∣science, without any civill offence, or wrong done to humane nature, she will indure to heare of i,
as the Iewes did of killing the Prophets, and betraying the just one, Acts. 7.52, 53, 54, not without cause did Christ say to the Iewes, I am come in my Fathers name and ye receive me not, if a nother shall come in his owne name, or without Gods sending him, ye will receive, Ioh. 5.43, both Christe himselfe, his Apostles, and Desiples, upon record, in scripture, have given large warning of false Christs, and false Prophets, which come in sheeps clothing, but are inwardly ravening Wolves, he and his Deciples, lived in a way of plaine dealing, and doing good, and instituted a state for that use according to the Proclamation of his comming, Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will towards men Luke. 2.14. he came and sent his Deciples abroad, into the world, not to re∣ceive but to administer, and the use of the state of Christs Government is not to compasse the world but to administer salvation, but this of Anti christ as it hath relation to the state of humanity, its al∣together deceiving the soules with a forme of godlinesse without powre, and the body of estate, of which you may read, 2 Tim. 3.2. Thes. 2, 2, Pet. 2. and were not the use hereof deceiptfull gaine, who would be the Divells slave, to be the Minister of a nationall Church State which Christ put an end unto, that he might establish that which is most perfect, of divine use but the world and Nation thereof, have ever been more apt to beleeve the Divell, then Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and ther∣by he hath brought them to this passe, that if men will have any part of the world, they must fall downe and worship him, or be killed, and be spitefully used by the peopl thereof, as Christ, Prophets Apostles and Desciples, have been in former times, for further satisfaction in the use of this state, I re∣ferre you to former passages. Now consider the nature and use of civell government, that of Christ Iesus, and that of Anti-Christ. And its apparent that of civillity, is to maintaine and preserve the rude Nations, and multituds of the earth, by correcting Malefactors, or evill doers, and by cutting of murderers with the sword of Iustice, without any relation to conscience. That the true Ecclesiasticall state, the Church of Christ, is to shew a more excellent way, of life it alloweth the former in its owne use, not requiring it to rectifie conscience, but in the nature and use of his government, setting forth a being of love, mercie, and forgivenesse, to that life and height as we would God should forgive us our trespasses against him. That the false Ecclesiasticall state, the worlds Church state, which the Divell hath set up to de∣lud men, of the world in matters of soule and body, and to spoile men of conscience, withall, to kill and handle the Saints of Christ, as himselfe with spite, is away of living in blaspheming, and lying against God, cursing what he hath blessed, and blessing what he hath cursed, and spilling in∣nocent blood, so deluding civillity, as to make her thinke she doth God service in cuting off men in maters of concience, which is a worke God, never required of Majestrates, as hath beene plainly proved over and over. Now all Ecclesiasticall government exercised in the earth, or amongest the Nations, under civil Government, medleth not without the approbation of civillity, in inflicting punishment upon no conformists in maters of conscience, and hath no powre but what is given them of Civility, to in force any thing upon conscierce which the Beast, and false prophet, have along time ploughed wit all they have built, & preserved their Sion with blood, yea with the blood of such who neither com∣mited sealony nor Treason, as this Kingdome well knoweth, Christ when he was risen from th dead and testified to be the Son of God, without exception by the world, he sent his Desciples to i¦lighten the Nations with the way of truth, and salvation, he sought it not with the wrong of Civil and humanly disposed persons, nor yet once moved Civility to convert people with the sword t the Government of his Kingdome, all the wayes of the Kings of the earth in their state, (I say no their persons) can be nourishing Fathers to that of Christ, is only by doing of justice, releeving th oppressed, and preserving the innocent, (as most men know, but are ashamed to justifie it) and if be not the part of the calling of Majestracie, to urge maters of conscience one Christ his part, I am sure, and it is plaine to all men tha its no part of that calling to order matters of conscience again
Christs Government and there owne two, and therefore it must needs he conded, that if there be any distemper in any Nation or Common wealth, an obstruction or stopping in the veines and passages of justice, and equity, in matters betweene man, and man, must needs bee the chiefe cause thereof. 2. Quest. But if in justice and injurie done and suffered between man, and man, not Religion, espe∣cially that of Christ Iesus, be the principall cause of distempers in this Kingdome or any other state of civill Policie. What is the most proper and speedy remedy to remove or take away that disease, with the cause thereof, the stopping or obstruction in the cause of Iustice in matters of humaity, and which ought to be betweene man, and man. Ans. It is a maxime in all natures, and an infalble rule, take away the cause, and the effect, or that which is wrought thereby, will follow, and so in taking away the cause of this obstruction, the re∣medy is had or gained: which that it may be accomplished, let it be considered. First, what the cause is. Secondly, From whence it is, whether from within the body or without it, for all bodies subject to corruption are incident to be hurt both waies, as experience teacheth. The cause whether within, or without the body, or state of civill, or humane policie, is an evill hu∣mour, spirit, or disposition, contrary and distructive to the nature of the same, and that is most com∣monly, and most ordinary in the life of man, personally and politically, one, or both, Pride and co∣vetuousnesse (the parents of cruelty and oppression) wherein humane nature is partially dealt with, not justly, but under, and over, not duely valued in one man as well as another; and so without all doubt as in the Religious policie, so and much more in the humane, whence is discord, contention, or striffes, onely by Pride, Prov. 13.10. And from whence commeth warres and fightings among men, come they not hence, even from their Lusts, unruly, and envious desires, seeking more then is due, Iames 4.1. and that the body of civill policie, the whole state thereof, from the King to the meanest subject thereof, is subject to be corrupted, both from inbred corruption and from without, experience is witnesse, not to be refused or scorned, and that Kings and great ones in the civill state of this Kingdome have committed oppression, and behaved themselves proudly over their subjects, and sought their owne ends without tendering their subjects good from inbred corruption, let re∣cords and experience testifie, I speake it not to disparage either the person or the office of any way of Majestracie: and that the like hath beene wrought, is, and will bee caused by corruption from without the civill body, is likewise not to be denyed, and that is a false Clergy, the best or false Prophet, witnesse the truth hereof civill and conscionable mens sufferings, without cause of any civill offence given to civill state, of which spirituall deluders, and their miserable effects wrought upon the State of humanity: I referre you to the foregoing Treatises, And O civill State from the highest to the lowest, bee not angry for plaine dealing, tis most honest and safe: the state of the Iewes which exceeded yours for all high priviledges, hath beene subjected under the same conditi∣ons, of which spake the Holy Ghost historically, and of this prophetically, Ezek. 22. from 25. to 31. Mich. 3.9, 10, 11, 12. for the same purpose, see Mat. 10.16, 17, 18. &c. Revel. 16.13, 14 Revel. 17.12, 13, 14 now minding the nature and use of civill Governement, what the cause of distemper is therein, and from whence, which being taken away, the distemper ceaseth, and the remedy is presently gained or had: God hath shewed thee O man what is good, and what he doth equire of thee, to doe justly love mercy, and walke humbly with God, by the rule of his wisedome, not mans vaine concepts, Mich. 6.8. 3. Quest. But since in states of Policie whose heads and bodies are subiect to corruption and utter distruction without remedy, (which many times commeth to late) what is or may bee the best meanes o prevent such distempers as are now on foot in this Kingdome, or their like, which may happen in fu∣ture time. Ans. What divine wisedome teacheth, and humane experience generally proveth for good, is
a rule to be followed not to be contemned by any, no, not by the greatest of men except they think to justifie wrong courses against God and their owne welfare, this Kingdome has learned, formerly and since our Kings Raigne, that his Majestie hath by flatery the goulden cover of pride, covetous∣nesse of Court and Clergie bin (and twere hapie if I might say is not) made stranger to the com∣minalty of all his Dominions, whilst all Civill Courts of administion of justice have bin made trapps and snares to undo, not to right men in case of wrong and the way of Religion, intended for inlargement of light and truth, not to confine it and such as know and practise the same, hath bin carried in away against the life of conscience, to imprison, banish, and punish civill disposed persons, differing in matters of conscience, which is inlightened only from above, so that justice being per∣verted, and the light of the Gospell of Iesus Christ measured out and confirmed by a Iewish and more Antichristian governement, the common weale must needs bee in a lamentable pickle if not fitted for utter destruction. The meanes of preventing these evills present, and the like for future time, Divine wisedome and common reason with experience, teacheth to be, not the permitting, but taking away the interpo∣sition of flatterers betweene the head and body, whereby grievances of both, may be freely commu∣nicated, and jountly releeved. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Kingdome shall be established in righteousnesse, Prov. 25.5. and if there be any wicked, flatterers are wicked, those that have respect of persons elivating corrupt nature of men, more in one person then another sliting the nature of justice, for, for a peece of bread that man, will transgresse, Prov. 28.21. A ly∣ing tongue hateth those that are afflicted by it, and a flattering mouth worketh ruine. Pro. 26.28. 4. Quest. But how shall this remedy for the present distemper and meanes of prevention against the same or the like for future, be administred or applyed for the reliefe and preservation of humanity and conscience, when the head by much corruption from within, & without is seduced & made unca∣pable of performing its office, the course of Governement & execution of justice issuing from thence. Ans. Although the ordinary course of Governement is in all bodies issuing from the head, yet in such whose head with the whole body is subject to corruption, the law of the nature therof for∣bids not, but rather enjoynes any way possible, of the preservation of the whole, both head & mem∣bers: the advice of wisedom in that expression, take a way the wicked from before the King intirnateth as much, wherein the King is rendered as the patient or partie suffering & another acting the remedy injoyned, both which cannot be performed by one instrument, at one & the same instant of the act in any case in the world, neither is it proper for the hand to say to the head, be thou whole, but actually to helpe; by the rule of policie, which all States follow, or ought so to do, wisedomes advise is given to the body, whose the head is, and who must suffer with the head when that suffereth, or that part of the body which may beare sway by rule of policie, the sound in nature, the major part thereof, and this either in the body in generall, or in the body representative, & intrusted by the whole, for the advice of the welfare thereof, or for the more private & common counsaile most usuall about the King; the nature of the act must needs properly belong to all, and such as strive not in it, to doe it when its a generall case, must needs be of the wicked before the King, for hee that acteth not indeede, and consent, as the cause requireth against murther, pertaketh therein, the thing needeth no proofe, and sure enough he that careth not to helpe, preserve, and maintaine Iustice, is no faithfull and true sub∣ject, but false and corrupted, as the Apostle saith of the state of Matrimony, The man is the head of the woman, yet they are not their owne but one anothers to serve each other in that condition, according to naturall bonds, so in civill Goveraement, which union cannot exceede in nature the other, neither come short, being of grea∣ter consequence, but keepeth the same bonds of naturall affection, and like unto the naturall head and body, which both subsist by the power and spirit of one nature, and are thereby made one body: so also the head in civill Governement in use, is not his owne but the bodies, and the body the like, both subjected under one life of justice, and so the King in his office, is the poorest subjects, as the richest, justice rendereth the preservation of nature all alike in the ordinary course, when there is any possible way of the preservation of all, and so the King is the bodies ingenerall without the exception of any particular, and without any partiality, and when a∣state service requireth the strength of nature from the whole, both head and body, it is performed by the Law and power of one nature, or at least ought to be, or if the head or any member thereof by any corruption falle to fulfill its office, the body in generall, and the body intrusted are by the lawe of nature to gather their for∣ces together for the recovery thereof out of any disease hartfull to the nature of the body, extrea mity in any griese calleth for extraordinary meanes of remedy; if by violence the head be abused, and natu
prevented of its course, by force of Armes, it must be recovered (if it may be) to prevent the ruine, slavery, and abuse of the whole body, (which is now the cause of this Kingdome) wherein the course which the Parliament (the body, presentative and intrusted for the common welfare) taketh it to be commended, and being justified by principles of all natures and policies (except what is falsely Ecclesiasticall and Devillish) is to bee encouraged with the assistance of all subjects, humanely disposed with life and estate, for when after due patience and use of gentle means, the desease is increased and growne stronger, what other remedy can be used by edvice of true Wisdome, tis not unknowne ever since his Majesties Raigne, his regall powre hath been abused in a very high nature, houlding the comminaltyat Staves-End with scorne and oppression through interposition of a proud and divelish Clergy, and their projecting creatures, who have caried him along as one assended of an higher, nor humatie generatio and as a perfect head in health, notwithstanding the miseries of his body, the common∣weale, or at least have possessed him with a conceit, that none could wish, and act his welfare like them selves, and since the time of Parliament, and the rising of differences betweene his Ma∣jesty and it, in most Declarations set forth in his highnesse name. The reason why he cannot con∣discend to the perticulers incontroversie, is, because his reason and conscience houldeth them not right and just, and taking them to be against his Prerogative, and the previledges of the Crowne, the ground from whence this judgment and conscience springeth, and that which iustifieth the same, must be the old Councell or none, for others cannot be heard, and tis strang, that neither the many and great straights which slatering projecting & Councellors have snared his Majesty withall, by interposing between his Royalty and comminalty, nor the consideration of the great dependance which the Commons welfare hath upon his Majestie, for if either his, or theirs uterly faile, the whole body will be essentially undon, which cannot but move his Commons to the most faithfull Councell for preservation of both, which only is obtainable, by re∣serveing and safe keeping the due prorogative and previledges of the Law and Government of the one nature and life, both of head and body, I say tis to be wondered at, that neither of these Motives should provoke his Majesty to alter his course, but oh the weaknesse of humane nature, before and since the curse, and the cursed effect of slattery from the begining, that now is, and will be to mans end, Take notice, ye rulers of the earth, no externall profession of Religion, saveth a man or Nation, tis not much sacrifice nor rare expressions in preaching, or praying doth that worke, witnesse the case of the Jewes, Caine, and Iudas, &c. obedience is bet∣ter then sacrifice, and the Rulers do iustly love mercy, and acknowledge, God in wisdome above you, according to Mich. 6.8. Math. 7.21. tis not a few or many great men, about a King in pompe and formality, which is his honour, but the multitude of People, Pro. 14.21. tis not great mens lookes, nor slatering, nor partiall doting on, or of them, but mercy and truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by mercy, Pro. 20.28, not by vaine slateries and conceipts of a prerogative above orbeyond the Law of nature, or Tytanicall cariage, but the King, by iudgment stablisheth the Land, Pro, 29.4. wherefore O King to uphould your Throne and establish the Land, your owne, and yours, laying a side all passion and pertial respects returne with peace in savour to your greatest and safest councell of your Land, and Nation, your presentative body, your Parliament. And likewise you highest Court of Parliament, and cheife Counsell of the Land, be ye faithfull to your head and Soveraigne, if no other wayes prevaile to regaine and preserve him in the nature of his office, if his health & strength afford him not powre to put away, doe ye take away the wicked before the King, anger will die, when the Thron is or shall be established, in righteousnesse (as a fore said) when a free union is accom∣plished, and interposition dispersed, and the head and body fit and ready to Act, be not unmindfull of former passages, what soever tendeth to the inlargment of all freedome of life in all humanity, and good conscience, the glory thereof will be to the giver of every good gift, and the comfort to your Soveragine and successors, with your selves and the whole Land, for present, and the time to come. FINIS.
