H1458 E138_8 99859965 156518
THE QVEENS MAIESTIES GRACIOUS ANSWER TO THE LORD DIGBIES LETTER, And the Parliaments Censure to the 18. Rebels. With the Examination and Con∣fession of Captain Butler, before the COMMITTEE. Likewise the true Relatton of 36. other Rebels, apprehen∣ded and taken in Milford-Lane, by many Constables, and a strong Watch▪ who intended to fire the City of London, had they not bin prevented The Names of those 36. Rebels. Captain Griffin, Captain Hornway, Captain Spencer, Lieuten. Williams, G. Coppinger Mr. Ric. Crab, Master. Iohn Tompson, Henrie Barton, Thomas Leidor, Adam Wheeler Wil. Hafford, Garret Ryat, I. Duport, Dan. Thornlie, Morgan Meridith Rich. Boys, Patrick Teenam, Thomas Lemon, Nich. Wright, Robert Delen, Darbie Kufoy David Speeloo, Ioh. Greenoraugh, Wil. Barwicke. Ionas Kipling, Peter Fotheogill, David Bodurdo, Gefferie Roberts, Thomas Trig Adam Bedford, William Grimes, Iohn Daveris Henrie Scarebie, Patricke Coots David Powell, Darbie Cobois. Printed at London for Tho. Powell, and averred by I. B. Cler.
Her Majesties gracious Aswer to the Lord Digbies LETTER. MY LORD, WE respectively entertain great alacritie in Our joyfull mind, to receive the undoubted fidelitie, which you expressed to Ʋs in your last Epistle. You may boldly adventure to write unto Ʋs with freedome, as well as by expresses, the time being come, that you have a Cypher, which I vouchsafe to confer upon you; I am exceeding joyfull to know, that the humblest, and most faithfull Servant I have in the World is now at Middleborough; where (We desire) you may re∣main in the privatest way you can, till you receive farther instructions how you may more faithfully serve the King, and Ʋs in those parts. The King having betaken himself to a safe place, where he doth, and will avow, and protect his Servants from rage, and violence (for from Iustice you cannot implore it) you may then live in patience, and joy, having the freedome to wait upon Ʋs. But he having betaken himselfe to the easiest and complaintest way of accomodation, confirm your confi∣dence, that then you may serve him more by your absence, then by all your industry: and let it be a comfort to you in all calamities, that you may serve Ʋs by your Actions only, and in no kind by your Suffe∣rings for Our sake: that you may have no measure of misfortune, but happinesse in this World, which you may derive from Our gracious value of your affection, and fidelitie. CANTERBVRY. Feb. 3. 1641.
C ◆ R royal blazon or coat of arms THE PARLIAMENTS CENSVRE, TO THE REBELS: LOng have the insolency of the Rebels in Ireland, insulted over the Protestant Partie, tryumphing in their barbarous inhumanity. And as they began to increase in their absurd Cruelties; so likewise they did corro∣borate their opposite forces, still daily expecting assistance, and propitious opi∣tulation from forraign Countries.
But the all-discovering eye of the Almighty (which cannot permit disloy∣alty to sleep in impunity) did impar∣tially behold the inveterate resolutions of some Rebels. The singularity of Gods omnipotent mercy distended towards England is so miraculous, that we are more bound to praise his propitious Name, then any other Nation under the Clymactriall Zodiack or collaterall Ze∣nith of the Caelestiall Pole. First, the dexterity of his infinit mi∣sericord shown, and apparently decla∣red unto us in diverting the Spanish Armado from us, then in dissipating that Hell nourished Plot of Gunpow∣der Treason, which alone pretended a prodigious demolition to this Realme, Again, in confounding the assiduous stratagems and conspiracies of the Pa∣pists, or at least their Adherents, which privacy of plotting trechery, they have not only hatched, but also pretended a∣gainst this Kingdom lately. Yet amongst all others his miraculous mercies perfe∣cted,
and declared unto us, this especially ought not to be forgotten; for it was neither lesse dangerous, nor trecherous: which I will relate in the subsequent description hereof, and refer (as our Ge∣nius suggest unto us) a plenary satisfaction in a more perspicuous Declaration. Eighteen of those Rebels being ap∣prehended, and suspected justly to be Confederates with those in Ireland, were according to the Warrant published by the House of Commons, committed to Newgate the 7. of this present Month, and likewise called to the Parliament House before the Committee to answer the Impeachments objected against them, they thus gave their Responsals as followeth.
The Examination, and Confession of Captain Butler, before the Committee the said Captain answering for them all. FIrst, they examined him, concerning their Religion; but he answered without any praetermissive negation, that they were all brought up in the Catho∣like Faith, and that they moreover resol∣ved themselves never to remove their Faith. Secondly, they questioned him con∣cerning their audacious presumption in daring to appropinquate any Coast in England, without Commission: but he answered, that they were beaten thither by an impetuous wind, and averse Tem∣pest: Moreover, that it was not their least resolution to have stayed there long. Thirdly, he was examined, whither they were going, and to what intent; he replyed to Ireland, then they demanded of him, whither they were resolved, or intended, either to assist the rebels there, or the Protestants: but he occluded his
mouth with silence, and did not answer one word to that interrogatorie; but we may easily conclude therefrom his mea∣ning, because silence gave consent. Fourthly, they examined him, whither they had no more Confederats, or where they were residing, and the number of them: he then answered, that they ex∣pected many more, and if they had not bin interrupted, they conceived credibly they should have seen more concomi∣tants to conjoin with them. With that, the Committee demanded of him again, where these their Confederates were, in what place, and the quantity of them. But to this Proposition he would give no answer, but replyed they knew not, only they expected their conjoinment very suddenly. With that the Comittee seemed to question him no more, but remitted him, and committed him to the custody of the Keeper of Newgate, from whence he came. Then they consulted amongst themselves, what verdict they should give unto them, and concluded unani∣mouslie, as followeth.
The Parliaments Censure to the Rebels. THen they respectively consulted, what they should do with these re∣bels; and to what condigne death they should condemn them. The Vote passed twice, that they should be hangd: but afterwards they unitly concluded; that they should continue in New-Gate a∣while till the Sessions, and then they should be hangd and quarterd, and their limbs to be set upon everie Gate, this Vote passed manie times shewing exem∣plarie punishment to all those, that shall presume to connive at the Rebellion in Ireland, or shall dare to assist them. The Apprehension of 36. more Rebels in Mil∣ford-Lane. AFter intelligence was given to some joint Confe∣derats with the Rebels, that 18. were sent to New-Gate, they amongst themselves appointed a meeting in Milford-lane, where they consulted to set the City of London on fire, in Vindication of their Friends; and ta∣king an Oath amongst themselves to confirm their reso∣lution, credible Information was given to divers Con∣stables, who summoned a strong Watch, and apprehen∣ded 36. more of them, who are now committed to safe Custody. FJNJS.
