H3135A R226078 99899934 136207
THE ELEMENTS OF HISTORY. FROM The Creation of the World, TO THE Reign of Constantin the Great. CONTAINING The HISTORY of the Monarchies in a New Order and Method. Together with a View of the Contemporary Kingdoms and Commonwealths. AND A Brief Account of their Magistracies and Politick Constitutions. Done for the Use of Young Students. By WILLIAM HOWEL, LL. D. Translated from the Latin. LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington at the Dolphin and Crown, the West-end of St. Paul's Church-yard: A. Bettesworth at the Red Lion on London-Bridge: And B. Lintott at the Middle-Temple-Gate, Fleetstreet, 1700.
THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE. BEing employ'd some years ago to instruct a Yong Gentleman of an excellent Geni∣us, I made it my whole business, to chalk out such a Method for him, as would tend most to his Improvement by his Studies, and render my Instructions effectual. In pursuing that Thought, the Knowledge of Languages presented itself to my View, as being a very considerable Accomplishment; and indeed 'tis justly such, both in regard of their own Beau∣ty, and with reference to the Excellency and Use∣fulness of the Things that by them are convey'd to our Understandings. But upon second Thoughts, I consider'd, that the Noble Birth and towring Genius of my Pupil entitled him to higher Things; and thereupon chose to put him upon the Study of History, which is, as 'twere, a Looking-glass for the Actions of Men, and a Directory for Bu∣siness of Importance. With this View I set about the compiling of a System to be learn'd by Heart and recited, as 'twere by the bye, in order to fasten and rivet the General Heads of Things in his Me∣mory. Designing afterwards, as his Age and Un∣derstanding
advanc'd, to comment upon the same, and furnish him with a clearer Idea of the Springs of Revolutions; the Counsels, Stratagems, and Models of civil Affairs; the success of Projects, and such other things as compleat the Knowledge of History. Some of my Friends, that were Men of excel∣lent Learning, having seen and perus'd the Sy∣steme, were mightily pleas'd with the Method; and press'd me to carry on the Scheme to its just Proportions, and finish the Work that would bring at once a considerable Advancement to my own Learning, and some good Services to the Repub∣lick of Letters, especially to History. This their advice was back'd by my own Incli∣nation, which was always bended upon History; and by the hardness of the Times, which superse∣ded business and made Men fond of retirement, in∣somuch that the Common saying was then verified, viz. Qui bene latuit, bene vixit. He was the best Man, that made the least Noise. Being thus en∣courag'd to go on I finish'd the first Part of my Institution of History; which, to my mind, I had enlarg'd to a just size; and publish'd it in our Mother Tongue, by reason that Latin Books of a large bulk and writ by young Authors who are not yet arriv'd at the Glory of a great Name; such Books, I say, go heavily off, and the Men that make Money of 'em carry most of 'em be∣yond Sea. I shall not spend time in discoursing my Coun∣trymen upon that Book. This is not a place for glorying. Besides, I look upon popular Ap∣plause as a meer Vanity. If it do's but meet with the Approbation of the Learned, I shall not mind
the Sentiments of others who are blinded by En∣vy or Ignorance. However I have a mind to touch upon upon a things on this occasion, for the sake of those who I think are chiefly concerned. Not that I mean to boast of any great performance: But on∣ly to explain the design and Scheme of the Work, and set a Copy for others, in giving the World to know what I mean'd to do, since in great un∣dertakings a good meaning uses in some Measure to attone for a slight Performance. Since 'tis ridiculous to conceal plain matter of fact; I acknowledge that I dislike all the Gene∣ral Histories or Systems of History, that are yet extant, or, at least, that I have yet seen; and have oftentimes arraign'd 'em, both privatly in my own Breast, and expresly in conference with o∣thers, of stuffing the mind of young Students with a shapeless and indigested meddley of things, and overpowering their Memories, instead of affording 'em true Information. For some, in carrying down the Thread of History from the Creation of the World, fancy they have answer'd the end of their undertaking, by drawing up the Names of the An∣cient Men and some Hero's, grazeing now and then upon some of their exploits, quoting a few Verses of Scripture, and so skipping thro' the most common Affairs of Persia, and passing on to those of the Roman Monarchy, without any or∣der, or at least in a very obscure Method; sel∣dom or never taking notice of the Series and con∣nexion of things relating to the same Nation, or the Original of Kingdoms and Republicks, or the Successions and Occasional Causes that usher'd in Wars and other Commotions.
Others again grasp at a greater bulk of things, and make larger Comments upon them; but they are chargeable with the same Crime, I mean, the same perplex'd way of confounding the States and Revolutions of different Kingdoms in one Joynt account; insomuch that one would think that the most different Affairs transacted in Places widely distant from one another, did equally re∣late to one Place of the World, as well as one Paragraph of the Book; and conspir'd in a Joynt Unity of time and reference to the same thing. Such Authors seldom describe the Forms of Ancient Kingdoms and Republicks in Greece and else∣where. Indeed they'l give you the Names of their Kings, and some of their Atchievements; but as for their Politick Model, and the Original and Offices of their Magistrates, not a Word of that; nor of the Histories of the Seleucidae, the Ptolomaeus's, and the later Macedonian Kings, un∣less it be a scrap here and there. They'll scarce afford to carry the Affairs of Rome further back, than the times of Pyrrhus; tho' at the same time there's nothing more beneficial to a young Student, than the being acquainted with the Civil Feuds, and Seditions at Rome, and the occasions of the several Magistracies that took their rise from thence. One Author follows one Chronological Standard, and another a different one. In one ye'll find several things Contempo∣rary, that lye at a distance of time in another. Hence is the Knowledg of ancient times so confus'd, and false glosses put upon true things. By this means, indeed, some scraps of Memorable Stories are pick'd out for a common diversion in Company; but the true and Genuin use of History, the just Se∣ries
of affairs, the due rank and Succession of A∣ges, the Models and Revolutions of Republicks; these are known to very few. When I dwelt seriously upon this Considerati∣on, I regrated both my own loss and that of o∣thers, in wanting the particular Histories of Anci∣ent Nations; for I could not meet with any thing of that nature, bating some incoherent Parcels scatter'd up and down. Now my Intention be∣ing to contrive a Methodical Institution of Uni∣versal History, in which all the several Parts should be rank'd in due order without confusi∣on or obscurity; the great Obstacle I met with, was, that History lyes in a more wretch'd Condi∣tion than any of its fellow Arts or Sciences, which are, almost all of 'em, improv'd to a due per∣fection: notwithstanding that History comes short of none of 'em, whether we consider the Excellency or the Usefulness of its Subject. For I do not stand to assert, that there's no im∣portant occurrence, relating to publick business or the adminstration of State-affairs, but what may be learn'd, and handsomely expedited, by the as∣sistance of History; with as great ease, as our Lawyers do form their Judgments and Decisive Sentences upon all Suits, from precedents and for∣mer decrees upon record. In History we'll meet with all that can occur in the Government of a State; with the Original Springs, the Progress and the event of things and the manner of going about them. 'Tis true the diversity of time and Place will sometimes occasion contrary Conclusi∣ons; but Prudence and Judgment will easily re∣move the difficulty, and reconcile the seeming con∣trariety. And History is so justly entitled to this
perfection that Cominaeus do's not stand to assert, that wise Counsellors ought to admit of no Mea∣sures, but what are either precedented, or at least approv'd and recommended by History. No Man can be a Stranger to the useful and necessary Offices that History do's to Theology, who do's but call to mind the different Opinions of different Times, and the infinity of Ecclesiasti∣cal heats that prevail'd both in the Synods and elsewhere. Now, who but a Historian should ac∣quaint us with these things? And who else can furnish us with an account of those secular Af∣fairs, which the Holy Pen-Men have glanc'd at by the bye? As for the Civil Law, History is so serviceable upon that score, that whoever neglects it, may well be a Petty-fogger, but cannot merit the ti∣tle of a Civilian. To this purpose are those words of the famous Gothofredus, viz. Since the Com∣mon Law (Jus Publicum) relates to the State of Rome, and that all its statutes are such as were occasion'd by the pinch of Circumstances and Times, and the temporary state of the Kingdom; how can any Man pretend to be throughly acqainted with the same, without carrying along with him, not only the General History of that Age, but, as Tertullian says, The particular Accounts of the minuter periods of time; without digging up and weighing the grounds and occasions of every Sta∣tute; and in a word, without distinguishing occa∣sional Priviledges from standing Laws? Now the omission of that, has occasion'd those blunders that stand staring in the Comments upon the most solemn Constitutions relating to Common Law. This is the source of those hard and intricat Questions,
that 'tis scarce possible to clear: this gave rise to the jarring sentiments of Lawyers which are alto∣gether irreconcileable, namely, that those Statutes which of themselves are truly ambulatory and only for a time, are put on the foot of a standing and perpetual Law. Now, since this is the case of the Roman Law, That of the Law of Nations must be much more such; since it depends so much upon History, that some have justly styl'd it, Jus Historicum. For it goes upon the Customs and Consent of Nati∣ons, which we are only given to understand by the Annals and Records of History. For, says Grotius, History has a double use with reference to this Law; for it furnishes us at once both with Examples and Judgments. Examples are so much the more Authentick, that the times and People which afford 'em are entituled to a good Character: Hence the Ancient Grecian and Roman Instances do justly claim a preference to others. Neither are we to slight the Decrees and Judgments upon Record, e∣specially those which agree: for, as I intimated a∣bove, the Law of Nature fecthes some evidence from them, but that of Nations has no other proof. Ac∣cordingly those who wrote upon the rights that are common to several Princes and Nations (a∣mong whom Albericus Gentilis and Hugo Grotius stand highest in the Roll) laid down this resolu∣tion to themselves, that almost all their advances shou'd be fetch'd from History, and be tried, and acquitted or condemn'd, by putting 'em to the test of the same. From whence they were justly call'd Historico-jure-periti, i. e. Historical Lawyers. But I am loth to tyre the Reader with an use∣less heap of Words upon so clear a point. The
same is the case of the Canon Law, the Law of Arms, and indeed of all Municipal Laws: I mean, that there's a necessity of explaining and illustra∣ting them by the State of times, the Circumstan∣ces of things, the Customs of Nations, and seve∣ral other things that are only to be met with in Annals and Histories. These Considerations egg'd me on to reduce History into such a form, as might resemble that of a compleat Art or Science, and prove inviting to young Students. I first began to pick up the scatter'd parcels of the Ancient Empires and King∣doms, like so many floating planks after a Ship∣wrack, and patch 'em up into one Body; and to trace the continued Series of things from their first source to the last periods, without omitting any thing of Importance. And always carried this view along with me, not only to trace the Progress of Commotions and Revolutions, but to lay open the Counsels, Reasons, and Methods of carrying them on; which to my mind are justly entituled the first fruits of History. But after I had finish'd my Collection, and mu∣ster'd up what I thought was wanting in other General Historians; I had a further concern upon me; namely, to pitch upon such a method and disposition of the whole, as would keep up the entire Schemes of Empires, Kingdoms and Re∣publicks, and at the same time lay them so toge∣ther as to observe the Unity of Time in Contem∣porary things, tho' widely different in their own Natures, and with reference to the places upon which they were acted. Sometimes I pitch'd up∣on one, and sometimes upon another method; what I lik'd but now, displeas'd me by and by;
'twas no sooner finish'd but I presently dash'd it out. At length, having weigh'd all objections in an even and just Ballance, I concluded upon the Method of carrying down the Contemporary's in parallel Chapters to those of the Monarchies. For in regard that History ought to be form'd into a Body, and the Affairs related ought to have a due connexion with one another; I thought it most proper to prefer the greater to the lesser, and to make the former a Standard for the order and method of the latter. Besides, every Monar∣chy may be look'd upon as a Head, by whose discretion and beck the better part of the World was govern'd in the respective Times. But more∣over, I have not only added the Contemporaries to each Monarchy, but have all along annex'd the more noted periods of Time and marks for Com∣putation, so that the Young Student may all a∣long see, not only in what Year of such and such a Monarchy any memorable thing was acted, but likewise in what Year of the World, of the O∣lympiads, of the City of Rome, and of the other Aera's. By this Method any Man may read the entire History of any Monarchy, Kingdom, or Repub∣lick, by its self, without confusion or interrupti∣on: And at the same time the Computation of Time is as clear and undisturb'd, as if all the dif∣ferent Kingdoms, &c. were mingl'd together in the usual Form. I have spent a great deal of pains in adding the History of the Hero's; by reason that if Young Students do not apply them∣selves to the Knowledge of these tho' never so obscure, and even of the Fables, they never will be Masters of Universal History, nor be duly qua∣lify'd
for reading Authors and hearing the Lectures of the Learn'd. Neither have I omitted the Politick Constitu∣tions and Forms of Governments, which were re∣quisite in this Scheme. Sometimes I act the part of a Critick, and sometimes that of a Politician. But I never am overborn with Conceit or puff'd up with Pride; I am not so Arrogant and Proud of my own Brains, as to take Pleasure in hearing my self arraign others of Ignorance, Weakness and Mistakes. On the contrary, I would fain bespeak a favou∣rable Construction of my Reader, and beg of him that he would rather consider the design and good meaning, than be scrupulously nice upon the Me∣rit of the performance. I am very sensible of my own Weakness, neither do I pretend to great things. I am sensible that whoever strikes out a new Method for things, lyes under many diffi∣culties, and drudges so under the weight of the things themselves, that he has not leisure to mind the Elegancy of Speech. Who can ex∣pect perfection in a first Essay? I shou'd not be asham'd to acknowledge, that some things are here wanting which might easily be added, and that I was so much taken up with the mat∣ter, that I did not much mind the dress of my Words. But, let it be as it will, the Dye's thrown. And thus stands the first Part of my Institution of History; to which a second Part will be ad∣ded, as soon as the weight and bulk of so great an undertaking, and the Author's private Cir∣cumstances will permit. That will be a Work of infinite Reading; a great many Books must
be read over and over again, many must be consulted, several collated and compar'd, in or∣der to clear up the Truth of things, lay open the particular Constitutions and Forms of Church and State Government in all Nations, and present the world with a view of the Affairs transacted in 'em. And after all, 'twill be as difficult a task to Methodise the Work, and avoid the wonted Confusion. But what infinite Sums of Money must be laid out in purchasing Books, for the In∣struments of this Work! And what expence of time must a Man be at in perusing 'em? Doubt∣less, to speak modestly, the undertaker ought to be a rich Man. Some were of Opinion that it would be a Piece of Service done both to my Countrymen and For∣reigners, to publish this Epitome of the first part, in Latin; while the other was getting ready. Should I tell the Reader, that 'twas in comply∣ance with their requests and repeated advice that I publish'd it, I should tell nothing but truth. However 'tis impossible to talk a reader into the belief of such a Story, or to manage it so dex∣terously as to avoid the Imputation of the same ridiculousness and impertinency, that is commonly charg'd upon vulgar Authors. I shall therefore only add, that those who lik'd the Method of my In∣stitution, cannot dislike these Elements; or deny that they are seasonably calculated for young Stu∣dents; to the end, that, by learning these by Heart, they may be conducted more easily and methodi∣cally to a fuller knowledge of things, and be led as 'twere by the hand from the General Heads of Affairs to the compleater and circumstantial ac∣counts of the same. I have favour'd their Study
by a succinct and perspicuous Brevity, that so the Heads may be better lodg'd in their Memories. And in regard that Sleidan is perus'd by most of 'em, I have pick'd out the best of the few beau∣tiful stroaks, which that Author has confusedly huddled up in his book of the four Monarchies; and transplanted 'em into this book with all due Caution. To conclude; I thought it needless to cram these narrow Pages with Quotations, to vouch for what I advance, since my Institution of Hi∣story is plentifully stor'd with such upon all oc∣casions. 'Tis now seven or eight Years, since I put this Book into Latin, and digested it in its due Me∣thod, being then in France, where the want of Books and the other Inconveniencies that attend travelling, hinder'd me both from carrying on the second part of my Institution, and from beauti∣fying these Elements in proportion to my own de∣sign and the Nature of the subject. After that, it lay by in my Closet, and was like to be wasted by time, for the putting off of which it was com∣pil'd; till at last upon a certain pressing occasion it was snatch'd out of my Hands, and now pub∣lish'd, I wish in a good time. My last request of the Candid Reader, is, that he would chiefly mind the Scheme and Design of the Work. Upon that score I hope it will not dis∣please him, tho' I cannot say that I am yet very fond of it. London, June 30. 1670.
THE CONTENTS. BOOK I. Ch. 1. FRom the Creation of the World, to the Commencement of the Babylonian Mo∣narchy. Page 1 Chap. II. From the Beginning of the Babylonian Empire to its Overthrow. p. 3 Affairs Contemporary with the Babylonian Monarchy. Chap. III. The Sacred History Contemporary with the Babylonian Monarchy. p. 18 Sect. 1. From the first Division of the World, to the Departure of the Children of Israel from Egypt. ibid. Sect. 2. From their Departure to the Death of Solomon, and the Division of his Kingdom. p. 26
Sect. 3. The Affairs of the Kingdom of Judah. From the Death of Solomon to the Fall of that Kingdom. Page 33 Sect. 4. The State of the Kingdom of Israel; from their Separation to the Captivity of the Tribes. p. 44 Chap. IV. The Affairs of the greatest Antiquity, relating to the Kingdom of Egypt, contempo∣rary with the Babylonian Monarchy. p. 52 Chap. V. The Ancientest State of Greece con∣temporary with the Assyrian Monarchy. To∣gether with a particular View of its Kingdoms and Republicks. p. 71 Sect. 1. The State of Greece in general. ibid. Sect. 2. The Kingdom of the Sicyonians. p. 72 Sect. 3. The Kingdom of the Argivans. p. 74 Sect. 4. The Ancient State of the Kingdom and Republick of Athens. p. 94 Sect. 5. The Ancient State of the Kingdom and Republick of Lacedaemon. p. 111 Sect. 6. The Ancient State of the Kingdom of Corinth. p. 125 Sect. 7. The Ancientest State of the Kingdom of Thebes. p. 130 Chap. VI. The Affairs of Rome contemporary with the Babylonian Monarchy. p. 137 Sect. 1. The Original of the City of Rome. ib. Sect. 2. The Affairs of Rome from the Build∣ing of the City to the Cessation of Kingly Government. The space of 245 Years. p. 143
BOOK II. Of the Persian Monarchy, and the Affairs of the World Contemporary with it. Ch. 1. THE State of the Persian Empire. Page 181 Sect. 1. From the Commencement of that Mo∣narchy to the Death of Cambyses. ibid. Sect. 2. From the Death of Cambyses, to the Death of Xerxes. p. 185 Sect. 3. From the beginning of the Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus to the Death of Ar∣taxerxes Mnemon. The space of 103 Years. p. 198 Sect. 4. From the Death of Artaxerxes Mne∣mon to the Death of Darius Codomannus. The space of 32 Years. p. 212 Affairs Contemporary with the Persian Monarchy. Chap. II. The Affairs of Greece, transacted while the Persian Monarchy stood. p. 224 Sect. 1. The Affairs of Greece from the begin∣ning of that Monarchy to the Descent of Xerxes. ibid. Sect. 2. A View of the Grecian Transactions from the Battles of Plataeae and Micale, to the Peloponnesian War. The space of 48 Years. p. 231 Sect. 3. From the beginning to the end of the Peloponnesian War. The space of 27 years. p. 237
Sect. 4. From the end of the Peloponnesian War, to the beginning of the Reign of Phi∣lip of Macedonia. The space of 44 Years. p. 251 Sect. 5. From the beginning of the Reign of Philip in Macedonia, to the Monarchy of Alexander his Son. The space of 31 Years. p. 264 Chap III. The Affairs of Sicily, Contemporary with the Persian Monarchy. p. 281 Sect. 1. The Names and Inhabitants of this Island; together with its State antecedent to the Persian Monarchy. ibid. Sect. 2. The Affairs of Sicily Contemporary with the Persian Monarchy. p. 284 Chap. IV. The Affairs of Rome Contemporary with the Persian Monarchy. p. 304 Sect. 1. From the Dethroning of the Kings and the first Alteration of its Government, to the second, made by the Decemviri. The space of 57 Years. ibid. Sect. 2. From the Creation of the Decemviri to the War with the Privernatians. The space of 121 Years. p. 338
BOOK III. Of the Macedonian Monarchy, and its Contemporaries. Ch. 1. FRom the Commencement of the Mace∣donian Monarchy to the Death of Alexander. The space of 6 Years and 10 Months. Page 1 Chap. II. The Transactions of his Generals, from the time of his Death, to the time that they divided the Monarchy, and assumed the Title of Kings. The space of 17 Years. p. 8 Chap. III. From their assuming the Title of Kings, to the Death of Seleucus who surviv'd the rest. The space of 24 Years. p. 14 Chap. IV. The State of the Kingdom of Mace∣donia, from the Death of Seleucus to the time of its being reduc'd to the Form of a Ro∣man Province. The space of 139 Years. p. 19 Chap. V. The State of the Kingdom of Asia and Syria; from the Death of Seleucus, to the time of its being made a Province of Rome. The space of 220 Years. p. 30 Chap. VI. Ths State of the Kingdom of Aegypt, from the Death of Ptolomaeus Lagus to the Death of Cleopatra, and Aegypt's becoming a Province of Rome. The space of 254 Years. p. 50
Things Contemporary with the Macedo∣nian Empire. Chap. VII. The Kingdom of the Jews, or the Principality of the Asmonaei; from the de∣parture of Antiochus Sedetes from Jerusalem to the beginning of Herod's Reign. The space of 98 Years. p. 61 Chap. VIII. The Affairs of Sicily, from the Death of Timoleon to the Sicilian or first Punick War. p. 70 Chap. IX. The Affairs of the Romans Contem∣temporary with the Macedonian Empire. p. 76 Sect. 1. From the War with the Privernates, to the first Punick War, or the first Adven∣ture of the Romans out of Italy. The space of 66 Years. ibid. Sect. 2. From the beginning of the first Punick War, to the War with Antiochus Magnus, or the first Invasion of Asia by the Romans. The space of 37 Years. p. 81 Sect. 3. From the War with Antiochus Mag∣nus to the Overthrow of Carthage; where∣upon the Romans became secure and dege∣nerated. The space of 45 Years. p. 97 Sect. 4. From the Destruction of Carthage to the Mithridatick War, which occasion'd the first Civil War. The space of 58 Years. p. 101 Sect. 5. From the Mithridatick and first Civil War, to the Triumviral Conspiracy of Pom∣pey, Crassus, and Caesar; which at last prov'd the Ruine of the Popular Form of Government. The space of 28 Years. p. 107.
Sect. 6. From the beginning of the Triumvi∣ral Conspiracy to the perpetual Dictatorship of Julius Caesar. The space of 16 Years. p. 118 Sect. 7. From the perpetual Dictatorship of Julius Caesar to the end of the second Tri∣umvirat; and the Monarchy of Octavius Caesar, or Caesar Octavianus. The space of 15 Years. p. 127 BOOK IV. Of the Roman Monarchy. Ch. I. FRom the Reign of Octavius to the Death of Tiberius. The space of 66 Years. p. 135 Chap. II. From the Death of Tiberius to the Death of Nero, the last Emperor of the Fa∣mily of the Caesars. The space of 20 Years. p. 148 Chap. III. From the Death of Nero, to the Death of Domitian, the last of the Family of the Vespasians. The space of 27 Years. p. 155 Chap. IV. From the Death of Domitian to the Death of Pertinax, and the exposing of the Ro∣man Empire to sale. The space of 97 Years. p. 162 Chap. V. From the Death of Pertinax, and the Sale of the Empire, to the Death of Maximi∣nus, the first Emperor that was confirm'd without the Consent of the Senat. The space of 45 Years. p. 161
Chap. VI. From the Death of Maximinus to the Monarchy of Constantin the Great, the first Christian Emperor, who translated the Seat of the Empire to Byzantium or Constantino∣ple, a City in Thrace. The space of 86 Years. p. 186
THE ELEMENTS OF HISTORY. BOOK I. CHAP. I. From the Creation of the World to the Be∣ginning of the Babylonian Empire. 1. IN the beginning God created Heaven and Earth: At last on the Sixth Day he created Man, having made all suitable Preparations, for the intertainment of the Inha∣bitant of the World. 2. Adam was thus left in a state of Happi∣ness: But he quickly forfeited both his Inno∣cence and felicity by eating the forbidden Fruit: And involv'd all his Posterity both in the Guilt and the Punishment. Having committed so hain∣ous a Crime, he was expell'd Paradise, and doom∣ed to Manure the Earth. By his Wife Eve he had
two Sons, namely, Cain and Abel: The for∣mer, in resentment of God's Preferring his Bro∣thers Sacrifice, kill'd the latter. At last Adam in the 130th Year of his Age, begot Seth, and liv'd in all 930 Years. 3. Cain's Posterity being swept off by a De∣luge; the Church of God, and the Race of Man∣kind, was propagated by Seth: Who, in the 105th Year of his Age begat Enos; Enos in the 90th begat Cainan; Cainan in the 70th be∣gat Mahaleel; Mahaleel in the 65th begat Ja∣red; Jared in the 162 begat Enoch; Enoch in the 65th begat Methuselah; Methuselah li∣ved 969 Years, which was longer than any Mortal Man did; in the 187th Year of his Age he begat Lamech; and Lamech in the 182 begot Noah; who, after he had liv'd 600 Years, made an Ark, pursuant to God's com∣mand, by which he sav'd himself and his Fa∣mily, when the rest of Mankind perish'd in a Deluge. This Deluge happen'd in the Year of the World 1656. 4. Noah had three Sons, Shem, Ham, and Japhet; who repair'd the loss of Mankind, and furnish'd the Earth with new Inhabitants. Shem possess'd part of Asia. Japhet was Master of all Europe, besides Asia the lesser, Media, part of Armenia, Iberia, Albania, and those vast Coun∣tries Inhabited formerly by the Scythians, and now by the Tartars. Not to speak of Ameri∣ca, which, it is probable, the Scythians reach'd through the straits of Anian; Japhet's Poste∣rity had a right to those Northern Countries, which Jornan justly styles a Warehouse of Na∣tions, and a sheath of People. Ham the Young∣est
got Egypt, all Africa, a great part of As∣syria and Arabia, besides Babylonia, Susiana, Assyria, and the other Countries which Nim∣rod his Grandchild Possess'd. CHAP. II. Reaching from the first Rise of the Babylo∣nian Empire to its downfal. 1. THE Earth being thus divided, Nimrod the Son of Cush, and Grandchild to Cham took up his seat at Babel, where he first begun to Reign, having added to his Do∣minions Erech, Accad, and Calneb in the Land of Sinaar. 'Twas he that projected the build∣ing of that prodigious Tower, which God re∣sented so much, that he punish'd Mankind with a Confusion of Languages: Whence that Monument of Madness was styl'd Babel. This was the true Belus and Bacchus, whom Moses represents as a great Hunter; whereupon some imagine he got his Kingdom by Hunting, ha∣ving drawn together a number of Men to make head against the Wild Beasts that infested the Land. He Reign'd 63 Years. 2. Ninus his Son and Successor, Worshipp'd his Father as a God, and so prov'd the first Au∣thor of Idolatry. He enter'd into a League with the King of Assyria, and with joint For∣ces subdu'd Armenia and Media, and in the space of 17 Years Conquer'd all Asia, besides the Indians and Bactrians; the latter of whom he at length defeated, notwithstanding the Va∣lour
of their King Zoroaster, or rather Oxyar∣tes. Having Reign'd 52 Years he died, either before some Town as being wounded with a Dart, or else through the Treachery of his Wife Semiramis. 3. Ninias or Ninus his Son being then a Youth, Semiramis the Mother put on a Mans Habit, and Reign'd in his room. She rebuilt, inlarg'd and fortified Babylon, and being not con∣tented with the Dominions of Ninus, added Ethiopia to them, and made War in India. In Riches, Victories and Triumphs, she was Infe∣riour to none. After 42 Years her Son kill'd her, either out of an itch to Govern, or to re∣ject her Embraces. 4. Ninias degenerated from the Example of his Ancestors, and gave himself to Luxury and Idleness: Tho' at the same time the Art of Ranking and putting Soldiers in Order is attri∣buted to him; which all the Succeeding Princes down to the fall of the Empire, did mightily esteem. Of thirty Successors, most of 'em fol∣low'd his Example, and none of 'em did any Memorable thing, bating Teutamus who sent Auxiliary Troops to Priamus when Besieg'd by the Grecians; and the last of that Line, who render'd himself famous by his Luxury and the manner of his Death, being styl'd Tonos-conco∣leros by his own People, and by the Grecians and Romans Sardanapalus. 5. He was the most effeminate Man upon Earth. He liv'd among Women in eternal Idle∣ness, and medled with nothing but the Distaff and the Wool. He was so much dedicated to his Pleasures, that he seldom appear'd abroad.
By these means two of his Governours, name∣ly, Belochus Governour of Babylonia, and Ar∣baces Governour of the Medes, were dissaffect∣ed, and combin'd to expose the soft and filthy Conduct of his Life, and Declare War against him. The King having early notice of their Revolt, made preparations for a Defence, and obtain'd three Victories over the Rebels. By this Success he became secure, and return'd to his Pleasures: Which animated the Rebels so, that they made the reprisal of an equal number of Victories over his Forces, and laid Seige to the Town. 6. Sardanapalus stood out against the Siege two Years, and perswaded himself he would be able to continue so to do, till relief came, because the Oracle had foretold, that Nineveh shou'd never be taken till the River wag'd War with the Town. But in the third Year of the Siege there fell so much Rain, and Euphrates swell'd so high, that it broke in over the Walls, and cover'd them for twenty Furlongs. This did so Thunder-strike Sardanapalus, that he erected a Funeral Pile, and threw himself and his Riches into the Flames. This says one, was the only Manlike Action of his Life; it happen'd in the Year of the World 3186, 43 Years before the first Oympiad, and 1400 Years after the building of Babylon. 7. The Assyrian Empire did in a manner sink with Sardanapalus; being divided into two Principalities. For Arbaces was declar'd King by the Army, and pursuant to a mutual com∣pact gave Babylon to Belochus. Some say, Ar∣baces laid Nineveh in Ashes; others think he
only pull'd down the Castle, because that Town had afterwards its Kings, who, tho' they were not comparable to their Predecessors for Pow∣er and Authority, yet they were very conside∣rable, and perhaps deriv'd their Original from Belochus. 8. One of these Principalities was the Medi∣an, which, it is probable, not only Arbaces, but his Posterity inherited. For tho' Herodotus Writes that the Medes shook off the Assyrian Yoke, and liv'd several Ages without a King: Yet Ctesias, who professes that he collected his History out of the Persian Annals, says that Ar∣baces having Reign'd 18 Years, was Succeed∣ed by Mandauces his Son, and he in order by Sesarmus, Artias, Arbianis, Arsaeus, Artynes, Artibarnes, and Astyages Grandfather to Cyrus by the Mother side. Besides, Eusebius in his Chronicle mentions the same Succession of Kings from Arbaces, tho' he differs from Ctesias as to the Names of the Princes. 9. The other Government was that of the Babylonians, headed by Belochus. 'Tis uncer∣tain how long he Reign'd, or who Succeeded him. After, 71 Years, Nabonasar obtain'd the Babylonian Kingdom, the beginning of whose Reign, in the 8 Olympiad, gave Date to that famous Aera of Nabonasar, commencing from the first Day of the Egyptian Month Thoth (Feb. 26) about 746 Years and 310 Days be∣fore the Christian Period according to some Calculations, and 424 Years before the Death of Alexander the Great. 10. Nine Kings Succeeded Arbaces in order; and then follow'd an interregnum of Eight
Years: At which time it seems the Royal Off∣spring fail'd, and Escarchaddon, King of Assy∣ria, subdued the Babylonians. For he who Govern'd the Babylonians, by Ptolomy is call'd Assaradinus, which Name seems to have no o∣ther difference from Escarchaddon, but what a∣rises from the various accents of different Lan∣guages. 11. As touching the reviving of the Assyrian Monarchy; 'tis not at all probable, that after the Death of Sardanapalus eieher the whole Empire, or the greater part of it was Subject to Media and Babylon. On the contrary, it is most likely, that Arbaces, when he Govern'd the Medes, left several Countries to the enjoy∣ment of their Liberty, whom he cou'd not bring to a tame compliance with his Yoke. After∣wards the Nations lying beyond Euphrates, be∣ing sick of Anarchie and the infinite evils that arise therefrom, did not scruple to receive a Prince of a Forreign Descent, who was so far inferiour to the Successors of Belus in Dignity and the extent of his Empire, that the Greci∣ans look'd upon Sardanapalus as the last Assy∣rian King. 12. We are not yet inform'd, who this first Prince was, or what was his Name. Some take him for that Phul, who in the Reign of Menachem invaded the Land of Israel; and cal∣culate the Beginning of his Reign from the 4 Olympiad, 17 Years before Nabonasar's Date. Another confounds him with Tiglath-Pilesar, who, as he reckons, took upon him the Name of Ninus Junior. This Prince destroy∣ed the Kingdom of Damascus, and after 28
Years left Salmanasar his Successor, who car∣ried the Israelites off in Captivity, and subdu∣ed Phaenicia and Syria. 13. Salmanasar was follow'd by Sennache∣rib, who infested Egypt with Hostilities, and mightily pinch'd Hezekiah King of Judah: But his Blasphemies did so incense the Almighty, that, by the Hand of an Angel, he lost in one Night 185000 Men: Upon which he return'd Home, was kill'd by his Sons Adrameleh and Sharezer, and his Son Escarchaddon Succeeded him. 14. This Prince is taken to be the same with Assardinus mention'd by Ptolomy that famous Mathematician, in his List of the Kings. He planted a new Collony in Samaria, and at the same time, as it is suppos'd, went into Judea, and carried Manasseh the King Prisoner to Ba∣bylon: For the Scripture testifies that at that time Babylon was under the Assyrian King. Assardinus Reign'd 13 Years, and then Saos∣duchinus (or Saosducmus) Succeeded him ac∣cording to Ptolomy. The common opinion is that Merodach kill'd him, and by that means Succeeding to the Assyrian Empire join'd it to the Babylonian. But the Author of that succession is Psuedo Metasthenes, whom Annius and such like Authors have put upon the World; and therefore 'tis deservedly rejected. 15. If we may credit the Book of Judith, that Nebuchadonosor who kill'd and defeated Arphaxad King of the Medes, and the Builder of Ecbatana, is the same with Saosducinus. This Arphaxad is the same with Deioces, whom Herodotus mentions as the Builder of that City
and Contemporary with Saosducinus, whose Ge∣neral Olophernes, lying before Beth-sara, was o∣ver-reach'd by Judith, and perish'd by her Cun∣ing. 16. Saosducinus was succeeded by Chynala∣danus, who is call'd Saracus by Alexander Polyhistor. Phraertes King of the Medes in re∣venge of his Father's Death, declar'd War a∣gainst him; but, tho' he subdu'd all Asia and Persia, was at length defeated: But his Son Cyaxares renewed the War, beat the Assyrians, and besieg'd the Town Ninus; but at that time the Scythians expell'd the Cimmerians out of Eu∣rope, and pursu'd them to Media, which oblig'd him to break up the Siege and return home: Where he was routed in a battel by the Scythi∣ans, and lost the Empire of all Asia, which the others possess'd for 28 Years. 17. After 28 Years, the Scythians were be∣tray'd to Security and Mal-administration: Upon which Cyaxares invited them to a Feast, and having made them drunk, stabb'd them: By this means he retrieved his former Dignity and Dominions. After that Nabopolassar, Ge∣neral to the King of Assyria's Army, made an alliance wirh Cyaxares, by marrying his Son Ne∣buchadnezar to Amyte, Daughter to Astyages, the Son of Cyaxares. Being strengthn'd by this mutual Alliance, they jointly destroy'd Chinalada∣nus or Saracus, after he had reign'd 22 Years. 18. By this means Nabopolassar, or Nabolas∣sar, the Assyrian General suceeeded to his Ma∣ster's Impire in the 123th Year of Nabonasar. He, being pinch'd by a War with Pharaoh Necho, who took the Town Charcemissus upon the Eu∣phrates,
and by the Rebellion of Caelo-Syria and Phaenicia, took in Nebuchadnezar his Son as Partner in the Government, and sent him at the Head of an Army against the Egyptians and Sy∣rians. 19. Nebuchadnezar upon the way oblig'd Je∣hojakin King of Judah, and subject to Neco, to be his Tributary. This incens'd the Egyptian King, so that he march'd against him, and in a second Engagement at Carcemissus, was routed and kill'd. While Nebuchadnezar pursu'd his Victory, and extended his Conquests from Eu∣phrates to the Nile, his Father died at Babylon, and himself was seasonably recall'd by the Cal∣deans, to establish his Crown. 20. This Prince beautified Babylon, added a new City to the old, and surrounded them both with three Walls. He caus'd the famous Hang∣ing Garden to be made round the Palace, in order to present his Wife with a continual View and natural Scheme of Media, for she took plea∣sure in beholding the High-lands of her own Coun∣try, 'Twas this Nebuchadnezar who besieg'd Jerusalem two Years, and laid it in Ashes; who pull'd down the Walls, and carried off the bet∣ter part of the People in Captivity; who put out the Eyes of King Zedekiah, and kill'd his Children and Noble-men. 21. This Prince in a Dream, had presented to him the Image of a large Statue, with a Head of Gold, Breast and Arms of Silver, Belly and Thighs of Brass, Legs of Iron, and the Feet half Iron and half Clay. When he awaken'd he forgot his Dream, and threaten'd Death to the Wise Men if they did not tell him
what it was: They were not capable to an∣swer his Demands, but Daniel of Jerusalem, by vertue of his Prayers, told him what he had dream'd, and having explain'd it, made a Pro∣phecy of the four great Monarchies. 22. God punish'd his Pride, with a horrible Instance, which all Great Men, Kings and Prin∣ces, ought diligently to weigh and consider, in order to dispose themselves to revere the Di∣vine Majesty, and perform their Duty to the People committed to their Care. He was for the space of Seven Times, (which most Writers understand to be Seven Years) expell'd Humane Society, and doom'd to live among the Beasts: But after the set Period was over, he return'd to himself, and retriev'd his former Dignity and Government. Abydemus a Heathen, men∣tions this Passage: Megasthenes, Diocles and Philostratus wrote upon the same Subject. He reign'd 43 Years, according to Ptolomy, who calls him Nabocolassar, or rather Nabocodolassar. 23. His Successor was Evilmerodach, a Man wrap'd up in wickedness and Debauchery, who after 2 Years was made away by the contrivance of Neriglissor his Brother-in-Law. Neriglissor reign'd 4 Years, and left his Son and Successor Laborosardock, who being an ill-natur'd Prince, was kill'd by his own People after nine Months. Then the Government came into the Hands of one Nabonydus a Babylonian, call'd by others Nabannidochus and Labynitus. When this Man had reign'd 17, or (as some will have it) 27 Years, he was kill'd by Cyrus, who conquer'd Babylon, and transfer'd the Empire to the Per∣sians.
24. This series of Kings is convey'd to us by Berosus a Chaldean Historian, whom Josephus often quotes; and whom Ptolomy that famous Alexandrian Mathematician, backs with Refe∣rence to the same. 'Tis true, there have been some Learned Men, who thought that Daniel's History was against this order; but there are others equally learned, who have given satis∣factory answers to all their Arguments: as it is made to appear in our Institutions of History. But now that we are come up with Cyrus, 'twill be requisite to describe, with all possible Brevity, who he was, of what Country, and what were the Qualities of a Man that was a∣ble to wield so large an Empire. 25. That he was the Son of Cambyses the Persian, by Mandane Daughter to Astyages King of Media, is agreed upon by all, bating only Ctesias, who asserts, that he was no way a Kin to Astyages. But there are various Ac∣counts of Cambyses his Circumstances. Herodo∣tus says, that he was a Man of a mean Birth and Fortune; and that Astyages gave his Daugh∣ter to such an one, on purpose, because he had dream'd that her Offspring would rise so high, as to overthrow his Government. He adds fur∣ther, that when the Infant was born, he was given to Harpagus to be made away: but he taking Compassion of the Child, entrusted the King's Shepherd with the Execution of his Ma∣jesty's Commands: And the Shepherd's Wife having lately brought forth a Dead Child, per∣swaded her Husband to bring home the Child he had laid out, and breed him up in the Room of his deceas'd Son.
26. But Xenophon in that incomparable Book of his, concerning the Instruction of Cyrus, as∣serts, that Cambyses was truely King of the Persians; and that Cyrus was admirably well vers'd in all the parts of Persian Learning, which he mightily cries up. But he has not one Word of the Story related by Herodotus, namely, That he was bred up among the King's Shepherds, and when by his princely and di∣stinguishing Genius he came to be known to his Grandfather Astyages, he sent him away to Persia; and that Astyages, for a Punishment of Harpagus his negligence in executing his Com∣mands, regal'd him at a Feast with his own Son's Flesh: in revenge whereof, Harpagus, after some time, push'd on Cyrus to make an Insurrection against Astyages, and outt him of his Kingdom. 27. For Xenophon relates that Cyaxares, Son to Astyages, having no Male Issue, gave his Daugh∣ter in Marriage to Cyrus the Persian his own Sister's Son; and that being incommoded by a War with the King of the Assyrians, he cal∣led in Cyrus to his assistance; who in that jun∣cture was made Emperor of the whole Army, and successfully acted his part, in taking Baby∣lon, and at last succeeding his Uncle, after he had subdued Craesus King of Lydia, and many others. Craesus is a considerable Actor in the History of these Times; and therefore 'twill be necessary to run over the History of the Lydian Kings. 28. Some Grecian Authors will have Lydia (or Maeonia) to be so call'd from Lydus the King, Son to Atys, and Brother to Tyrrhenus.
But 'tis apparent that Lydia was so call'd from Lud the Son of Shem, mention'd by Moses; and Maeonia from the River Meander. When Lydus's Issue fail'd, according to Herodotus, the Heraclidae reign'd there 505 Years thro' 22 Successions: till the time of Caudaules, who was so proud of his Wife's Handsomeness, that he oblig'd Gyges his Servant to view her when naked. When the Queen knew this, she took it so ill, that she gave Gyges his Choice, whe∣ther he would die himself, or kill the King: by this means she push'd on her Servant to Par∣ricide, and afterwards married him. 29. Thus Gyges of a Servant became a King, conquer'd his Enemies by the Favorable Re∣sponse of the Delphick Oracle, subdued Colo∣phon, made War with Miletus and Smyrna, establish'd and continued his Government 38 Years. Ardys his Son and Successor took Pri∣ene, and besieg'd Miletus. In his time the Scythians drove the Cimmerians from their Seats, carried their Arms into Asia, and took Sardes, but did not carry the Castle. After 49 Years Sadyattes his Son succeeded: and he, after 12 Years, was follow'd by Alyattes. 30. Alyattes made War with Cyaxares the Mede, and expell'd the Cimmerians out of Asia. While he lay before Miletus, and had almost starv'd them out, they expos'd all the Corn, they had left, in the Publick Market-place; whereupon he, fancying they had more Provision than he was aware of, raiss'd the Siege, and concluded a Peace with 'em. He reign'd 57 Years, and then Craesus his Son, aged 35 Years, succeeded him.
31. Craesus subdued all the People of Asia on this side the River Halys: And rais'd to himself a great Fame by his glorious Achieve∣ments, and infinite Plenty of all good things. Among the wise Grecians that crowded to Sar∣des, Solon of Athens came likewise to visit the King. At first he met with a very welcome reception; but when the King and he came to Discourse of Happiness, he would not own that the King was Happy, but gave out all worldly things for uncertainties; whereupon he was dismiss'd as an indiscreet and unequal Judge of things. However Craesus, who was so much puffed up, that he thought himself the happi∣est of Men, was of a sudden Mortified with the Death of his Eldest Son: Which was so much the more cutting, that his Brother who Succeeded him was Dumb. After he had de∣plor'd the Fate of his Son for two Years, he was touch'd with the Envy of Cyrus's Prosperi∣ty, the heat whereof flew up into so great a flame, that all his Pride and Luxury vanish'd in Smoak, and he himself did but hardly escape the being burnt alive. 32. For, being deceiv'd by his Oracles, he in∣vaded Cappadocia, under the pretence of having satisfaction of Cyrus for the injury he did to A∣styages his Sister's Husband; tho' at the bottom his design was to add that Fertile Country to his own Dominions. Cyrus March'd out to meet him with a greater Number of Forces, and tho' they fought with equal Success, yet Craesus's Officers blam'd him for offering to Engage with an unequal Number of Men. Where∣upon the next Day, Cyrus not coming on to of∣fer
him Battel, he retir'd to Sardes, designing to wait the Arrival of Auxiliary Troops from his Allies, in order to attack the Persian next Spring with joint Forces. 33. Craesus thinking himself safe from his Enemy, because he had rendred him secure by his Retreat, dismiss'd his Mercenary Troops: When Cyrus receiv'd Advice of that, he thought he had a fair opportunity of bringing his De∣signs to bear, and March'd with full speed to∣wards him, in order to surprize him. Craesus made what haste he could in preparing for a Defence; but having march'd out of the Town, was routed, and then besieg'd. On the 14th Day of the Siege Sardes was carried, and he was taken Prisoner. 34. He was sentenc'd to be burnt: And when he mounted the Pile, cried out thrice, Solon. Being desir'd to give the Reason of this Outcry, he related the Story of his Interview with So∣lon, and Solon's Assertion, viz. That before Death, no Man should be accounted happy. Cy∣rus taking this saying into his serious Conside∣ration, bethought himself that he was likwise liable to the Jolts of Fortune; and therefore made a more moderat use of his Victory; and, having pardon'd Craesus, us'd him as his Friend and Kinsman. This happen'd in the 4th Year of the 58th Olympiad, the 15th Year of Cyrus, A. M. 3460. 35. Cyrus design'd to march against the Ba∣bylonians, Bactrians, Saccae, and Egyptians. He employ'd Harpagus the Mede to subdue Lesser Asia; which accordingly he did; and like∣wise conquer'd the Ionians, Carians, Caunians,
Lycians, and several other Nations. Having subdued all the remaining part of the Conti∣nent, he march'd against the Assyrians, who had heap'd up great Magazines of Provisions, and retir'd within the Walls of Babylon. At first La∣bynitus their King drew out his Troops, but he was routed, and oblig'd to return to the Town, which the other besieg'd. Who this Prince was, whether Belshazar, or another, I have not room here to enquire. Those who are curious may consult our Larger History. 36. Labynitus indeed endur'd the Siege long, and would have stood out longer, had not Cy∣rus found out another way of preventing the tediousness of the Siege. He caus'd large Ditches and Channels to be made, in order to divert and drain the River; which accord∣ingly came to pass, so that the Persians had free access to the Town, and by this means Babylon and the Babylonian Empire came into the Hands of Cyrus, in the Year of the World 3465, the 1 Year of the 60th Olympiad, 539 Years before the Birth of Christ.
Affairs Contemporary with the Babylonian Empire. CHAP. III. The Sacred History Contemporary with the Babylonian Empire. SECT I. Reaching from the Division of the World, to the Departure of the Israelites out of Egypt. 1. SHEM the Son of Noah, being 100 Years old, begat Arphaxad; Arphaxad in the 35th Year of his Age begat Salah; he in the 30th be∣gat Eber (from whom some derive the Name Hebrews;) he in the 34th begat Phaleg, so call'd because in his Days the Earth was divided; he in the 30th begat Reu; he in 32d begat Serug; he in the 30th begat Nachor; and Nachor in the 29th Year of his Age begat Terah, or Tharem. 2. Terah, being 70 Years old, begat Abram, Nachor and Haran; of whom the last is reck∣on'd the eldest, who died at Ur of the Caldees, and left three Children, namely, Lot his Son, and two Daughters, Milcah, who married Na∣chor, and Sarai or Iscah who married Abram her Father's Brother. The second was Nachor, Fa∣ther to Chesed, or Phased: So that Abram was the Youngest, who seems to be born in the 130th, and not in the 70th Year of his Father, according to St. Stephen's Discourse of the Ages of Terah and Abraham, when the one dyed, and the other departed from Haran. A.M. 2008. 3. Abram, about the 70th year of his Age, was order'd to remove into the Land of the
Canaanites, God having promis'd to him that his Family shou'd become a great Nation, and that all the Nations of the World should be blessed in him. He, pursuant to the command, went with his Father, Lot, and his Wife, from Ur of the Chaldees into Haran, and dwelt there. It seems he spent Five years at that place, out of tenderness to his Ancient and Sickly Father: And when the old Man departed this Life, set forward on his Journey to Canaan, in obe∣dience to the Divine Precept. So that the pe∣riod of Abram, and his Posterity's sojourning in a strange Land, is to be measur'd by 430 years. 4. He sat first down in Sichem, where God re∣newed the former promise, with an additional one of giving the Land to his Seed: And in this place Abram built the first Altar to the Lord. In the 11th year after his Entry into Canaan, he had a Son call'd Ismael by Hagar his Maid: And 15 years after that, God made a Cove∣nant with him about Isaac, that was to be born as next year; and Instituted Circumcision as a Token of the Covenant. At that time his Name was chang'd from Abram to Abraham, as being not only a high and mighty Father, but a Father of many Nations. Sarai likewise his Wife, whose Name signified only my Mistress, as if it related only to one Family, was call'd Sarah, that is, an absolute Mistress, or one of many Nations. 5. In the same Year God discover'd to Abraham his Decree of destroying Sodom, and the other Cities; and he not being able to pa∣cify the Divine Wrath, a Fire came down from Heaven that set the Cities in a Flame, and on∣ly
Lot was saved. The Ground on which they stood became a dead Sea 70000 Paces wide: In which no Creature lives, neither doth it af∣ford any thing but a sort of slimy Pitch for the use of Seamen; so that the Heathens them∣selves have heard by Report, That in the Anci∣ent Times this Countrey was blasted from Hea∣ven. Lot's Wife, going out of Sodom, by look∣ing behind her was turn'd into a Pillar of Salt; which Josephus says was standing in his time. Lot's Two Daughters fancying that the whole Race of Mankind was destroy'd, made their Father drunk, and embrac'd him: And from these incestuous Embraces sprung Moab and Ammon, Two Patriarchs of as many powerful Nations. 6. When the time was expir'd, according to the Tenour of God's promise, Isaac was born in the 100th year of his Father, and the 90th of his Mother, 400 before the return of the Israelites out of Egypt, 37 years after Sa∣rah dyed. Then Abraham married Keturah, and had Issue by her, which he regal'd with Gifts, and sent away before he dyed. When Isaac was 40 years old, he gave him in Marriage Re∣bekah, Daughter to Bethuel, Son to Nachor his Brother: And she after Twenty years barren∣ness brought forth Twins; namely Esau and Jacob. 7. At length after 15 years Abraham, God's Darling, gave up the Ghost in the 175th year of his Age; 100 years after his arrival in Canaan, 25 years after the Death of Shem, in the Reign of Inachus in Greece, 1821 years before the Birth of Christ, in the year of the
World 2183. Artapanus, Charax, Berosus, He∣cataeus, and Nicolaus Damascenus, who were all Heathen Writers, make mention of him. 8. Abraham being dead, God blessed Isaac, and made a Covenant with him, 48 years after Ismael dyed, in the 137 year of his Age, A.M. 2231. From Nabaioth his Eldest Son sprung the Nabatheans, who inhabited a part of Arabia, call'd Petraea, from Petra the Metropolitan. Among them 'twas reckon'd a crime to Sow or to Plant, to drink Wine or to build Houses: They were fond of their liberty, and lookt up∣on these things as the Incentives of Ambition. Kedar Ismael's t'other Son gave likewise the Name to a part of Arabia, that's frequently mention'd in Scripture. Tho' the Cushites, Midianites, and Ismaelites were not of the same Original; yet since they liv'd together, it seems they grew together into one Nation of the Saracens. 9. 15 years after this, Isaac being then blind, and in the 138th year of his Age, sent his Eldest Son Esau a Hunting, to the end that he might feed upon Venison, and then bless him. But Jacob by his Mother's cunning per∣sonated him; and having already bought the Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, chous'd him of the blessing. His Brother was so incensed at this, that Jacob was forc'd to flee into Mesopo∣tamia to Laban his Uncle, whose two Daugh∣ters he married, having purchas'd 'em for 14 years service. 10. By these two Women, and as many Handmaids, he had Twelve Sons, and One Daughter. After 20 years hard service he re∣turn'd
from Mesopotamia into Canaan. While he liv'd there, Joseph his Son was sold by his envious Brethren to Midianite Merchants, and carried into Egypt in the 17th year of his Age, and 109th of his Father. In Egypt he serv'd Potiphar Governor to Pharaoh's Houshold, and was made Overseer of his Family. After he had serv'd him 16 years, his Mistress sollicited him to uncleanness, which he refus'd, and was there∣upon charg'd with the same Crime, and cast in∣to Prison. 11. About this time his Grandfather Isaac dyed, and was buried by Esau and Jacob his Sons; of whom the former was reconcil'd to his Brother; and having made an equal divi∣sion of their Goods, return'd to Mount Seir; God having so order'd it, that hereafter when the Israelites should come to repossess Canaan, his Posterity shou'd not be thrown out of their Possessions. He was likewise call'd Edom, and from thence the Country was stil'd Idumea, and under that Name the Country of the Naba∣theans seems to be included. For it is not im∣probable, That he who married Nabaioth's Si∣ster, join'd in with them, and headed them. And this is that famous Hero, who Christen'd not only Idumea, but likewise the Erythrean, Idumean, or Red-Sea, all which signify the same thing; for Erythraeum among the Grecians sig∣nifies the same as Edom in the primitive Lan∣guage. 12. While Joseph continu'd in Prison, he in∣terpreted the Dreams of two Courtiers, and the event justified his interpretation; whereupon after Two years Imprisonment, the King call'd
for him, his own Wise men having fail'd in the interpretation of his Dreams. As his Dreams implied the Succession of 7 years of Plenty, and as many of Famine; so Joseph gave him such seasonable advice for laying up Provisions a∣gainst the approaching Famine, that the King perceiv'd it surmounted the pitch of humane strength, and thereupon advanc'd him to the highest Dignity in the Kingdom, giving him in Marriage Asenatha, Daughter to Potiphar, Go∣vernor of On, or Heliopolis. 13. The Famine did not only over-run Egypt, but also reach'd the Neighbouring places of Canaan and Arabia: So that Jacob being pinch'd by it, sent his Sons to buy Provisions; where being discover'd by Joseph their Brother in disguise, they were cunningly charg'd with be∣ing Spies. But when they came a second time he releas'd Simeon whom he had kept as an Hostage, and discover'd himself to them. They were cast down, as being conscious of their former Wickedness, but he encourag'd them, and furnished them with all neces∣sary Provisions, and sent them to bring up their Father, and his whole Family, with all speed. Jacob was animated by his Son's Safety and good Fortune, whose imaginary Death he had long lamented; and being encourag'd from Heaven, went cheerfully down to Egypt, in the 130th year of his Age, and the Third year of the Famine, in the 2298th year of the World. 14. He liv'd 17 years in Egypt, and then a∣dopted Joseph's Two Sons, preferring the Younger to the Elder; and having call'd to∣gether and bless'd his Children, gave up the
Ghost. In Egypt his death was lamented 70 or 72 days: Then he was carried into Canaan, and after the Observation of 7 days more of Mourning, was buried by his Sons, attended by a great Number of Courtiers and Princes. Jo∣seph's Brethren deprecating his Wrath, were pardon'd by him, and freely provided with all Necessaries. 15. At length, having govern'd Egypt under several Kings for 80 years, having liv'd 110 years, and survived his Father 50, he ended his days. Trogus Pompeius wrote several things of him, as it appears from Justin; which are partly taken from sacred History, and partly deriv'd from the Fables, which the Heathens, pursuant to their Custom, invented of the Jews. The period of Joseph's Life, concludes the Book of Genesis, which contains an account of the Affairs of 2369 years. The next to that seems to be the Book of Job, which the He∣brews always attributed to Moses. 16. Joseph and his Contemporaries being all dead, the number of the Israelites increas'd every day so much, and became so great, that the King being apprehensive of the consequen∣ces, concerted measures to impair it. First, he order'd the Midwives to make away all the Male-children; and when that Project did not take, issued out an Edict for drowning them. About this time was born Moses Son to Amram, and Jocabed, and after three Months, when he cou'd not be hid no longer, was laid by the brink of a River in an Ark of Bulrushes daub'd with Slime and Pitch. Pharaoh's Daughter call'd by Josephus, Thermutis, finding the Child
there, put him out to be Nurs'd by the Mo∣ther, whom she did not know to be such: Af∣terwards she adopted him for her Son, and took care to see him instructed in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians. 17. When Moses grew up, through Faith he refus'd to be call'd Pharaoh's Grandchild, and after the 40th year of his Age, visited his Bre∣thren the Israelites, and took their Burthen in∣to his consideration; upon which occasion he kill'd an Egyptian for striking a Hebrew. When Pharaoh heard this, he sought for him in order to punish him by Death: Whereupon he fled into the Land of the Midianites, and was kindly entertain'd by Hobab or Jethro, whose Daughter Zipporah he married, and stayed there 40 years. 18. When the 40 years were expir'd, as he was feeding the Sheep, he was call'd by God, and sent to Pharaoh, to rescue the Israelites from their insupportable Bondage. But the Embassy took no Effect; nay on the contrary harder la∣bour was enjoin'd the Israelites, over and above their daily Task. Whereupon after many Signs, God, by Moses's Ministry, afflicted the Egyp∣tians with Ten Plagues; Nine of which made little impression upon the King; but the Tenth, namely the Slaughter of all the First-born con∣strain'd him to dismiss the Israelites.
SECT II. From the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, to the Death of Solomon, and the Division of the Kingdom. 1. THere went out of Egypt 600000 Israelites Twenty years old and upwards, be∣sides Women and Children. According to this computation the total Sum of persons of all A∣ges will amount to 1500000, if we follow the common Calculation of all Nations. And the mixt multitude that accompany'd them seems to equal the number above-mention'd. 'Tis ap∣parent that 70 persons might naturally multiply into so large a Number, as I made it out in my Institutions. 2. Moses gather'd the People at Rameses, from whence they mov'd and took up their second Station at Succoth. From thence they pass'd to Etha, and at length to Pihahiroth, whither Pha∣raoh pursued them; and God dividing the Wa∣ters of the Red Sea, to make way for their Pas∣sage into the Desert, suffer'd Pharaoh and the Egyptians to be over-run by the returning Waves. Josephus lessens the Credit of this Miracle; thinking to gain Credit from the Heathens, by comparing it to Alexander's Passage thro' the Bay of Pamphylia: Whereas Strabo tells us, that when the Sea ebbs, this Bay is quite dry; and even when the highest Tyde comes in, 'tis ne∣ver so deep as to be impassable. 3. The Israelites spent a year and a half in the Desert, to the end that their Spirits being
broke and debas'd by Bondage, might rise by degrees to the pursuit of Military and Civil Affairs. In this Interval of time, their Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial Laws were enacted by God himself, their Tabernacle was erected, and the Sanhedrim, or a Court of 70 Judges, was instituted. In the 5th Month of the 2 Year, they sent Twelve Spyes, that is, a Man for every Tribe, to view the land of Canaan. When they return'd, ten of 'em gave an ill Character of the Countrey, and cry'd up the strength of the Towns and Inhabitants so much, that the Peo∣ple were scar'd from pursuing the Enterprise, and offer'd to return to Egypt, and to stone Jo∣shuah and Caleb to Death, who were the Two Spyes that differ'd from the other Ten. 4. God threaten'd these Rebels with sudden Destruction: and tho' by vertue of Moses's Prayers he was influenc'd to delay it for a time, yet he sentenc'd all above Twenty Years, ba∣ting Joshuah and Caleb, to die in the Wilder∣ness, and the whole Body to wander there 40 Years. Accordingly, the Ten Spyes were taken off by sudden Death, the Memory of which Judgment is to this day celebrated by the Jews by a Fast on the Seventh Day of the Sixth Month Elul. The surviving number, when they were just upon the Borders of Canaan, were order'd to return towards the Red Sea; but marching up the Mountain contrary to God's Commands were routed by the Amalekites and Canaanites, and weep'd in vain before God. 5. Upon the occasion of this Disaster, and the continual and daily Death of the Israelites in the Wilderness, Moses compil'd the 90th
Psalm, in which he implies, that the Life of Man is confin'd within the Compass of 70 or 80 Years. Which was the third time that Man's Life was shorten'd by one half; the same having happen'd for the first time immediately after the Deluge, and a second time in the Days of Phaleg,, when the Earth was divided. 6. Moses gives but a small account of what happen'd in the succeeding 38 Years; but in the 40th Year he tells us the Kings of the Aradites and Amorites were defeated. Pursuant to God's Denunciation, all that were fit for War died in the Wilderness. Whereupon Moses was order'd to number the People a third time, and found there was 61173, aged twenty Years and up∣wards, besides 23000 Levites including all above one Month old, so that the number of the Chil∣dren almost equal'd that of the Parents. 7. At last the Midianites were conquer'd, and the Countries of Zihon King of the Amorites, and Og King of Bashan, were divided among the Children of Reuben and Gad, and half the Tribe of Manasseh. And then Moses died, aged 120 Years, five Months after the Death of his Brother Aaron. He spent one third of his Life∣time in the Administration of Affairs, since the 40th Year of his Age was just expir'd, when he conducted the People out of Egypt, A. M. 2548. The Israelites mourn'd thirty Days for him. His Death concludes the Pentateuch, which is follow'd by the Book of Joshua. 8. After the Death of Moses, Joshua, or Je∣sus, the Son of Nun, govern'd the People, and conducted them into Canaan, on the 10th Day of the first Month Nisan. When Joshua pur∣su'd
his Enemies, the Sun and Moon stood still one whole Day, to favour the Pursuit. No City made Peace with the Israelites, excepting the Gibeonites, who over-reach'd them; but they were all destroy'd, bateing a few, whom God reserv'd to be imploy'd in future times, to punish his Rebellious People. 9. The Canaanites being dispossess'd of their Country repair to the Sea-side, where they were afterwards Christen'd Phaenicians; they planted Colonies in several parts of Africa and Europe, and particularly, in Fez and Morocco, where they rear'd up Pillars, with Inscriptions in Phaenician Letters, to this purpose. We are of that Nation, which fled from before the Face of Joshua the Robber, the Son of Nun. This War with the Canaanites lasted six Years, and some Months, as it appears by the Age of Caleb in whose time the Land was divided. 10. The Division of the Land commenc'd in the beginning of the Seventh Year from the En∣try of the Israelites into Canaan, and in the be∣gining of the 2555th Year of the World. It lasted a whole Year. So that from the Crea∣tion of the World to the Finishing of this Divi∣sion, we reckon 2555 Years, and 365 Weeks, or Septenary Periods of Years, equalling the num∣ber of natural Days in a Solar Year: So that from the begining of the World, we reckon on intire Hebdomas or Septenary Period of great Years, each of which contains as many Years, as there are Days in one Year; viz. 365. Af∣ter the War had lasted six Years, the People rested in the Year of the Division as a Sabbatical Year: So that the commencement of the Sabba∣tical
and Jubilee Years is calculated by some from their Entry into Canaan, rather than from the Division it self. 11. Joshua being dead, together with the El∣ders, who being of Age when they came out of Egypt, had the opportunity of remarking the wonderful Works of God: The Age that suc∣ceeded them forgot God, and mingled with the Canaanites by Intermarriages, and fell down before their Idols. This incens'd God so much, that he deliver'd them into the Hands of Ty∣rants and Oppressors, who loaded them with heavy Afflictions. In the Interim he now and then raised up Judges to rescue them from the Calamities that had almost sink'd them; but the People rejected their Counsels. 12. Wherefore the Lord decreed, that those Nations which Joshua spar'd should continue in the Country, in order to try his People, and teach the Israelites the Art of War. According∣ly, there were Five Lords of the Philistines left, together with those Canaanites, Sidonians and Hivites that inhabited Mount Lebanon from Mount Baal-hermon into the entring in of Ha∣moth. The Israelites dwelt among the Canaa∣nites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizites, Hivites, and Jebusites; they took their Daughters to be their Wives, and gave their own Daughters to their Sons, and serv'd their Gods. 13. After the Land was divided by Lot, God gave them Judges for about 450 Years, till the Days of Samuel the Prophet, according to Paul the Apostle. But that Passage in the First Book of the Kings, which says, that the Temple was founded by Solomon, only 480 Years after their de∣parture,
seems to go against S. Paul's Computation. For this Number surpasses the other only by 30; whereas it should have 100 more, namely, the Six Years preceding the Division, those of the Government of Samuel, the Reigns of Saul and David, and the Three Years of Solomon's Reign preceeding the Founding of the Temple. Some endeavour to reconcile these contradictory Passages; but others are forc'd to confess a Mi∣stake in one of the two places. 14. Some cry up the untainted Credit of the Hebrews, and say it is entitled to a Preference upon the score of its Antiquity. Others stand to St. Luke's Testimony, and alledge, That the Hebrew Text is more liable to Errors and Over∣sights. If we reckon up the times of the Judges, and the Periods of their Persecutions, all apart, without confounding 'em together, then indeed this last Computation is entitled to a Preference. But this is the only Difficulty, the removal whereof would set the whole Series of Years in a clear Light, namely, That by this means the common Aera of the World will be enlarg'd by the Accession of 100 Years. 15. The Scriptures do not expresly acquaint us how long Samuel govern'd the Republick; but it seems he govern'd 20 Years, that is, from the Death of Eli the Priest till the Election of Saul. For when his Sons were charg'd with Bribery, and the Mal-administration of the Pub∣lick Affairs; and at the same time the Philistines and Ammonites made War with the Israelites; they were dissatisfy'd with their present Consti∣tution, and obtain'd from God a King, namely, Saul the Son of Kish of the Tribe of Benjamin.
16. Saul's Wickedness render'd him unaccep∣table to God; whereupon David the Son of Jesse of the Tribe of Judah was anointed King. Saul sought to kill him for several years; but at last he and his three Sons died in a Battel with the Philistines. That Passage which says, that God gave Saul to the Israelites for 40 Years, must be understood to include Samuel's Government. 17. Saul being dead, David reign'd over the Tribe of Judah; and Seven years after, the other Tribes came in, Ishbosheth the Son of Saul ha∣ving perish'd by the Treachery of his own Peo∣ple. He took Jerusalem from the Jebusites, and made it his Royal Seat. He routed the Phi∣listines in several Battels, and carried on every thing prosperously, till God punish'd him for his Ingratitude, in his Adultery with Bathsheba, and making away Uriah her Husband, in order to conceal the Wickedness. At last he took in Solomon his Son as Partner in the Government, and died Six Months after, having reigned 40 years. He was a gallant Warrier, an excellent Prophet, and a sweet Musician. His Death hap∣pen'd A. M. 2985. 18. Solomon confirm'd his Government, by putting several Persons to Death. In the fourth Year of his Reign, the Second Day of the Se∣cond Month Ziphi, he laid the Foundation of the Temple of Jerusalem, which was built and finisht Seven Years after. At the same time he caus'd to be built a Navy of Ships at Esionga∣ber on the Red Sea, which brought him every Year 420 Talents of Gold from Ophir. Be∣sides the Temple, he built likewise other Mag∣nificent
Buildings. Tho' God gratified his Wish∣es in giving him more Wisdom than to any Man upon Earth, and loaded him with other Gifts beyond his Wishes; yet he arriv'd at that Pitch of Ingratitude, that he first became wan∣ton, and then fell into horrible Idolatry. This provok'd God so, that he denounc'd the rending of his Kingdom. At last Solomon return'd to himself, repenting of his Folly, as appears by the Book of Ecclesiastes, and died, after he had reign'd 40 Years, A. M. 3025. SECT III. An account of the Kingdom of Judah from the Death of Solomon to the fall of that Kingdom. 1. SOLOMON was follow'd by Rehoboam his Son by Naamah the Ammorite. The People petition'd him for a Diminution of the heavy Taxes laid on by his Father, but he fol∣lowing the Counsel of young Men, by his unfa∣vourable answer, provok'd them to revolt, and send for Jeroboam the Ephrathite the Son of Ne∣bat, out of Egypt, to be their King; under whose Reign, they at once revolted both from the House of David and the true Worship of God. In memory of this sad Revolution an anniversa∣ry Fast was appointed on the 23 Day of the Month Sinan. 2. The Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and the greatest part of the Levites, continu'd true to Rehoboam. The Levites shifted their ancient Seats, for new ones, in Judah and Jerusalem; be∣cause Jeroboam had turn'd them out of the Priest∣ly
Office. To the Tribe of Judah that of Simeon is to be added, the Lands of the latter lying within the Heritage of the former. A part of the Children of Dan were likewise planted within the same boundaries; for the Tribe of Judah properly so call'd had a large Country al∣lotted to them, not to be possess'd only by them, but to be under their protection. 3. However it is said that the Ten Tfibes re∣bell'd, because the Metropolitan of Dan came within Jeroboam's Dominions, or because the Tribe of Manasseh being scatter'd into several Places might be look'd upon as two. The Kingdom being thus divided, the Northern Countries re∣volted, but those to the Southward continu'd in Subjection to Solomon's posterity. Hereafter the Successours of Solomon were stil'd Kings of Judah, and those of Jeroboam Kings of Israel. But 'tis to be remark'd that this Rule was not observ'd on all occasions, for Jehoshaphat and Achaz are call'd Kings of Israel, notwithstand∣ing that it is apparent, they only govern'd Ju∣dah and its confederate Tribes. 4. Rehoboam design'd to make War with the Rebels, but God enjoin'd him to desist. However he and his Subjects Rebell'd against the Lord, who being incens'd sent Shishak King of Aegypt with a mumerous Army against him. The E∣gyptian made himself Master of several Places of Strength, penetrating ev'n to Jerusalem; where he rifl'd the Temple of God and the Pal∣lace, and took away the Shields of Gold which Solomon had made; so that Rehoboam was ob∣lig'd to make brazen ones in their stead.
5. Next to him was Abijah his Son, whose Mother in one Place is said to be Maacah Ab∣salom's Daughter, and in another Micajah Daughter to Uriel of Gibeah. Some think she was Uriel's Daughter by Tamarah, and adopt∣ed by Absalom who seems to have left no Issue be∣hind him. Abijah following his Father's Footsteps wag'd continual War with Jeroboam, who ap∣pear'd in the Field with 800000, but was so far routed by the Army of Judah, that was not half his Number, that he lost 500000 Men, a larger number of Slain, than any we read of in any other Battel. Abijah carried on his Interest vigorously, he married 14 Wives, begat 22 Sons and 15 Daughters, but reign'd only 3 Years. 6. His Son Asa succeeded him in the later end of the 20th Year of Jeroboam's Reign. He was a good Man; He repuls'd 100000 of E∣thiopians that invaded his Kingdom. Baasha the King of Israel, incens'd by Envy, and provok'd by the perpetual Revolts of his Subjects, built Ramah in the 36th Year of the Reign of Asa, in order to prevent their going over to Asa. King Asa by Gifts oblig'd Benhadad King of Sy∣ria to attack Basha, and divert him from Ramah; which Asa quickly demolish'd. But in this Af∣fair he trusted too much in Human Means, and neglected God; whereupon he was check'd, and continual War denounc'd against him. Being fretted by the Divine Message, he was incens'd against the Prophet, and oppress'd some of his Subjects. In his Old Age he was seiz'd with the Gout, of which he died in the 41 Year of his Reign, having sought help from the Physicians, and not from God.
7. Asa a good Father was succeeded by Je∣hoshaphat a better Son; who remov'd the High Places and Groves; and in the 3d Year of his Reign sent his Princes, together with the Le∣vites, to instruct the People in the Cities of Ju∣dah. He was faulty in one thing, namely, That he enter'd into a League with the Idolatrous Kings of Israel. Before Ramoth Gilead he e∣scap'd narrowly with his Life: and the Ships which he had prepar'd upon an Expedition to Ophir, to fetch Gold, were shatter'd. He reign'd 25 Years, or 24 years and some Months. 8. Joram succeeded to Jehoshaphat, the wretch∣ed Son of an excellent Father. Being confirm'd in his Government, he put to Death all his Brethren, and some of the Princes. The Chil∣dren of Edom, that from David's time were sub∣ject to Judah, revolted in his Reign, according to the Prediction of Isaac the Patriach, together with Libnah, a City of Priests. God rais'd a∣gainst him the Philistines and Arabs, who in∣vaded his Country, and carried off all his Sub∣stance, together with his Wives and Sons, bate∣ing Jehorah, the youngest. At last he was seiz'd with an incureable Disease in his Entrails, which, after two Years, fell out. Thus, the Wretch was punish'd for his Idolatry and other hainous Crimes, after he had reign'd Three Years joint∣ly with his Father, and five Years by himself. 9. Jehoahaz (Alias Achaziah and Azariah) suc∣ceeded. He follow'd the Footsteps of Ahab his Grandfather by the Mother's side, and counte∣nanc'd Idolatry. He went to visit his Uncle Je∣horam King of Israel, and was kill'd along with him by Jehu; when he had scarce reign'd one
Year. Athaliah, Ahab's Daughter, receiving Ad∣vice of her Son's Fate, possess'd her self of the Government; and in order to establish it, made away all the Royal Offspring, excepting Joash an Infant, her Grandchild, whom Jehoshabeth, Daughter to Jehoram, and Wife to Jehojada the High Priest, had hid in the House of God. Six Years after Jehojada brought Joash, then Seven Years old, to light, and having kill'd Athaliah with the Priests of Baal, anointed him as King. 10. While Jehojada liv'd, Joash kept up to the Measures of Piety and Justice, and repair'd the Temple of God, which had then stood 155 Years, having gather'd a Collection for that purpose. Jehojada died, aged 130 Years; for the Jews observe, that this Restorer of the Tem∣ple was born the same Year, that the Builder of the same died. When Jehojada was dead, Joash fell in with Idolatry and Cruelty; and car∣ried his Ingratitude to that pitch, that when Zacharias the Son and Successour of Jehojadah check'd him for worshipping Idols, he gave Or∣ders to stone him to death in the Porch of the Temple. In the end of this Year he was hea∣vily punish'd by an invasion of the Syrians, and after their departure was seiz'd with grievous Di∣stempers, and kill'd by his own Servants in re∣venge of the Blood of Zacharias, in the 40th Year of his Reign, A. M. 3160. 11. Next succeeded Amasiah his Son, who seems to have reign'd jointly with his Father for three Years, since the Commencement of his Reign is dated in the 2d Year of Joash King of Israel. He put to death the Murtherers of
his Father, but spar'd their Children, in Obedi∣ence to the Mosaick Law. At first, things went well with him; but afterwards he fell in with Idolatry, slighted the Divine Admoni∣tions, and hurried himself headlong into Dan∣gers, and at last to Destruction. He disoblig'd Joash, was taken Pris'ner by him, and largely fin'd. Fifteen Years after a Conspiracy broke out against him; whereupon he fled to Lachish, but was pursued and kill'd, having reign'd 29 Years. 12. His Son and Successor Uzziah, or Aza∣riah; began to reign in the 17th Year of Jero∣boam King of Israel: From whence we gather, that there was an Interegnum of twelve Years from the Death of his Father, to the time when he, being 16 Years of Age, was elected King by the People. In his time Judah flourish'd migh∣tily. And about the 25 Year of his Reign, the first Olympiad was celebrated in the Morea, which sets the series of time in a Clearer light. When he invaded the Priests Office, by offering to sacrifice, he was smitten with a Leprosy, and thereupon separated from the Society of Man∣kind, Jotham his Son being intrusted with the Administration of Affairs. He reign'd 52 Years. 13. Jotham, after his Father's Death, be∣hav'd himself piously, and met with all man∣ner of Prosperity. When he had reign'd 16 Years, Ahaz his Son succeeded him, having acted a part in the Government 7 or 8 Years before. Ahaz was mightily giv'n to the Wor∣ship of Idols, and committed many hainous Crimes. Upon these high provocations God stir'd up several Enemies against him, viz. Pekah
King of Israel, Rezin King of Syria, the Edo∣mites and Philistines. He sought help from Te∣glath-Pilezer, King of Assyria, who made him∣self Master of all Syria, took Rezin, and put an end to the Kingdom of Damascus, which had lasted 10 Generations, and expir'd under the same Royal Name, with that which gave it a Being. 14. Tiglathpilezer, having thus conquer'd the Syrians, turns the dint of his Arms upon Pekah, and carries off the Gileadites and Neph∣thalites into Assyria, as formerly he did the Peo∣ple of Damascus. Ahaz becoming a Slave to the Assyrian, found himself in no better Condition: Being harden'd in Wickedness, and jealous of his Circumstances, three Years before his Death, he made Hezekiah his Son partner in the Go∣vernment; and at last died, having reign'd 16 Years. 15. Hezekiah open'd the Temple, restor'd Re∣ligion, and shook off the Yoke of Bondage. Sen∣nacherib the King of Assyria took this so ill, that he besieg'd Lachish, and after he had promis'd to depart upon the receipt of a Reward, broke his Promise, and sollicited the People of Jerusa∣lem to revolt. Finding this Project successless, he lay down before Libnah, a fortified City of Judah; but upon advice that Shishak King of Ethiopia was marching towards him, he broke up the Siege: But having still an Eye upon the Riches of Judah, wrote a Letter to Hezeki∣ah, stuff'd with Blasphemies and Threats, which did not pass with Impunity, for in one Night the Angel of the Lord cut off 180000 of his
Men; and when he returned home he was put to death by his own Children. 16. In those Days Hezekiah was taken very ill, and by Prayer obtain'd the addition of 15 Years to his Life. Ambassadours being then sent from Babylon to congratulate his Recovery, he shew'd them all his Treasure; and God be∣ing offended by that Ostentation and Levity of Mind, denounc'd, that all should be carried off to Babylon. He reign'd 29 Years, three of which he was join'd to his Father. He abounded in Riches, was celebrated by Fame, and honou∣red with a Stately Funeral by the People lament∣ing their loss. 17. Manasseh his Son and Successour, whom he begot after the Recovery from his Illness, was 12 Years of Age when the Government came into his Hands. For Idolatry, and all other Wickedness, he went beyond ev'n all the Kings of the Gentiles. But being taken by the Babylo∣nians, and bound in Chains, he repented; and God mov'd by his Supplications, restor'd him to his former Dignity. Being return'd home, he purg'd the Kingdom from Idols, 33 Years be∣fore his Death, according to the Jews. He reign'd 55 Years. 18. Amon his Son succeeded to his King∣dom and Idolatry, but not to his Repentance. After two Years he was kill'd in his own House by a Domestick Conspiracy. The People pu∣nish'd the Murderers, and set up Josiah his Son, then 8 Years of Age, to be their King, in the Fourth Year of the 35th Olympiad, A. M. 3368. Josiah stands highest in the Roll of the best Princes: he repair'd the Ruines of the Temple,
and restor'd the ancient and pure Worship of God. Towards the end of the 33 Year of his Reign, he unadvisedly engag'd in a War with Neco, King of Egypt, and wou'd not be di∣swaded from appearing in the Field in Person, where he was kill'd, to the infinite Loss and Grief of the People. 19. While Neco was diverted by other de∣signs, the People anointed Jehoahaz or Shallum his Son, as King. But he follow'd the Exam∣ple of his Ancestors, in doing what was evil in the Sight of the Lord, and enjoy'd his King∣dom only three Months. For Neco, having compass'd his Design upon Babylon, carried Je∣hoahaz to Egypt, and set his elder Brother Elia∣kim upon the Throne, changing his Name to Jehojakim, and laying heavy Taxes upon the Kingdom. 20. Neco was kill'd in the second expedition against the King of Babylon: After which Ne∣buchadnezar came to Jerusalem, and made Je∣hojakim Tributary to him in the Fourth Year of his Reign. Four Yeas after Jehojakim rebell'd, and in the Third Year of his Rebellion, being the Eleventh of his Reign, Nebuchadnezar re∣turn'd and took him Prisoner; but before he could be transported to Babylon he died, and was bu∣ried with the Burial of an Asse, according to the Prediction of Jeremiah. The Conqueror put Jehojachin in his Room, who follow'd his Fa∣ther's Humour, and was depos'd in the Second Year, and the Government was giv'n to Matta∣niah, Son to Josiah, who was Christen'd Ze∣dekiah, because he swore allegiance to the Con∣querour.
21. Zedekiah followed the Footsteps of his Brother and Nephews, and the People kept equal pace with him in Wickedness. Trusting to the Alliance of Pharaoh, he broke his pro∣mise of Allegiance. The King of Babylon, in revenge of the Breach of promise, comes up a∣gainst him, and took all the Cities of Judah, excepting Jerusalem, Lachish, and Azekah, which he likewise besieg'd. The next Year Pha∣raoh march'd out of Egypt in order to relieve Ze∣dekiah; but upon advice that Nebuchadnezzar mov'd towards him, he retir'd. Whereupon thc King of Babylon return'd, and renew'd the Siege of Jerusalem, where the Famine prevail'd so far, that it was taken the first day of the Month in the latter end of the Eleventh Year of Zedekiah's Reign. 22. Zedekiah fled, together with his Army; but was taken in the Plains of Jericho, and brought back to Riblah, where his Children were put to Death before his face, his own eyes put out, himself Bound in Chains and carried to Babylon, where he ended his days in Exile. The 10th day of the 5th Month (August 27.) on the very Sabbath-Day, the Execution being perhaps put off till that day, Nebuzaradan, Captain of the Guard, burnt the Temple of God, and the Palace, with all the Houses of Jerusalem. In the same Month he broke down the Walls of Jerusalem, and Transported to Babylon all the People that were left in the City, and those who joyn'd in with the King of Babylon, together with the Treasure of the King and Princes, and the Instruments of God's House. 23. This Catastrophe of Affairs, the just con∣sequent
of Impiety and Idolatry, happen'd 12 years after Jehojakim's Death, 390 years after the Death of Solomon, and separation of the Tribes; (To which Number if we add two years more, at the end of which the total Cap∣tivity was accomplish'd, Gedeliah being then dead, we'll find that it contains just 8 Jubilees:) 490 years after the beginning of Saul's Reign: (From whence 'tis apparent that the Kingdom of Ju∣dah lasted Ten Jubilees, or Seven Hebdomades or Septenary Periods of years, a Number equal to those attributed by Daniel to the Republick of Judah from its Restoration to the coming of the Messias;) and 420 after the build∣ing of the Temple, which at that rate stood just 8 Jubilees with 4 Weeks, or in all 60 Weeks of years. 24. Now if we reckon 967 Years from their Entry into Canaan, by adding the 100 Years mention'd under the Head of their Judges. That Number will contain 138 Weeks of Years: And according to this computation there pass'd 1007 Years from their departure out of Egypt, in which time Satan was bound, and the People of God at liberty: And 3515 from the Creation of the World, which makes 502 Weeks of Years, or 71 Jubilees with 5 Weeks of Years. 25. Gedaliah was set over the sorry Remains of the People of Judah. He freely offer'd all his Substance to his Subjects: But before he had compleated one Year, was kill'd at a Feast, to which he had been invited by one Ishmael sprung from the Royal Blood. The Jews be∣ing thus destitute of a Governor, many of 'em
remov'd to Egypt, notwithstanding the Remon∣strances of Jeremiah the Prophet, whom they consulted upon the matter, and oblig'd to go a∣long with 'em; and whom, if we credit the An∣cients, they afterwards ston'd to Death, for up∣braiding them with Idolatry, and threatning certain destruction both to them and the E∣gyptians. 26. At last, in the 23d Year of Nebachadnez∣zar, while the King Besieg'd Tyrus, Nebuzara∣dan carried off the Remnant of the Israelites, and the People of Judah, to the Number of 745 Souls; And this was the last Transportation. The Prophecies of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, do sufficiently acquaint us, That the Jews who fled to Egypt were carried Captive, together with the Natives, into Babylon, or else put to Death: But all the Affliction that their impiety had drawn upon their Nation, did not influence them to Repentance. SECT 4. From the Division of the Tribes to their Captivity. 1. THE Ten Tribes that Revolted from Re∣hoboam, elected Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, an Ephramite to be their King. He was very industrious in managing Fortifications, and was preferr'd by Solomon to be Ruler over all Joseph's House. God being offended by Solo∣mon's Idolatry, promis'd him the Government of the Ten Tribes; whereupon Solomon sought to kill him, but he fled into Egypt, where he
lurk'd till the Death of Solomon. After his Death he was sent for; and first Headed the People as Speaker, and afterwards as their King. 2. Jeroboam, in order to prevent the Revolt of his new Subjects, diverted them from going to Jerusalem, by erecting Two Golden Calves at Bethel and Dan, to be worshipp'd by the stu∣pid people. He persisted obstinately in pursuing this invention, notwithstanding the promises and threats of God to bring him from it. He died the 22d Year of his Reign. His Son and Suc∣cessor Nadab Besieging Gibbethon of the Phili∣stines, was kill'd by Basha, of the house of Isathar, in the second Year of his Reign: And all Jeroboams Race fell with him. 3. Nadab is said to begin his Reign in the se∣cond Year of Asa; and at the same time the Date of Basha's Reign commonly commences in the Third Year of Asa. Now in order to recon∣cile these two passages, we must know that Jeroboam did not Reign full 22 years, but only a part of the 22d Year; so that the far greatest part of Nadab's First Year is parallel with the greater part of the Second Year of Asa; and that Nadab did not Reign full Two Years, but only one Year, with part of another. By this means we see, the First Year of Basha will run parallel to the far greatest part of the Third Year of Asa. 4. For, in the History of the Kings of Ju∣dah, and Israel, these Remarks are commonly to be met with: Namely, 1. A Year begun is reckon'd as if 'twere intire and compleat. 2. The
Fathers in their lifetime oftentimes took their Sons in to be partners with them in the Govern∣ment. 3. Some were twice install'd, as Jero∣boam and Hoshea. 4. There were many inter∣regnum's, especially in the Kingdom of Israel. 5. Baasha did not Reign full 24 Years, but only 23, and a small part of the 24th. Elah being dead, his Son succeeded in the 26th Year of Asa; and after he had Reign'd two Years, he and his whole Family was cut off by Zimri's Treachery. Seven days after, Zimri was defeated by Omri, whom the Army that then lay before Gibbethon had declar'd King: But a division a∣rising among the People, part of them set up Tibni Son to Ginath: And that division lasted Three Years, that is, till Tibni died. 6. Omri began to Reign in the 31st year of Asa, that is, he began then to Reign without a Ri∣val; for 'twas in the latter end of the 27th or beginning of the 28 year of that Prince, that he kill'd Zimri. After he had reign'd six years at Tirzah, he translated the Seat of his Empire from thence to Samaria, which he built upon a Hill that he bought of one Semerus. He reign'd 12 Years. If we reckon these 12 Years as com∣mencing from the Death of Zimri, so as to in∣clude the whole duration of his Government; then Ahab his Son and Successor Reign'd along with him only 2 Years; the Eleventh Year of his Reign falling parallel with the 38 of A∣sa's. But if they commence only from the Death of Tibni, then Ahab must have reign'd five Years jointly with his Father. 7. Ahab's impiety out-strip'd that of any of
his Ancestors. He married Jezabel Daughter to Ethbaal King of the Sydonians, and worship'd Baal his Idol. When the Syrians besieg'd Sa∣maria, he routed them, and in a second engage∣ment took Benhadad their King; but set him at liberty again, after entring into a League with him: for which the Lord denounc'd Death to him. Afterwards false Witnesses being su∣born'd against Naboth for the sake of his Vine∣yard, he got him ston'd to Death. Three Years after the Conclusion of the Treaty with Benha∣dad, the War broke out again, and he died of a Wound receiv'd in Battel, in the 22 Year of his Reign. 8. His Son Ahaziah succeeded, having acted a Part in the Government in his Father's Life. The Commencement of his Reign is dated in the 17th Year of Jehoshaphat, so that he reign'd one Year and part of another. In his Days the Moabites, who from David's time were Subject to Israel, revolted from it. Next to him fol∣low'd Joram his Brother who persecuted the Moabites, and himself was maul'd by the Syri∣ans. As he wag'd War with Hazael Benha∣dad's Successor, he receiv'd a Wound in the Bat∣tel, and return'd to Jezreel to be cur'd. While he was gone, one of the Sons of the Prophets was sent by Elisha to anoint Jehu as King, who was then General to the Army. Jehu ad∣vanc'd to Jezreel, and kill'd Joram, after he had reign'd 12 Years. 9. Jehu cut off all the Race of Ahab; but retain'd the Worship of Idols. Tho' God gave him a Promise, as a Reward for his Service, in punishing the Family of Ahab, that he and his
Posterity should enjoy the Kingdom to the 4th Generation: Yet, in his time, the Kingdom was lessen'd; for Hazael did not only subdue the Gileadites, but likewise all the People beyond Jordan, and treated them all cruelly, according to Elisha's Prediction. The date of the com∣mencement of Jehu's Reign is the same with that of Athaliah's usurpation over Judah. He reign'd 28 Years. 10. Jehoahaz succeeded to Jehu in the 23th Year of Joash. He worship'd Jeroboam's Golden Calves, and enlarg'd his Idolatry by the accession of the Samaritan Grove. All his time Hazael the King of Syria oppress'd the Israelites; and tho' God sent them a Deliverer, yet neither the Prince, nor the People, repented. 17 Years af∣ter he died; and his Son Joash succeeded, his Reign being dated from the 37th Year of Jo∣ash King of Judah; so that it seems he reign'd three Years along with his Father. He beat the Syrians thrice, and recover'd the Towns which his Father had lost. He joyn'd in with King Ahaziah, and took Jerusalem; and made a Breach 400 Cubits wide in the Wall, and return'd to Samaria with all the Treasure of the Temple and Palace. This Idolater reign'd 16 Years. 11. Next to him was Jeroboam his Son, by whom God not only sav'd Israel, but rais'd 'em to the highest pitch of Grandure, in recovering Damascus and Hamath, which by right belong'd to the Tribe of Judah, and repossess'd the Coast of Israel from the entring of Hamath to the Sea of the Plain, according to the Prediction of Jo∣nah, the Son of Amittai, who being born in Gatho-Chepher, a Town of the Tribe of Zebulun, in Gali∣lee
of the Gentiles, was a Prophet rais'd up in Galilee; notwithstanding that the learned Pha∣risees, the inveterate Enemies of Christ, ob∣truded the contrary upon Him. 12. Tho' God loaded Jeroboam with so great and so many Favours, yet his Ingratitude was such, that he still countenanc'd that inveterate Idolatry of the Calves, introduc'd by Jeroboam his Predecessour. For all the Samaritan Kings look'd upon that as a secret and hidden Myste∣ry of their Government: Which certainly was the highest degree of Folly, since the divine Pro∣vidence display'd it self to them in so many cer∣tain Proofs. 13. He reign'd 41 Years. After his Death the Affairs of that Family, and at length those of the Kingdom it self, began to stagger. There happen'd at this time an Interregnum of 24 Years, for Zacharias his Son did not begin to govern till the 38 Year of Uzziah. Now the last Year ef Jeroboam's Reign falls in with the 14th of Uzziah; and Uzziah's Reign began in the 27th Year of Jeroboam, who reign'd 41 Years. 14. Zacharias following the Example of his Ancestours, continu'd his Reign only 6 Months, being kill'd by Shallum, who usurp'd the Go∣vernment in the 29th Year of Uzziah. Shallum was brought to condign Punishment for the Re∣gicide, about two Months after, by Menahem: Who likewise worship'd Jereboam's Calves, ac∣cording to the Impious Custom of the Kings of Israel; and by that means provok'd the Lord to stir up Pul King of Assyria to invade the King∣dom, after he had strugl'd and grapl'd with ma∣ny Troubles for almost 22 Months, to secure to
himself the Possession of the Kingdom. But Pul was brib'd by 1000 Talents of Silver to confirm his Right. So that Menahem reign'd 10 Years, and then died. 15. Pekahiah his Son succeeded, in the 50th Year of Azariah, or Uzziah. Whence we ga∣ther, that after Menahem's Death there was an Iterregnum of at least One Year. Unless we join with some who think that Menahem did not reign Peaceably till about a Year after Shal∣lum's Death. So that, by that Calculation, Pe∣kahiah must begin his Reign in the beginning of the 50th Year of Uzziah; and a few Months being added to Menahem's 10 Years, there will be no necessity of an Interregnum. However Pe∣kahiah was a Prince of the same Kidney with his Ancestours; and having reign'd two Years, was kill'd by Pekah the Son of Remaliah. 16. Pekah join'd in with the Syrians in afflicting Ahaz King of Judah. He kill'd 120000 of the stoutest Jews in one Day. He kill'd Masasiah the Kings Son with the other Princes; and carried out of Judah and Jerusa∣lem 200000 Women, Girls, and Boys, with a very Rich Spoil. But the Prophet Oded influ∣enc'd him to release the Captives. 17. Ahaz fearing the Consequences of that Expedition, desir'd help of Tiglath Pilezer King of Assyria who had quite overthrown the King∣dom of Damascus, and transported the People of Gilead or Perea, namely, the Reubenites, Ga∣dites, and half the Tribe of Manasseh, to Calah, Cha∣bor, Haran and Neharogosan; and then having pass'd Jordan, made himself Master of all Gali∣lee and carried the Inhabitants to Assyria, together
with the Nephthalites that remained after the stroke formerly inflicted by Benhadad. 20 Years after Pekah was kill'd by Hoshea the Son of Elah who invaded the Kingdom. 18. Hoshea the 19th and last King of Israel began to reign in the 12 Year of Ahaz as Part∣ner with his Father for 7 or 8 Years; for he did not administer Affairs by himself till the 17 Year of Pekah, so that Hoshea's Reign is right∣fully dated from the 20 Year after the inaugu∣ration of Jotham. This is the only account can be given, unless we can produce some proof of an Interregnum for 8 or 9 Years, in which the disorder of Affairs kept Hoshea out of a peacea∣ble Possession. But according to that Calcula∣tion, we must add as many Years to the dura∣tion of his Reign. 19. Hoshea was as Idolatrous, but not so obsti∣nate as his Ancestours. By the advice of So King of Egypt, he refus'd to pay the yearly Tribute to Salmanassar. The King of Assyria smell'd out the Conspiracy; and took Possession of the Land of the Moabites, designing to make all sure behind him; and then he invaded the whole Countrey of the Israelites, and laid siege to Samaria, in the 4 Year of Hezekiah, and the 9 of Hoshea. 20. Towards the end of the third Year, he carried the Town, and carried off the Israelites to Chalah, Chabor, Neharogosan, and the Cities of Media; because they had rebell'd against their Lord and their God. In the Countries for∣merly possess'd by them he planted new Inhabi∣tants, that formerly liv'd upon the River Chuth, and were afterwards call'd Samaritans. This was
the fatal exit of the Kingdom of Israel, which happen'd 255 Years after the Division of the Tribes, 134 Years before the Destruction of Jerusalem and the Transportation of the People of Judah, A. M. 3280. CHAP. IV. The Affairs of the greatest Antiquity, relating to the Kingdom of Egypt, contemporary with the Babylonian Empire. 1. IN the Division of the Earth, Egypt and all Africa were allotted to Cham's Posterity; and 'tis thought he himself liv'd in Egypt. Upon which account David do's often call it the Land of Cham; Plutarch would have it Che∣mia; and Stephanus, Hermochymia. The In∣habitants themselves christen'd it Cham; and the particular Divisions were call'd Chemmim, Psochemmim, and Psittachemmim. 2. The neighbouring Places of Africa did likewise derive their Names from the Posterity of Cham: Upon the River Magra, we find the City of Ammon; in the Island Meroe, the Temple of Ammon; in Barcha, the Town of Ammon commonly call'd Panaetonium; and in the Country of Ammon, the famous Oracle of Jupiter Hammon or Ammon. Arabia likewise the neighbouring Country bears proof of the same Posterity; for the Word Ammon (without the Aspiration usual elsewhere) is frequently us'd among them, as it plainly appears from the River Ammon, the Promontory Ammon, and the People of Ammon.
3. When Cham died, the Government fell into the Hands of his second Son Misraem, or rather him whom Moses calls the Prince of the Inhabitants of Misraim; for that Word is in the Dual Number, and therefore can scarcely be look'd upon as a Man's Name. This Country in Scripture is often call'd Masor which is the sin∣gular Number of Misraim the contraction of Mesoraim; and signifies a fortify'd or narrow Place. Now such is Egypt above all other Coun∣tries. 4. To this very Day Cairo the Metropolitan is call'd by the Arabs Mesre, and in former times the Egyptians call'd the first Month Mesori. But the Dual Number Misraim seems to im∣ply that Egypt was divided into the upper and the lower: The former water'd by the River Nile, as it runs in one great Channel, and di∣vided into Thebais and Heptanomus; the latter call'd by the Grecians Delta, from its Triangu∣lar Figure, where the River is divided into ma∣ny Channels. 5. Misraim is thought to be the same with Osiris, the Son of Saturn, and of Jupiter Ham∣mon. For the Grecians call Osiris, Dionysus; and Diodorus Siculus says he was so call'd from his Father and his Country; the former signify∣ing Jupiter, and the latter Nyse, a Town of A∣rabia Faelix, built by Cham, where it seems Mis∣raim was born. From the Reign of Osiris to the descent of Alexander the Great the Egyptian Priests reckon up 10000 Years, and some 23000. 6. But, since 'tis agreed upon by all, that the various Motion of the Planets along the Zodi∣ack,
occasion'd a great variety in the Forms of the Years us'd in Ancient times, 'tis therefore to be conjectur'd, that these were only Lunar Years, that is, each of 'em consisting of one Month. Accordingly, James Capellus reckons 1889 Years from that Osiris to the descent of Alexander the Great, beginning the Computation from A. M. 1778, or 132 Years after the Deluge at the same time that Nimrod his Nephew gave being to the Babylonian Empire. 7. There are a great many Stories told of O∣siris, and Isis his Sister whom he married; which the Grecians fabulously applyed to Bac∣chus and Ceres. He built the Egyptian Thebes, with 100 Gates, which was the chief Seat of the first Kings. At length he was kill'd by his impious Brother Typhon, who usurp'd the King∣dom, but was quickly outted and put to Death by Isis and Orus. Isis gather'd the Members of her Husband, which Typhon had tore asunder, and instituted Divine Honors to his Memory; enacting, that each Tribe of Priests should wor∣ship some certain consecrated Animal in his Room. There were various kinds of Animals consecrated, according to the diversity of Places; But 'tis universally agreed on, that the Cow Apis was most esteem'd and worship'd, by Reason of that Creature's Usefulness for the Food of Man. 8. Now Apis was black all over the Body, with a square white Spot, according to Hero∣dotus in the Forehead, and according to Pliny in the right Side; resembling the Horns of the Moon when it begins to wax; for Marcellinus says, it was dedicated to the Moon: It had
likewise the stamp of an Eagle upon its Back, upon its Tongue a Knot like a Beetle, and double Rolls of Hair upon its Tail. When it died, they were mightily afflicted, and were di∣ligent in quest of another: Neither did their Lamentation cease, till they found a Cow di∣stinguish'd by such Marks, in order to make it an Apis. 9. The Egyptians ador'd Apis as the greatest God, and, as Macrobius says, worship'd it with a Veneration full of astonishment and fear. There was a certain Period of years determin'd, be∣yond which it was not to go: When it arriv'd at the Critical year, the Priests drown'd it in a Ditch. Some alledged this Cow was ador'd, out of Honor to Apys King of the Argivans who went down to Egypt: For that King was rec∣kon'd a God, and call'd Serapis: But there were several Kings of that name in several Places, and Authors commonly confound them. 10. The Course of time, and the Tricks of the Priests, who invented whatever tended to the Honor, and conceal'd whatever redounded to the Dishonor of their Country; have brought things to that pass, that we can scarce fix upon any thing as certain in those Ancient Times. They talk of a great many Reigns before A∣bram's Days: Whose Birth calculated to the 43d year of Ninus they make contemporary to their Sixteenth Reign. A great deal of Pains and Labor is spent in reconciling and ordering these Governments. If we approve of 'em, we must allot only 200 years to the first Fifteen, the time being so short. 11. Some fancy that these were not Successi∣ons
of Kings, but only so many Series's of Viceroy's of different Sizes and Ranks, who go∣vern'd the Republick, when the Kings were la∣zy. Eusebius has turn'd and moulded these Reigns so variously, in order to make 'em Ser∣viceable in the regulating of time; that James Capellus thought it improper to insert the Ca∣talogue of the Kings in his Chronicle; for Ma∣netho, whom Scaliger produces to correct all the Errors of Eusebius, is least of all to be credited. However since young Students ought to know something of the uncertain times, I rec∣kon 'twill not be amiss briefly to run over such of those uncertain occurrences as best Merit our Belief. 12. After Typhon's Death, 'tis said that Isis Reign'd joyntly with Orus, or Horus, her Son, who was reckon'd the last of their gods. He instituted a Year consisting of Three Months, which from him was call'd . Next to the gods Reign'd Menas, or Menis: Some will have this word only to signify some Dignity, and al∣ledge his Name was Osiris, or, according to o∣thers Trismegistus, or, as some would have it, Sesostris. Others again give it in for a Man's Name. 'Tis uncertain who succeeded to him, for the Priests forg'd a List of 52 Kings suc∣ceeding in order, in the space of 1400 years. 13. In this uncertain period of Time, we must have recourse to the order of the Reigns, tho' it be a blind one; and passing over 17, for which 400 years are allotted, the 18th must be∣gin, according to our computation, Nine years before Eusebius's method, that is in the 107th year of the Patriarch Jacob. Now the first of this List was Amos, or Amosis.
14. Amosis, they say, Reign'd 25 years. At this rate, this must be he who preferr'd Joseph to the highest Dignities in Egypt. Eusebius reckons 11 Kings from him to Cenchres, who treated the Israelites with all manner of Indignities, and as he pursued them upon their Flight, was drown'd in the Red-Sea. The Egyptians have always own'd and boasted that the Jews went out from them; but to avoid the Dishonour, and conceal their own Disaster, have obtruded an Infinity of staring Lyes upon the vulgar People, by the Ministry of some foul-mouth'd Histo∣rians, particularly Manetho, Chaeremon, Lysima∣chus, and Apion the Grammarian; whose fa∣bulous Advances are sufficiently refuted by Jo∣sephus. 15. A certain Learned Author prefers Ma∣netho's List to that of Eusebius, and would have the Name of Cenchres to be Ramesses Miamun, who oppress'd the Israelites with that severe Bondage. Indeed the long continuance of his Reign, viz. for Sixty Years and Two Months, seems to imply some such thing; and 'tis pro∣bable the Town of Rameses, which the Is∣raelites provided Materials for, was so Christen'd from his Name. His Son and Successor Ame∣nophis was brought to condign Punishment for his Cruelty, being swallow'd up by the Waves 19 years and 6 Months after. Next to Ame∣nophis, Manetho places Sethosis, who made Armais his Brother Viceroy, and subdued a great part of the World with his Naval and Land Forces: But upon Advice that his Brother usurp'd the Government, return'd home, and re∣duc'd his Subjects to their wonted Allegiance.
16. Manetho adds, That this Sethosis was call'd Aegyptus, from whom the Country de∣riv'd its Name; and Armais was Sirnam'd Da∣naus. If these advances be allow'd, then Ame∣nophis who was drown'd in the Red-Sea, must be that Belus, whom the Grecians give in for the Father of Aegyptus and Danaus. But that Belus must not be confounded with the Father of Ninus, (as the Mythologists do.) He liv'd according to the above-mention'd computation about 322 years before the taking of Troy, which agrees exactly to the time of Amenophis. Besides, the Name of Rameses Miamun qua∣drates with Neptune: Since Mia without any stretch may be deriv'd from Moy, which, in the Egyptian Language, if we may credit Josephus, signifies Waters. 17. Neptune, they say, begot Busirides, who at this time liv'd near the River Nile, and treat∣ed the Inhabitants very barbarously. Now that Fable seems to be taken from Amenophis's cruelty to the Israelites. Besides, Gellius tells us, That the Poets us'd to represent the Nep∣tunes as cruel and barbarous, as deriving their Original from the frothy and troubled Sea: From whence we conclude, that the word Neptune sprung from the occasion now mention'd. 18. To compare this account of Things, with the other given in by the Grecians: Nep∣tune, say they, married Libya the Daughter of Epaphus, and begot Belus and Agenor. Agenor went off to Phoenicia, and died there. Egypt was allotted to Belus, who begot Aegyptus and Danaus upon Anchinoe, the Daughter of Nilus. Danaus was sent into Africa, or Libya so call'd
from his Mother. Aegyptus conquer'd the Coun∣try of the Melampodes or black Feet, and Chri∣sten'd it Egypt after himself, which formerly was call'd Aeria, and Potamitis. However, Manetho's Sesothes mention'd by Josephus, seems to be the same with Diodorus's Sesooses, and Heredotus's Sesostres: Since the Circum∣stances of Power, Warlike Preparations, Victo∣ries, Success, and Magnificence ascrib'd to them, resemble those of the other. 19. Next to Sesostres, his Son of the same Name succeeded. He was follow'd by several others, till the days of Amoses, who by his Tyranny open'd a Door to the Ethiopians; whose King Artisanes us'd his Power but moderately, in punishing the Criminals not with Death, but with cutting off their Noses, and banishing them to the Confines of Egypt and Syria, where he built a Town call'd Rhinocolura, from the maim'd condition of the Inhabitants. He pitch'd upon such a place as by its barrenness and un∣temperateness of Air oblig'd them to work hard for their living, which they got by Fishing in the Sea that lay just by them. 20. The Egyptians at length recover'd their own Government, and set up Mendes, one of their own Nation, to be their King. He spent all his time in building a Tomb; which, tho' inimitable, serv'd for a Pattern to Daedalus. A long Anarchy ensued; after which, one Cetes, a very ordinary Man, was made King. The Grecians call'd him Proteus. In the time of the Trojan War he was a noted Astrologer, and admirably well vers'd in the Knowledge of the Winds. This his distinguishing Talent, toge∣ther
with the Custom of the Egyptian Kings in wearing the various Forms of Creatures, Trees, and Fire, painted upon the Ornaments of their Heads, gave occasion to the Grecian Fable, That he was a Man that could transform him∣self into all Shapes. 21. Remphis his Son made Mony his whole Business. The next remarkable Prince was Ni∣leus, who took a great deal of Pains to turn the Water of the River Aegyptus upon the neigh∣bouring Grounds, and by so doing christen'd the River Nilus from his own name. The eighth in order from Nileus was Chemmis, who rear'd up the largest of the three Pyramids, which is usu∣ally reckon'd among the Seven Wonders of the World. Herodotus tells you that one Cheopes was the first that gave his mind to the build∣ing of these Mad Piles; that he prostituted his own Daughter to fetch in Mony for carrying on the Work; and that the largest Pyramid was not finish'd till after 20 Years and that by 100000 Workmen, for whose maintainance 1600 Ta∣lents were laid out upon Parsley, Onyons, and Garlick. 22. After a long course of Years, the King∣dom came once more into the Hands of the E∣thiopians, whose King Sabacus, or Sabacon, put none to Death in Egypt, but sentenc'd the Criminals, in proportion to the Demerit of their Crime, to heap up a determin'd Measure of Bullwarks within the Cities where they dwelt. By which means the Cities were made more Stately. The first digging up of Earth for this use was perform'd by those who had digg'd for the Channels of Rivers under Sesostres. Sa∣bacus
is thought to be the same with So the E∣gyptian, that joyn'd in the Conspiracy, with Ho∣shea King of Israel, against Salmanasar. 23. Sathon the Priest of Vulcan follow'd him. 'Tis said, he put no Confidence in his Army, but obtain'd help from God against the Assyri∣ans. But the Holy Scriptures do plainly give us to know, that the Assyrians invaded Egypt, and carried off in Captivity a large number of the Inhabitants. Some say this Prince was fol∣low'd immediately by Tirac, or Tirhak, who oblig'd Sennacherib to retire, invaded Europe, and reach'd as far as the Straits of Gibraltar. 24. After him a two Years Anarchy ensued, and after that the Government was adminstred by 12 Men; but at last one of them, namely Psammeticus, converted it into a Monarchy. This Prince lay 29 Years before Azot, or Ashdod, in Syria; and 'tis said, he was the first Egyptian King, that entertain'd any correspondence with the Grecians. Herodotus says, that all the oc∣currences posterior to his Government are cer∣tain and free of all Ambiguity. His Son and Successor was Necus, call'd in Scripture Phara∣oh-Neco, who first attempted to run the Ca∣nal along to the Red Sea, capable to receive two Gallies a Breast, and four Days sailing long. 25. In digging this Ditch under Neco 12000 Egyptians perish'd; and the King desisted from the interprise, being discourag'd by an Oracle ac∣quainting him that the Work he was upon would fall into the Hands of a Barbarian. Now the Egyptians, as well as the Greeks, look'd upon all Nations as Barbarous, that did not
speak their Language. Neco giving over the Thoughts of perfecting the Ditch, bended his Mind upon his Army, and march'd against the King of Assyria, upon which occasion Josiah King of Judah, appearing in the Field against him, receiv'd a mortal Wound. Neco plac'd Je∣hojakim his Son upon the Throne, whom Nebu∣chadnezar afterwards sollicited to break his Pro∣mise to Neco; whereupon he march'd towards the Euphrates, and was there kill'd. 26. Herodotus tells you that Neco engag'd with the Syrians and carried the Victory, and made himself Master of Cadytum a great Town in Syria, the same with Kadesh mention'd by Moses. After his Death Psammis, or Psammi∣tichus his Son succeeded, and then Apries his Grandchild, who was so lifted up with a long course of Prosperity, that he aspir'd beyond the Bounds of Human Nature. As he besieg'd Cy∣rene, he met with a Defeat, which his Soul∣diers charg'd him with, and revolted. 27. Upon Advice of their Mutiny, he sent Amasis to pacify them; but he was presently declared King by the Army. Soon after Apries having no Body to back him, but mercenary Troops, was taken Prisoner by his Enemies and strangled: He thought before, that he had so establish'd his Kingdom, that neither Gods nor Men could wrest it out of his Hands. 28. This was the Exit of Apries, if ye'll Credit the Egyptians, who have been very care∣ful to conceal whatever tends to the Discredit of their Country. But Josephus's Account is more agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, scil. that Nebuchadnezar in the 23 Year of his Reign, and
the 5th Year after the Destruction of Jerusalem, subdued Egypt, put their King to Death, and plac'd another on his Throne. Some think A∣masis was instrumental in bringing this about, and that he was made Viceroy: Others alledge that the Assyrian Viceroy that ministred to the Bondage of Egypt, was afterwards kill'd by A∣masis, and the others return'd from their Banish∣ment. 29. Amasis, a Man of a mean Birth, was at first but little respected, tho' afterwards he pro∣cur'd a great deal of Esteem; for the Egyptians Glory, that in his time the Land was most hap∣py, both in the advantage that accrued from the River to the Country, and the Profit that the Inhabitants made of their Grounds; and that the Cities then inhabited were in number 1020. Amasis enacted a Law, appointing every Man to give an account of himself to the Governor, how he liv'd, and upon what; annexing the Penalty of Death upon all that either did not or could not give a good Account of their way of living. Solon the Athenian took this Law from the Egyptians, and publish'd it among the Athenians which they always observ'd. 30. 'Tis very probable that Amasis was Tri∣butary to the King of Assyria, and rebell'd or else expell'd the Viceroy; and this was the rea∣son (whatever the Priests may have forg'd) that Cambyses the Persian invaded Egypt, and made it a Province of the Persian Empire. In∣deed that was not accomplish'd in the Days of Amasis, for he died in the very beginning of Hostilities. But 'twas Psammenitus his Son that
was conquer'd, and at once lost both his Life and his Kingdom. 31. As for Antiquity, the Kingdom of Egypt was inferior to none: tho' at the same time the Priests have carried it prodigiously wide of the true Epocha. In Abrahams Days, before the People of Israel had a being, 'twas a very flourishing Kingdom. The Ethiopians indeed boasted in a Preference upon the score of Antiquity, going up∣on a Fable that Egypt was the Gift of the Nile: Whereas any who traces their Original thro' some thousands of Years will find that the slime cast up by the River Nile did not amount to any such considerable accession, but that Towns are still found in Egypt equally distant from the Nile. 32. The Antiquity, which the Grecians claim a Right to, is ridiculous and contemptible up∣on the comparison with that of the Egyptians. The Splendour of the Greek Republicks is but of Yesterday; their Laws, Politicks, Religion, and Rights, are late things; and, if we believe the Egyptians, are borrow'd from them. In∣deed, it is apparent, that the knowledge of Letters, Civil Government, and the Invention of a great many things, arriv'd to a considerable Maturity among the Egyptians, before they were ever heard of in Greece, Italy, and the Western Parts of the World. But the Egyptians are Proud of boasting, that Greece borrow'd these things from them. 33. Especially, they alledge; that the whole Religious Worship with the Names of the Gods, bating a few minute things, foisted in to disguise the Truth, are owing to them. Osiris,
say they, was the true Bacchus, and the fable of Semele was invented by Orpheus. Isis was the true Ceres, and the Egyptian Hercules was not born in the Age preceding the Trojan War, but in the first beginning of the World, with which the Club of Hercules and the Hides of Lyons were more suitable, as well as the slaughter of Mon∣sters and Wild Beasts, with which the Earth, in that its impolish'd Condition, did then abound: Apollo, continue they, was only Orus, who taught the Art of Prophesying, and curing Di∣seases by his Mother Isis. 34. Here a young Historian may take occasi∣on to observe the uncertainty and inconstancy of the Heathen Vanities. The same Person is by one taken for Isis, by another for Ceres, a third Thesmophoris, and a fourth Juno: and some fancy that all these different Names do proper∣ly relate to one and the same Person. Some take Osiris for Serapis, some for Dionysius, some for Pluto, some for Ammon and Jupiter, and some again for Pan, as Diodorus Siculus him∣self observes. 35. Tho' it is not altogether true that the World owes the use of Letters to them; yet it is certain that the more liberal Sciences began to be propagated among them in the earliest times of Antiquity. Besides the common way of writing, they likewise made use of Hieorogly∣phicks, in which a Letter signifies a Word, and a Word expresses a whole Sentence. Tho the Ba∣bylonians vie with them for the Knowledge of Astronomy, yet the evenness of their Ground and the clearness of their Air, might contri∣bute
much to promote their Knowledge of the Stars. 36. It seldom rains in Egypt, the defect of that Moisture being supply'd by the yearly Inundations of the Nile. If the World owes them any thing upon the score of Geometry, they were beholden for that to their beneficial River, the inundations whereof defac'd the di∣visions and boundaries of their Lands, and so drove the Inhabitants upon a necessity of find∣ing out a way to Measure their Grounds. But in order to prove that the most ingenious Arts and the best Laws were translated from thence to Greece, they give the following account. 37. The Priests boasted that they met with a List in the Sacred Archives, and several other E∣vidences, importing that Orpheus translated the Misteries of Ceres, and the Fable of the infer∣nal World, from Egypt; and that the Acherusian Lake, over which they carried their dead in a Boat to be interr'd, gave occasion to the forging all the different apartments below, and putting up Charon as Ferry-man. Museus, continue they, Melampus, Daedalus and Homer travel'd into Egypt for the improvement of their Minds, as also the Legislators, Lycurgus the Spartan, Solon the Athenian, and Plato; the Phi∣losophers Pithagoras of Samos, Democritus of Ab∣dera, Oenopius of Chios, and Eudoxus the Ma∣thematican; who, all of 'em, water'd barren and impolish'd Greece with the Wisdom they had suck'd in Egypt. 38. The Invention of Philosophy and Laws, together with the whole Egyptian Wisdom, are by some attributed to Hermes or Mercurius Tris∣megistus:
But we know nothing certain of that Man, who he was, or when he liv'd. Cotta reckons up five Mercuries: The first sprung from Caelus for his Father and Dies for his Mother; The second the Son of Valens and Phonoris, who was call'd Triphonius, and rec∣kon'd to reside under the Earth; The third the Son of Jupiter the third and Maja; the fourth the Son of Nilus, whom the Egyptians thought it a Crime to mention; the fifth was worship'd by the People of Pheneum, and, they say, kill'd Argus, upon which account he was set over Egypt, and taught the Egyptians Laws and Letters. 39. He was call'd by the Egyptians Theut. But others do justly attribute the Invention of Letters to the first Mercurius, who was the true Theut, Thoyoth, Thot, or Tautus; for there can be nothing more absurd than to say, that Let∣ters were first carried out of Greece into Egypt. Some alledge there were two Egyptian Mercuries, the former being the Nephew of the latter; o∣thers think Joseph was the only Mercurius; others again think there was no other besides Moses. Whoever he was, it is apparent from his Books, some of which are lost and some still extant, that he was not ignorant of the true Divinity, and merited to be enroll'd among the Sybille or Heathen Prophets. 40. The Egyptians arrogate to themselves the Glory of planting many Colonies abroad. Be∣lus the Son of Libya and Neptune planted the first in the Country of Babylon; Danaus planted a second in Greece, fixing his Seat at Argos, which was almost the Ancientest City in Greece.
They plead the Circumcision, as an argument that the Jews and Colchi came from them. They alledge that Cadmus and Phaenices inhabited the Egyptian Thebes, and carried the name of the City into Greece. Cecrops, they say, did lead the first Athenians out from Sai the mouth of the River Nile. Peleus the Father of Menestheus, and Erechtheus came likewise from Egypt; and it was Erechtheus his carrying a large quantity of Corn to Athens, that gave rise to that Fable, that Ceres at that time came into Greece. 41. The Government of Egypt in the first times was Monarchical; and indeed in those days it was such every where else. But the Princes suffer'd themselves to be confin'd by such Laudable Statutes, that it was not in their Pow∣er to transgress the bounds of Equity and Ju∣stice, but they were ty'd up to such an admi∣nistration as purchas'd them Happiness at Home and Glory abroad. Sesoosis or Sesostris, divided the Country into 36 Divisions, each of which included a certain number of Cities with Villa∣ges and Lands. Ten of these belong'd to The∣bais, ten to Delta, and the rest to the interja∣cent Countries. Each of 'em had its own Go∣vernour who collected the Kings Taxes and go∣vern'd them. The Hereditary Right to the Lands was divided among the Priests, King and Soldiers: The People was divided into Shep∣herds, Husbandmen, and Tradesmen. 42. The Court of Justice was managed by 30 Judges, noted for their Probity and Knowledge in the Law; ten whereof were elected out of the Province of Heliopolis, ten out of Memphis, and as many out of Thebais. If the President
was chosen out of their Number, another of the same Province was put into his place. There were no Barristers employ'd among them, for fear of disguising and sinking the Truth in de∣ceitful Words. They had many Laudable Laws; none of which was more famous than that of Amasis, by which they were all oblig'd, upon the pain of Death, to give an account how they liv'd. 43. They had a very peculiar and remarkable Statute, requiring all that gave themselves to Theft, to enter their Names with the Captain of the Thieves, and give in to him what they got according to their agreement. At the same time whoever lost any thing were oblig'd to write down a particular account of what they lost, together with the place, day, and hour in which the loss happen'd. By this means e∣very thing was easily found again, and when the Goods were apprais'd, the true owner redeem'd them for a quarter of their value. Thus, since it was not possible to keep all the People from Theft, the Law-giver found a way of recovering what was lost for a small matter. 44. The first Egyptian Law-giver was Mnevis, who said he had the Laws from Mercury; the second Sasyches; the third Sesostris that great Warriour; the fourth Bocchoris, whose Apho∣risms were long preserv'd after him; the fifth Amasis, who by his extraordinary Wisdom did much promote the interest of Egypt: The last was Darius the Son of Hystaspes King of Persia. 45. As for their Customs, all the Egyptians, bateing the Priests, were allow'd to Marry as
many Wives as they wou'd. Their Children by their Servant Maids were upon the same foot with those by their Wives. They were e∣ducated very sparingly, at the rate of Twenty Drachms of Silver for their Board. Every Man bred up his Sons to succeed to his Trade as well as to his Estate. And all of 'em were taught some Science or other. They slighted Musick, as be∣ing an Instrument of softness. They Purg'd their Bodies once a Month; but had no Phy∣sicians that pretended to the Universal Cure of all Diseases. They that were, were maintain'd upon the Publick, and ty'd up to certain Forms and Rules, which if they transgressed, and if their Patients died, they were punish'd for their temerity with the loss of their Lives. 46. This was the Acient State of the Affairs of Egypt; according to the Account given by the Egyptians themselves. But some are of o∣pinion that this Form of Government cou'd not be settled and lasting among them, since it was so insuitable to the Humours of the Kings who erected Pyramids. Above all this is to be re∣mark'd, that if things were in that posture; the Regulation of Joseph was quite abolish'd, which declar'd the King to be the only Lord of the Land. 47. The People were possess'd with a blind and furious superstition towards Cows, Sheep, Dogs, Cats, Storks, Rats, Haulks, Eagles, Goats, Wolves, Crocodiles, Garden Herbs, with such kind of things: Which at first view, has such a horrible Aspect, that it seems inconsistent with Prudence, if not with common Reason; for let their pretences be what they will, there
is not the least Colour of Reason to be alledg'd for such a Custom; which any Man indow'd with the common Light of Nature would readily pro∣nounce to be the effect of Madness. CHAP. V. The Ancientest State of Greece, contemporary with the Babylonian Empire; together with a particular Description of its Kingdoms and Republicks. SECT. I. The State of Greece in General. 1. WHen the Inhabitants of this Country came under one common Denomina∣tion, they were first call'd Grecians, and after∣wards Hellenes, both Names being borrow'd from the People of Thessaly. For the Thessalians, formerly call'd Graeci or Vetusti, were Sirnam'd Hellenes, from Hellen the Son of Deucalion that govern'd them. The Sirname was so agreeable to all the People, that they neglected the o∣ther Name, tho' it was chiefly known among all the neighbouring Nations; and Callimachus, Sophocles and other Poets did not Scruple to make use of it. 2. The first Grecians follow'd a wand'ring un∣setl'd way of living, preying upon one another in Mutual Robberies. They did no memorable Action before the Trojan War. A little before that time Minos clear'd the Seas from Pirates,
whereupon they began to Build Cities both in the Isles and the continent, and Greece began to rise. But their circumstances were, as yet, so nar∣row, that when they went to Troy they were ob∣lig'd to maintain themselves by Agriculture and plunder; because they wanted the necessa∣ry provisions in order to attack the Town. 3. Their absence was so long that it occasion'd several great Commotions. After the disorder∣ly State of their Affairs was redress'd, they fit∣ted out Colonies. The Athenians planted Colo∣nies in Jonia and the Islands of the Grecian Sea, and the Peloponnesus and other Countries in Ita∣ly and Sicily; and Tyrannical Governments were establish'd every where. The Corinthians were first famous for naval Force, after them the Ioni∣ans, Polycrates Tyrant of Samos, and others. They engag'd in no memorable Land Battel, till they embark'd in the difference between the Peo∣ple of Chalcis and those of Eretria. In this whole circle of Time they scarce had any Laws; Wit∣ness Homer who never so much as mentions the Word. This was the State of the common and general Affairs of Greece. SECT. II. The Kingdom of the Sicyonians. 1. AEGialeus did first begin to Reign, near to the bay of Corinth, upon the confines of Achaia, A. M. 1915, 270 Years after the de∣luge, 859 Years after the Birth of Noah, 232 Years before Inachus, 1313 Years before the
Restoration of the Olympiads by Iphitus, in the Reign of Ninus King of Assyria. 2. The Town was first call'd Aegialea from Aegialeus, as also a part of the Peninsule, which was afterwards christen'd Peloponnesus from Pe∣lope. 52 Years after, his Son Europs succeeded him; next to him was Telchines, then Apis from whom the Peninsule was call'd Apios, then Thelxion, in whose Reign the People were so happy and flourishing, that when he died they worship'd him for a God, by offering Sacrifices and celebrating Games, which were first institu∣ted upon his Account. 3. There were 8 others who interven'd be∣tween him and Corax, who died without Chil∣dren: Upon which occasion Epopeus King of Thessaly possess'd himself of the Kingdom. This Prince ravish'd Antiope, Daughter to Nycteus King of the Thebans; whereupon a War en∣su'd, in which both the Kings were mortally wounded. Then the Kingdom came into the hands of Lamedon, Brother to Corax, who de∣liver'd Antiope to the Thebans. Antiope, upon her Journey, brought forth Twins; namely, Am∣phion and Zethus, who were found by a Shep∣herd and brought up. Amphion, a famous Mu∣sician, and Zethus who was bred a Shepherd, did afterwards resent the Affront done to their Mother. 4. Lamedon being engag'd in a War, sent for Sicyon the Son of Metion, and Grandchild to Erechtheus by his Daughter Attica, whom he made his Son-in-law and Successor. From him the City was called Sicyon, and the Country Si∣cyonia. He was follow'd in order by 8 Kings;
and then, the Kingdom having stood 962 years, the Priests of Apollo Carnius, as some will have it, became Masters of the Government. But Pausanias writes, that, in the Reign of Lacesta∣des Son to Hippolytus at Sicyon, Temenus the Son of Phalx, who had been King of the Ar∣gives, surpriz'd the Town with the Dorians in the night-time. But by reason that they were both descended of the Heraclidae, made him joint Partner in the Government. By this means the Sicyonians became Dorians, and were reckon'd as part of the Argives, in the 871st Year before the Destruction of Troy, the 120th before the first Olympiad, A. M. 2908. SECT. III. The Kingdom of the Argives. 1. THis Kingdom had always the second, if not the first Rank in Antiquity. Perhaps the Sicyonian was ancienter: But if we consider Power, Riches, and the Glory of great Atchieve∣ments, the other does far outstrip it. The Ar∣golick Bay lies near the Scyllean Promontory and Myrtoan Sea; near to that was the Coun∣try Argos and Mycene built long after, the Rivers Inachus and Erasinus, and part of Laconia. 2. Inachus was the first who began to Reign here, about 244 years after the Date of the Si∣cyoman Kingdom, 142 Years after Abraham, 676 Years before the Destruction of Troy, 1082 be∣fore the first Olympiad, A. M. 2149. His An∣tiquity gave Rise to the Proverb Inacho antiquior, upon which Erasmus may be consulted. Melissa
his Sister and Wife bore to him Phoroneus and a Daughter Io, which is not to be confounded with Io the Daughter of Jasus, as the Mytho∣logists do. After 50 Years Inachus died, and Phoroneus succeeded him. 3. Some took Phoroneus for the first of Man∣kind, the Son of the River Inachus, and the com∣mon Father of the Human Race; and the Town into which he gather'd the dispers'd Peo∣ple was call'd Phoronicum from him. He Made himself Master of the whole Peninsula, and by the Nymph Laodice begat a Son call'd Apis, and Niobe his Daughter, who is said to be the first Woman that Jupiter lov'd, with whom he begat Argus. Phoronaeus reign'd 60 Years and then died. 4. Apis his Son and Successor had a mind to Christen the Peninsule by his own Name. He reign'd 34 Years, and then being betray'd by Thelxion and Telchines, dy'd without Issue. A∣pollodorus says, he was kill'd for his Tyranny. Others say he went into Egypt, and was worship'd there as a God under the Name of Serapis: But there were several Kings of that Name, whom the Mythologists confound. Argus the Son of Niobe by Jupiter succeeded. At that time Ju∣piter reign'd in Crete. But since many Kings were call'd by that Name, and by that means it became liable to Ambiguity; I shall there∣fore oblige the Young Historian with a short Account of the matter. 5. Ham the Son of Noah was the first who was so call'd after his Death, being worship'd as God under the Title of Jupiter Hammon. His Grandchild Nimrod, the first King of Babylon
and Assyria, was called Belus, and Jupiter Be∣lus. In ancient Times there reign'd a King in Crete, who was brought up by the Curetes, or Idaei Dactyli; and about 150 Years after another of the same Name reign'd in the same Island, who was the first Jupiter that was given to A∣mours, whence Niobe was said to be the first Woman that Jupiter lov'd. 6. Aeolus the Son of Deucalion was so noted by his Posterity, that he was call'd Jupiter and Neptune. Picus King of the Aborigines was by some call'd Jupiter, and by the Romans Aeneas is call'd Jupiter Indiges. In former Times eve∣ry Nation had a Jupiter of their own, whom they own'd for a Common Father. The Anci∣ents had likewise a Custom of calling the anci∣entest of their Kings Saturn, his Eldest Son Ju∣piter, and the strongest of his Grandchildren Her∣cules. It is also to be observ'd, that the Illegal Issue of any Noble Woman was commonly laid to Jupiter, and sometimes to Mars and A∣pollo. 7. The Town Argos was so call'd from Argus, as the Inhabitants were Christen'd Argi and Ar∣givi, and the Peninsule Argos. In his Reign Greece began to have Corn of its own, by virtue of their own Agriculture, the Seed being im∣ported from abroad. Upon which Account Ar∣gus, after his Death, was accounted a God, and honour'd with a Temple and Sacrifices. During his Reign, and in the times preceding that, that Honour was engross'd by a private Man call'd Homogyrus, as being, the first who yok'd Oxen to the Plough. Argus had a Brother call'd Pelas∣gus (the Father of Lycaon) from whom sprung
the Pelasgi, who first inhabited Arcadia, from them call'd Pelasgia, and afterwards planted Co∣lonies in several other Countries. 8. Argus had four Sons by Evadne the Daugh∣ter of Strymon, namely, Jasus, Peiranthus, Epi∣daurus, and Criasus; to which number Pausani∣as adds Phorbas. Peiranthus (or Pirasus) was the first who consecrated a Temple to Juno, and appointed his own Daughter Callithya, or Cal∣lirrhoe, or Io, to be Priestess; and the Women of that Order became so famous, that the Gre∣cians measur'd their Publick Account of Times by the Years of their Priesthood. Pausanias is the only Man that says Pirasus came to the Crown; but others say Criasus succeeded to Argus, then Phorbas, and after him Triopas. 9. Pausanias writes, that Triopas had two Sons, Jasus and Agenor; and that Jasus was King of the Argivans; tho' Eusebius leaves him out in the List of their Kings. The Daughter of this Prince was the famous Io, who is said to be ravish'd by Jupiter, and thereupon to be trans∣form'd thro' Juno's Envy; and in passing the Thracian Streight Christen'd it Bosphorus. Af∣terwards she went into Egypt, recover'd her Hu∣man Shape, bore Epaphus the Builder of Mem∣phis, and was worship'd as a Goddess under the Name of Isis. Herodotus writes, that this Wo∣man was ravish'd by Phaenician Merchants, and that that was the occasion of the Feud between the People of Greece and those of Asia; but at the same time he confounds her with the Daugh∣ter of Inachus.
10. The Town was call'd Jasos, and the Citizens Jasii, from Jasus. To him succeeded Crotopus, his Brother Agenor's Son; whom o∣thers wou'd have to succeed to Triopas his Grandfather. His Daughter Psamathe being got with Child by Apollo, laid out the Infant Linus. Upon the Discovery of this matter, her Father put her to Death: Which Apollo resented so much that he punish'd the Argivans with a Plague; and they, to pacifie him, appointed an anniver∣sary Mourning for the Child. This Child is not the same, as some have imagin'd, with the famous Poet Linus. After 21 Years Crotopus was succeeded by Sthenelas, and after 11 Years he was follow'd by Gelanor, his Son. 11. In the Reign of Gelanor, Danus the Bro∣ther of Aegyptus came to Argos, to make good his claim to the Kingdom, as descending from Epaphus; and the People sided with him. Da∣naus had 50 Daughters, and his Brother had as many Sons; but the former was afraid to give his Daughters to them in Marriage, being fore∣warn'd by the Oracle to beware of his Son-in-Law; and thereupon absented from his own Country. But Aegyptus, fearing that his Brother might make too great Alliances by the Marriages of his Daughters, dispatch'd his Sons with an Ar∣my to Argos, with orders either to Marry the Girles, or kill their Father. 12. Danaus seem'd to comply with his Brothers demands; but underhand provided a Dagger for each of his Daughters, and order'd 'em to mur∣der their respective Husbands the first Night: which accordingly they all did, excepting Hy∣permnestra, and as some say Bebryce. Hyperm∣nestra
was charg'd by her Father with the neg∣lect of her Duty, and brought to a Tryal; but the Argives clear'd her. The rest by so black a Crime as parricide drew upon themselves eter∣nal Disgrace, and, as the Story goes, were Con∣demn'd in Hell to fill a leaky Vessel with Wa∣ter, which let out as it receiv▪d. 13. From Danaus the Citizens were call'd Danai, instead of Pelasgians. 'Tis thought he built the Castle. Having reign'd 50 Years he was follow'd by Lynceus his Nephew and Son in Law, Husband to Hypermnestra. Lynceus's Successor was Abas, to whom Ocalea bore Twins, namely Acrisius and Proetus. The Story has it, that these two struggled for Preference in the Womb. However, they Disputed the Kingdom with one another. Oftentimes they attack'd one another by open force, and, 'tis said, they were the first that Fought with Shields. At last they came to a Composition, and the Patri∣mony was equally divided. Arisius got Argos; and Proetus got Hiraeum, Meda, Tiryns and the Seacoasts. And thus was the Kingdom of the Argives split into two parts. 14. Acrisius Marry'd Eurydice, and by her had Danae, whom he shut up in a Tower toge∣ther with her Nurse, because the Oracle foretold him that his Grandchild would certainly be the Author of his Ruine. But Jupiter, transform'd into a Golden Shower, got in to her and begat Per∣seus. When she was deliver'd of the Child, she and the Infant were put into a Chest and com∣mitted to the Sea; but they were drove upon the Island Seryphus, where Dictys sav'd and brought up Perseus. Perseus was the first Grecian Wrest∣ler,
and did many noble Exploits, He defeated and kill'd Medusa Gorgon the Daughter of Or∣cus, who liv'd upon the Lake Triton. Now History mentions three Gorgons, namely, Medu∣sa, Steno, and Euryale, the Daughters of Orcus and a Sea-monster. 15. Perseus Married Andromeda the Daugh∣ter of Cepheus by Cassiopeia, after he had snatch∣ed her out of the Jaws of a Whale. At length when he was in Pelasgia, or Thessaly so call'd by the Pelasgians a Wandring and Vagabond People, he invented the Game of the Quoit; and while Teutamias King of the Larisseans was Celebrating Games to the Honour of his deceas'd Father, he unfortunately threw a Quoit that kill'd his Grandfather Acrisius. Some think that the Council of the Amphictyones, which commonly met at Delphi, was rather ordain'd by Acrisius, than by Amphictyon the Son of Deucalion, who Reign'd in Athens 100 Years before. 16. But 'tis not improbable that Amphictyon first ordain'd that Council to meet at the Ther∣mopylae, and that Acrisius Translated it from thence to Delphi. This place was reckon'd the Center of Greece, and of Europe. It was the Seat of that famous Oracle of Apollo Pythius; and of the Publick and Universal Council of Greece which met twice a Year, to adjust dif∣ferences between the Cities of Greece; and which consisted of certain Commissioners, cal∣led Pylagorae, delegated by each City. This Council continued long in its primitive consti∣tution, till Philip King of Macedonia, cut off the Phocians from Voting, and join'd them to his
own Kingdom. A long time after that Augustus Caesar made some Alterations in it; and in the Reign of Antoninus Pius it still had a being and consisted then of 30 Members. 17. Perseus return'd to Argos, to avoid the discreditable Imputation of Parricide: and per∣swaded Megapenthes the Son of Praetus to ex∣change Kingdoms with him. After that he built Mycenae, so call'd, because in that Place the Head of the Handle of his Sword fell off. Per∣seus had 5 Sons by Andromeda, namely, Perses, Alcaeus, Sthenelus, Electryon and Mestor. The credulous Grecians perswaded themselves, that Perses gave Being to the Persians. Alcaeus be∣got Amphitryon. Sthenelus succeeded his Fa∣ther Perseus in the Kingdom of Mycenae, after he had reign'd 58 Years. Electryon begat Alc∣mena, wife to Amphitryon. 18. About this time the Kingdom of the Ar∣gives, having stood 534 Years, was divided in∣to 3 or 4 Parts. For Anaxagoras the Son of Megapenthes, contenting himself with a third Part of his own Kingdom, gave the other two to Melampus and Bias, the Sons of Amythaon, because Melampus the first Inventor of Artificial Purgation, cur'd the Daughters of Proetus (who were Anaxagoras's Aunts) of Madness; or else, because he found out a Remedy for checking an Epidemical Madness that reign'd among the Women of that Country. 19. Bias was follow'd by 5 Successors in a direct Line, till the Days of Cyanippus, Son to Aegialeus, who descended, all of 'em, from Ni∣leus by the Mother's side. Melampus had six direct Successors for as many Ages, till the Reign
of Amphilochus Son to Amphiaraus. But the na∣tive Line, the race of Anaxagoras, continued to Reign much longer. 20. For Iphis the Son of Alector, and Grand∣child to Anaxagoras, left the Kingdom to Sthe∣nelus the Son of Capaneus his Brother. After the destruction of Troy Amphilochus went into that Country, and the People were christen'd Amphilochi after him, and about the same time Cyanippus dy'd without Children: So that Cyla∣rabes the Son of Sthenelus got the Kingdom to himself. Cylarabes likewise dy'd without issue: Whereupon Orestes the Son of Agamemnon, be∣ing outted of his Fathers Kingdom, possess'd himself of the Kingdom of the Argives and then of that of Sparta: of which more an∣non. 21. Sthenelus the Son and Successor of Per∣seus, begot Eurystheus Heir of the Kingdom; and about 7 Months after his Birth Alcaeus Hercules the Son of Amphitryon and Alcmena was brought forth. And for as much as Iphicles one of the Twins was brought forth after Hercules, Amphi∣tryon was esteem'd the Father of the one, and Jupiter of the other. 22. From hence, they took occasion to say that Juno pursu'd him with a mortal hatred, and by the help of Ilythia, alias Lucina or Luna re∣tarded the Birth for 7 Days. The Child was call'd Alcaeus from his Grandfather and after∣wards by reason of his mighty Achievements was Sirnamed Hercules. There being several Persons of this Name, which signifies Fame dif∣fus'd thro' the Air; and since the Grecians seem'd to attribute the exploits of several Per∣sons
to their Hercules, it will not be impro∣per to insist a little upon that Subject. 23. Cicero says there were 6 of that Name: The first and ancientest begot of the first Jupiter and Lepitus, who, they say, disputed with A∣pollo for the Tripos: The second begot of Ni∣lus in Egypt, who, they say, contemn'd the Phrygian Letters: The third Indigetes sprung from the Ideans, to whom they offer'd Sacrifices for the Dead. The fourth Son to Asteria Sister to Latona, whom the Tyrians worship'd very religiously, taking Carthago to be his Daugh∣ter: The fifth call'd Belus in India: And the last the Son of Alcmena. 24. Diodorus Siculus says there were 3 Her∣cules's, Servius mentions 4, and Varro recounts 44. Tacitus writes that the Lybians said the Ancientest Hercules was born in their Country, and those who equall'd him in great exploits were honour'd with his Sirname. It is likewise to be remember'd, what the Author of the Ae∣quivoca commonly ascrib'd to Xenophon observes; viz. That the Ancientst Kings of noble Families were wont to be call'd Saturns, their eldest Sons Jupiters, and the bravest of their Grandchildren Hercules's. 25. Among all these, he who carry'd the Club and the Hides of Lyons, who kill'd Mon∣sters, and, as the Story has it, assisted the Gods against the Giants; is rather to be reckon'd an Egyptian, than to be that Grecian who preceded the Trojan War by one Generation. But he who erected the Pillars upon the outermost Boundaries of the World, was certainly a Ty∣rian, the leader of those Phenicians who made
an irruption into Spain as far as Gades. And the Ambitious Plea of the Grecians is sufficiently baffl'd by this one remark, that in that Island of Gades there stood a most Ancient Temple, in which Hercules was worship'd in the Tyrian, and not in the Grecian way. 26. Sanchoniathon the Ancientest Writer of the Phenician Annals, writes that this Hercules was the Son of Demacoon, and that his proper Name was Melcarthus, which signifies King of the City, the Grecians calling him Melicertes and Palaemon. In his own Country he was likewise call'd Diodas as being invok'd by Lovers. Some will have him to be the same with that Lybian or Egyptian Person, whom Pausanias calls Ma∣ceris, who went to Delphi, and whose Son Sar∣dus carried a Colony to Ichnusa, and christen'd the Island Sardinia. 27. However Amphitryon the Father of Alcae∣us or Hercules, seems to have been Governor of Tiryns. Having kill'd Electryon his Uncle and Father-in-Law, he was was oblig'd to flee to Thebes. Hercules being educated at Thebes, gave many wonderful Specimens of his Valour, and when he was 20 Years of Age, sail'd to Colchis in company of the Argonautae so call'd from the Ship Argos, in order to get the Golden Fleece. 28. The Projector and Head of this adven∣ture was Jason the Son of Aeson, of the race of Aeolus, whom 53 noble Grecians of the first rate accompany'd. After 4 Months they re∣turn'd home. Medea the Daughter of Aeetas, having fallen in Love with Jason, betray'd the Golden Fleece into his Hands, and came with
him to Corinth. Upon their Voyage to Colchis they met with a storm off of Sigaeum a promon∣tory of Troas, where Hercules kill'd a Whale, and rescu'd Hesione the Daughter of Laomedon from its Monstrous Jaws. Afterwards Laome∣don refus'd to give Hercules the reward he had stipulated; whereupon Hercules took Troy, slew the King, and set his Son Priamus upon his Throne. 29. Hercules, upon his return to Greece, in∣stituted Games to the Honour of Jupiter Olym∣pius. Afterwards Eurystheus being Jealous of his greatness, and plotting his ruine, press'd him to undertake the 12 famous exploits. 1. He kill'd the Lyon of Nemea. 2. The Serpent at Ler∣na, with a hundred Necks and as many Serpents Heads growing out of one Body; of which when one was cut off two started up in the Room on't. 3. He brought off the Wild Boar of Erymanthus alive, and in the same expedition defeated the Centaurs. 4. He catch'd a Hind with Golden Horns, notwithstanding it's extreme swiftness, and brought it to the King. 30. In the 5th place he unkennel'd the Birds of the Lake Stymphalis. 6. He clean'd Augea's Stable without any assistance, by bringing up the River Peneus to it. 7 He brought the Bull out of Creet, which Pasiphae is said to have been in love with; and at the same time assisted the Gods against the Giants, and releas'd Promethe∣us. 8 He brought Diomedes's unruly Horses out of Thracia. 9. He made War with the A∣mazons and carry'd the Girdle of Hipolyta. 31. The 10. labour injoin'd him by Eurystheus, is said to be this, to drive away Geryon's Oxen
which fed in the maritim Places of Spain: Whereas Geryon did not Reign in Spain, but in Epirus, near to Ambracia and Amphilochus. So that this expedition into Spain is rather to be attributed to Hercules the Tyrian, who at the same time is said to have kill'd Antaeus and Bu∣siris, and to have erected Pillars upon the Boun∣daries of the World. 11. He brought Cerberus out of Hell. 12. At last he cross'd over to A∣frica and brought off the Aples belonging to the Hesperides. 32. At last, after many noble Atchievements, his Wife Deianira being possess'd with a furious Jealousy put upon him a Garment tainted with Poison, which Nessus the Centaur at his Death (enjoyn'd by Hercules for offering to ravish his Wife) recommended as an excellent thing for creating Love. The Story is, that the Poyson soak'd thro' to his Shirt, and ate away the Flesh all over his Body; whereupon in the extremity of his Torment he threw himself into a Fire upon the Mountain Oeta, and was burn'd to death. Some are of the Opinion, that he was mad when he threw himself into the Fire. He dy'd when he was 52 Years old, A. M. 1776. 33. Eurystheus being apprehensive of the dan∣ger he was in, made War with the Heraclidae; but had the misfortune to be worsted and slain together with all his Children. The Heraclidae endeavour'd a Restoration, but were disappoint∣ed: So that Atreus the Son of Pelops, who at this time govern'd Argi, got the Kingdom of the Mycenae. This Pelops was the Son of Tantalus the Phrygian, who about an hundred Years be∣fore being beaten by Ilus King of Troy, fled
to Greece, and marry'd Hippodamia the Daugh∣ter of Oenomaus King of Elis. Having got Pisa with her as a Dowry, he afterwads ma∣ster'd almost the whole Peninsule, which de∣riv'd from him the Name of Pelopponne∣sus. 34. He had several Children by Hippodamia; by the marrying of whom, or rather by the vast Summs of Money which he brought into Greece, he insinuated himself into several Cities. The most noted of his Sons were Atreus, Thyestes and Plisthenes. The first two succeeded their Fa∣ther, after he had reign'd 54 Years. Plisthenes dy'd while he was yet young, and left his two Children Agamemnon and Menelaus to the charge of Atreus. Atreus marry'd Aerope the Mother of these Children, and the Daughter of Minos. Thyestes being found guilty of adultery with her was first banish'd; but afterwards was recall'd and entertain'd with the flesh of his own Chil∣dren at Table. 35. After the Death of Eurystheus, Atreus having master'd all the Peloponnesus, put the Heraclidae to flight. He was reckon'd a famous Astrologer. He adopted his two Nephews Aga∣memnon and Menelaus, who succeeded him 18 Years before the Trojan War. Agamemnon be∣ing a Man equally noted for his Valour and Pru∣dence, master'd not only Mycenae and Argi, but the whole Country as far as Sicyon and Corinth, and that part of the Country which was then call'd Jonia, Aegialea and afterwards Achaia. Menelaus reign'd in Lacedemon, having marry'd Helena the Daughter of Tyndareus the Lacede∣monian King. Paris the Son of Priamus stole
away his Wife, which was the cause of the Tro∣jan War. In order to present you with a brief account of this War, it will be necessary to pre∣mise a succinct Scheme of the Kingdom of the Trojans. 36. Dardanus the Son of Jupiter and Electra the Daughter of Atlas, having left Arcadia, planted a Colony in Phrygia; and having mar∣ry'd Batea the Daughter of Teucer and the Grandchild of Scamander, setl'd in that Country which was afterwards call'd Troas; and there built the City Dardanum, about the 2530 Year of the World, in the reign of Sthenelus at Argi. Erichthonius his Son and successor was prodigi∣ously Rich, and marry'd Calirrhoe the Daughter of Scamander, by whom he had a Son call'd Tros, from whose name the Country was call'd Troas. 37. Tros had 3 Sons, namely, Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymedes. Ilus succeeded his Father As∣saracus and begot Capys the Father of Anchises and Grandfather of Aeneas. Ganymedes, being a beautiful boy, was ravish'd by Tantalus, where∣upon a War broke out, in which Tantalus was outted of Paphlagonia. King Ilus built a City upon plain Ground, which being the Metropo∣litan, was call'd by the Grecians Ilium, and by the Latins Troja, which name more properly belongs to the Country. Pelops the Son of Tantalus was worsted in the War which he wag'd with Ilus. Laomedon the Son of Ilus was at once strip'd of his Kingdom and Life, for offering to cheat Hercules of the reward he had stipulated for saving his Daughter.
38. Podarces the Son of Laomedon was Sir∣nam'd Priamus; and was very famous for his Riches and the largeness of his Kingdom. He begat 50 Sons, 17 of which were by Lawful Marriage. One of whom, call'd Paris Alexan∣der, came to Lacedemon and ravish'd Helena: Upon notice whereof the Princes of Greece join∣ed together, and resenting the affront as if it had been given to themselves, chose Agamem∣non to be their head, and declar'd War against Priamus, and oblig'd themselves by an Oath ne∣ver to return till they had taken Troy. 39. The heads of this Expedition, were Ne∣stor, the 2 Ajax's, Achilles, Ulysses, Thoas, Po∣dalirius, Machaon, and Tlepolemus. It's said, 120000 Men were Transported in a Fleet of 1000 Ships. As soon as they arriv'd in Troas, they had a slight Skirmish, and then sent Am∣bassadors to demand Helena. But Priamus was so far influenc'd by the Counsel of Young Men, and so indulgent to Paris, that he rejected their demands. Then the War broke out on both sides, and lasted for 10 Years. 40. Upon the Grecian side Protesilaus, Pa∣troclus, Euphorbus and Achilles were slain. In the Trojan Army, Hector, Troilus and Paris, Sons to Priamus, Mnemon Son to Tithon the King's Brother, and Penthesilea the Amazon, un∣derwent the same Fate. At last the Town was taken by a Stratagem, and Menelaus recover'd his Wife Helena, and slew Deiphobus who Mar∣ried her after the Death of Paris. Priamus was kill'd by Pyrrhus, or Neoptolemus the Son of Achilles. But Antenor and Aeneas with some others escap'd out of the Grecian hands. This
famous Destruction of Troy happen'd in the 10 Year of the Seige, 408 Years before the first Olympiad, 1182 before Christ, A. M. 2821. 41. Among the Grecians who surviv'd the War, the two Ajax's dy'd before their return; one of 'em, viz. The Son of Telamon laid vio∣lent hands on himself, after he lost Achilles's Armour by the decision of the Army, or by U∣lysses cunning; the other, the Son of Oileus was lost at Sea: Ulysses is said to have been toss'd to and again several Years: Menelaus was 8 Years absent from Home: Agamemnon indeed return'd Home; but was presently Murder'd by Aegisthus the Son of Thyestes, with whom Cly∣temnestra his Wife (the Daughter of Tyndareus) not only committed Adultery, but Conspir'd to bring about that detestable Parricide. 42. Agamemnon had by Clytemnestra one Son, namely Orestes, and 3 Daughters. Orestes was with some difficulty sent out of the way by E∣lectra his Sister, for fear of Aegisthus, before his Father's return. About 8 Years after his Fathers Death, he recover'd his Kingdom, and put Ae∣gisthus and his Mother to Death. Being seiz'd with a furious Remorse for killing his Mother, he submitted his Case to the Areopagites, whose decision clear'd him, there being just as many Voices for him as against him. Cylarabes the Son of Sthenelus being dead without Issue, he obtain'd the Kingdom of the Argives; and after∣wards upon the death of Menelaus came to that of Lacedemon. 43. By this means the Kingdom of the Ar∣gives was once more united, about 140 Years after its Division into 4 Parts. Orestes Trans∣ported
a Colony of Eolians into Asia, about 4 Ages before the Ionians went thither, and at last dy'd in Arcadia, after he had reign'd 70 Years. He left two Sons, one Tisamenus by Hermione the Daughter of Menelaus, the other a bastard by the Daughter of Aegisthus. Tisame∣nus succeeded his Father, but was soon after expell'd his Kingdom by the Heraclidae. Pater∣culus writes that both the Sons reign'd after the Death of Orestes. 44. The Heraclidae made many successless at∣tempts to return into the Peloponnesus. Hyllus the Son of Hercules attempted it twice, and Clodeus and Aristomachus once, but both were e∣qually unfortunate. Aristomachus left 3 Sons, Temenus, Cresphontes, and Aristodemus. They chiefly laid claim to 3 Parts of the Peloponnesus, namely, 1. Argi, as being the posterity of Perseus▪ whereas Tisamenus the present Possessor de∣scended of Pelops, who had no Title to that Country. 2. Lacedemon, because Hercules re∣stor'd Tyndareus when he was outted by Hypo∣coon, upon this Condition, that he shou'd hold the Kingdom only as a Depositum. 3. Messenia, grounding their Title upon this Plea, that when Hercules destroy'd Pylus, he likewise deposited this Country in the Hands of Nestor. 45. Having built a Fleet upon the Coast of Aetolia, from whence the Place was call'd Nau∣pactus, they pretended to go by the Isthmus, but in effect were bound for Molycrium. Upon their arrival in the Peloponnesus they gain'd that Country without great difficulty. Temenus got Argi, Cresphontes cunningly hook'd in Mesenia to himself; but Lacedemon fell to Proclis and Eu∣rysthenes
Sons to Aristodemus, who had been slain by the Sons of Pyladas and Electra, and Tisamenus's Cousins. 46. Tisamenus and the Achaians, being thus outted of Argolis and Lacedemon by the Hera∣clidae and Dorians, were upon certain Terms en∣tertain'd by the Jonians then inhabiting the Pe∣loponnesus. But afterwards the Jonians grew Jealous, that the Valour and Quality of Tisa∣menus, might induce both People to choose him King, whereupon a War broke out and Tisamenus was kill'd in Battel. However the Achaians drove the Jonians to Attica, where the Athenians by advice from their King Melanthus, receiv'd them into their City, not so much out of deference to their former friendship, as out of fear of the Dorians. 47. Temenus being possess'd of Argi, his Sons out of envy to Deiphontes his Son-in-Law, whom he too much respected, made away with him. Cisus the eldest succeeded his Father. But the People was so much at Deiphontes's beck, and so fond of their Liberty, that the re∣gal Power was confin'd to a very narrow com∣pass, and the posterity of Cisus had little else but the name of a King. So that this Kingdom was converted into a Democracy, about 40 Years after the Restoration of the Heraclidae 690 after the Reign of Inachus, A. M. 2940. 48. A certain learned Author endeavours to prove from Aeschylus the Tragedian, that this Government of the Inachidae was highly Monar∣chical. Another gathers from Pausanias that it was very moderate and limitted by some Authori∣ty in the People, and that, because the Argives
at first are said to be very careful of their Liberty, and to have dethron'd Meltas, the Son of Laci∣daus and Grandchild to Medon: For tho' Herodo∣tus mentions a King of the Argives, yet there the Word King signifies only a magistrate ac∣countable to the People, as in several other Pla∣ces. 49. However the People having the Supreme Authority in their Hands, were divided into 3 Tribes. Under them was a Senate, to be ele∣cted every year, for preparing Affairs to be laid before the Convention, for executing the Laws, and some other Ministerial Services. There was likewise another Society of 80 Men, that took Care of part of the Republick; besides the , whom we take to be City Magistrates and Judges of Courts. All these Courts and Of∣fices are expresly mention'd in a formal Treaty between the Athenians, Argivans, Mantineans and Eleans; which is extant in Thucydides. 5. All the ancient Records that we are Masters of, do not furnish us with any further Account of the Republick of the Argives. That City wag'd frequent Wars with the Lacedemonians their Kinsmen and Neighbours, which was chief∣ly occasion'd by reciprocal Pretensions to some Lands in the Neighbourhood, adjacent to Thyre. Not to speak of their mutual Emulation, and vying with one another for the Preference. To which you may add this Consideration, That the La∣cedemonians hated that Popular Government which the Argives were fond of; and on the o∣ther hand, the Argives hated the Lacedemonian Aristocracy. But we shall have occasion to con∣tinue our Account of the Argives elsewhere.
SECT. IV. The ancient State of the Kingdom and Republick of Athens. 1. THE Kingdom of the Athenians was founded by Cecrops, who began first to reign in Attica (then Acte) in the Reign of Triopas the Argivan, 374 Years before the de∣struction of Troy, 780 Years before the first O∣lympiad, A. M. 2449. 2. Neptune and Minerva are said to have quarrel'd about christening the new City. The debate was remitted to a general assembly of the People, in which the Men voted for the for∣mer and the Women for the latter, but the number of the Women carry'd it for Minerva; which Neptune took so ill, that he punish'd the new Citizens by an inundation of their Lands. The Athenians, in order to attone for the Crime, doom'd the Women to a threefold punishment, 1. That they shou'd never be admitted to vote in their Conventions. 2. That none of the Chil∣dren should be call'd by their Mother's Names. 3. That they shou'd not be allow'd the Title of ; whereupon they were call'd . 3. But now that we are speaking of Minerva, it is proper to observe that several Women have been dignified with that name. Cicero in his 3 Book de natura deorum reckons up 5; the 1st the Mother of Apollo by Vulcan; the 2d the Daugh∣ter of Nilus, worship'd by the Aegyptians of Sais; the 3d the Daughter of Jupiter Caetius; the 4th the Daughter of Jupiter and Coryphe Daugh∣ter
of Oceanus, whom the Arcadians call Co∣ria, and give out for the inventor of Coaches. 4. The 5 the Daughter of Pallas, who is said to have kill'd her Father for offering to de∣flour her. The 2d of these was reckon'd a God∣dess at Athens; she built the City of Sais, and was call'd by the Egyptians Neuth. Cecrops is said to have erected a Statue to her Honour in Egypt, and to have invented the name of Jupi∣ter. The Athenians had a particular Month, commencing from the new Moon of Decem∣ber, which they call'd , in remembrance of that famous debate between Neptune and Pallas. 5. In the mean time it is to be remember'd that there were 3 Towns of Athens as Varro testifies in his Books De analogia. There was the Athenae Atticae, where the People were call'd Athenienses; and Athenae Euboicae in the Island Euboea, built by Cecrops the Son of Erechtheus, the inhabitants whereof, it seems, were call'd Athenaei by the Latins; tho' the Grecians gave the Title of  to the Citizens of Attick Athens. Besides these two Cities, there was likewise Atheneopolis in Gallia Narbonensis near Marseilles, the inhabitants whereof were call'd Atheneopolitae. Moreover there was yet a 4th Athenae in the Lacedemonian Ground. 6. While Cecrops reign'd at Athens, Deuca∣lion the Son of Prometheus sway'd the Scepter in Thessaly; the History of whom must briefly be hinted at; since his Posterity gave names to the Grecians. Japhet had three Sons, Atlas, Prometheus and Epimetheus. There were three Atlas's. One a Moor who was the greatest of
'em all; another an Italian the Father of Ele∣ctra; and a third an Arcadian the Father of Maja the Mother of Mercurius. Authors are commonly liable to mistakes in confounding these three. 7. The first of the three is said to have liv'd near the Mountain Atlas, and, by reason of his uncommon skill in Astronomy, to have support∣ed the Heavens. This was the Father of Ele∣ctra. Prometheus is said to have form'd Men out of Clay, because he was an excellent teacher of Wisdom. Epimetheus begot Pyrrha. 8. Deucalion the Son of Prometheus married Pyrrha the Daughter of Epimetheus. In his Reign there happen'd a Deluge, which chiefly over-run his Seat, the Proper Name whereof was Hellas. But it did not reach Egypt, or its neighbouring Countries. We read of three De∣luges in in Greece. One in the Reign of Ogyges, which will come in under the History of Thebes. The Second was this of Deucalion, which hap∣pen'd about 248 years after the first, and 737 before the first Olympiad. The Third came to pass in the Reign of Dardanus and Cadmus, 86 Years after the second. 9. Deucalion had by Pyrrha two Sons, name∣ly Hellen and Amphictyon. From the former his Subjects who before went by the name of Greci∣ans, were call'd Hellenes, and the Country it∣self Hellas, which formerly had been call'd Pe∣lasgia from the Pelasgi, and Haemonia, from Haemone the Daughter of Pelasgus, and Pyrrhaea from Pyrrha. Hellen had three Sons, Xuthus, Aeolus and Dorus. He left his Kingdom to Aeo∣lus, and sent the rest abroad to shift for them∣selves.
Aeolus was so much respected by his Subjects, that he was Sirnam'd Jupiter and Nep∣tune. Dorus settled in the Country that lyes about the Mountains, Ossa and Olympus. Xu∣thus was outted of his Kingdom by his own Brothers for pretending to engross all his Fathers Money. Whereupon he fled to Athens, and E∣rechtheus thought him worthy of his Daughter, by whom he had Achaeus and Ion. 10. But Xuthus was afterwards expell'd A∣thens, because being chosen arbiter by Erech∣theus's Sons, he adjudged the Kingdom to Ce∣crops the eldest, whereupon he remov'd to Aegi∣alia a Country lying, upon the Sea-side Eastward, between the Eleans and Sicyonians. Achaeus one of his Sons, came with Auxiliary Troops from Aegialia and Athens, to Thessaly; and recover'd his Father's Kingdom; but afterwards upon the casual killing of a Man, was oblig'd to flee to Lacedemon, where his Posterity remain'd till they were turn'd out by the Dorians and Heraclidae. 11. Archander and Architeles the Sons of A∣chaeus remov'd from Pthiotis to Argi, where the former married Scaea, and the latter Autòmate Danaus's Daughter. And the Sons of Achaeus became so powerful in Argi as well as Lacede∣mon, that the inhabitants of both Places were call'd, under one general Name, Achaei; tho' the peculiar Title of the Argives was Danai. 12. Ion the other of Xuthus's Sons was about to make War with the People of Aegialia; when Selinus their King pacified him by giving him Helice his Daughter in Marriage. He suc∣ceeded Selinoon in the Government, and built a Town which he christen'd Helice after his Wife,
which was afterwards swallow'd up by the Sea together with Bura. He likewise christen'd the People Iones, tho' that was not so much a Change of, as an addition to, their Name. For they were call'd Aegialenses Iones: And after all, the Primitive name stuck best to them, for Homer makes use of it in the List of Agamemnon's For∣ces. 13. Ion, being afterwads chosen General to the Athenians in the War against the Eleusians, died in Attica. But his Posterity continued in Possession of the Kingdom of Aegialia, till the Acheans being expell'd Lacedemon and Argi by the Heraclidae and Dorians, turn'd 'em out of their Kingdom, and oblig'd them and the whole People to flee to Athens; but they did not stay long there, for soon after the Sons of Codrus carried 'em away to Asia. These things I thought it more proper to wind up together, for easing of the Students Memory. 14. To return. Eusebius reckons that the Council of the Areopagites commenc'd in the Reign of Cecrops. Some date its being from the time of Solon; others think it was Ancienter. Neither are Authors better agreed upon the O∣riginal of the Name, tho' they all own that A∣reopagus has an Allusion to Mars, which in Greek is call'd Ares. However Cecrops dying a∣bout 50 Years after, Cranaus the richest of all the Citizens succeeded him, who continued only 7 Years in the Empire, at which Period Amphy∣ction the Son of Deucalion turn'd him out of his Kingdom. And Ten Years after that Amphyction himself was serv'd at the same rate by Erichtho∣nius.
15. Erichthonius was reckon'd the Son of Vul∣can and the Earth. He instituted Games to the Honour of Apollo and Minerva, and after 50 Years left the Kingdom to his Son Pandion, who reign'd 40 Years, and then was follow'd by his Son Erechtheus. This was a famous Prince. He made War with the Eleusians, and made Ion his Daughter's Son his General. The King of his Enemies being kil'd in the Field, he himself likewise fell, in the 50 Year of his Reign. 'Twas under his Reign that the Ci∣tizens who formerly were call'd Cecropidae, got the Name of Athenians from the Town it self. He left three Sons, Cecrops, Metion, and Pandorus. 16. Xuthus adjudg'd the Kingdom to Cecrops, and is said to have gather'd the People into 12 Towns, by reason that lying at a distance from one another they were expos'd to the Robberies of the Carians and Beotians. After 40 Years Pan∣dion succeeded his Father Cecrops, and being out∣ted of his Kingdom by the Sons of Metion, fled to Megara, where he obtain'd the Principality of Pylas his Father in-Law. During his Exile he begat four Sons, namely, Aegeus, Lycus, Pallas, and Nisus; who after the Death of their Fa∣ther, turn'd the Posterity of Metion out of A∣thens, and divided the Kingdom into 4 Parts, pursuant to their Father's Orders to that effect. Megara was alloted to Nisus, who reign'd there a long time. 17. Notwithstanding the abovemention'd di∣vision, Aegeus was the Head that govern'd all. Pallas's 50 Sons laid wait for Aegeus, as con∣temning him for want of Children. At last Pit∣theus
the Son of Pelops, who reign'd at Traecene, oblig'd him to embrace his Daughter Aethra, by whom Theseus was born. Theseus coming to Athens and being own'd by his Father crush'd the Family of Pallas; and to ingratiate himself with the People, tam'd the Bull of Marathon, that was very troublesome to the Inhabitants of Tetrapolis; and shew'd him alive up and down the Town, and then Sacrific'd him to Apollo Delphinius. Afterwards he sail'd to Greece, and by the help of Ariadne the Daughter of Minos, is said to have kill'd the Monster Minotaurus, that devour'd the Athenian Youths. Of which more in our large History. 18. Aegeus had given these Orders to the Captain of the Ship when he put out, that, if Theseus return'd alive, he shou'd hoise up a white Sail, but, if any unlucky accident happen'd to him, he shou'd signifie so much by a black Sail. But both the Captain and Theseus were so overjoy'd upon their approach to Attica, that they never thought of their orders: Upon which omission Aegeus concluding that things went cross, threw himself headlong over a Rock. It was from this Aegeus, as some say, that the Aegean Sea was so call'd: Others derive its name from Ae∣gae an Island near Euboea consecrated to Nep∣tune: Others from Aege a Town of Euboea. Others from Aega a promontory in Aeolia, and others again from Aegis a Rock lying beween Tenedos and Chios. 19. Some allege the Aegean Sea was so call'd from the many little Islands, that afar off look like Goats, or . Others from Aegea Queen of the Amazons who was drown'd there; others
from Aegeus a Name giv'n to Neptune as Phere∣cydes testifies: Others from Aegeon who is the same with Briareus: Others from the Constel∣lation Capra: And others again from a Goat, be∣cause that Sea is toss'd like a Goat. The famous Samuel Bochart derives it from Az a Hebrew Word, which signifies Hard and Rough, and is sometimes us'd as an Epithet to the Sea by sa∣cred Writers. 20. Theseus gather'd all the Athenians who were dispers'd in 12 Towns, into one City; and by clipping the regal Power cut the Sinews of Monarchy. He rank'd the People in 3 States viz. the Noblemen, Husbandmen, and Artificers; and accomplish'd many Glorious Exploits. He instituted the Isthmian Games to the Honour of Neptune. He sail'd to the Euxine Sea against the Amazons, and brought his Wife Antiope from thence. With the help of Pirithous the Son of Ixion he ravish'd Helena the Daughter of Tyndareus: But when he on his Part assisted Pirithous in ravishing the Daughter of Aidoneus King of the Molossi, he had the misfortune to be taken and put into Prison. His Associat was put to Death; but he was at last set at Liberty thro' the intercession of Hercules. That King is call'd Pluto, his Daughter Proserpina, and the Dog by which Pirithous was devour'd was call'd Cerberus. 21. At a time when Theseus was gone a∣broad, Castor and Pollux took the opportunity to rescue their Sister Helena. Menestheus the Son of Peleus and Grandson to Erechtheus, en∣deavor'd to lessen his Credit among the People, and brought his design to bear so far, that when
Theseus return'd, he was oblig'd to retire to the Island Scyres where Lycomedes the King, being Jealous of his Glory, put him to Death. Mene∣stheus having possess'd himself of the Kingdom by his cunning, set out with 50 Ships upon an expedition against Troy, Atreus being then King of the Argives and Mycene. He took the Town, and pronounc'd a funeral Harangue to the praise of Ajax the Son of Telamon. For it was a cu∣stom among the Athenians to pay that comple∣ment to those who dy'd in War. Soon after he himself became a proper object of the like Com∣plement in the Island Melos upon his return from Troy. 22. After the Death of Menestheus, Demophoon the Son of Theseus by Phedra recover'd the Kingdom of his Ancestors. He was educated by Elpenor the Son of Chalcedon, together with his Brother Achames. Demophon snatch'd the image of Pallas from the Argives, who upon their re∣turn from Troy were forc'd in by a Storm upon the Coast of Attica. After 34 Years he left the Kingdom to his Son Oxyntas, who after 22 Suc∣cessions was follow'd by Aphidas. He having reign'd one Year was follow'd by Thymoetes the 15th King, who, being a bastard, is said to have kill'd his Brother Aphidas. After 8 Years this Prince lost his Kingdom, and concludes the List of the Kings of Erechtheus's Posterity. 23. There arose a difference between the Athe∣nians and Baeotians about Caelenae which lay in their neighborhood. And 'twas mutually agreed upon that the two Kings should decide the mat∣ter in a Duel. But Thymoetes refusing to fight was thereupon outted of his Kingdom. Melan∣thius
Messenius, whom he Heraclidoe had expell'd his own Country, takes up the Quarrel; and by a Stratagem defeats Xanthus the King of the Baeotians. By which means he obtain'd the Go∣vernment of Athens, by way of reward. After Melanthius his Son Codrus succeeded, who was the last King of Athens. 24. The Heraclidae being engag'd in a War with the Athenians, were advis'd by the Oracle, that the only way to obtain a Conquest was to avoid hurting the King of their Enemies. Co∣drus knowing this, put on the Habit of a com∣mon Soldier, and expos'd himself where the Action was hottest, and was kill'd. Upon the news of his Death the Heraclidae broke up the Siege and march'd off, tho' some of their Army had already enter'd the Town, whom the Athe∣nians sent safe home. The Death of Codrus happen'd 486 Years after Cecrops, 114 Years after the destruction of Troy, 35 Years after the return of the Heraclidae, 293 Years before the first Olympiad, A. M. 2935. 25. After Codrus there was no King at Athens. The adminstration was then put into the Hands of the Archontes, who possess'd the Govern∣ment for Life, their Power being lessen'd and Subject to the People. Medon the Son of Co∣drus was the first Archon; tho' he was bred up in hopes of being King. Nileus his Brother was very troublesome to him. He refus'd to o∣bey Medon whose Government was lame and maim'd. But at last the Affair was remitted to the Delphick Oracle, which made answer, that the Government of the Athenians belong'd to Medon.
26. After that Nileus and the other Sons of Codrus were sent into a Colony, and carried with them both a great number of Athenians that listed themselves under their conduct, and a con∣siderable Body of Jonians. This Colony was likewise enlarged by the Thebans, the Minyae from among the Orchomenians, the Phocians bating those of Delphi, and some Aebantes out of Eubaea. This Colony built the twelve Jonian Cities in Asia, namely, Miletus, Ephesus, Priene, Colo∣phon, Myus, Teos, Lebedos, Clazomenae, Ery∣thrae, Phocaea, Chius, and Samus; the Original of which Cities is accounted for at large by Pausa∣nias. 27. Medon was follow'd by twelve successive Princes in the space of 15 Years, who were call'd Medontidae from him. The last of these was Alcmaeon the Son of Aeschilus, who died be∣fore the end of the Second Year of his Reign. Then the People being uneasy under the perpe∣tual Power of the Archontes, confin'd it to the compass of ten Years. This change was de∣cree'd about the beginning of the Olympiads. And Charops was the first who was invested with this ten Years Government. That form of Go∣vernment lasted 70 Years. The last of that sort of Archontes was Erixias, who, after a six Years Reign, either died or was degraded; and then the Republick put on a new Face. 28. For the People being proud of their Pow∣er, and possess'd with an insatiable itch for Li∣berty, did quite abrogate the Monarchical Con∣stitution, and put the administration of Affairs into the Hands of 9 Archontes, to be elected yearly. The first of these was President and
call'd Eponymus. The second was call'd King; being Judge of all Civil and Criminal Causes. The third was Polemarchus, the Supream Judge of Military Affairs. The other six were call'd Thesmothetae, or Defenders of their Laws and Customs. The whole Body of the Nine, joyn'd together, had Power to call a Meeting of the People, and propose their Opinion in matters of importance, as the Kings and Archontes did be∣fore. 29. So great was that superstructure of Liber∣ty, that they rear'd up upon the Foundation that Theseus laid. But the People having once the Reins in their own Hands, did not know where to stop or fix. The Harangues of popular Ora∣tors turn'd and toss'd 'em to and again, as the Winds do the Sea. The Power of the Nobility was mightily wrong'd, especially by this, that the Sentences of the Judges were look'd upon as Laws, there being no certain Statutes, as yet, to walk by. About 50 Years after, a complaint was given in upon this Head, which seem'd to carry justice along with it: Whereupon they employ'd one Draco a prudent and good, but ve∣ry Stanch, Man, to make Laws for 'em. 30. He abrogated many Laws, and reform'd the Court of the Ephetae, which was order'd to consist of 51 Members, each of 'em 50 Years Old and upwards. But the Laws were so bloody, as entailing Death to every slight Crime, that the Common People who were drown'd in debt became turbulent and daring, and their divisions and Animosities rose to a dismal Degree. At last all their hopes were pointed upon Solon a Man of Prudence and known Integrity. They
intreated him to act the Part of a Physician to the Republick. And in order to furnish him with suitable Power for that end, of their own accord offer'd him a tyrannical Govern∣ment. 31. Tho Solon was sensible that he had ingra∣tiated himself with the People, by the Fame of his Wisdom, and the Stratagems with which he recover'd the Island Salamina; yet he had no mind to meddle with the Government. He dread∣ed the Avarice of the Poor, and the Pride of the Rich. He down-right refus'd to be Tyrant. But his Friends chid him mightily for so doing, char∣ging him with the Folly of standing out meerly for the Name's sake, since his Vertue could easi∣ly convert a Tyranny to a moderate Government, as Tynnonidas had lately done in Euboea, and Pit∣tacus in Mytilene. 32. But no such Offer could prevail with Solon to depart from his concerted Measures. 'Tis said, he answer'd his Friends, That Tyran∣ny was a tempting thing, but there was no end on't. At last he took upon him the offer'd charge of setting the Government to rights; but before he set about it, he enacted a general Re∣mission of Debts, call'd Sisachthea, by which means he ingratiated himself into the Affection of all Parties. He was elected Prince and Ar∣chon, immediately after Philombrotus; and his first business was to abrogat all the Laws of Draco, together with those of Murder, which provided severe and disproportion'd Penal∣ties. 33. Then he review'd the People, and drew them up in 4 Tribes; allotting Offices to every
one suitable to their Station. The poorer sort being excluded from the Magistracy; and al∣low'd only to have a Place in the Meetings. And in order to curb the growing Power of the Plebs, he instituted a Senat, besides that of the Areopagites, consisting of 400 Members, (that is, 100 out of each Tribe) which was to form and moderat the general Conventions, and to examin and judge of all things belonging to the People. Their Decrees were to be look'd upon as defini∣tive, if the matter was only of small Conse∣quence; but if it was a business of great Mo∣ment, they were to be remitted to the Censure of the People. 34. Tho' the Power of the Society of the 9 Archontes was much empair'd, yet he allotted them the same Offices as they had perform'd be∣fore, with the addition of a more solemn Instituti∣on, and a Reward for their good Services, after a severe Tryal before the Areopagites. For he suppos'd the Senat of the Areopagites to be ve∣nerable and of untainted integrity; and invested them with the Supream Authority in the City; and with a right to inspect and censure the Lives and Conversations of the Citizens, especi∣ally those of the Younger Form. 35. He gave the general Conventions of the People, Power to make Peace and War, to send out Ambassadors, and to naturalife Forreigners. The Place of their Meeting was either the Fo∣rum, or a Place of Judicature just by, call'd Pnyx; and sometimes the Theater of Bacchus. The set time of sitting; was three Days, to be renew'd after every 35 Days. The extraordi∣nary
times were determin'd, by occasional Oc∣currences. The ordinary Convocations were call'd , the extraordinary were call'd , or . 36. There were several Courts for Law-suits, besides that of the Areopagi. The most remark∣able was that of the Ephetae instituted by Demo∣phoon the Son of Theseus: The next was that of the Heliastae, so call'd from sitting in an open place, which consisted of 500 or 1000 and some∣times 1500 Members, chosen by Lot, all of 'em being above 30 Years Old. There was like∣wise a Court of Arbiters, to whom 220 Men chosen equally out of the Tribes were join'd; and they took Cognisance of Affairs belonging to the Tribes. Besides a Court of 30, and after∣wards 40 Members, which went round the Tribes, and determined their differences about small Summs of Mony and triffling concerns. 37. After Solon had made an end of his task, he obtain'd leave of the Athenians to Travel for 10 Years, in order to avoid the calumnies and reproaches of the Citizens: Thinking that in 10 Years time they would be tam'd and inur'd to the Laws. But upon his departure, the Com∣monalty split into divers Factions; as they gene∣rally do when over grown in Power. Lycurgus Headed the Pediaei, Magacles, the Son of Alcmae∣on, the Paralii, and Pisistratus the Diacrii, who were joyn'd by a body of Hirelins that hated the Richer sort. Tho' the Laws continu'd still in Force, yet the People were all in a Ferment, and eager for changing the Form of the Repub∣lick; for every Party made account, that by a Revolution they would advance themselves.
38. When Affairs were at this Pass, Solon re∣turn'd, and endeavour'd to bring the Factions to an Accommodation by separate Interviews with their respective Heads. Pisistratus seem'd to li∣sten to his Proposals. He was a fair spoken Man, Proud of assisting the Poor, moderate in Revenge, and one that glory'd in having such qualities as Nature had denied him. Solon saw thro' the Humour and deceit of the Man, and endeavour'd to reclaim him. 39. But Pisistratus had insinuated himself so much into the Affections of the People, that he expected to be made King, and contemn'd all the Remonstrances that were offer'd to him. At last he wounded himself in two places, and expos'd himself thus wounded in a Chariot riding along the Streets, as if his Enemies had laid wait for him and treated him in that fashion. By this Stratagem, notwithstanding all Solon's Remon∣strances to the contrary, he got the People to make a Law empowering him to hire and main∣tain 50 Men to Guard his Person. By the means of these his Guards he possess'd himself of the Castle, and usurp'd the Government. 40. He sat at the Helm of Affairs three Years: At the end of which Megacles and Lycurgus conspir'd against him, and expell'd him. But afterwards the Conspirators disagreed a∣mong themselves; whereupon Megacles brought him back upon the Condition that he should Marry his Daughter. The Stratagem by which he was restor'd was truely Comical. There was a strapping Handsome Woman, in the Tribe cal∣led Paeaniaea, whose name was Phya: She was fout Cubits high.
41. This Woman was set out with all sorts of Armour, and plac'd in a Coach, in a very be∣coming Habit. In this fashion she rode thro' the City, with some Athenians going before her, and calling upon the People to give a welcome Reception to Pisistratus, whom Minerva her self honour'd above all Men, and was then Con∣ducting to her own Palace. By this means the Report was spread among the Tribes that Pisi∣stratus was brought back by Minerva: And those who were in the Town, being perswaded that 'twas the Goddess her self; fell down be∣fore the Woman and receiv'd Pisistratus. 42. Pisistratus being thus restor'd, married the Daughter of Megacles pursuant to his Promise. His Wife after some time complain'd that her Husband us'd her unkindly: Wherupon Megacles her Father was again incens'd against him: And in short, things were brought to that pass, that he was oblig'd to retire to Eretia, in the Tenth Year after his Restoration to the Government of Athens. He continued in Exile other Ten Years without attempting any thing. But at the end of them, his Son Hippias push'd him on to Enterprise something. Accordingly he Hires some Theban and Argivan Troops, masters Marathon, routs the Athenians, and Possesses himself of A∣thens without much opposition. Being thus a se∣cond time restor'd to his Government, he Fortifi'd himself in it, only by making Friends and Allian∣ces, making it his Business to gather up Summs of Money, and by taking up his Enemies Sons as Ho∣stages. 43. For the Athenians could charge Pisistra∣tus with nothing else but the Usurpation of the
Government. They felt no other Yoak, but that of thwarting their Humour which could not brook a Monarchical Government. He ex∣acted no Tribute, but the Tythes that the Kings us'd always to have. He put none to Death; he Banish't none; he turn'd no Man out of his Estate; and gave Affronts to no Person. He left the Laws of Solon, and the order of the Magistracy unviolated; and tho' Solon was his Enemy, yet he Honour'd and Respected him in a distinguishing manner. 44. He was both Learn'd, and did considerable Service to the World of Learning. He was the first Institutor of the Grecian Library, and drew up the scatter'd Poems of Homer, in the order they now appear in. He left the Government to his Sons Hippias and Hipparchus, who us'd their Power with a great deal of Moderation, and manag'd the Administration of Affairs in∣comparably well, till Hippias being fretted by the Death of Hipparchus, lost his Government. This happen'd in the Reign of Darius Son to Hystaspes, and therefore will come in more pro∣perly elsewhere. Pisistratus died at the same time that Craesus King of Lydia was Conquer'd by Cyrus in the 20 Year of the 57 Olympiad, A. M. 3460. SECT. V. The Ancient State of the Kingdom and Republick of the Lacedemonians. 1. THis Country was first call'd Lelegis and Lelegia from Leleges, who was Born
there. Afterwards 'twas christen'd Lacedaemon from Lacedaemon the Son of Jupiter and Tay∣geta. Lacedaemon married Sparta the Daughter of Eurota, and Grandson to Myles, and great Grandson to Leleges, whence the City was cal∣led Sparta. And that is the proper name of the City, as distinct from the Country, tho' some call it Lacedoemon: And the Citizens are pro∣perly call'd Spartiatae, as the Inhabitants of the Country go by the name of Lacedaemonii. This City was built while Crotopus reign'd at Argi, and Amphytrion at Athens, 304 Years before the Destruction of Troy, 712 Years before the first Olympiad, A. M. 2518. 2. Lacedaemon was follow'd by Amyclas, and he by Argalus, who left the Kingdom to Cynor∣tas his Brother. Next to Cynortas was Oebalus, from whom the Country was call'd Oebalia, whence Statius uses Oebalidae-fratres for Castor and Pollux. Oebalus by his first Wife had Hy∣pocoon, and Icarius; by his second, namely, Gor∣gophone the Daughter of Perseus, he had Tynda∣reus who disputed with his Elder Brother for the Kingdom. Hercules assisted Tyndareus and kill'd Hypocoon with his ten Children; and gave Tyndareus the Kingdom by way of ufufruct, se∣curing the Reversion to his own Children. 3. Tyndareus, by Laeda the Daughter of Thes∣tius King of Aetolia, had Castor and Pollux, who were call'd Dioscuri, or Jupiter's Sons, and either by her or some body else, a Daugh∣ter call'd Helena. Menelaus married Helena, who was ravish'd by Theseus, and afterwards by Paris. Helena bore to Menelaus Hermione, whom he first married to Orestes the Son
of Agamemnon, and afterwards took her away from him and gave her to Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles. But Orestes slew his Rival, and so recover'd his Wife. Menelaus had two Sons by a Servant Maid, namely, Nicostratus and Me∣gapenthes; but by reason of their spurious Birth, the Lacedemonians gave the Kingdom to Orestes. 4. Tisamenus the Son of Orestes Succeeded him; but was outted of his Kingdom by the Heraclidae, as I intimated above. Lacedaemon fell by Lot to Procles and Euristhenes the Sons of Aristodemus. After this time the Lacedaemo∣nians were reckon'd Dorians, by reason of the Dorians that came along with the Heraclidae. But these Dorians were not so call'd from Do∣rus the Son of Hellen; for they are said to come of the Achaians, who upon their return from Troy were repulsed and oblig'd to put off in quest of a new Country, and were call'd Dores from their Leader. However, if they truely descended of the Achaians, they had as much, if not more, right to this Country, than the He∣raclidae. This change of Affairs happen'd, about 8 Years after the taking of Troy, according to Thucydides's Computation, 327 Years before the first Olympiad, in the Reign of Melanthus at Athens, A. M. 2901. 5. Euristhenes and Procles being Twins, and it being doubtful which of 'em came first into the World; they Reign'd jointly. They differ∣ed hugely one with another, and the Emulation and Discord was transmitted to their Posterity, who were call'd Euristhenidae and Proclidae. A∣gis the Son of Euristhenes succeeded him, from whom his Posterity were call'd Agidae. And Sous succeeded Procles. Agis turn'd the Helotae
first out of the City they Inhabited, which was built by Helius the youngest Son of Perseus; and afterwards of their Liberties, because they re∣fus'd to pay the Tribute he required. This fa∣mous Exploit, of reducing the Helotae to Bon∣dage gave occasion to the ordinary way of call∣ing the Lacedemonian Slaves, Helotae. 6. Echestratus the Son of Agis succeeded him, and Eurypon (alias Eurytion) Succeeded Sous, and his Posterity after him were call'd Eurytionidae; for, by quitting part of the Regal Prerogatives, he was the first that ingratiated himself into the Affections of the People. Echestratus was fol∣low'd by Labotas, and Eurytion by Prytanis, in whose Reign the discord between the Lacedemo∣nians and Argives had its rise. Labotas was follow'd by Doryssus, and he by Agesilaus. Pry∣tanis left the Kingdom to his Son Eunomus. 7. Eunomus of the Race of the Proclidae, got by his first Wife Polydectes; and by his last Wife Lycurgus, 250 Years before the first Olympiad. From the time that Eurytion cramp'd the regal Power, the People grew unruly, and great com∣motions ensu'd thereupon. During that confusi∣on, Eunomus, offering to adjust some difference, was run thro' with a Butcher's Knife, and dy'd, leaving the Kingdom to his eldest Son Polydectes. Not long after that Polydectes dyed without Is∣sue, and Lycurgus his Brother succeeded him. 8. But so soon as it was known that the Widdow of Polydectes was with Child, he profes∣sed, that, in Case it prov'd a Boy, he would only Govern the Kingdom by way of Guardian∣ship. Tho' the Widdow gave him to know that she wou'd make away with the Child, in Case he kept the Kingdom and Married her; yet he
only counterfeited an approbation of her Propo∣sal, and at the bottom detested her Principles. For as soon as the Child came into the World, he resign'd the Government of his own accord, and plac'd it upon the Throne. 9. The Royal Child was call'd Charilaus, al∣luding to the Joy that accrew'd to the People, in admiring the Magnanimity and Justice of Ly∣curgus. But the Vertue which merited Love and Praise, met with Hatred and Invective. For the Child's Mother, thinking her self affronted, together with her Relations, bespatter'd him with Calamnious Imputations, as if he had a design upon the Child. This he took very ill; and fear∣ing the uncertainty of Events, resolved to Travel till his Nephew came of Age▪ and begot an Heir to the Crown. He visited many Places and Countries; and is said to have collected and methodiz'd Homer's Verses, and to be the first that brought 'em to Greece. 10. But the Lacedemonians did often miss and call upon Lycurgus in his absence, for all things ran into Confusion. For the People not only refus'd all allegiance to their Kings, but wanted further to feed an insatiable appetite for Liber∣ty. Lycurgus being well acquainted with the na∣ture of their Distemper, resolv d first to evacuate and purge the Body, as being foul and stuff'd with all manner of Distempers, and then to en∣joyn a new Diet. However being sensible what influence Religion has over Mens Minds, he went to Delphi; and it is giv'n out that he fetch'd from thence the Rhetra, as a Model for the Re∣publick. 11. He propos'd that the Republick shou'd be govern'd by 2 Kings, that is two nominal Kings,
divested of all Majestick Power, uncapable of doing any thing of Moment at home, by reason of their Subjection to the Senate. Abroad in∣deed he was allow'd the command of the Ar∣my. The Senate consisted of Elders, 60 Years old and upwards, besides the Kings. This Se∣nate he set in opposition to the Kings, as being a Medium between them and the People, in Or∣der to confine both within the Limits of their Duty. Lycurgus did not Trouble himself with backing his Laws with Argument; which Me∣thod Aristotle finds fault with, as being unsuitable to the Measures of a free Republick, and an inlet to unjust Demands; such as are many o∣ther things in Lycurgus's Laws. 12. Whatever the Kings lost, the People got but little for shifting two Masters for 30. For there was no appeal allow'd from the Conven∣tion of the Senate and Kings. All the privilege they had was to enact such things as the Kings and Elders propos'd. However, in order to make this form of Government lasting, there was a ne∣cessity of sinking the Occasions of Sedition. Now to compass that, it was proper to reduce their Estates to an equal Standard. With which view Lycurgus took all their Gold and Silver from 'em, and coin'd Iron Money for 'em. 13. He order'd the Citizens to feast together at their Publick Meetings, call'd Andria, Phydi∣tia, and Scyssitia. He order'd the Boys to be e∣ducated and instructed upon the publick Charge, under the Hands of the Paedonomi and Irenes. And as they were to be exercis'd in harsh and dangerous Adventures; so he order'd the Girles to be exercis'd in running, wrestling, throwing of
Coits and Darts; and in effect remov'd all the wonted Tenderness and softness that us'd to at∣tend the Education of Women. 14. In order to put a stop to Luxury and the Inundations of Vice, he prohibited any Man to Travel; and all those who repair'd to Lacede∣mon without some good and useful Errand, were expell'd the City. He would not have the Town to be surrounded by Walls, as taking the Valor and Watchfulness of the Citizens, who minded nothing but the good of their Country, to be the Walls and Security of the City. For he would not allow any of 'em to meddle with il∣liberal Arts. The Helotae manur'd the Grounds and pay'd the Landlords the stinted Rents. And that they might not grow too powerful, were sometimes barbarously murder'd by Young Men hid in the Fields; from whence their mutual En∣gagements were call'd Cryptia. 15. But all the thanks Lycurgus got, was, to have Stones thrown at him, and to have his Eye knock'd out with the Blow of a Stick. Valerius Maximus writes, that he was once ex∣pell'd by the fury of the Mob, and at last ba∣nish'd his Country. Plutarch says, he oblig'd the Kings, Senat and People by Oath, to keep up the same Form of Government till he return'd. For he was then upon a Journey to the Oracle, to consult it with reference to one of the great∣est Points he had yet to manage. 16. The Oracle made answer, that his Laws were well concerted, and that the City would continue its Glory, providing it follow'd Lycur∣gus's Model: Whereupon, according to Plutarch, he resolv'd never to free the Citizens from the
Obligation of their Oath, and to that end starv'd himself to Death. Some say, he died in Crete, and order'd his Body to be burnt and the Ashes to be thrown in the Sea, to the end that the Spartans should not gather 'em together, and pretend to free themselves of their Oath by carrying 'em back to Lacedemon. But Tertulli∣an says he starv'd himself to death, because the Lacedemonians offer'd to introduce new Laws. 17. The Republick was then in Peace. But after Lycurgus's Death, it renew'd the War with the Argives, and took up Arms against the Tege∣atae a People of Arcadia, and the Achaians. The Tegeatae took Charilaus their King, but quickly dis∣miss'd him. That King was follow'd by his Son Nicander; and Teleclus his Collegue, by Alca∣menes. In the 34th Year of Nicander, Iphitus restor'd the Olympick Games, which were for∣merly celebrated by Hercules, Pelops, Endymion, Neleus, Peliades, Lycurgus, and several others. 18. After the return of the Heraclidae, Oxylas had restor'd 'em, and got Elis by his dexterity at 'em. But afterwards they were forgot for 303 Years, till Iphitus in the time of the Divisions of Greece, being of Oxylas's Posterity, restor'd 'em, upon Advice from the divine Oracle. They were call'd Olympick from the City Olympia, and were celebrated in the beginning of every fifth Year, at full Moon, in the Month Hecatombaeon, a little before the Summer Solstice. 19. The Grecian Games, consisted of wrestling, running, leaping, throwing of Quoits, and fenc∣ing with Sticks, that they call'd Cestus, or . From these 5 exercises they were call'd  and Quinquertiones. However 'tis to be remark'd
that Varro's second interval of time ends in this Restoration of the Olympick Games. For he makes three differences of times. 20. The first reaches from the Creation of Man to the first Deluge, which he out of ignorance styles , or Obscure. The second goes from the first Deluge to the first Olympiad, and by rea∣son of the fabulous Stories with which 'tis stuff'd, is call'd , or Fabulous. The third runs be∣tween the first Olympiad and his own time, and is call'd Historical, because the Transactions re∣fer'd to it are related in true Histories. Now this Restoration of the Olympiads happen'd 408 Years after the taking of Troy, 714 before the Christian Aera, A. M. 3229. 21. In the end of the 7th Olympiad, there happen'd a great Alteration of Affairs in Lacede∣mon, upon the Institution of the Ephori, about 130 Years after the commencing of Lycurgus's Laws. The number of the Ephori, was 5, to be chosen every Year out of the Commons. Ela∣tus was the first that got that Office. Most wri∣ters say these Officers were first created in the Reign of Theopompus Son to Nicander and Grandson to Charilaus. But we are at a loss to know what was the end of their Institution. 22. Many alledge they were appointed for a Ballance to the regal Power. But others say they were created by the K.s themselves, when engag'd in an expedition against the Messenians; which oblig'd 'em to nominate some of their Friends to manage Affairs in their absence, and these were call'd Ephori from inspecting the Publick Affairs. So that at first they were only the King's Mini∣sters, but afterwards gradually arrogated to them∣selves
a magistratical Power, when no Body was aware of it. But whatever was the end of their Institution, 'tis certain their Power in a short time became Tyrannical, and put their Kings in danger of their Lives. The President of the Court, who was call'd Eponymus, inspected the publick Accounts every Year. 23. In the 2d Year of the 9th Olympiad, the Lacedemonians embarqued in an open War with the Messenians; tho' before the Institution of the Ephori they had jealousies of one another. For the Lacedemonians took it very ill, that Cres∣phontes over-reach'd his Grandsons, and pos∣sess'd himself of the Messenian Ground. And their Anger was inflam'd by the Battel fought at Dia∣na's Temple in the confines of Messene, in which Teleclus Father to Alcmenes then King, was, kill'd. However both sides cry'd out that they were wrong'd. 24. At last their mutual hatred broke out into a War, by means of a horrid Piece of Wicked∣ness committed by one Evaephnus a Lacedemoni∣an. This fellow endeavor'd to cheat Polychares the Messenian, of some Oxen that were put out to him; and when he found the design was dis∣cover'd, desir'd his Son should be sent to receive their Price, and when he came kill'd him. Po∣lychares was justly incens'd at the hainousness of the Action, and demanded that the Criminal should be deliver'd up in order to be punish'd. But finding his Solicitations were not regarded, he slew every Lacedemonian he met with. 25. Whereupon the Lacedemonians were ex∣asperated, and demanded that Polychares should
be brought to condign Punishment. The Messe∣nians were divided among themselves; but the Majority carried, that he should be defended by force of Arms, if there was occasion. When the Lacedemonians heard this, they refus'd to remit the Case to the Judgment of the Amphyctyo∣nes or Areopagites, and prepar'd for an Eepediti∣on, engaging in a mutual Oarh never to return till Messene was taken. 26. The War was carried on for several Years, with various Success. At last, the Messenians, whose Country was the Seat of the War, were mightily put to it, and in fine resolv'd to aban∣don all the Towns that lay remote from the Sea, and to remove to the Mountain Ithomes. Upon this removal, there follow'd a cessation of Arms on both sides for some Years. And in the Inter∣val, the Lacedemonians wag'd War with the Ar∣gives, which had been occasion'd by a dispute concerning Thyrea which lay in the confines. Both Parties agreed to leave the matter to the Am∣phictyones, and their sentence was, that the Con∣troversy should be decided by 30 Men on each side, adjudging the rightful Title to the Victors. And indeed the Senate adjudg'd the Victory to the Lacedemonians; but the Argives pretended they were Victors, and thereupon renew'd the War, but with small Success. 27. About 8 Years after the removing to Itho∣mes, the Messenians and Lacedemonians return'd to their former War, and had several engage∣ments with various Success. In the first engage∣ment the Messenians lost their King Euphaes, and chose Aristodemus for his Successor: In the second engagement, being fortified by the Auxi∣liary
Troops from the Arcadians, Argives and Sicyonians, they had better success; whereupon the Lacedemonians seem'd to be doubtful of the event; and both the one and the other sent to Delphi, to enquire into the event of the War. 28. The Lacedemonians observ'd the Orders of the Oracle in doing what it gave for an Omen of the Victory; and at last besieg'd the frighted Mes∣senians, and took the Mountain Ithomes, in the end of the 28 Year of the War, in the first Year of the 14th Olympiad, while the Medontidae con∣tinued in the Decennial Government of Athens, in the Reign of Hezekiah over the Jews, about the same time that the 10 Tribes were carried off in Captivity by the King of Assyria. 29. The Conquerors destroy'd Ithomes, and master'd all the other Places of Messenia, and ob∣lig'd the Messenians to manure the Ground, and bring one half of the Fruits every Year to Lace∣demon. They bound them by an Oath to remain ever true to them, and to appear in Mourning, both Men and Women, at the Funerals of the Lacedemonian Kings. 30. The Lacedemonians being yet absent from home, call'd to Mind the Obligation of their Oath, and were much affraid of their future off∣spring, lest the People should revolt, during the absence of the Husbands from their Wives. Whereupon they sent home 50 of their stoutest young Men, who were so young at the first set∣ting out that they were not engag'd in the Oath, and order'd 'em to lye promiscuously with the Women. 31. There Sprung from them an Offspring call'd Parthenii; who, when they grew up, were
own'd by none, and had no Heritage allotted them; whereupon they enter'd into a Conspira∣cy together with the Slaves or Helotae. But, the Conspiracy being discover'd, they were ex∣pell'd, and as they wander'd in quest of a new Seat happen'd to fix in Italy, where they expell'd the Barbarians and Cretians that liv'd near Taren∣tum. 32. The Messenians were impatient of bon∣dage and having no hopes that the Lacedemo∣nian Yoak would become easier, thought it bet∣ter for them to dye in Battel, than to depart the Peloponnesus; whereupon they enter'd into a Conspiracy under the Conduct of Aristomenes a Youth of noble Birth. Accordingly, when all things were got in readiness for War, they revolt∣ed in the 39 Year after the overthrow of Ithomes, the 4th of the 23 Olympiad in which Icarus was Victor, while the yearly Magistrates go∣vern'd in Athens, and Tlesias was Praetor or chief Archon. A. M. 3320. 33. Aristomenes being a Man equally admir'd for the accomplishments of his Body and endow∣ments of his Mind, govern'd the Messenians very happily, and routed the Lacedemonians oftner than once; so that they began to entertain some Thoughts of Peace; but Tyrtaeus the Poet un∣hing'd their Resolutions by teaching 'em to make up the loss of their Men by recruits of the Helotae. For about a Year or two before they had sent to consult the Delphick Oracle about the event of the War; and the Goddess made answer, that a Counsellor must be sent for from Athens. The Athenians being desir'd to give 'em a Coun∣sellor, were indeed unwilling to assist them, but
dreaded to disobey the Oracle; wherefore they sent 'em this Tyrtaeus, a Schoolmaster, lame in his Feet, and not over-sound in his intellectuals. 34. In the third Year of the War, the Messeni∣ans being deserted by the Auxiliary Troops of Arcadia, were almost totally cut off at Fossa-magna. Whereupon, by Aristomenes's advice, they abandon'd all their Towns; excepting Pylus and Methene; and retir'd to the Mountain Ira, where they were soon after block'd up. The Siege lasted 10 Years, till at length Aristomenes, who had frequently gall'd the Lacedemonians in sallying out, was wounded; whereupon the Guards were but carelessly kept, and the Enemy got ac∣cess into Ira; but with a very hot engagement, which gave Aristomenes the opportunity of get∣ting off. Thus the War ended, and the slavery of Messenians was compleated in the 16th Year of the War, the first Year of the 28th Olympiad, in the Archonship of Autosthenes, A. M. 3337. 35. While the Lacedemonians were pulling Messenia to pieces, Aristomenes resolv'd to at∣tack Sparta: But unfortunatly discover'd the de∣sign to the Arcadians, and their King, Aristocra∣tes, who formerly had betray'd them at Fossa-mag∣na, reveal'd it to the Lacedemonians. By which means Aristomenes was indeed baulk'd; but Ari∣stocrates was brought to condign punishment for his perfidy, being ston'd to Death by his own Subjects. Next Spring several Messenians sail'd to Italy, being invited thither by Anaxilaus Ty∣rant of Rhegium, who was a Messenian by Birth. 36. By advice from Anaxilaus, they besige'd Zancle a City in Sicily; and being at last receiv'd
into the City christen'd it Messene. Aristomenes gave his Daughter to the Men of the biggest Character; and soon after went to Rhodes, to his Son-in-Law Demagetus, where he died. He was a very famous Man, and deserves to be rank'd among those few who liv'd and died in a flourishing and glorious state. 37. Such of the Messenians as would not leave their Country, were added to the number of the Helotae, and oppress'd with the highest degree of Slavery; because they were not so much Ene∣mies as Rivals; and the War they had wag'd was not carried on out of any design to affect the Government, but to shew themselves a gallant People. The Lacedemonian interest was conside∣rably strengthen'd by the addition of Messenia to their Dominions. It continued 200 Years in their Hands, till at length the old Inhabitants return'd. But the return of the Messenians and the affairs of the Lacedemonians contemporary to it, must be cast into another Place. SECT. VI. The most Ancient State of the Kingdom of Corinth. 1. COrinth, a City in the Isthmus of Pelopon∣nesus, was built by Sisyphus, under the Reign of Cecrops King of Athens, a little be∣fore Deucalion's Deluge, A. M. 2486. 2. Sisyphus was a wise Man. He marry'd Merope the Daughter of Atlas; and begot Glau∣cus, Ornytion, Thersander, and Olmus; and was the first that celebrated Games in the Isth∣mus.
Glaucus begat Bellerophontes. Bellero∣phontes being guilty of Murder, fled to Argi, where he was entertain'd by the King Praetus; but having deny'd to satisfie the Queen, who courted his Embraces, was charg'd by her with the offering Violence to her; and the King sent him away to Lycia to Iolus the Queen's Father, with private Orders to the King to make away with his Guest. 3. Accordingly Iolas engag'd him with the Monster Chimaera, which he defeated and kill'd, being mounted on Pegasus. Then he sent him against the Solymi and Amazons, whom he like∣wise conquer'd. At last several stout young Fel∣lows laid wait for him, whom he likewise kill'd. Whereupon Iolus admir'd his Valour, and mar∣ry'd his Daughter Philonoe to him; and, when he died, made him his Heir. When Bellerophontes fled from Corinth, Thoas the Son of Ornytion got the Kingdom. Demophoon succeeded him, and after him Propodas; whose two Sons Doridas and Hyanthidas reign'd jointly, when Aletes the Son of Hippotas, Grandson to Antiochus, and Great Grandson to Hercules, conquer'd Corinth. 4. It is not certain from whence the City was call'd Corinth; but thus much we know, that Aletes christen'd it Corinthus Jovis in Honour of Jupiter Dodonaeus, whose Oracle foretold his Accession to the Crown. Hence the vulgar Peo∣ple took occasion to boast, that one Corinthus the Builder of their City was descended of Ju∣piter; and were so proud of the Fancy, that all Greece ridicul'd them for it. 5. After Aletes, the Eldest Sons of the Heraclidae reign'd for several Ages. The first was Ixion,
the second Agelaus, the third Prumnis, the fourth Bacchis, whose Posterity were called Bacchiadae. He was follow'd by 8 Successors in order, the last of whom, Automenes, had reign'd just one Year, when above 200 Bacchiadae possess'd themselves of the Kingdom, and continu'd an Aristocratical Government for 90 Years, chusing every Year a Prytanis as Superintendant over the rest. 6. While the Bacchiadae were thus possess'd of the Government, the Corinthians were Lords of the Sea, and carry'd a Colony to Sicily, under the Conduct of Archias, which built the City Syracusae. About the same time they sent ano∣ther Colony to the Island Phaeacus, which built the City of Corcyra, from whence the Island de∣riv'd its Name. 7. The Bacchiadae admitted no body else to share with them in the Government, or to join with them in Marriage. But one Labda, slight∣ed by her own Family because she was lame, married Eetion Son to Echecrates, who consulted the Delphick Oracle concerning his Issue, and re∣ceiv'd this Response, That he should have a Son, who would fall like a Stone upon the Oligarchy, and crush it to pieces. The Bacchiadae being a∣ware of the Prophecy, resolv'd to make away with the Infant as soon as it was born; and ac∣cordingly sent 10 of their Family to put the De∣sign in Execution, under the pretence of congra∣tulating Eetion. 8. But when they took the Child in their Arms, it smil'd so prettily upon them all, that they were mov'd with Compassion, and went a∣way without hurting it: But being gone, they chid one another, and return'd to put the Mur∣der
in execution. But the Mother over-hearing their Conference, hid the Child under a Bushel, which in Creek is call'd , whence the Child was nam'd Cypselus. 9. When Cypselus came of Age, he blinded the People with his Bounty, and invaded the Govern∣ment in the 2d Year of the 31st Olympiad, in the Reign of Phraortes in Media, and Ardyes the Grandson of Croesus in Lydia, 20 Years after the Messenian War, and 30 Years after the Institution of the Archontes at Athens, A. M. 3350. At first he establish'd himself in the Government with the Slaughter of a great many, but afterwards be∣hav'd himself so civilly and bountifully, that he made use of no Guards. His Example upon this score is truly wonderful; and Gelon, Tyrant of Syracuse, was the only King that propos'd it as a Pattern. 10. After 30 Years Cypselus died, and his Son Periander succeeded, who was so timorous, that he kept a Guard of 300 Men, and chose rather to be fear'd than belov'd. Authors tell us, that at first he demean'd himself pretty moderately, and gradually degenerated into a cruel and barbarous Temper. He marry'd Melissa the Daughter of Prles or Patrocles King of Epidaurus, by whom he had 2 Sons, Cypselus and Lycophron; but upon the Sollicitation of his Whores, kick'd her to Death when she was with Child. 11. Lycophron was mightily troubled at his Mother's Death, and prov'd so disobedient to his Father, that he banish'd him to Corcyra. But af∣ter some Years, Periander being worn out with Age, and Cypselus being naturally unfit for Busi∣ness, he call'd him home again, and purchas'd
his Return at no less rate, than that of devesting himself of the Power, and shifting Places of Re∣sidence with him. But after all, when every thing was agreed upon, the Corcyreans being resolv'd to undergo any Difficulties, rather than admit Periander, made away with the young Prince. 12. Periander took the Murder of his Son so much to heart; and withal, his not being able to revenge it upon the Corcyreans; that he sunk un∣der it in the 80th Year of his Age, and the 40th of his Reign. He was reckon'd by some one of the Seven Wise Men. He was a most cruel Ty∣rant, famous for his Knowledge of Military Af∣fairs, as having pass'd all his Days in Arms, and redoubted for his Power at Sea, being furnish'd with the most commodious Harbours both in the Ionian and Egean Sea. He died in the 4th Year of the 48th Olympiad, 7 Years after Solon's Laws were receiv'd in Athens, A. M. 3420. 13. The Tyranny did not last much longer than Periander: for Psammeticus, Son to Gordias his Brother, or else to Periander his Kinsman, possess'd it only for 3 Years and 6 Months: After which time the Monarchy was abrogated, and a Popular Government erected, which continu'd as long as the Liberty of Greece it self. We are at a loss to tell what was the particular Form of this Republick; but 'tis plain from Plutarch, that the Power of the Commons was not so extensive as in that of Syracuse. 14. However the Government was all over popular; for nothing of any Importance was de∣termin'd without the Consent of the People. The Corinthians were mortal Enemies to Monarchy, and cou'd least brook it; upon which account
they frequently Embarqu'd in heavy Wars, and a Corinthian General was always look'd upon as a most fit Person for extirpating Tyranny. SECT. VII. The most Ancient State of the Kingdom of The∣bes. 1. Boeotia was bounded by Phocis on the West; the Eubean Sea to the East, the East Locrians to the North, and Attica and Me∣garis on the South. Its Metropolitan was The∣bes; but it is uncertain who Built it. Calydnus is said to have Reign'd there first, and next to him Ogyges, in whose Reign the ancientest De∣luge happen'd in Greece, and from him was cal∣led Ogygium, 1020 Years before the first Olym∣piad, in the Reign of Phoroneus at Argi. At length Cadmus came to the Government, while Corax Reign'd at Sicyon, and Danaus at Argi, a∣bout 347 Years after the beginning of Ogyges's Reign. 2. According to the Grecians, Cadmus was the Son of Agenor, Brother to Belus, and Cousin German to Danaus and Aegyptus, who went from Egypt into Phoenicia; and besides Cadmus, begat upon Telphussa, Phoenices and Cilices his two Sons, and Europa whom Jupiter ravish'd. The three Brethren were sent to see for their Sister, and pro∣hibited to return without they brought her back. Cadmus wander'd up and down a long while, and when he despair'd of finding his Sister came at last to Boeotia, where, by the Advice of the Oracle, he either built or restor'd Thebes, and
added a Castle to it, which from him was call'd Cadmaea. He Marry'd Harmonia the Daughter of Mars and Venus. He was the first that intro∣duc'd Letters from Phoenicia to Greece, which were thence call'd Phoenician, and afterwards Pe∣lasgian, because the Pelasgi were first acquainted with them. 3. By Harmonia Cadmus had one Son, namely, Polydorus, and four Daughters, namely, Semele, Ino, Autonoe, and Agaue. Semele bore to Jupi∣ter, Dionysus or Bacchus the Inventer of Wine; Ino bore to Achamas the Son of Aeolus, and Grandchild to Hellen, Actaeon whom his own Dogs pull'd in pieces; and Agaue bore Pentheus to Eetion. Cadmus being invited to Head the En∣chiloi against the Illyrions, left Thebes to Polydo∣rus, and Conquer'd the Illyrians and Reign'd over them. Having establish'd himself in the Govern∣ment he begat his Son Illyrius, who either gave the name to the People, or else deriv'd it from them. The Poets fabulously represent Cadmus and Harmonia, as being at that time converted into Snakes, because they laid aside their former Goodness, and took up a Barbarous Temper. 4. This is the Grecian account of Cadmus-Tho' they Honor'd him with the Title of a King's Son, yet the Sidonans his Countrymen deny that he had any such Title, and say he was only the King's Cook, who run away with one Harmonia a Musician. His Arrival in Greece, happen'd a∣bout the time of Joshua; so that we may lawful∣ly inferr that the Colony of the Canaanites, when outted of their own Country by Joshua, was Con∣ducted by him to Greece; and that he deriv'd his Name from Cadmonim or the Hivites, who
were so call'd because they Inhabited Mount Hermon in the East of Canaan. 5. To which we may add, that his Wife might be call'd Harmonia from Mount Hermon; and the Fable of their being turn'd into Snakes might take its rise from Hevaeus, which in Syriack signifies a Snake. There are many Proofs that he intro∣duc'd Letters into Greece. It is probable he likewise first Instituted the Rites of Bacchus, and upon that account is represented as his Grand∣father, whereas Nimrod was the true Bacchus. He call'd the City Thebes, there being another City in Canaan of the same name mention'd in the Book of Judges, which Josephus calls Thebae in the Plural Number. Now the word Thebae signifies Mudd or Slime. 6. Polydorus Succeeded his Father Cadmus, and begat Labdacus, by Nycteis the Daughter of Ny∣cteus, and at his Death, recommended his Son to the Care of his Father-in-law. Epopeus King of Sicyonia ravish'd Antiope, Nycteus's other Daughter, whereupon a War broke out, and both the Kings died of their Wounds. So that Lycus the Brother of Nycteus became Guardian to Lab∣dacus, who manag'd every thing so faithfully, that when Labdacus died he committed the Edu∣cation of his Son Laius to his Care. But Lycus ha∣ving punish'd Antiope in pursuance of the Orders left by Nycteus, was kill'd in an Engagement with Amphion and Zethus her Sons, so that The∣bes was taken, and the Infant Laius escap'd ve∣ry narrowly. 7. By this means Amphion and Zethus the Sons of Antiope Possess'd themselves of the King∣dom of Thebes▪ Amphion was so noted a Musi∣cian,
that he is said to be able by his Art to draw up Stones for the building of Towers. He Mar∣ry'd Niobe the Daughter of Tantalus and Sister to Pelops; who being the Mother of a nume∣rous Issue, ruin'd her self by boasting that she was more fruitful than Latona her self. For Apollo was order'd to put to Death all the Males, and Diana was enjoin'd to do the same to the other Sex; whereupon Niobe was so stupify'd with sorrow, that she was fabulously represen∣ted, as being turn'd into a Stone. Afterwards Amphion and all his Family died of the Plague. Zethus was so griev'd for his Sons being casual∣ly kill'd by his own Wife, that he died of a Consumption. The two Brethren being thus cut off, the Thebans restor'd the Kingdom to Laius the Son of Labdacus. 8. Laius marry'd Jocasta the Daughter of Me∣noeceus by whom he had a Son, whom he bound in Fetters and laid out, because the Oracle had adver∣tis'd him to beware of him. The Infant, whose Feet were mightily swell'd, from whence he was call'd Oepidus, was carried to Polybus King of Corinth, who cur'd him and brought him up. Long after that, both having heard some uncer∣tain Rumours, the one of his Father and the o∣ther of his Son, they went both to Consult the Oracle; and meeting accidentally in Phocis, Laius Imperiously Commanded the other to get out of his way, whereupon the Son thinking nothing of his Father kill'd him. 9. After the Death of Laius, Crion the Brother of Jocasta, possess'd himself of the Kingdom, and continu'd Possessor till Oedipus unfolded the Rid∣dle of Sphinx. The Story is, That this Monster
had a Woman's Head and Face, with lower Parts resembling those of a Lion, and Wings besides: It us'd to sit on Mount Phiceon, and propose Riddles to Strangers, which whoever could not unfold was slain, and whoever could do it was to have Jocasta and her Kingdom for a reward. 10. The Riddle propos'd to Oedipus was this: What is it that walks upon two, three and four Feet? Oedipus apply'd it to a Man, who in his Infancy creeps upon the Ground upon his Hands and Feet, and when he comes to be of Age walks upright upon his Legs, but when Age has worn him out, he stoops and leans upon a Stick. Some say this Monster was a cruel and ugly Woman, that liv'd upon Plunder and laid wait for Strangers. 11. But Pausanias says, she was a Bastard Daughter of Laius, and upon that account some think, that, by reason of her extraordinary Wis∣dom, she was empower'd to determine the De∣bates of those who were Rivals for the King∣dom, and punish those with Death whom she Convicted of falsities. From whence the Po∣ets took occasion to invent the Fable. The E∣gyptians had such an Opinion of this Woman's Wisdom, that they made use of the Monster, as a Hierolgyphick for Wisdom and Fortitude. 12. 'Tis reported that Oedipus married his Mo∣ther, and obtain'd the Kingdom of Thebes. But af∣terwards both his parricide and incest were brought to light. Whereupon Jocasta hang'd herself, and Oedipus was put in Prison by his Sons, and banish'd to Athens to the Court of Theseus then King, where he died. He had 2 Sons, either by his Mother or by Euryganea, namely, Eteocles and
Polynices, the eldest of whom promis'd to share the Government with his Brother, but was not so good as his Word. Adrostus King of Argos, and Father-in-Law to Polynices, resolv'd to resent the injury he did to his Brother, and accordingly drew together a company of the most War-like Youths, in order to attack Thebes. 13. Seven great Captains engag'd 'emselves in this War with the Obligation of an Oath, among whom was Amphiaraus, who marry'd Eriphile the Sister of Adrastus. After several doubtful Skir∣mishes it was agreed upon that the two Brethren should decide the Quarrel in a Duel, but to no purpose, for they kill'd one another, and a Bloo∣dy engagement ensu'd, and all Adrastus's compa∣nions were cut off, and himself escap'd very nar∣owly by the advantage of a swift Horse. But the Thebans lost so many Men and purchas'd this Victory so dear, that Victoria Cadmaea became a Proverb among them. This Theban War hap∣pen'd 28 Years before the Destruction of Troy. 14. Eteocles left a Young Son, nam'd Lato∣damus, and Creon, Jocasta's Brother, undertook his Guardianship. Creon prohibited the Burial of the Argives, till Theseus obtain'd it by his in∣treaty. About 10 Years after the War, Laoda∣mus came of Age; at which time the Offspring of those who were kill'd (who were call'd Epi∣goni) resolving to be reveng'd upon the Thebans, engag'd in another War, in which Laodamus and the City were taken. Notwithstanding that Pausa∣nias writes, that Latodamus escap'd and fled to the Illyrians. 15. The Epigoni being Masters of the Town, set Thersander the Son of Polynices upon the
Throne, who afterwards headed the Beotians in their expedition against Troy, and was kill'd by Telephus in Mysia. Tisamenus his Son being then a Child, the Beotians chose Peneleus to be their Head, who died in an engagement with Eu∣ryphilus the Son of Telephus. 16. After the Death of Peneleus, Tisamenus the Son of Thersander reign d in Thebes. Autesi∣on his Son went over to the Dorians, and his Place was fill'd by Damasichthon the Son of O∣pheltas, and Grandson to Peneleus; and he a∣gain was follow'd by Ptolomy. The last in the Roll was Xanthus, whom Melanthus the Mes∣senian kill'd in a Duel; at which time the War broke out between the Thebans and Athe∣nians, upon the account of Celaenae which lay in their Confines; of which elsewhere. This War happen'd 56 Years after the Destruction of Troy, 24 Years before the return of the Hera∣clidae, 57 Years before the Death of Codrus, 252 Years before the Restoration of the Olympiads by Iphitus, A. M. 2877. 17. After the Death of Xanthus, the Thebans together with the Celenians renounc'd Monar∣chy, preferring the Government of many to that of one; witness Pausanias; tho' at the same time that Author gives us no distinct account of the Form of the Republick, whether it was an Oligarchy or a Democracy that prevail'd, when the Persian Monarchy flourish'd, and Greece was in its best Condition; upon which Period of time we shall have occasion to continue the ac∣count of the Thebans.
CHAP. VI. The Original of Rome, and its affairs contem∣porary with the Babylonian Empire. SECT. I. The Original of the City of Rome. 1. THE City of Rome is situated in Latium in the West of Italy, upon the River Tibe∣ris. The Sicilians are said to have inhabited that Place first, and were expell'd by the Aborigines, the Offspring of the Oenotrii, so call'd because they came from Lycaonia (afterwards Arcadia) under the Conduct of Oenotrus Son to Lycaon. 2. The Aborigines were joyn'd by some Pelas∣gians who fled from Haemonia, afterwards Thessa∣ly; and the Arcadians who came from Palanti∣um under the conduct of Evander the Son of Mercurius and the Nymph Themis, and christen'd the Hill where they planted themselves by the name of Palantium. Not long after that hap∣pen'd, Hercules upon his return from Spain left some Peloponnesians upon the Hill Saturnius or Capitolinus; in the reign of Faunus King of the Aborigines. 3. The Father of Faunus was Picus the Son of Saturn, who fled from Creet to Italy for fear of his Son Jupiter, and christen'd the Country La∣tium, (a latendo) from his living Incognito. Some allege this Man's name was Sterces, and Picus was his Sirname; and that he gave being to the
Laurentian Kingdom so call'd from Laurentum a City that deriv'd its name from the Laurel-tree. 4. This Faunus or Fatuus is said to have mar∣ried his Sister Fauna or Fatua, who us'd to Pro∣phesie things to come in a Fit of Madness or Fu∣ry; from whence the Word Fatuari was applied to that sort of People. But since he is reckon'd the Sons of Mars, and is said to have serv'd un∣der Bacchus in India; since he goes likewise by the name of Sylvanus, Invius and Pan; he must be the same Pan Arcas, whose Worship was introduc'd into Italy by Evander. So far was he from reigning in Latium. 5. The Next King to Faunus was Latinus, whom some give in for his Son, and others for the Son of Hercules. In the 35th Year of the Reign of Latinus, and 55 Years after Her∣cules's departure, Aeneas with his Trojan retinue landed at Laurentum near the Mouth of the Ti∣beris, after he had wander'd a long time. This Aeneas was the Son of Anchises, the Grandson of Capys, and Great Grandson to Assaracus, Brother to Ilus, and Son to Tros the King. When he perceiv'd that Troy was reduc'd to the last extremity, he had retir'd to the Castle; and while the Greci∣ans were busi'd about the Town, escap'd from thence to Mount Ida with a Company of Men. 6. From thence he put out to Sea, and was toss'd up and down by the Sea and Winds for a long time, till at last in the 2d Year he arriv'd in Italy accompany'd by 600 Men. 'Tis true, Virgil, the Poet, makes as if he came not to Ita∣ly till the 10th Year, and stuffs the accounts of his Voyage with a long Story of Dido, who built
Carthage 310 Years after the taking of Troy; but these are only Poetical Fictions, and groundless advances. 7. Aeneas having a piece of Ground allotted him, assisted Latinus against the Rutili; and when they were conquer'd married his Daughter Lavinia, from whom the Town he afterwards built was call'd Lavinium. Next Year the Ru∣tili rebell'd, and kill'd his Father-in-Law in Bat∣tel, so that he got the Crown, and gave all his Subjects the Name of Latini, partly for the Ho∣nour of his Father's Name, and partly in order to unite the Minds of his People. In the 7th Year after the destruction of Troy, and the 4th after the Death of Latinus, Mezentius King of the Etrurians, being apprehensive of his great∣ness, declar'd War against him; and came to a battel, which only Night decided, in which Aeneas disappear'd; that is, was either kill'd or drown'd in the River Numicus. However his Subjects be∣liev'd he was taken up to Heaven, and honour'd him with a Niche, under the Title of Jupiter In∣digetes. 8. Aeneas was follow'd by his Son Ascanius, whose name was Euryleon before it was chang'd upon the Flight. 'Tis not certain whether he was born of Creusa or Lavinia. About 30 Years after the building of Lavinium he left that City to his Stepmother, and march'd off with a Colo∣ny and built Alba Longa. After 28 Years Syl∣vius the Brother of Ascanius succeeded him. He was the Son of Lavinia who for fear of Ascanius retir'd to the Woods, and there brought forth this her posthumous Child.
9. Iulus the Son of Ascanius disputed with him for the Kingdom; but the People thought fit to give the Priesthood to him and his Poste∣rity. After Sylvius all his Successors were Sir∣nam'd Sylvius's; and they follow'd in this order; viz. Aeneas Sylvius, Latinus, Alba, Capetus, Ca∣pys, Calpetus or Carpentus, Tiberinus (who was drown'd in the Albula and gave it the name of Ti∣beris) Agrippa, Alladius (or Aremulus and Ro∣mulus) Aventinas, Procas and Sylvius. 10. Procas was the 13th King of Alba. He left two Sons, namely, Numitor and Amulius, the latter of whom dethron'd his Elder Brother and usurp'd the Government. He kill'd his Son, and for fear his Daughter Sylvia or Ilia should have Issue, Consecrated her for a Priestess to Vesta. But in the 4th Year of her Priesthood, some body got her with Child, and she brought forth Twins, namely, Romulus and Remus; who were thrown into the River by the King's Orders, their Mother being either Murder'd or Condemn'd to perpetual Emprisonment. 11. But it happen'd that the Water Ebb'd and left them on the dry Ground, whereupon a Wolf came and Suckled them, and afterwards Faustu∣lus the King's Shepherd found them, and brought them up among the Royal Shepherds. Some think that Acca Laurentia who Nurs'd them by the orders of Faustulus, was not his Wife, but his Whore, which gave occasion to the fabulous Story of their being suckled by a Wolf or Lupa; that being the Name for a Whore, as Lupana∣ria was for a Bawdy-house. 12. When the Children came of Age, and were acquainted with their Original, they slew Amu∣lius,
and restor'd their Grandfather Numitor to his Kingdom. Having set the Affairs of Alba in a peaceable State, they had a mind to March out with a Colony. Numitor encourag'd their De∣sign, and to that end allotted 'em the Grounds upon which they were brought up, together with such Citizens as he knew to be most devoted to his Brother, and such as preferr'd a strange Ha∣bitation to their own Country. Most of the Trojans Listed themselves in the Colony, and we're inform'd that 50 Trojan Families conti∣nued till the time of Dionysius Halicarnasseus. The Inhabitants of Palantium and Saturnia, hap∣pening to live upon the Place, join'd in with them. 13. When the Brethren set about their new Project, they differ'd upon the place where the City should be Built. Romulus was for the Mons Palatinus, upon which they were brought up. At last the Affair was left to the determination of their Grandfather; who advis'd them to re∣mit it to the augury of Birds. Accordingly it was done. And Remus had first six Vultures up∣on the Mons Aventinus; but afterwards twelve came to Romulus upon the Palatinus. Whereupon the Discord was still inflam'd, while the one pleaded the Priority of Time, and the other the advantage of Number, and both were declar'd Kings by their followers. At last they came to an Engagement, in which Rèmus lost at once both his Life and Kingdom. Then Romulus having an uncontroll'd Liberty to do what he pleas'd, surrounded the Aventian Hill with a Wall. 14. This is the most Probable and approv'd Account of the Original of Rome. The Greci∣ans
attribute the building of it, some to Romus the Son of Aeneas, some to Aeneas himself, o∣thers to the Sons of Latinus and one Roma, and others again to Remus the Son of Circe and U∣lysses. Neither are the Roman Writers agreed upon the matter; for some give in the Sons of Aeneas, and others his Daughter's Sons, for the Builders. Besides Antiochus the Syracusan makes mention of a City of Rome built before the Tro∣jan War; so that some think it was built oft∣ner than once, or else that some time after its building it was repair'd by others. 15. But to wave the Debate, whether this was a new Albanian Colony, or an Old City re∣built; Authors are very much divided upon the time of the rebuilding. Timaeus Siculus makes the Date of Rome equal to that of Carthage, and says it was built 38 Years before the first Olym∣piad. And among those who are look'd upon as most Authentick, some say it was built in the 6 Olympiad, viz. The first Year of it, according to Velleius Paterculus, or the third according to o∣thers, or the fourth according to Varro the most Learn'd of all the Grecians and Romans, who in that point follow'd Tarrutius the famous Ma∣thematician. 16. M. Porcius Cato Dates the Aera of the City in the 1 Year of the 7th Olympiad: But Fa∣bius Pictor casts it into the 8th, and L. Cyncius into the 12th. Among all these jarring Opini∣ons, Varro's seems to be best Entitl'd to a pre∣ference; which is, that Rome was built in the 4th Year of the 6th Olympiad, the 6th of Jo∣tham King of Judah, the 7th of Pekah King of Israel, at the time of the Institution of the E∣phori
in Sparta, in the Archonship of Charops the 1 of the Decennial Archons, A. M. 3252. SECT. II. From the Building of the City, to the overthrow of the Monarchy. The space of 245 Years. 1. ROmulus being 28 Years of Age, laid the Foundation of the City, on the 20th day of April (according to the Julian Year, the 4th of October) between Eleven and Twelve a Clock, when the Sun was in Libra, the Moon in Jugum, Jupiter in Piscis; Saturn, Venus, Mars, and Mercury, in Scorpio, according to the Com∣putation of Tarrutius, who is certainly the most topping Man among all the Mathematicians. Varro, Ovid, and others wou'd have Rome to be Founded with the Parilia or Palilia. The Pari∣lia were so call'd a Pariendo, and therefore the Hyades, under which the Town was Built, go by the Name of Parilitium, or Palilitium Sydus. Now Pales among the Romans was the Goddess of Pasture, and the Feasts Celebrated to her Ho∣nour on the 1 Day of May were call'd Palilia. Capellus, pursuant to Tarrutius's Opinion, dates the 1 Year of the City from the first New Moon of January and Capricorn, 3 Months after its Foundation was laid. 2. The Colony consisted only of 300 Horse and 3000 Foot, and in order to enlarge their Number, a Sanctuary was open'd to all Refugees. The People were divided according to their Num∣ber into three Tribes, and every Tribe into ten Wards, or Curiae, and every Ward into ten les∣ser
Wards or Decuriae. But with reference to their Dignities, they were distinguish'd into Pa∣tricii and Plebeii, who were mutually engag'd to one another by the rights of Patronage and Vassalage. Their Senate, was elected by the Peo∣ple and consisted of 100 Patricii. It got its Name from Senium, or, if we Credit Festus, a Sinendo. The People did likewise chuse 300 Young Men for a Guard to their King, who were call'd Celeres, either from their Celerity and Ex∣pedition in executing their Orders, or, according to Valerius Antias, from Celer their Captain. 3. The Politick Constitution of the Kingdom of Rome was this. The Kings had Power to de∣termine all forms of Worship or Superstition; and to oversee all Laws and Customs, whether Natural, or Enacted by Statute; and to give Judg∣ment in matters of greater Importance, those of lesser Moment being left to the determination of the Senate. Moreover, the King had Power to call the Senate, to call together the People, to give his Opinion first, and to ratifie what the Majority carry'd. Thus we see the limits of the King's power were too confin'd at Home; but his Power in Military Affairs was not at all bounded. 4. The Senat's Priviledge was to take into Consideration his Majesties Proposals, and Enact what they thought fit. The People assembled was to create Magistrates, make Laws, receive his Majesties Proposals of Military Affairs, but not without the intervention of the Senate's Au∣thority. For when the Wards Voted any thing, their Decree or Plebiscitum was remitted to the Senate. Tho' this Custom seems to be afterwards
chang'd, when the People confirm'd the Acts of the Senate call'd Senatus Consulta, and not the Senate those of the Wards. 5. Romulus made many Laws and those very good ones, most of which were written. He enacted, that if they took any Land from their E∣nemy, a Colony should be carried thither, and the Inhabitants of the Place should be translated to Rome, and allow'd the Freedom of the City. His Laws of Matrimony were so admirably well contriv'd, that for 520 Years no Divorce was heard of, till the 137 Olympiad, in which Sp. Carvi∣lius divorc'd his Wife, in the Consulship of M. Pomponius and C. Papyrius. For tho' he did it for the sake of Children, according to his Oath be∣fore the Censors, yet the People always hated him for it. 6. Indeed he gave Parents too much Power over their Children. He prohibited sordid Trades and such as promoted Luxury. He only desir'd to ad∣vance the Arts of War and Husbandry, and allow'd Mercats only once in 9 Days. He us'd to come in Person to the Mercat Place, and pronounce the Laws from a Tribunal, attended by the 300 Cele∣res, together with Sergeants before him carrying the Axes and Rods, and other Badges of Majesty. 7. Romulus taking into consideration how much he was hated by the neighbouring Nations, courted Alliances with them. It is uncertain whether it was the Scarcity of Women, or the design of an opportunity of War, that mov'd him to institute solemn Games, and when great num∣bers of People crouded to see them from all cor∣ners, to give the Signal to his own Men to ravish their Virgins. However 683 were ravish'd by that
Stratagem, which gave rise to a heavy War, especially with the Sabini, who became Masters of the Capitol by Treachery, and gall'd the Ro∣mans mightily. 8. While both Parties were sollicitous concern∣ing the event, the Women upon whose account the War broke out, went upon an embassy, and reconcil'd their Parents and Husbands upon these Terms. 1. That Tatius the King of the Sabines should reign along with Romulus at Rome, with equal Power. 2. That the City it self should be call'd Rome from Romulus; but the Citizens should go by the name of Quirites from Cures which was Tatius's Country. 3. Any of the Sa∣bines that pleas'd were to have the Freedom of the City. 9. By this means Tatius bacame Sharer in the Government of the Kingdom of Rome, but was kill'd by the Lavinians about 5 Years after, because he refus'd to deliver up some Robbers. Romulus did not much resent the murder of his Colleague, but gave Satisfaction to the plaintiffs. Then he conquer d the Fidenates and Crustumeni, and at last the Veientes; by which conquests, to∣gether with his other enterprises which were al∣ways successful, he became a Tyrant, and then the Senate was never call'd but to confirm his Placita. By which means he render'd himself so odious to the Senate, that they pull'd him in Pieces at the Lake of Capria while he harangu'd to the People; and for so much as he disappear'd all of a sudden, it was giv'n out that he was ta∣ken up to Heaven. 10. He liv'd 55 Years, and reign'd 27, and enlarg'd the number of the Citizens to the rate
of 46000 foot and 1000 Horse. He had suc∣ceeded to his Grandfather in the Kingdom of Albany which he govern'd by Deputies. He died on the 5th Day July (acccording to the Julian Year, on the 26th of May) which day was call'd Nonae Caprotinae, alluding to the Place where the Murder was committed, and the flight of the Peo∣ple, for the Plebs was in so great a Consterna∣tion that they run all away. 11. The Senate govern'd the Republick one Year, after which Numa Pompilius a Sabine was chosen King. This Prince added the Ornament of Laws to the City that ow'd its rise to Arms alone. He built a Temple to Janus, which was always to stand open in War, and shut in time of Peace. He discarded Romulus's Guards; and to the 2 Flamines, viz. one for Jupiter and ano∣ther for Mars, he added a 3d for Romulus. He instituted the order of Priests, and vestal Virgins; and reform'd the Model of the Year, by adding or at least prefixing January and February to the other 10 Months. 12. His Religion came nearest to the Pythago∣rean Worship, as in many other things so especi∣ally in this that he allow'd no image of God; for an immortal and invisible Majesty is only to be view'd by the Soul, and indeed the Romans us'd no image of him for 170 Years. Whereas some have alledg'd that Numa convers'd with Pytha∣goras; that Plea is plainly naught, since that Philospher was not born till 100 Years after his Death. Indeed 'tis true he kept company with one Pythagoras a Lacedemonian, who assisted him in the administration of the Government, and who went into Italy in the 16th Olympiad, from the
3d Year of which Plutarch dates the beginnig of Numa's Reign. 13. After Numa had reign'd 43 Years, and liv'd 80, Tullius Hostilius succeeded him, in the 2d Year of the 27th Olympiad, in which Eury∣bates won the Race, in the Archonship of Leo∣stratus, the 31 of the Reign of Manasseh King of Judah, and the 83 from the building of the Ci∣ty, A. M. 3333. He was the Son of that Hosti∣lius who behav'd himself so bravely against the Sabines, and married Hersilia out of the same Fa∣mily. He ingratiated himself with the People by the division of Lands, and added the Hill Coe∣lius to the precincts of the City. He was a Warlike Prince and hugg'd all Opportunities of War. 14. Hostilius took occasion to declare War, upon the Alban's plundering the Roman Grounds. And indeed C. Cluilius their Dictator was not in∣clin'd to Peace. But as soon as Cluilius dy'd, the Albans were much dishearten'd notwithstand∣ing the Pains that Metius Suffetius his Successor took to inflame the Quarrel. Besides, the Fide∣nates waited greedily to see the Event of the War, as having an equal design against both Par∣ties. Whereupon 'twas mov'd and agreed to, that the matter should be decided by the Engagement of Three Brethren on each side, viz. The Hora∣tii and Curiatii. In the beginning of the Engage∣ment two of the Horatii were kill'd, and the third was oblig'd to engage the other three; but acted his part so, that he engag'd 'em all singly and successively, by which means he got the Victory, and Rome triumph'd upon it.
15. Hostilius was very civil to the Albans. But sentenc'd Suffetius to be beheaded, for be∣ing concern'd with the Fidenates and Veientes in a perfidious Conspiracy. He likewise levell'd Alba with the Ground, which was then the Me∣tropolitan of Rome, and about 30 other Towns, after it had stood about 487 Years. 16. Hostilius first conquer'd the Fidenatians, and afterwards the Sabines: And then declar'd War against the Latines, for refusing to pay Ho∣mage to the Romans when they conquer'd the Metropolitan. The War went on pretty easily for 5 Years, and then they were beginning to en∣tertain some Thoughts of Peace, when all of a sudden Tullus and all his Family were cut off either by a Thunderbolt, or, as most Men be∣liev'd, by the intrigues of his Successor, after he had reign'd 32 Years. 17. After the Death of Tullus the Regent put up an election; and Ancus Martius, Numa's Grandson, was pitch'd upon to be King in the 2d Year of the 35th Olympiad, in which Phaedrus the Lacedemonian won the Race, in the Archonship of Damasias, and the 115 Year from the build∣ing of Rome. Ancus devoted himself entirely to Peace and Religion; and was thereupon accoun∣ted Lazy and Timorous. But the Latines quick∣ly rous'd him up, by plundering the Country, and reviving the War. 18. But Ancus quickly reduc'd them, as well as the Fidenates, Volsci, Vejentes, and Sabines. He joyn'd Rome to Janiculum by a Bridge. And in the middle of the City built a Prison for Cri∣minals. He enlarg'd the precincts of the City, and extended the Dominions of Rome to the Sea, and for
the encouragement of Trade built Ostia in the Mouth of the Tiberis. He reign'd 24 Years, and was short of none of his Predecessors. 19. His Succcessor was Lucius Tarquinius, O∣riginally a Grecian, being the Son of Demaratus of Corinth, who descended of the Bacchiadae, and in the time of Cypselus's Tyranny came to Hetru∣ria, and begot two Sons, namely Aruns and Lucumo, upon an Etrurian Matron. Aruns died without any living issue; but after his Death a Posthumous Child was brought forth, which from its Poverty was christen'd Egerius. 20. For Demaratus took his Son's Death so much to Heart, that he died for Grief: So that Lucumo possess'd himself of the whole Heritage and became very rich; but not meeting with sui∣table preferment in Tuscany came to Rome; where Ancus gave him a very civil reception, and he chang'd his name from Lucumo to Lucius, toge∣ther with a Sirname taken from his Country Tar∣quinia. His Wife's name was Tanaquil Gaja Caecilia. 21. Ancus made Tarquinius a Senator; so that Tarquinius won a considerable share of the Af∣fections of the People. He was noted both for his peaceful and military Vertues; and the King depended so much upon his Integrity, that he left him Guardian to his Sons. But Tarquinius insulted over their Childhood, and harangued the People, in order to hook in the Kingdom to him∣self. He produc'd the Example of Tatius and Numa to vouch for a Foreigners Title to that Dignity; but above all, cry'd up his own Libe∣rality. By which means he compass'd his end, in the 2d Year of the 41st Olympiad, in which Cleonidas the Theban won the Race, 139 Years
after the building of Rome, and the 30th Year of Josiah King of Judah, A. M. 3390. 22. Tarquinius oblig'd the Latines to beg for Peace. He subdued the Sabines twice, and after a War of Nine Years standing, master'd the E∣trurians, who in testimony of their Homage sent him of their own accord the Badges of Majesty, viz. A Crown of Gold, a Throne of Ivory, a Scepter with an Eagle on the top of it, a Purple Coat barr'd with Gold, and a Purple lac'd Gown that differ'd from those which the Lydian and Persian Kings wore, by its semicircular Figure. Some say they likewise sent 12 Axes for so ma∣ny Towns: For the Custom was, That the Ma∣gistrate of every Town should have one, and the General of the Army twelve, carried before him. 23. I intimated above, that Romulus instituted a Senat of 100 Men; which number was now enlarg'd by the Addition of an equal number of Sabines, who were made free of the City, and thereupon call'd Patres Conscripti. Tarquinius added, to these 200, yet another hundred, who were styl'd Patres Minorum Gentium. He en∣larg'd the number of the Vestal Virgins from 4 to 7. He beautified the Forum, and repair'd the Walls (which had been built in a hurry) with Stones, every one of which was a full Cart-load by itself. He likewise caus'd Sinks and Common-Shoars to be made for conveying the filth of the Tiberis; which was so magnificent an underta∣king that the Censors laid out 2000 Talents in cleaning 'em. 24. He design'd to add three Centuries of Hors-men to the like number instituted by Romu∣lus: But being premonish'd by Actius Naevius, a
noted Augur, to avoid the Alterations of Romu∣lus's Model, he doubled the Number of the ad∣ditional Centuries, and left the other three as they were. At length about the 38 Year of his Reign, and the 80 of his Age, he was kill'd by a Con∣spiracy of Ancus Martius his Sons. He was Sirnam'd Priscus, from the time that his Grand∣son was christen'd Superbus from the Corruption of his manners. 25. Tarquinius Priscus was follow'd by Servi∣us Tullius in the 4th Year of the 50 Olympiad, in the Archonship of Archestratides, the 176 Year after the building of the City, A.M. 3427. He was call'd Servius, as being the Son of one Ocrisia Serva, who was left with Child when her Husband was kill'd before Corniculum a City belonging to the Latines, and was gifted by Tarquinius to the Queen. He was born and brought up in Tarqui∣nius's House, and gave great Proof of an excellent Genius: Whereupon he was prefer'd to the high∣est Posts both in the Army and at home; he was equally lov'd by the People for his integrity and prudence; and at last came to be Son-in-Law to Tarquinius. 26. Tarquinius left no Sons alive, only two Grandchildren very Young. The Queen wheed∣led the People so that she got the Guardianship of these two Children to him. He being Regent did so Humor the Plebs, that in spite of the Se∣nat and the Patres Conscripti, the Common Council or Comìtia Curiata elected him King. Having confirm'd himself in the Government, he distributed Publick Lands to the Poor; he made 50 Laws in the Common Council concerning Con∣tracts and Injuries; he added the Viminalis and
Esquilinus Hills to the other 5, and surrounded 'em all with a Wall; he divided the City into 4 Parts, and added a 4th Tribe. 27. Whereas Romulus divided the People into the Tribes and Wards, according to their Seats and way of Communion in their Sacrifices; Ser∣vius drew them up in 6 Ranks according to their Substance. The first rank was alloted to those who were worth 110000 Asses; the next four comprehended those whose Substance was gradu∣ally less by a fourth Part; and the last included those who had little or nothing. 28. However these 6 Classes were divided in∣to 188 Centuries; the first contain'd 80 of Foot∣men and 18 of Horsemen; in all 98: the second 22, including the Tradesmen; the third 20; the fourth 22; the 5th 30; and the 6th only one Century. Both the Men and their Estates were to be tax'd according to their Centuries. So that tho' the Richer sort were the fewer in number, yet being divided into several Centuries they con∣tributed more Money and Men towards a War. 29. But after all, the Poor had nothing to boast of, for the same Law strip'd 'em of all Power. For, whereas formerly their number gave 'em an ascendant in the common Council; Servius order'd that matters of great importance should be handled by a convention of the Centu∣ries. The first that voted, was the first Class con∣sisting of 98 Centuries of the richest Citizens; and if these 98 agreed upon one Vote, they were sure to carry it, as being more numerous than the rest. But if their Votes jarr'd, other Classes were call'd in till the 98 came to agree.
30. And if after all they did not agree, then at last the 6th Class, containing only one Century of the Poorest sort of People, was call'd to vote, but withal very seldom. In the mean time, let the young Historian remark, that the Word Centuria do's not imply just a hundred Men, but a certain division of Men; and that in those Conventions of the Centuries, 'twas not every sin∣gle Man, but every Century, let its number be what it would, that gave in one Vote. 31. When Tullius had gone through with the Census, by which he came to know both the Number and the Estates of the People; he ap∣pointed a Lustrum so call'd a luendo, as Flustrum is a fluendo, according to Varro. So thar after the rating was over, the Citizens appear'd in Arms in the Campus Martius and made a Proces∣sion, and the Sacrifice of Suovetaurilia, or a Hog, a Sheep, and an Ox, were offer'd up. 32. Then the Procession or Lustrum was ap∣pointed to be every 5th Year, for the Money was paid every 5th Year, and Lustrum seems to de∣rive its name from paying or a luendo or Solvendo. After the Kings were expell'd, the Consuls and Censors manag'd the Ceremony. But in the mean time 'tis proper to distinguish between the Ancient Roman Lustrum, and the new Julian one, which consists of 4 Julian Years, the last of which has 366 Days without any additional Hours. For 'tis apparent that the Ancient Lu∣strum, properly so call'd, included full 5 Years, and could by no means quadrate with the Olym∣piads. 33. In this first review, 84700 Roman Citizens were rated; and in order to increase their num∣ber
he introduc'd the Manumission of the Elders and di∣vided 'em thus set free into 4 Tribes. At first indeed they were not made free, but upon very good grounds; but afterwards any Misdemeanor in an ill Master was accounted sufficient; so that Dionysus had rea∣son to blame the City that govern'd the World, for suffering their Censors to degrade the Senators and E∣quites, and to have no regard to the Merit of those whom they made free of their City. 34. Tullius did not only abridge the Authority of the Noblemen and the Senat, but likewise lower'd the Re∣gal Power, in order to advance the Power of the Peo∣ple. The Latines, by his Advice, built a Temple to Diana at Rome, where they met every Year upon a a Festival, and remitted their mutual Debates to the Publick Judgment; which was the same Project that the Amphyctiones pursu'd in Greece, as well as in the Ionian Council in Ephesus, and the Convention of the Dorians at Epitropium. He was the first that stamp'd the Effi∣gies of Cattel upon Mony; from whence 'twas call'd Pecunia; for before that time, the Romans only us'd the unpolish'd Mettal. 35. This was Servius's business at home. Abroad, he wag'd War with the Etrurians, and, after three Tri∣umphs, at last subdu'd 'em. But tho' he surmounted all Publick Jealousies and Oppositions, yet the Dome∣stick Feuds, was too hard for him. For he married his two Daughters to Tarquinius's two Grandsons, viz. One Daughter of corrupt Manners to the best of the Princes, and another of extraordinary good Qualities to a Profligate Prince. Whereupon the two corrupt Parties, one of either Sex, combin'd together to kill, the one her Husband, the other his Wife, and then to marry together. After that, their business was to re∣move Servius out of the way, who had possess'd himself of the Kingdom by trick, and without the Consent of the Patres: But in order to compass that end, there was a necessity of winning the Favour of the People. 36. At last when Servius's Glory defeated all their attempts; Tarquinius, upon his Wife's Sollicitation, re∣solves
to make away with his Father-in-Law. Accord∣dingly, he came to the Council-House, and pull'd the old Gentleman from off his Throne, and dragg'd him to the Door, and when he offer'd to return home set Men upon him to kill him. And the barbarous Daughter would needs have her Coach drove over her Father's Corps as they lay in the way; from whence the Street chang'd its name from Vicus Cyprius to Vicus Sceleratus. This was Servius's Exit after he had reign'd 44 Years. He was a Man of great Moderation, and by his modest Beha∣viour wip'd off the Imputations he was charg'd with for invading the Government. The Patricii saw that he design'd to put the Power into the Hands of the People, and therefore joyn'd in with Tarquinius, in order to keep up the Authority of the Senat. 37. Lucius Tarquinius possess'd himself of the Kingdom of Rome, in the 4 Year of the 61st Olympiad, in which Agatharchus won the Race, in the Archonship of Heraclius or Heraclides, the 26 Year of Cyrus, 220 Years after the building of the City, A. M. 3471. The violence of his Temper procur'd him the Sirname of Superbus; for, 'tis said, he dispos'd of every thing at discretion; he sunk the Authority of the Senate and Conventions, and fill'd the City with Blood and Rapes. He ingag'd in a War with the Volsci, which continued 20 Years; and defeated the Sabines. He enter'd into a confederacy with the Aequi and Hetrusci. He took from the Volsci, the City of Gabii together with Suessa Pometia, and pre∣tended to build the Capitol upon its Spoil, out of re∣gard to his Grandfather Tarquinius's Vow, who, in the last War against the Sabines, had vow'd a Temple to Jupiter, Juno and Minerva; and had been at a great deal of Charges, in smoothing the Rock. 38. It is said that a certain old Woman came to Tar∣quinius, and offer'd him 9 Books which he refus'd to pur∣chase as being overrated: Whereupon she went off, and burnt 3 of 'em, and return'd with the other 6, de∣manding the same price for them: the King put her off for a Mad Woman; but she made away with 3 more,
and offer'd the remaining 3 at the same rate. Then the matter was look'd upon as a Prodigy and referr'd to the Augurs, who advis'd the King to buy those Sibylline Books (for so they were call'd) at any rate. According∣ly 'twas done, and the Woman immediately disap∣pear'd. 39. Tarquinius having purchas'd the Sibylline Books, im∣ploy'd two Men to take care of 'em, and allow'd only them to consult them when there was occasion, whence they were call'd Duumviri Sacrorum. Afterwards the number was enlarg'd so that they became Decemviri Sacrorum, upon the reception of the Law call'd Septia Licinia, when the States were at variance, about 2 Years before the Commoners were allow'd to share in the Consulship. A long while after that 5 more were added, and then the number was at a stand. By an Act of the Senate these Books were to be consulted, when Sedition prevail'd in the Republick, when they were routed in War, or when prodigies appear'd. They were kept in a Stone Chest under the Capitol, till both they and the Place fell a Sacrifice to the Flames. Then they were sought for in other Towns and private Houses, and some were made use of that were spurious; but the Genuin sort were di∣stinguish'd by Acrostick lines. 40. This Old Woman which brought the Books to Tarquinius, was call'd Sibylla. Now that Word signifies a Woman privy to Jupiters's Counsels; and it will not be improper to give a short account of the Family of the Sibylls. The first Sibylla, according to Varro, was either a Persian, Chaldean, or Hebrean; born at Noe near the Red-Sea, her Father's name being Barossus, her Mother's Erymantha, and her own Sambetha. The second was a Lybian. The third, the Delphick Themis. The fourth a Cumean from Cimerium a Town in Campania near to Cumae in Italy. The 6th was a Samian; her name was Phyto. The seventh was of Cuma; her name was Amal∣thaea, and according to others Hierophile or Demophile. 41. Suidas calls her Hierophile, and says that she car∣ried those 9 Books to Tarquinius, and demanded 300 Phi∣lippus's
for 'em. Plinius mentions only 3 Books, and says that one of 'em was sav'd when the other 2 were burnt. The 8th Sibylla was of Hellespont. She was born in the Trojan Territories, in a Village call'd Marmissum near the Town Gergetium. Heraclides Ponticus writes that she liv'd in the time of Solon and Cyrus. The 9th was a Phrygian, and prophecy'd in Ancyra. The 10th a Tiburtine; her name was Albunea, and she was worship'd for a Goddess at Tibur near the Banks of Anio; it being said that the image of her holding a Book in her Hand was found in that Ri∣ver. 42. This is Varro's account of the Sybills. But there are yet others made mention of; namely Colophonia Elis∣sa, Cassandra the Daughter of Priamus, Sybilla Epirotica, the Thessalian Manto, the Daughter of Tiresias the Theban; to whom we might add Carmentis the Arcadian, Mother to Evander, and Fauna or Fatua Sister and Wife to King Faunus. Strabo mentions 2 Sibylls that liv'd in Erythra, one of whom flourish'd in the Reign of Alexander the Great. 43. To return. Tarquinius finding that the People were out of Humour for being oblig'd to Work at the build∣ing of the Capitol and such mean sort of Work, had a mind to break the resenting Spirit with a design to gra∣tify his own Avarice, and march'd them out against Ar∣dea a Rutilan City richly stor'd with plenty of all things. While he lay before this Town, Sextus his eldest Son ra∣vish'd Lucretia Wife to Tarquinius Collatinus, the resentment of which Piece of wickedness went so high that the King and his whole Family were expell'd the Kingdom. This Tarquinius Collatinus was the Son of that Collatia, whom Tarquinius Priscus took from the Latins and gave to Egerius his Posthumous Grandson, the Father of this Man. 44. The chief Authors of the King's Exile, were Lucretius the Father of Lucretia, Publius Valerius, and L. Junius Brutus the Son of Marcus Junius who descended of one of Aeneas's retinue. This Marcus Junius married Tarquinia the Daughter of Tarquinius Priscus, by whom
he had this Lucius; and afterwards Tarquinius Superbus put him and his eldest Son to Death, in order to possess himself of his Estate. Lucius, upon the Death of his Fa∣ther and the loss of his patrimony, was constrain'd to act the Part of a Fool, and was thereupon Sirnam'd Brutus: but being a Man of a shrewd Genius, he diligently watch'd the opportunity of taking off the Tyrant. Ac∣cordingly when Lucretia laid violent Hands on herself, and Collatinus discover'd the Plot to him, he took the bloody Knife in his Hand, and perswaded all the com∣pany to swear by Mars and the other Gods, to expell Tarquinius and his Offspring, and never to suffer another King in Rome. 45. After Brutus had laid open the Method for execu∣ting the design, the Conspirators enter'd into a debate upon the future form of Government At length they a∣greed to the opinion of one, who acknowledg'd that they could not fall upon a better form and Method, than that chalk'd out by Romulus, Pompilius, and the other Kings; under which the Government was happily ad∣minstred, till Tarquinius departed from their example. Besides, he thought that there were some things that occasion'd the degeneracy of the Kingdom into a Tyran∣ny, and mov'd that these should be quite abolish'd; that the name of Kingdom should be shifted for that of a Re∣publick; and that Modester Words should be us'd for King and Monarchy. 46. His Model was, that not one but two should sit at the Helm of Affairs, and that the more Splendid Badges of Majesty, which inflam'd the People's Jealousy, should be quite laid aside, excepting on triumphal and festival Days. Such Badges were the Scepters, the Crowns of Gold, and purple Garments. He allow'd the use of the Ivory Chair of State, the Praetexta or white Garment border'd with Purple, and Serjeants carrying the Rods of State and Axes. Moreover, the Opinion was that the perpetual Power was by no means to be indur'd; but, that a Yearly Power was infinitly more suitable both to Modesty and Liberty. But at the same time, in order to keep up the name of a King, he propos'd that
the Title of Rex Sacrorum should be conferr'd upon some Noblemen, who should have the Charge of Religious Worship. 47. Brutus having obtain'd an act of the Senate for his purpose, calls together the People, and exposes to to their view the Corps of Lucretia stain'd with Blood and Gore. Then he took occasion to exaggerate the Charge against the Tarquinij, and made it out at large, that both the People and Senate were monstrously in∣jur'd. He told 'em, that neither the Temper of his Sons, nor the Humour of Tarquinius would permit them to hope for amendment; and that the business they were about might easily be put in Execution. By which means he obtain'd a Plebiscitum for expelling Tarquinius and all his Offspring, and prohibiting any Man, under the Pain of Death, to countenance their Restoration either by Words or Actions. 48. This was concluded upon in the Convention of the Wards or Comitia Curiata; and besides it was agreed upon that 2 Men chosen by the Convention of the Cen∣turies or Comitia Centuriata should govern the Republick. Brutus nominated one Sp. Lucretius as Regent and Presi∣dent to the Meeting, who remov'd the Convention to the Campus Martius, and put up Brutus and Collatinus as Candidats for the Office of yearly Kings. The Centu∣ries back'd the Proposal nemine contradicente. Then a Messenger was dispatch'd to the Camp to sollicit the Sol∣diers to revolt. 49. The King came post to Rome, but finding the Gates shut upon him return'd to the Fields, where his Sol∣diers likewise refus'd him admittance; so that in his Old Age, his Hairs being already gray, he was forc'd to submit to banishment, in the 244th Year after the building of the City according to Cato, but according to Terentius Varro the 245th; in the end of the 67th or beginning of the 68th Olympiad, A.M. 3496. Plinius says, Tarquinius was expell'd in the same Year that the Pisistratidae were outted of Athens, and Clemens casts it into the same time that Darius the Son of Hystaspes took Babylon. These things happen'd about 20 Years after Cyrus put an end to the Babylonian, and be∣gun the Persian, Monarchy.
THE ELEMENTS OF HISTORY. BOOK. II. The Persian Empire and the affairs of the World Contemporary with it. CHAP. I. Of the Persian Monarchy. SECT. I. From the beginning of that Monarchy to the Death of Cambyses. 1. CYrus, having establish'd his Em∣pire, released the Jews from Captivity, and allow'd them to return into their own Country; the 70 years foretold by Jeremiah, being then elaps'd. There return'd 42462 un∣der
the Command of Zorobabel, with Joshuah the Highpriest. In the second month of the se∣cond year of the Persian Monarchy, the Founda∣tions of the second Temple were laid, but a stop was put to the building of it by the In∣trigues of the Cushits, till the second year of Darius. This prov'd a mighty affliction to Da∣niel, who was then 90 years of age, and mor∣tifying himself by fasting three weeks, had the great and last vision, of the future Kings of Persia, and of Alexander and his successors. 'Tis not certain that he liv'd till the 4th year of Cyrus. 2. The accounts of Cyrus's death are diffe∣rent and full of uncertainty. Some say that his end is owing to the circumvention of To∣myris Queen of the Massageta, whose History is obvious to every School-boy. Ctesias says he died of a wound, receiv'd in fighting a∣against the Derbices, a People of Scythia. But Xenophon will have it, that he died peaceably, when he was worn out by age, and reason'd with his Sons and Friends about the Immorta∣lity of the Soul. Had the King been cut off with his whole Army, it is not probable that Cambyses would have transported his Forces in∣to Egypt, and leave the Borders of his King∣dom expos'd to the Incursions of the Scythians. 'Tis plain that all the Authors that wrote up∣on the Actions of Alexander the Great, say that Cyrus was inter'd at Pasargadae, and that his Tomb was open'd by Alexander. But Ma∣lela, is of opinion that he lost his Life in a Sea fight, against the Samians.
3. Lucian writes that he liv'd 130 years, where∣as 70 was the out-side of his Life. He reign'd 30 years, reckoning from his beginning to reign in Media. But 'tis not certain how long he reign'd after the overthrow of the Babylonian Empire. Some reckon upon 10 years, and o∣thers 3: Upon which subject you may consult Ludovicus Capellus in his sacred Chronology. He left two Sons Cambyses and Smerdis or Tan∣aoxares; and three Daughters, namely, Atossa, Meroe, and Artystona, to which number Ctesias adds Amyte. If we may credit Xenophon's Cyropaedia, he left the Kingdom to Cambyses, and to Smerdis the Government of Media, Armenia, and the Cadusians. 4. Cambyses, succeeding his Father, marched presently with his Forces against Amasis King of Egypt, either because he had courted his Daughter, and yet married the Daughter of Apries, or else, which is more likely, because he look'd upon himself as Successor by right of War to Nebuchadnezar, who conquer'd Egypt, tho this pretension is carefully conceal'd by the Priests. Having got a safe passage through Arabia, by vertue of the King's assistance, he compass'd his end without any difficulty. For Amases being then dead, his Son Psammitichus succeeded him, who being overpower'd by the Persian Forces was forc'd to submit; and af∣terwards during his Captivity was constrained to drink Bulls-blood, for plotting innova∣tions.
5. Egypt being thus added to the Persian Do∣minions, Cambyses resolv'd to attack the Carthaginians, Ethiopians, and Ammonians: But the Phenicians, who were best vers'd in Naval affairs, refused to put out in opposition to the Carthaginians, who were their own Colony. He march'd himself against the Ethiopians, but o∣mitting to take sufficient Provisions along with him, was oblig'd to return with his Army, after they had eaten every 10th Man: and as for the expedition against the Ammonians, 50000 Men employ'd in it were buried in heaps of Sand. Upon all these disasters, he return'd to Memphis, destroy'd all the sacred things among the Egyptians, and married two of his own Sisters. 6. He had sent his Brother back to Persia, because he only was able to bend the Ethiopian Bow: But for so much as he saw in his sleep a messenger who told him that Smerdis sat upon the Throne, he gave orders to kill him: And when his youngest Sister being with child charg'd him with the parricide, he kill'd her with a kick of his heels. 'Tis worth while to take notice of the answer given in by the Judges, when Cambyses put the question to them, whe∣ther or no there was any Law that allow'd him to Marry his Sister; 'Twas, that indeed the Persians had no such Law; but there was one extant, which empower'd the King to do what he pleas'd. 7. When Cambyses treated his relations so barbarously, Patizithes a Magician, who was Governour of his Household, and acquainted with the manner of Smerdis's death, having a
Brother whose name and body resembled that of the murder'd Prince took occasion from thence to revolt, gave out his Brother the Magician for the Son of Cyrus, and dispatched Heralds round the Countries, to press the people to obey Smerdis the Son of Cyrus, ra∣ther than Cambyses. Upon the advice of these news, Cambyses regrated the death of his Bro∣ther too late, and resolv'd to set out for Suse, in order to quash the Rebellion: but as he mounted his Horse, his Sword slipt out of the Scabbard, and wounded him in the Thigh; and the wound festering put an end to his days, after he had reign'd 7 years and 5 months. He left no issue. SECT. II. From the Death of Cambyses, to the Death of Xerxes. 1. Smerdis the Magician (called Mardus Sphendadates and Oropastes) reign d those se∣ven months which were wanting to compleat the 8th year of Cambyses. For, notwithstand∣ing that the King on his Death-bed discove∣red the whole Intrigue, and earnestly entrea∣ted all the Noblemen about him to punish the Magician, yet they did not believe him, because Praxaspes, the Minister im∣ployed to execute the Parricide, had not yet made any discovery. Afterwards, finding that Smerdis avoided showing himself, they began to smell out the matter, and the whole Im∣posture was discovered by the Daughter of
Otanes, who was Concubine to the Magician and to Cambyses; the mark she discovered him by was the cropping of his Ears, having call'd to mind that Cyrus had cut off the Ears of Smerdis the Magician. 2. Whereupon seven Noble Persians conspired against the Magician, namely Otanes, Aspa∣thines, Gobryas, Intaphernes, Megabyzus, Hydar∣nes, and Darius. They rush'd into the Palace, and kill'd the Magicians without any difficulty. Then they concerted measures concerning the Administration of the Government. Several forms of Government were started and ap∣prov'd of. At last Darius's proposal of a Monarchy was most generally lik'd. In order therefore to pitch upon a King, they agreed to ride out into the Suburbs next morning, and that he, whose Horse neighed first, should be invested with Cambyses his Empire. 3. Darius got the Empire thro the contri∣vance of his Groom, who had put his Horse to a Mare in the same place over-night. He was the Son of Hystaspes, Son of Arsamnes, the Brother of Cambyses, Cyrus's Father. Tho he was invested with the Government, yet it seems 'twas only a sort of perpetual Dictator∣ship, so that the others retain'd a power like to that of Tribunes. For the holy Scrip∣tures and other Histories make mention of o∣ther Kings intervening between the slaughter of the Magicians and his Reign; and say that at length he cut off the Conspirators, which it is probable he did out of fear and envy. In the second year of his Reign, by his com∣mand,
and upon his charges, they set about the rebuilding of the Temple of Jerusalem. 4. He divided the Kingdom into 20 Pro∣vinces, call'd by the Persians Satrapiae, and was the first that laid Taxes upon every one of them, so that as Cyrus was call'd Father, and Cambyses Lord, Darius was stil'd Factor. He punish'd Intaphernes with the loss of his Head for entring the Palace by offering vio∣lence to the Porters. In the 18th year of his reign the Babylonians rebell'd, being animated by the strength of their Walls, which Cyrus had left as Invincible, and by the successless Ex∣peditions of Cambyses, and the Imposture of the Magicians. Having singl'd out some Wo∣men to bake bread for them, they slew all the rest, bating their own Mothers; and thus thinking themselves Invincible, they contemn'd the Persians, and stood out▪ against all their at∣tacks for 19 months. 5. At length Zopyrus the Son of Megabyzus pretended to desert, his Nose being cut off, as if Darius had us'd him so; and being readi∣ly entertain'd by the Babylonians, was made their Governour, and betrayed the Town into the hands of the King. Then the Walls were le∣velled with the ground, 3000 of the Citizens were crucified, and the rest were furnished with 5000 Women, in order to repair the loss of their kind. The Town it self was gi∣ven to Zopyrus as a reward for so great an Exploit. 6. Darius being Master of Babylon invaded the Scythians, in order to make his reprisals, for their possessing themselves of Asia 28
years in the reign of Cyaxares the Median, or else to resent the repulse he met with in courting the Daughter of King Lanthius. He could not by any means come up with his Enemy, for the Scythians to this very day inhabit no City nor Town, but are scattered up and down the Country, feeding their Cattle. At length after many disappointments and decoys, he es∣caped narrowly, and return'd home without any memorable action. 7. He had left Megabyzus the Son of Zopy∣rus in Europe, at the Head of an Army of 80000 Men. He conquered the Perinthians and Peonians, and sent Ambassadors to Amyntas King of Macedonia to demand free Passage. But they were kill'd in revenge of their wan∣tonness, by the contrivance of Alexander the Kings Son, and so never returned: and Bubares the Persian who was sent with an Army to de∣mand what the matter was, fell in love with Gygea the Kings Daughter, and married her, and in Complement to his Father-in-law con∣cealed the murder. 8. In the 16 year of Darius, Otanes was put into Megabyzus's place, who took the Citys of Chalcedon; Byzantium (or Constantinople) and Tandros, together with the Islands Lemnos and Imbros. But soon after the Persian inte∣rest was mightily mortified by the revoult of the Ionians. The Author of that revoult was Aristagoras Tyrant of Miletus, who had lately been disoblig'd by the Persians, and was push'd on by Histieus his Father-in-law, a Milesian Prince, and a man of a ready Wit, whom Da∣rius out of policy had carried along with him to Suse.
9. Histieus preferring the Government of one little Town to his splendid bondage, mean∣ed to set Ionia in fire, thinking that he would be sent to quench it. In pursuance of this pro∣ject, he shaved the head of a trusty Servant of his, and with a hot Iron imprinted certain marks of his design upon it; and when his hair was grown, sent him to Miletus with or∣ders only to tell Aristagoras to shave his head. By this means Aristagoras received the advice that he had mightily long'd for, and readily influ∣enc'd the Ionians to rebellion. 10. The Athenians sided with the Ionians, and their Tyrant Hippias, then at the Court of Persia, us'd all means to incense Darius a∣gainst them. They sent 20 Ships to assist them, besides five sent by the Eretrians. This was the beginning of that infinite number of evils, which put an end to the Persian Empire. This Ionian War happened in the 19th year of Da∣rius, the 2 year of the 69 Olympiad, 507 years before Christ, A. M. 3502. 11. With the naval forces mentioned but now, Aristagoras quickly took Sardis, which was laid in ashes by the firing of one house. Artaphernes, Darius's Brother, continued Ma∣ster of the Castle. But the Grecians were put to the flight, when the tumult occasioned by the fire set the Persians and Lydians to fight. Many were kill'd upon the flight, and Aristo∣goras could by no means hinder the Athenians from returning home. 12. Cyprus indeed sided with the Grecians, and Histieus did so far over-reach Darius, that he got leave to be gone. But presently their con∣dition
became more desperate. For at the end of one year Cyprus was recover'd by the Persians, and the Governours of the Provinces that had married the K.'s Daughters, having divided the Ionian Towns among themselves, got most of 'em; whereupon Aristagoras, designing to flee into Thracia, was kill'd. 13. The Governours having reduced all the Ionians that lived above the Hellespont, to Da∣rius's Government, besieged Miletus, both by Sea and Land. The Ionian Ambassadors, out of regard to the Panionian Council, resolv'd to fit out a gallant Navy, to make-head a∣gainst them, and not to trouble themselves with the levying of Land-forces. But the Persian Officers did so dexterously imploy their interest with the Samian Tyrants, that the Sa∣mians observing the lazy backwardness of the rest, gave them the slip, in hopes of obtaining pardon: and at last the others followed their example. 14. Miletus being block'd up, was at length carried by Mines, and other strata∣gems usual in the Sieges of Towns; and was quite demolish'd in the 6th. year after their Re∣volt. Histieus being toss'd up and down, was at last taken Prisoner in the Field, by Harpagus the Persian: His body was nail'd to a Cross by Artaphernes, and his head was sent to Da∣rius, who was much disturb'd at the death of so Great a Man. Thus were the Ionians thrice Conquer'd, once by the Lydians, and twice by the Persians.
15. Tho the Commotions of the Ionians were now asleep, and the Ring leaders of the Re∣bellion punish'd, yet Darius had no mind to put up the Affair, while the Athenians boldness pass'd with impunity, and the destruction of Sardes was unresented, which incens'd him so much against them, that he order'd his Servant while he sat at Table, always to cry out, Ma∣ster remember the Athenians. First he sent Am∣bassadors to Greece, to demand Provisions from the Cities; whom the Athenians and Lacedemo∣nians threw head-long into Pits. Then he sent Dates, the Median, and Artaphernes, his Bro∣ther's Son; at the head of a gallant Army a∣gainst them. 16. Their orders were to lay Athens and E∣retria waste, and to bring the Inhabitants be∣fore him. Eretria indeed was taken by Treach∣ery; but when they march'd against the A∣thenians, they were routed by them, under the Command of Miltiades, in that great Battle which was fought in the Marathonian Fields, in the 2d. or 3d. year of the 72d. Olympiad, and the 4th. or 5th. year before the King's death. 17. Darius, notwithstanding this unfortu∣nate Expedition against the Athenians, design'd to make tryal of another. Accordingly, about 4 years after, when the Egyptians rebell'd, he made great Preparations, in order to make head against both the one and the other, and was just ready to take the Field, when the Cu∣stom of his Country oblig'd him to declare his Successor, before he set out.
18. Artibazanes, (alias Artamenes and Aria∣menes) his eldest Son, by the Daughter of Go∣bryas, who bore him three besides, put in for the Succession: But Xerxes, his Son by Atossa, the Daughter of Cyrus, had the better of him. Darius just ready to march against the Grecians, was prevented by Death, in the latter end of the 1st. year of the Egyptian Revolt, the 3d. year of the 73d. Olympiad, the 28th. year of his Reign, 495 years before the Christian date, A. M. 3519. 19. Xerxes, the 4th. King of the Persians, Succeeded to the Empire of his Ancestors. Herodotus tells us, his name signifies a Warriour, as Artaxerxes signifies a great Warriour. His Father having left all things in a readiness for War, the next year he recover'd Egypt, and having put it under a harder yoke, made Ar∣tamenes, his Brother, Governour of it. 20. Being encourag'd by this success, he re∣solv'd to attack the Grecians, pursuant to the advice of one Mardonius, a Cousin of his; and slighted the grave remonstrances of his Uncle Artabanus, who preach'd up moderation to him upon the account of the inconstancy of world∣ly affairs. He was farther encourag'd to car∣ry on that design by the solicitations of the A∣levadae or Thessalian Princes, who envied the Grecian Liberty, and the Pisistratidae, who had a spiteful eye upon Athens. 21. In order to carry on this War, such mighty preparations were made for 4 years together, that Asia seem'd to be mov'd out of its place. At length, in the 4th. year of the 73d▪ Olympiad, and the 5th. of his own Reign,
he set out from Suse, and took up his Winter Quarters at Sardes. Lest his Fleet, consisting of 12000 Ships, shou'd be cast away in sailing round the Mountain Atho, he converted it into an Island, by digging a ditch of such a breadth that two Galleys abreast might go a∣long it. In the beginning of the Spring he came to Abydos, where a day was turn'd into night by a sudden darkness, without any E∣clipse of the Sun. Having laid Bridges over the Hellespont, he transported his Army into Europe in seven days time, and march'd from thence to the Plains of Dariscus, where he re∣view'd his Naval and Land Forces. 22. The World never saw nor heard of so great a number of Soldiers in one Body. Up∣on the review a List was given in of 2317910 Souls, and yet he plac'd such confidence in mul∣titudes of Men, that he requir'd all the Nati∣ons from Dariscus to Greece, to rise up in Arms, by which means his Naval force was enlarg'd by the accession of 120 Ships, and 24000 Men, and his Land force was encreas'd by 300000: So that the total number of his Men, at this rate, amounted to 2641610, and it is thought that was follow'd by an equal number of Ser∣vants, and other Retainers to the Camp: So that there was in all 5283220 Persons that Travell'd over Land to the Straits of Thermo∣pylae, and came by Sea to Sepias. 23. As for their Women that bak'd their Bread, their Concubines, Eunuchs, their Beasts for Carriage, and their Indian Dogs, their number cannot be determin'd. So that it is no wonder if whole Rivers did not suffice this
stupendious multitude. It is rather to be wonder'd that a heavier Plague did not Reign among them, that Sedition and Mutinies did not prevail, and that Famine did not sweep 'em off. 24. The Grecians were well acquainted with all these motions, bating a few that sided with the Persians; whereupon they put up all their mutual Contests, and having enter'd into a Confederacy, sent Leonidas, the King of Lace∣demon, to defend the Thermopylae, who, with a handful of Men, put a stop to the passage of the Persians, till they got over the Hills, and attack'd his Rear. Xerxes had no sooner en∣ter'd Greece, but his Affairs began to have a worse Aspect than before; for he was defeated in a Sea fight at Artemisium, after the loss of 400 Ships. 25. His Army being divided, that part which was sent to Delphi, was almost all of it knock'd down with Thunder-bolts, and two Rocks that fell from Parnassus; the other part march'd towards Athens, under the Command of the King himself: Which being unpeopled and abandon'd, he took and set it on fire. But soon after, his Fleet, tho' recruited and enlar∣ged was routed by the Grecians, in a sharp En∣gagement at the Island Salamine, and quite lost. 26. Xerxes being cast down by this disaster, saw it necessary for him to flee, least the Ionians, who sided with the Grecians, shou'd break his Bridge over the Hellespont. And here we meet with a notable instance of Divine Vengeance; he, who a little while before was so fierce as
to order the Sea to be whip'd with Cords, and bound with Chains, when his Bridge was broke down by a Storm; this proud Creature was now reduc'd to that extremity, that in a timorous and trembling condition he cross'd the same Sea in a sorry little Boat. 27. Upon his departure he left 300000 Men under the Command of Mardonius, in order to carry on the War: The rest march'd along with him to the Hellespont, of whom such an infinite number was cut off by the Plague, Fa∣mine, and other Calamities, that a prodigi∣ous flock of Fowls follow'd the Camp, in quest of prey. And when they came into Asia, a great number dy'd thro' hard drinking, and a violent loosness. 28. Mardonius was the Man that advis'd this War, and in order to clear himself from the imputations that might ensue upon the success∣less Adventure, perswaded the King to re∣turn to Asia, which he knew the King would willingly do, and of his own accord undertook to compleat the remaining part of the design, with the Forces that were left: According∣ly, being mindful of his promise, when he cou'd not by any means perswade the Gre∣cians to submit, he march'd out of Thessaly, invaded Attica, routed the Athenians, and laid the Town and Country once more waste. But finding the Country Mountainous, and not proper for his Horse, he return'd to Beotia, where the Grecians drew together, in order to make head against him.
29. The Grecians led into the Field 110000, but Mardonius appear'd at the head of 300000, besides 50000. Grecian Auxiliaries. For some days there was no Action, bating some light Skirmishes, till the Grecians being obliged to change their ground, because Mardonius had cut off their Water; that he thereupon pur∣su'd them, as if they had been running away: By which means they came to a sharp Engage∣ment, and the Action was very hot on both sides. 30. Mardonius being kill'd, the Persians threw down both their Courage and their Arms, and run for't. Artabazus, with a Body of 40000 Men, made the best of his way to the Hellespont. The rest return'd to their Camp, which, at last, was Storm'd, and almost all of 'em put to the Sword. For, of all the 300000 which Xerxes left, bating those who went off with Artabazus, there was but 3000 sav'd; and Dio∣dorus Siculus tells us, that 10000 had their Throats cut within their own Trenches. The Grecians lost but few. 31. While Affairs were carried on so suc∣cessfully in Greece, Leutychides King of Lacede∣mon, and Admiral of the Grecian Fleet, was e∣qually successful, in defeating the Persian Fleet at the Promontory Mycale: By which Victory Ionia was once more snatch'd out of the Persian hands, and joyn'd to Greece. When the two Fleets began to engage, a report was bandy'd about, that Mardonius was defeated in Baeotia, which News did so animate the Soldiers, that they fought with an undaunted Courage, and gain'd the Victory.
32. Indeed it is unaccountable how the re∣port of that Victory could flye so soon into Asia; for, upon subsequent Computations, it was found that the Engagement happen'd in both places on the same day: insomuch that some alledge, the rumour was started on pur∣pose to animate the Soldiers, and, by good luck, was confirm'd by the Event. The fight happen'd in the 3d. or 4th. day of the month Boedromion, in the 2d. year after Xerxes inva∣ded Greece. 33. All the Grecians went home, excepting the Athenians, who Besieged Sestus, which in the latter end of the Autumn was abandon'd, and so came into their hands. There was no∣thing else acted this year: And thus an end was put to that 2 years War of the Persians, or Medes, as Thucydides calls it, in the 2d. year of the 75th. Olympiad, the 7th. year of Xerxes, A. M. 3526, 477 years before Christ. 34. Xerxes took his disaster so ill, that (as the story has it) he set all the Churches of Asia on fire, excepting that of Diana at Ephe∣sus. For the envy of that wicked incestuous Person, rose in proportion to the contempt he was brought under, by his dishonourable flight. The Grecians, in pursuit of their Victory, first under the Command of Pausanias, and then under that of Cimon, made themselves Masters of several Towns, and did so maul the Persi∣ans with their Land Forces, that their King was oblig'd to make Peace.
35. The King being ready to sink under such a load of misery, there seemed nothing to be wanting but the last misfortune to compleat his ruin: which accordingly came upon him. For Artabanus a Hyrcanian, Captain of his Guards, who in order to possess himself of the King∣dom, had enveigl'd Mithridates the Eunuch, Gentlman of the Bed-chamber to the King; this Captain of the Guards with seven of his Sons fell upon the King at night, as he was going to Bed and, strangl'd him, after he had reign'd 20 years and some months. SECT. III. From the Death of Xerxes to the Death of Artaxerxes Mnemon. The space of 103 Years. 1. XErxes being kill'd, it remain'd still to make away with Darius, Artaxerxes and Hystas∣pes, his three Sons, before Artabanus could bring his project to bear. In order to this end, im∣mediately after he had kill'd the King, he went to Artaxerxes, and told him that Darius his Brother had a design upon him, whereupon he sent a party to dispatch Darius out of the way. 2. But after seven months (which Eusebius makes the period of his reign) he was killed himself, together with his Complices, upon offering to attack Artaxerxes. By this means the Government came into the hands of Ar∣taxerxes,
who was called Longimanus, because his right arm was longer than the left. This happen'd in the 4th. year of the 78 Olym∣piad, or the beginning of the 79th, while Lysitheus was Archon, 463 years before Christ, A. M. 3540. 3. In the Reign of Artaxerxes, the Bactri∣ans rebell'd, but were quickly reduc'd. The Egyptians gave him more trouble, who sub∣jected themselves to Inarus, King of Libya, and routed Achaemenes, the Son of Darius, who was sent against 'em with a most nu∣merous Army; and block'd up the sorry re∣mains of his army so that they cou'd not get off. Megabyzus Son to that Zopyrus who took Babylon, and Artabazus, were sent to re∣lieve them: Accordingly they rais'd the Siege, defeated the Egyptians, recover'd the whole Country, bating some marshy places, and took Inarus Prisoner, and crucify'd him. 4. The Valour of the Athenians upon this occasion was very remarkable: When their Ships were lying in the road of Byblus, in order to assist the Egyptians; the Persians drain'd the Water out of the Channel of the River, by ditches; and by that means left the Fleet upon dry ground. But the A∣thenians exhorted and encourag'd one ano∣ther to be guilty of nothing beneath the Character of a Grecian; and set their Ships on fire: and with an undaunted Courage dis∣pos'd themselves for fighting: Whereupon, the Persians suffer'd them to get off, tho' they were but 6000 Men. Thus they return'd
home, after they had been engag'd in a suc∣cesless War 6 years. 5 Artaxerxes, in the 7th. year of his reign, publish'd an Edict, allowing the Jews to go and dwell at Jerusalem; and liberally furnish∣ed them with all necessaries, leaving the di∣stribution of 'em to the discretion of Ezra, the Priest. This Edict mentions nothing of building the Walls; yet it is not to be doubted, but the King design'd it, since the Inhabitants and Builders of the Temple, could not be safe otherwise. 6. If matters stand so, then the beginning of Daniel's 70 weeks must be dated from this Juncture. These weeks consisted of 490 years, terminating in the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. Indeed there are many various Opinions, concerning the beginning and the end of these years; but they go upon weak grounds. However, if we reckon from this 7th. year of Artaxerxes, down thro' the Reigns of the Persian and Macedonian Kings, the Hasmonaei, and of Herod the Great; or, thro' the series of the Olympiads, and the years of Rome's standing, down to the death of Christ; The whole will amount to 490 years, without any great odds. But of this more in our large History. 7. In the 20th. year of Artaxerxes, upon the News that the Walls of Jerusalem were thrown down, the Gates set on fire, and the People mightily oppress'd; Nehemiah, a Jew and Cupbearer to the King, was immediate∣ly dispatch'd, by virtue of the old Edict,
there being no necessity of a new one, to repair the Walls, and put the republick in order. 8. The years accruing from the New Moon in the Month Nisan, immediately after the reparation of the Walls, to the New Moon of the Month of Christ's Passion, amount to 475 of the Julian form, which make 490 Lu∣nar years. 'Twas upon this account that se∣veral Learned Men follow'd the opinion of Africanus, who reckon'd the course of Dani∣el's weeks, as running from this year to the death of Christ. But he reckon'd 475 years from this time to the Reign of Tiberius, whereas, there was only 472, and Christ did not dye, but was baptis'd in the 15th. year of Tiberius. 9. The Athenians recall'd Cimon from his Exile, and sent him with 200 Ships against Cyprus, which was then subject to the Persian. He detach'd 60 out of that number for E∣gypt to assist Amyrtaeus, and with the rest block'd up Citium. 10. Cimon dy'd before this Town: But his Army, upon their return home, met the Persian Navy, and defeated them so much, that the King call'd a Council; in which, a Peace was concluded upon, and mutual Hostilities prohibited. Peace being concluded with the Grecians, Megabyzus rais'd up a Civil War, which, after several Engagements, was at length brought to an end. Artaxerxes having reign'd 41 years, dy'd in the 2d. year of the 98th. Olympiad, 421 before the Birth of Christ, A. M. 3592.
11. Artaxerxes left only one lawful Son, namely, Artaxerxes, born of his Wife Da∣maspia, and 17 bastard Sons, among whom were Sogdianus, Ochus, and Arsites. Artaxerxes succeeded his Father, but was kill'd by Se∣cundianus, in the 45th. day of his Reign. Secundianus drew upon himself the hatred of the Army, and was so little esteem'd, that Arberius, General of the Horse, went over to Ochus; who, at last was oblig'd by Ar∣xanes, Vice-roy of Egypt, and Artoxares, Go∣vernor of Armenia, to put on the Turbant, or Cap peculiar to the Persian Kings and Priests. 12. Ochus being invested with the Govern∣ment, took to himself the name of Dariaeus. Having decoy'd Secundianus, he threw him into Ashes; a form of punishment attributed by Valerius Maximus, to Darius, the Son of Hystaspes, but by others to the Dariaeus we now speak of. In his Reign the Medes re∣volted, but were quickly reduc'd. He was marry'd to Parysatis, Daughter to Xerxes, and his own Aunt, by whom, in his private ca∣pacity, he had a Son, Arsaces, and a Daughter, Amistris; and after he was made King, Cyrus, so call'd from the Sun, with 13 others. In the 17th. year of his Reign he made▪ Cyrus Governour of the Sea-coasts, with Authority over the other Satrapae, and General of all the Forces that us'd to draw up in the Castalian Fields.
13. He likewise gave Cyrus orders to as∣sist the Lacedemonians against the Athenians. For, at this time, the Grecians were enga∣ged with one another in the Pelopponesian War, and intestine divisions; and he had been a considerable gainer by their Animo∣sities, thro' the ministry of Tissaphernes. But he had a strong mind to see the Athenians ruin'd, because he knew they were best ac∣quainted with Naval Affairs, and always favour'd the Ionians, in memory of their O∣riginal. 14. Cyrus had scarce Govern'd 2 years, when he was so transported with Prosperi∣ty, that he put to death Autobaesaces and Mi∣traeus, his own kinsmen, because in their approaches to him, they did not keep up their hands within their Garments, which was usual in making Addresses to the King. A heavy complaint being given in to the King, upon this matter, he was call'd to his Father, who soon after dy'd, after he had reigned 19 years, in the 4th. year of the 93d. Olympiad, the latter end of the 27th. and last year of the Pelopponnesian War, 43 before Christ, A. M. 3600. 15. While Darius lay a dying Parysatis his Wife solicited him to leave the Kingdom to Cyrus, in imitation of Xerxes, in considerati∣on that he was a King, and not a private Man, when he begot him: But the King rejected the proposal, as being highly unjust; so that Arsaces, who was call'd Artaxerxes, succeeded his Father, and with reference to his excellent memory was sirnam'd Mnemon.
Cyrus had the Government of the Cities left him; but that did not satisfie his Ambitious Temper: He had a mind to be a King, and, in order to compass that end, resolv'd im∣mediately to kill his Brother. 16. His Plot being discover'd, his Mothers tears and intercession sav'd him from con∣dign punishment; but being sent into Lydia, his own Province, he insisted on his former projects, and was the more eager upon sedi∣tious designs, that he was at so great a di∣stance from the King. With various pre∣tences and artifices, he procur'd Auxiliaries from all corners. 17. He march'd against the King at the head of 12800 Grecians, and 10000 Barbarians. After he had pitch'd 93 Camps, and march'd 535 Persian miles, 1630 furlongs, and above 2000000 paces; He found the King, attended by 900000 Men. 18. The Valour of his Grecian Troops, which the Persians were not able to cope with, had been a sufficient bulwark for him, had not his own temerity, and the laziness or timorousness of Clearchus, the Lacedemonian General, occasion'd his destruction: For, while the former rush'd in among his Enemies Troops, in order to find out his Brother, the other lingred in bringing up the Grecians. So that Cyrus dy'd in the battel at Cunaxa, about 500 furlongs from Babylon: A Man of a Princely mind, and one that merited a Crown, be∣yond all those who derived their original from Cyrus the Great.
19. The Grecians, who thought of nothing but Victory, having routed all those who op∣pos'd them, were extreamly mortified by the sad News of Cyrus's death. They invited Ariaeus the Persian, who commanded his Troops, to possess himself of the Kingdom, but he rejected the proposal; so that they were o∣bliged to think of returning into their own Country. Artaxerxes pursu'd them, but his Soldiers were struck with such a Conster∣nation, that he was oblig'd to retire, and suffer them to get off. Tissaphernes took up∣on him the task of managing the Grecians, and, having desir'd an interview with the Captains, perfidiously kill'd them: But o∣thers were chosen in their room, and Xe∣nophon, an Athenian, was made Commander of the Forces. 20. At last, notwithstanding that they were Foreigners in that Country, destitute of all Provisions, unacquainted with the Pas∣sages, and oblig'd to make their way over craggy Mountains, and almost impassable Pla∣ces; in a Country, where the unwholesome∣ness of the Air, the ruggedness of the Ground, and the watchful spite of the Enemies did at once attack them; yet, by Divine Provi∣dence, and the Ministry of Xenophon's singu∣lar Prudence, they got off clear. It is rec∣kon'd, that, in coming and going, they En∣camped in 212 places; they march'd 1150 Persian miles, 34255 furlongs, 4281000 paces. In the whole Expedition they spent 1 year and 3 months.
21. In the mean time Parysatis was infinite∣ly displeas'd with the death of Cyrus, whom she lov'd beyond all things; and display'd all manner of cruelty upon those whom she su∣spected as instruments of his ruin. She poi∣son'd Statira the Queen, with whom she had many occasions to be angry. But, after all, Artaxerxes behav'd himself very modestly towards his Mother; for, tho' he knew that she always lov'd his Brother better than him, and endeavour'd by all means to get him to succeed his Father; and that now she was the occasion of the death of a Wife which he lov'd very tenderly: yet he neither injur'd her by word nor deed; only, when she told she was going to Babylon, he reply'd, that he was very well satisfi'd with her design, but withal, that he would not see that Town while she liv'd. 22. Artaxerxes having thus put his Affairs in∣to a peaceable state, bended his mind upon the recovery of the Cities that had revolted. The charge of this interprise was committed to Tissaphernes, and not to Pharnabazus, whose name has crept into the History of Diodo∣rus Siculus, thro' the negligence of Writers, or some other mistake. The Ionians finding the design was upon them, solicited the La∣cedemonians to assist them. The Lacedemoni∣ans were so transported with their success against Athens, that they thought of no small matters; and being encourag'd by the re∣turn of the Grecians, who had follow'd Cy∣rus, embrac'd the opportunity of invading
Asia, and began to entertain some hopes of mastering it. 23. They sent an Embassy to Tissaphernes, which he slighted; whereupon they sent Thimbrones with an Army against him; but Thimbrones being misfortunate, was soon af∣ter degraded and banish'd. Dercyllidas suc∣ceeded him: who by reason of his extraordi∣nary sagacity was sirnam'd Sisyphus. He soon perceiv'd that he had two Generals to en∣counter; and therefore endeavour'd to gain one of them; by which means he rais'd such a jealousie between the two, that Pharnabazus (one of 'em) went home to the King, and accus'd Tissaphernes (whom Dercyllidas had re∣tain'd) of Treachery. Upon his solicitation, Conon, the Athenian, was made Admiral of the Fleet. After that, orders were given to invade Caria, Tissaphernes's Province, where∣upon an Interview was agreed to, and a Truce concluded upon, in order to a Peace. 24. However, the Truce did not retard the building of a new fleet in Phoenicia, which was given out as consisting of 300 Ships. Upon the News whereof, Agesilaus, King of Sparta, was sent into Asia: and he made use of Lysander for his Ambassador, a man that was admirably well vers'd in Military Af∣fairs, who, by his celebrated Victory of the Athenians, had put an end to the Peloponne∣sian War. 25. Agesilaus behav'd himself so well, that he was likewise made Admiral of the Navy. He did so over-reach Tissaphernes, and fought so successfully in his absence, that Tissaphernes
was again charg'd with Treachery, and pu∣nish'd with the loss of his Life. The Fleet being fitted out, Agesilaus flatter'd himself with the hopes of turning the Persian out of Asia. Tithraustes, Tissaphernes's Succes∣sor, having notice of the project, saw there was no other way of diverting the design, but that of giving the Lacedemonians so much trouble at home, that they were obliged to to recall their King, for the relief of his Country. 26. In pursuance of this thought, he sent Timocrates, the Rhodian, with 50 Talents of Gold into Greece, in order to bribe the heads of Factions, and tempt 'em to make War with the Lacedemonians. This project took so well, that in the space of 1 year, a great Conspiracy broke out against the Lacedemonians, which occasion'd so great a War, that they were oblig'd to recall their King. He was mightily troubled for being oblig'd to return, just when he was setting out for the upper Provinces, whom the glo∣ry of his name it self would have retain∣ed; and was hugging himself in the happy issue of all his labour and hopes. 37. However, his regard to his Country outweigh'd all other Considerations, and his stedfast opinion was, that a General was o∣blig'd to obey the Laws and the Magistrates. Upon his departure from Asia, he said in a merry humour, that 30000 Archers had beat him out of Asia, alluding to so many pieces of Money, bearing the Effigies of an Archer, with which they had purchas'd the War against the Lacedemonians.
28. Notwithstanding that Agesilaus was recall'd, the Lacedemonians, were so routed by Conon at Sea, and so much oppress'd at home, that they began to fear that the Athenians might recover their former Power; and thereupon made Peace with the King, by the Ministry of Antalcidas; whence it was call'd Pax Antalcidae. Arta∣xerxes by this means being free of the Gre∣cian War, and having put his Affairs in a pretty good order, pointed the dint of his Arms towards Cyprus, which Evagoras had almost master'd. 29. Evagoras was overcome at Sea; but the Persian Officers happening to Quarrel among themselves, a Peace was agreed upon about 2 years after, after the laying out of 50 Talents upon the War. And by this means Evagoras peacefully enjoy'd the bet∣ter part of his former possessions. After that Artaxerxes wag'd War with the Cadusians, but with small success. In the mean time Egypt had revolted for several years. When he set about the reducing of it, he carry'd on his designs pretty happily, till a private Quarrel between Pharnabazus and Iphicrates, ruin'd it. 30. In the mean time the Grecians were mutually engag'd in Civil Wars, which he endeavour'd to adjust, thinking to get as∣sistance from them against the Egyptians. But the Lacedemonians were so angry with him for including Messene in the Confedera∣cy, that they sent relief to Achoris, King of Egypt. Besides, the Grecian Towns in
Asia, made head against him, and occasion∣ed the revolt of several Satrapae. Indeed the Satrapae were soon after betray'd by O∣rontes, their head; but he was not able to recover Egypt, notwithstanding the divisions it lay under, which were occasion'd by va∣rious pretensions to the Crown. 31. Artaxerxes had 115 Sons, but 3 of them only by lawful Marriage, namely, Da∣rius, Ariaspes and Ochus. The rest were born of Concubines, of whom he kept 360; tho' ev'n that number did not satisfie him, for he added to it, by the incestuous pollution of his own Daughters. In his old Age he check'd Ochus for aspiring to the Kingdom, and took in Darius, the eldest, then 50 years old, as partner with him. But Da∣rius courted Aspasia, Cyrus's Mistress, whom the King had married; and being rejected, took that for an Affront, and enter'd into a Conspiracy with 50 of his Brethren against his Father. The Plot being discover'd, he and all his Complices were punished with death. 21. Upon the death of Darius, Ochus aspi∣red at the Crown more eagerly, but was much afraid of two of his Brethren, name∣ly, Ariaspes, the eldest lawful Son, and Ar∣samis, a bastard, whom the Father doated on for his Wit and Capacity. He continually gave it out, that Ariaspes was quickly to be put to death, by his Father's orders, and by this means provok'd him to poison him∣self; and at the same time took care to see Arsamis kill'd by Harpates, the Son of
Teribazus, who lost his Life in Darius his Plot. 33. Artaxerxes was acquainted with all these things, but being worn out with Age, could not pursue them. His grief and trou∣ble of mind was such, that he sunk under it, and dy'd in the 94th. year of his Age, the 43d. of his Reign, the 3d. of the 104th. Olympiad, 360 years before the birth of Christ, A. M. 3944. His Subjects reckon'd him the meekest of Men, especially upon the account, that the cruellest of Parricides was his Successor. SECT. IV. From the death of Artaxerxes Mnemon, to the death of Darius Codomannus. The space of 32 years. 1. OChus succeeding to his Father, in memory of him, was sirnam'd Artaxerxes. This is that Ahasuerus the Husband of Esther, men∣tioned in the Holy Scriptures: since the Cir∣cumstances there related, quadrate best with him. He is said to have concealed his Fa∣ther's death for 10 months, till all the Peo∣ple were satisfied, by the sending about the Royal Seal, that Artaxerxes had nominated Ochus for his Successor. Having purchas'd the Kingdom by Wickedness, he resolv'd to establish it by more of the same stamp: Ac∣cordingly he fill'd the Palace with Barba∣rous
Murders, without any regard to Dig∣nity, Blood, Affinity, Sex or Age. 2. Artabazus revolted from Ochus, and by the help of the Grecians, defeated several of his Armies, which obliged the King to make Peace with them. Egypt had thrown off the Persian yoke a long while ago; but Ochus be∣ing unfit for War, did easily sit with the loss. But, after all, in the 11th. year of his Reign, when the Phenicians and Cyprians likewise revolted, and enter'd into a Con∣federacy with the Egyptians, he took up new resolutions, and purpos'd to reduce the Rebels. 3. Having drawn together an Army of 300000 Foot, and 30000 Horse, and fitted out a Fleet of 300 Ships, he march'd into Phoenicia, where Sidon was surrender'd into his hands, by the Treachery of Tennes their King; and the Treacherous King lost his head: But the Inhabitants finding the Town lost, set it and themselves on fire, and it is said 40000 Men perish'd in the flames. Ochus being animated by this success, toge∣ther with that in Cyprus, which he had reco∣ver'd by the good services of Adrieus, Prince of Caria, invaded Egypt; and likewise re∣duc'd it, by the good services of Mentor, a Rhodian. Having beat Nectanebus, their King, and carry'd off great spoil, he return'd home, Crown'd with Glory and Renown; and on his return carry'd off a great number of the Jews, some of whom he plac'd in Babylon, and others in Hyrcania, at the Caspian Sea.
4. Mentor reconcil'd Artabazus and several others with the King, and reduc'd the whole Kingdom to a peaceable state. At this time Philip, King of Macedonia, flourish'd mightily, and besieg'd Perinthus, a Town in Thracia, situated upon the Propontis. Ochus being jea∣lous and afraid of the overgrown power of that King, and finding the Perinthians in a sad condition, order'd the Governours of the Maritim Provinces to give speedy and present relief to the besieged; by which means the hopes of, the Macedonian were frustrated. Alexander, the Son of Philip, did afterwards twitt the Persians with this, when they com∣plain'd of his incursion. 5. In the 9th. year of Ochus, Mausolus, Vice∣roy of Caria, dy'd without Issue; his Wife, Artemisia, built such a noble Tomb for him, that the Romans dignifi'd their Magnificent Buildings with the name of Mausolea. In the mean time Bagoas, an Eunuch, was so great a favourite of the King, that he dispos'd of every thing according to his pleasure. This Bagoas, who was an Egyptian, suborn'd Ochus's Physitian to poison him, in the 23d. year of his reign; either out of the fear of Ochus's cruelty, or in revenge of the death of Apis, the Egyptian King, whom Ochus had kill'd, or else in order to enlarge his own Authority and Power. He expos'd his Corps to be de∣vour'd by Cats, and bury'd another Carcass in the Royal Tomb; and, for an Emblem of the King's cruel temper, caus'd Sword hilts to be made of the Bones of his Legs.
6. He set Arses, the Son of Ochus, upon the Throne, and kill'd all the other Chil∣dren, to the end that the new King being destitute of Friends, might depend upon him for support; but, in effect, Bagoas was the Man that reign'd, and usurp'd every thing belonging to the Crown, bating the name. When he perceiv'd that Arses took more than ordinary notice of things, he apprehended the danger of being call'd to an account; and in order to avoid it, slew him and all his Children, before the end of the 3d. year of his Reign. 7. He heap'd up Wickedness upon Wick∣edness, and added Parricide to Parricide, till the Royal Family became so desolate, that scarce any one remain'd to possess the Crown. Things being at this pass, he pitch'd upon one Codomannus, a Friend of his, whom some gave out to have been only a Steward, and an Alien to the Royal Family; but others al∣lege, he was the Son of Arsames, and Grand-Child to Ochus, by Sisygambe, their Sister or Kinswoman. Curtius writes, that the Father of this Woman and 80 of his Sons were bar∣barously put to death by Ochus. 8. Codomannus is said to have behav'd him∣self bravely in the Cadusian War, and to have defeated his Enemy upon such an ex∣traordinary occasion, that the King reward∣ed him with several Complements, together with the Government of Armenia; and the people at last elected him to be their King, and he was Christen'd Darius, that being a Title of greater Majesty and Honour. Bagoas
quickly repented of what he had done, and resolved to add Darius to the number of the murder'd Princes: But the King perceiv∣ing the design, when he offer'd him the poi∣son, oblig'd him to drink it himself. 9. Darius misfortunately fell into such times and aukward Circumstances, that the wisest of Men wou'd have found great difficulty to get clear of; and if we compare the Temper of this Prince, with the Genius of the Adversary he was oblig'd to encounter, we'll find it a down∣right impossibility for him to escape. The Kingdom of Macedonia was at this time advan∣ced to the highest pitch of Grandeur, that the limits of Greece cou'd afford. Philip had all Greece at his beck, and under his Authority; and by the means of Schools for War and Sciences, had plac'd both Mars and Mercury in his Camp: Whereas, the Monarchy of the Persians was a'most worn out with Age, and stagger'd under its own weight; in it the juice and blood of Sciences and Virtue dwin∣dled, and vanished into the vapour of Luxury. 10. There were many Quarrels between the Persians and Grecians, besides the invete∣rate feuds that the ravishing of the Women in ancient times occasion'd. The Expedition of the Athenians against Sardes, started new grudges, which the Adventures of Xerxes in∣flam'd. Besides, the riches of Asia were a great Temptation to the Grecians. They thought it was a shame that such great Possessions shou'd continue in the hands of such a Peo∣ple. After Xenophon's return with a handful of Men, thro' so many Provinces, they always
prefer'd the Grecian Steel to the Asiatick Gold. In short, the Grecians were mad with an in∣satiable itch to pillage the riches of those Countries. 11. Cimon indeed was the last of the Gre∣cian Generals; but Philip, King of Macedonia, a Man equally entitled to Prudence and Mi∣litary Vertues, equall'd the Glory of the most renown'd Generals, and at this time kept Greece in bondage, under the pretence of li∣berty. When this great Prince divulg'd his purpose of making War with the Persian, the Grecians almost unanimously elected him to be their head, and Soldiers were levy'd in eve∣ry City. 12. The next Spring he sent Parmenio, A∣myntas and Attalus before him into Asia, un∣der the pretence of rescuing the Grecian Ci∣ties; himself, designing to follow, was mur∣der'd by one Pausanias, at his Daughter's Wed∣ding. Upon his death Darius thought him∣self secure, and slighted Alexander, the Son and Successor of Philip, who was then a youth of 20 years of Age. 13. But Alexander had an invincible great∣ness of mind, and did not fail to enlarge his Patrimony. He surmounted all difficulties in Greece, and cross'd the Hellespont, at the head of an Army of 31000 Foot, and 5100 Horse. Darius thought it not proper to overlook small things, and therefore sent an Army to oppose him; but flatter'd himself with the hopes of so great success, that in contempt of the Juvenile Ardour, he order'd that Boy
to be first whip'd with rods, before he was brought into his presence. 14. Memnon the Rhodian, a Man admirably well vers'd in Military Affairs, was made Ge∣neral to the Persian Army. He was of opi∣nion that they should by no means engage with Alexander, but stop his further progress by laying the Country waste all about him, and transfer the War (if possible) into their Enemies Kingdom, by invading Mace∣donia; by which means he wou'd be recall'd to defend his own Country. But the Persi∣ans slighted this seasonable advice, as being too mean and unworthy of their Honour and Valour, and thought it much more credita∣ble to come to an Engagement: According∣ly, they attack'd Alexander, after he cross'd the River Granicus, and were routed, with the loss of 12000 Men. 15. The fame of this Glorious Victory, procur'd him the easie Conquest of Asia. At Gordium, a Town in Phrygia, finding that he cou'd not untye Midas's knot, he cut it with his Sword, and by that means either fulfilled or eluded the Oracle. Darius employ'd Mem∣non, his General, to draw together a new Army, and fit out a Fleet of 300 Ships. But Memnon in the mean time dy'd, and the in∣terest of Darius fell with him. The King finding none fit for the office, headed his Ar∣my himself. He march'd out of Babylon towards Cilicia at the head of an Army of 400000 Foot, and above 100000 Horse, together with his Mother, his Wife, his Son, then
6 years of Age, and two Marriageable Daughters. 16. Darius pursu'd Alexander to the Straits of Cilicia, fancying that he declin'd Battle as the flatterers had suggested to him: He came up with Alexander near to Issus, where he en∣gag'd with all his Force, and was routed, and oblig'd to flee, riding upon a Mare that had lately foal'd. There were 10000 Persians kil∣led, and 40000 taken Prisoners; whereas, the Macedonians scarce lost 300. Men. The Mother, Wife and Children of Darius were taken. This Battel happen'd in the month Maemacterion, while Lycostratus, or Nicocrates, was Archon, in the 4th. year of the 3d. O∣lympiad, the 4th. of Darius, the 4th. of Ale∣xander, A. M. 2672. 17. Darius being routed at Issus, many of his Governours went over to Alexander. Da∣rius wrote a Letter to the King of Macedo∣nia, about the ransoming of his Prisoners, and did not speak like one overcome, tho' this was the second time, but as if he had the better on't; neither did he deign to give his Adversary the Title of King. But his Adversary answer'd him bravely, and like a King. Alexander quickly reduc'd Syria, and all Phoenicia, excepting Tyrus, which he af∣terwards master'd, by an unheard of method. 18. For the Town being situated in an I∣sland, he joyn'd it to the Continent by▪ Bul∣warks, and heaps of Earth. The Inhabitants defended themselves stoutly, and lost 7000 Men: The rest were taken Prisoners, of whom 20000 were put to death, and the Women
and Children were sentenc'd to slavery; but there was 15000 of them entertain'd by the Sydonians, from whom a Nation did after∣wards spring. Tyrus was taken in the month Hecatombaeon, while Annicetus, (alias, Nicera∣tus and Nicetas) was Archon; in the 1st. year of the 112th. Olympiad, the 5th. of Darius, and the 5th. of Alexander, A. M. 3673. 19. After the taking of Tyrus, Darius sent Proposals of Peace to Alexander, which Ale∣xander did not much mind, but invaded Ju∣daea; the Inhabitants whereof had sworn Al∣legiance to Darius, and refus'd to surrender to him. At that time the Governour of the Jews was one Jaddus, whose Brother Manas∣ses had marry'd the Daughter of Sanballat, Governour of Samaria, under Darius. This being done contrary to the Laws of the Country, and he refusing to part with his Wife, his Father-in-Law Sanballat built a Temple in Gerizin, a Mountain in Samaria, in which he was to perform the Office of a High-priest. 20. Alexander was mightily incens'd at the answer sent him by the Jews, and threat∣ned destruction to the whole Nation; where∣upon Jaddus, in his Pontificial habit, went out to meet him: As soon as the King saw the Priest, he alighted from his Horse, and wor∣ship'd him. And when Permenio ask'd him the reason of so doing; he answer'd, that he worshipd the God of that Priest, who appear'd to him in such a habit in Greece, when he was considering seriously of the
War, and encourag'd him to go on in the design'd Expedition. The Prophecy of Da∣niel, which plainly pointed to him, was laid open before him; whereupon he offer'd Sa∣crifie to their God, and freely allow'd the Nation several immunities, and gave liberty to all the Jews, that had a mind to be Sol∣diers, to worship God in their own way. Having taken Gaza, where he was wound∣ed in the shoulder; he master'd all Palestine, and from thence march'd into Egypt, which came into his hands without stroke of Sword. He built a new City between the Lake Ma∣raeotis and the Egyptian Sea, in the same place where the Village Rhacotis stood, and christen'd it Alexandria. In this work he employ'd Dinocrates, or Stasicrates. This Town, which afterwards became very fa∣mous, was founded in the 5th. year of Ale∣xander, the 1st. year of the 112th. Olym∣piad, the 417th. of Nabonasar: From whence Ptolomaeus, the celebrated Mathematician of this City, dates the beginning of the Aera of Alexander, in the month Thoth of the 5th. year of Darius's reign, 329 years before Christ. A. M. 3673. 22. Alexander went from Egypt to the Hammonian Oracle, where the Goddess, ei∣ther thro' Ignorance or the Corruption of the Greek Language, saluted him as the Son of Jupiter. From thence he took occasion to aspire beyond human things, and require the adoration of a God, and to that pur∣pose was call'd by the Arabs, Dulcarnajin.
23. In the mean time Darius was prepa∣ring for another Battel, and drew together an Army that doubled the number of that which fought at Issus. Alexander with all possible speed cross'd the Euphrates, and Ti∣gris; and his Expedition in crossing the lat∣ter, put his Soldiers in such a condition, that Darius might easily have routed them. But the Persian Empire was now on its last Legs, and the fatal Exit was unavoi∣dable. 24. Statira, Darius's Wife, was so fatigu'd with the Journey, that she miscarry'd by the way, and dy'd. Her death made Ale∣xander cry bitterly. This his humanity made such an impression upon Darius, that he of∣fer'd him his Daughter Statira, with 30000 Talents, and all Asia, lying between the Hel∣lespont and Euphrates. 25. But Alexander rejected these terms, as being not favourable enough; so that they came to another Engagement upon the River Bumelus, near the Village Gaugamela; where Darius was routed, and put to flight, as easily as before, and lost an infinite num∣ber of Men; which Authors do not certain∣ly agree upon. This Battel was fought the 5th. day of the month Boedromion, in the 6th. year of Alexander, the 6th. of Da∣rius, the 2d. of the 112th. Olympiad, and while Aristophanes was Archon, A. M. 3674.
26. Alexander finding that he cou'd not come up with Darius, when he fled, went to Arbela, and was there proclaim'd King of Asia. Then he set out for Babylon, and enter'd that City in great splendour. From thence he went to Susa, where a large Trea∣sure was given him: And from thence to Persepolis, which he allow'd the Soldiers to plunder and lay waste; and when he was drunk, yielded to the Solicitations of Thais, the Whore, in ordering the Palace to be set on fire, in the execution whereof she had the first hand. 27. Then he went to Pasargadae, a Town (the name whereof signifies, the Army of the Persians) built by Cyrus, in memory of the Victory obtain'd over his Grandfather Astyages. Here he open'd Cyrus's Tomb, where he found a Golden Bed, a Golden Table and Cups, and a great quantity of Garments adorn'd with Pearls. Then he render'd himself master of all Persia, what by force, and what by other methods, a∣bout the rising of the Pleiades, from whence the Ancients us'd to date the beginning of Summer. 28. Darius, in order to have the oppor∣tunity of renewing the War, at a conside∣rable distance, fled towards Bactria. Bessus, the Governour of that Country, and Na∣barzanes, the General of the Horse, bound him with Fetters, and when they heard of Alexander's approach, wounded him mortal∣ly. They likewise wounded the Beasts that drew his Coach, and left them to wander
without e'er a Coachman. By chance they came to a place where Polystratus, the Ma∣cedonian, being a'most choak'd with thirst, was come to drink Water in his Helmet. 24. He found Darius just expiring in his Coach, who desir'd of him a draught of Water. Polystratus gave him such as he could find, which was muddy, and polluted with dead Corpses; and Darius said he ne∣ver drunk with more pleasure in his Life, because he was scarce ever thirsty when he drank. He return'd thanks to Alexander for his singular humanity, and wish'd him the Empire of the World. He affirm'd that it was his interest, and that of all other Prin∣ces, not to suffer his death to go unpunish∣ed. Then he gave Polystratus his hand, with a return of thanks, and expir'd. 30. Authors give strange accounts of the Splendor, Luxury and Pleasures of Darius, which are rather to be imputed to the cor∣ruption of the times, than to him: He kept in his Camp all sorts of Cooks, Confecti∣oners, and dressers of Meat, and Perfumers, that nothing might be wanting towards his bodily pleasures. As for other things, se∣veral Authors have given full accounts of the noble Splendor of the Table and En∣tertainments of the Persian Kings. 31. They us'd to have several Wives, and allot them several Cities, appointing one to furnish Ornaments for the Head, another for other parts, and so on. However, Da∣rius's Death concluded the Persian Empire, in the 203d. year after its beginning, the
7th. year of the Reign of Darius, the 50th. of his Age, the 3d. year of the 112th. O∣lympiad, the 328th. before Christ, in the month Hecatombaeon, under the Archonship of Aristophon, A. M. 3675. Affairs Contemporary with the Persian Empire. CHAP. II. The affairs of the Grecians, transacted in the time of the Persian Monarchy. SECT. I. Of the Affairs of Greece, from the begin∣ning of the Persian Monarchy, to the death of Xerxes. 1. IN the reign of Cyrus the Great, Poly∣crates, Tyrant of Samos, flourish'd; and from a mean Original, advanc'd himself to so happy a State, that none of the Gre∣cian Tyrants cou'd match. 2. Suidas derives the name of Tyrannus from Tyrrheni an Italian People, famous for their Cru∣elty and Robberies: Others, from Tyrus, a City, that flourish'd in Riches and Glory. At first
the name imply'd no harm; for all the An∣cient Poets, bating Homer, give it to good and worthy Kings. Afterwards the Violence and Cruelty of some, who invaded the Ad∣ministration of Affairs, and Usurp'd the Go∣vernment of Cities, without any right, gave occasion to the word's being apply'd to an unfavourable meaning: And from the time that it fell under that acceptation, we sel∣dom meet with it as apply'd otherwise. 3. However, Polycrates having reduc'd the Citizens to a worse state than that of slave∣ry, was so very successful, that whatever he did, he came off with the Victory. He in∣vaded all his Neighbours, without any dif∣ference, protesting that he would oblige his Friend more in restoring what he took from him, than in taking nothing at all. But A∣masis, the Egyptian, with whom he had en∣ter'd into a League, affirm'd, that his unac∣countable happiness would terminate in some terrible disaster; and with that view per∣swaded him to give his fortune another turn, by throwing away what was dearest to him. 4. He went aboard of a Ship, and threw out a Ring, with a Seal upon it of Emerauld. It happen'd so that the Ring was afterwards found in the belly of a Fish, which for its stately bulk, was given to the King, as a Present. Upon the News of that Accident, Amasis renounc'd all Friendship with him, as foreseeing that he would come to a miserable end. And indeed he prov'd no false Pro∣phet.
5. For Oraetes, the Persian, Governour of Sardes, under Cambyses, being well acquain∣ted with the Man's Temper, offer'd him a large sum of Money, in order to subdue Greece; and by that means tempted him to come to Asia: And when he had him there, kill'd him; either out of a prospect of Glo∣ry by the Death of the Tyrant, or else with a design to join Samos to the Persian Empire. After Polycrates, Maeandrius was Go∣vernour to the Samians; but he being dispatch'd by the orders of Darius, the Persian, Sylo∣son, Son to Polycrates, was made Tyrant; after him, his Son Aeaces succeeded, by the assistance of the Persians, but was outted in the 18th. year of Darius, the Son of Hystas∣pes, when Aristagoras, the Milesian, broke the Tyrannical Governments of the Ci∣ties, in order to promote the Rebellion of the Ionians. 6. In the 3d. year of the 66th. Olym∣piad, and the 8th. year of Darius, there hap∣pen'd great Commotions at Athens, which forwarded the overthrow of Tyranny. The Pisistradae were then Governours of Athens, and had hithreto kept themselves within the bounds of moderation; but now it happen'd that Hipparchus, the second of that line, fell in Love with one Harmodius, and solicited him to Sodomy; and was thereupon kill'd by him and his Friend Aristogiton. His eldest Son Hippias, was so much incens'd by the Action, that tho' the Actors were kill'd up∣on the spot, yet he treated the People with more severity. This gave occasion to di∣visions,
which, by the help of the Alcmaeonidae, procur'd the liberty of the Athenians. 7. The Alcmaeonidae were the Off-spring of Alcmaeon, the great Grandson of Nestor, who, being turn'd out of Messenia, by the Hera∣clidae, came to Athens, and were banish'd from thence by the Pisistratidae. They had brib'd the Priestess of Apollo; so that when the Lacedemoni∣ans consulted the Delphick Oracle, she always an∣swer'd that Athens wou'd be retriev'd out of the hands of Tyrants. Upon which motion, the Lacedemonians sent an Army twice to beat them out. At last the Sons of the Pisistratidae being taken Prisoners upon the flight, their Fathers ransom'd them with the promise of banishing themselves from Athens: Accord∣ingly, they went to Sigaeum, and from thence to Lampsacus. 8. The Pisistratidae being thus turn'd out; the Athenians split into two Factions, which were headed by Clysthenes and Isagoras. The former, in order to get the better of his Rival, made it his whole business to ingra∣tiate himself with the People. He conver∣ted the 4 Tribes into 10; he expell'd Isa∣goras with his Party, and restor'd the Laws of Solon; and to prevent the Tyranical pre∣tensions of those who were great in power, introduc'd a Law, injoining a 10 years Exile to all those whom power or glory had rai∣sed beyond the common level. This Law was call'd Ostracismus, because the people in their meetings, wrote upon an Oyster shell, the names of the Persons they had a mind to banish.
9. The Lacedemonians sided with Isagoras, and their Garrison was turn'd out together with him. Their King, Cleomenes, taking that for an Affront, march'd once more a∣gainst the Athenians, but return'd without doing any thing. Soon after, Darius having reduc'd the rebel Ionians, sent Ambassadors to Greece, to demand Subjection. The In∣habitants of Aegina and the other Islands com∣ply'd with his demands. Cleomenes. the La∣cedemonian, came to Aegina, to take up the heads of the revolt, but Demaratus, his Col∣league, with whom he was at variance, pre∣vented his design: Whereupon, he was so incens'd, that he return'd to Lacedemon, and got Demaratus degraded, and Leutychides put in his place. 10. Both of 'em were punish'd for the injury they did to Demaratus; for Leutychides was found guilty of Treachery, and dy'd in his Exile: And Cleomenes turn'd Lunatick, and rip'd up his flesh, beginning at his feet, and when he came to the guts kill'd himself. The Athenians renewed the War with the people of Aegina: Upon the ac∣count, that while the Athenians detain'd their Hostages, they intercepted a Galley that us'd to sail every year from Athens to Delphi. But upon Xerxes's invasion of Greece they clap'd up a Peace. 11. In the time of this War, the Battel between the Athenians and Darius's Forces, was fought at Marathon; in which Miltiades, the Grecian General, came off with the Vi∣ctory. This Miltiades was the Son of Ci∣mon,
and late Tyrant of Chersonesus. He un∣dertook a fruitless Expedition against the Parii, upon which he was fin'd in a large sum of Money, and not being able to pay it, dy'd in Prison: Nay, his Corps were kept up till Cimon his Son deliver'd himself up as a pledge, who did not get out till the Money was paid. 12. Soon after Xerxes invaded Greece. The Athenians were the chief Authors of this War, and accordingly sustain'd the greatest burden in it. Their Victory is a'most whol∣ly owing to the sagacity and industry of Themistocles; for 'twas he that perswaded the Citizens to build a Fleet, that diverted the Peloponnesians from returning home, and put Xerxes to flight. 13. Aristides, who, by reason of the ex∣actness of his life, was sirnam'd the Just, join'd with Themistocles. Formerly indeed Themistocles had put him out of the City, by virtue of the Ostracismus, but recall'd him when he saw his Country reduc'd to that extremity of danger. After Xerxes's flight, the Grecians routed and kill'd Mardonius, his General, in the Battel of Plataea. While these things were carry'd on against the publick Enemy, there were but few Domestick Oc∣currences, that did not relate to them. 14. As for their Learned Men: Some of the seven Wise Men flourish'd in the Reign of Cyrus. Now these seven were Pittacus of Mi∣tylene, Bias of Priene, Chilon of Lacedemon, Cleobulus of Lindus, Thales of Miletus, Solon of Athens, and Periander, a Tyrant of Corinth.
15. About the same time flourish'd Xeno∣phanes of Colophon; Phocylides; Anacreon, a Po∣et; Anaximander, a Physician of Miletus; A∣naximenes his Disciple; Theagenes of Rhegium, a most ancient Chronologer; Democedes of Croton, a Physitian, who was taken prisoner by Darius, and administred Physick to him and his Wife Atossa, with very good success. 16. To these we may add Cadmus of Mi∣letus, a Historian; Hecataeus, who led the way to Herodotus, the Historian; Phrynichus of Athens, a Tragedian; Heraclitus of Ephe∣sus, call'd Scotinus; Xeno of Velia in Italy, and Pythagoras of Samos. 17. Next to the Divine Poets, of whom Orpheus was the head, the seven first men∣tioned were particularly call'd Sophi, or Wise∣men. But Pythagoras wou'd not arrogate so much to himself, and therefore chose rather to be call'd Philosophus, or a lover of Wis∣dom. He was born at Sidon in Phaenicia, about the 53d. Olympiad, and dy'd at Me∣tapontum in Italy, in the 4th. year of the 70th. Olympiad.
SECT. II. Of the Grecian Affairs, from the Bat∣tels of Plataea and Mycale, to the Pe∣loponnesian War. The space of 48 years. 1. THE Persians being expell'd Europe, both by Sea and Land, and those few who fled to the Promontory Mycale, be∣ing quite cut off, Leutychides the Lacedemo∣nian, Admiral of the Grecian Fleet, return∣ed home with the Confederate Peloponnesians. The Athenians, together with the Ionians and those of the Hellespont, besieg'd Sestus, and after they had taken it return'd likewise home. 2. The Athenians, after the defeat of Mar∣donius, brought back their Wives and Chil∣dren to the City, and by the help of Ari∣stides set up a Democratical Government. By the advice of Themistocles they set about the repairing of their Walls, which the Lacede∣monians warmly oppos'd, but were eluded by the cunning and industry of that Man. Soon after, Pausanias the Lacedemonian, who gain'd the Victory at Plataea, made himself master of several Persian Cities; but ha∣ving an eye upon the Kingdom of Greece,
did privately enter into a League with Xer∣xes, who gave him his Daughter, as a reward of his Treachery. 3. Being charg'd with the Treachery, and with engaging the Helotae in the same Sediti∣ous Design, he took shelter in the Tem∣ple of Minerva, and the gate being shut up was starv'd to death. At the same time The∣mistocles, whom the Lacedemonians thro' en∣vy had banish'd, dy'd at the Court of Ar∣taxerxes Longimanus, who had allow'd him some Cities for maintaining him in his Exile: Five years after his Banishment, Aristides dy'd, whose abstinence was such, that after his death there was not Estate enough left to maintain his Daughters, but the publick was oblig'd to take the charge of 'em. 4. The meek temper of Aristides, toge∣ther with the haughty humour of Pausanias, occasion'd the transferring of the Admini∣stration of the Grecian Affairs both by Sea and Land, from the Lacedemonians to the Athenians: For the Allies of Sparta were so disoblig'd by the Pride of Pausanias, that they all run over to Aristides, who, under the pretence of making reprisals upon Xer∣xes, impos'd Taxes on every City. Some were order'd to fit out such a number of Ships, and others to advance certain sums of Money. The Island Delos was the Place appointed for the Treasury, the gathering and disposal of which was solely left to the Athenians.
5. Aristides laid on a Tax of 460 Talents, Pericles rais'd it to 600, but after his death it was screu'd up to 1300. The Athenians converted to their own uses what was on∣ly design'd for the publick good, and laid out that Money in opposing the Cities, which was gather'd for the common benefit of them all. 6. The Athenians being transported with their new Power, possess'd themselves of Thassus, as taking it ill that the People of that Island should be masters of Silver and Gold Mines. The Thassians desir'd assistance of the Lacedemonians, but they were busie at home, being engag'd with the Helotae, who rebell'd and possess'd themselves of I∣thomes, after a great Earthquake. So that the People of Thassus were left to the dis∣cretion of their Enemy. 7. The Lacedemonians having lost 3000 Men, and several Houses, by the Earth-quake, sought help from the Athenians. The Athe∣nians sent them Auxiliary Forces: But the Lacedemonians, upon some sinister Constru∣ction, sent them immediately home again. This the Athenians look'd upon as a great Affront, and thereupon enter d into a League with the Argivans, their Enemies. After 10 years they expell'd their Servants out of I∣thomes, and possess'd themselves of Megara, which had sided with the Lacedemonians against the Corinthians. This was the Original of the Jealousies between the Athenians and Spar∣tans, as also between the former and the Co∣rinthians.
8. At the same time Mycene was taken and destroy'd by the Argivans, because the Citizens wou'd not sit with the Argivan yoke. The War between the Athenians and Corinthians upon the account of Megara broke out again, but the Athenians came off with the Victory. The Athenians likewise assisted the Phocians against the Dorians and Lace∣demonians, but were not so successful, and be∣sides sustain'd several losses in Egypt and elsewhere, so that they were obliged to make Peace with the Peloponnesians, and to part with Boeotia, at the same time that the I∣sland Euboea revolted from 'em. 9. However, Pericles, the Son of Xanthip∣pus, recover'd Euboea to them, and did so bribe the Peloponnesian Officers, that they re∣turn'd home and left Attica, when they had just invaded it. This success dispos'd both parties to a Peace of 30 years. Soon after Pericles subdu'd the Island Samos, and the Byzantians were so apprehensive of the like fate, that they surrender'd their City to the Athenians. 10. In the 2d. year of the 85th. Olym∣piad, and the 25th. of Artaxerxes Longima∣nus, these Commotions happen'd, which not only occasion'd the Corinthian War, but laid the foundation of the Pelopennesian. The People of Corcyra, were a Colony of the Corinthians, and those of Epidamnus were a∣nother of the Corcyreans. The Epidamnians were oppress'd with Seditions at home, and finding their own banish'd Persons too hard for them, had recourse to the Corcyreans as
their Patrons: But they either favour'd the seditious Persons, or were so taken up with other things that they cou'd not mind their concerns. The Corinthians, who always com∣plain'd of the Haughtiness and Pride of their Colonies, embrac'd this opportunity of Cha∣stising them. At the same time the Corcy∣reans alledg'd, that the business of Epidam∣nus belong'd wholly to them, and that the Corinthians did amiss in offering to meddle with it. 11. The Town being defended by a Co∣rinthian Garrison, was taken by the Corcy∣reans, who, finding themselves not able to cope with the Corinthians, enter'd into an Alliance with the Athenians. The Atheni∣ans indeed thought to find their account by possessing themselves of the Island Corcyra, from whence they might be able to annoy the Peloponnesians, with whom they saw a War ready to break out. 12. With their assistance, the Corcyreans defeated the Corinthians, in a Sea Engage∣ment. The Athenians, for fear the Corin∣thians should prejudice them in Thracia by inveigling their Cities, endeavour'd to per∣swade the Potidaeatae, a Colony of the Corin∣thians planted in the Isthmus Palenae, to reject the Magistrate that was sent them every year from Corinth, and to take in an Athe∣nian Garrison; but the Potidaeatae refusing to comply with the motion, were block'd up by Sea and Land.
13. This incens'd the Corinthians; and mov'd them to desire the assistance of their Neighbours, who sent Ambassadors to Lacedemon to arraign the Atheni∣ans. There a War was agreed and con∣cluded upon, and an Embassy was sent to demand such things of the Athenians, as they knew wou'd never be granted. Sthe∣nelaidas the Ephorus perswaded the Lacede∣monians to engage in this War; and Pericles on the other hand stirr'd up the Athenians, to the end that the publick business might divert the People from inspecting the Ac∣counts of the Money giv'n for publick uses, which he had laid out upon his private con∣cerns. Hitherto they had carry'd on their debates without the formalities of Heraulds, but so soon as their contests were carri'd on so far as to infringe their mutual Leagues, they gave rise to a heavy War. 14. At this time flourish'd Aeschylus, the Tragedian; Iccus, the Physitian of Tarentum; Anaxagoras of Clazomene, whom Pericles his Disciple seconded; Panyasis, the Poet; Peri∣cles the incomparable Athenian General and Orator, whose Harangues, says Aristophanes, were able to Lighten and Thunder, and set all Greece by the ears: For in former times Eloquence and Valour lodg'd in the same Persons. Charondas, Law-giver to the Thurii, and Zaleucus, Law-giver to the Lo∣cri, both of 'em Pythagoras's Disciples.
15. Melissus, Protagoras, Empedocles, Hero∣dotus Halicarnasseus, whom Cicero intitles the Father of History; Euripides the Tragedian, and Sophocles, the Athenian General; Phryni∣chus, the Comedian; and Pindarus of Thebes, the Prince of Lyrick Poets. In the year pre∣ceding the Peloponnesian War, when Apsendes was Archon, Meton the Athenian commenc'd his cycle of the Moon, or the Golden num∣ber, containing 19 years. SECT. II. From the beginning to the end of the Pelo∣ponnesian War. The Space of 27 Years. 1. THE Peloponnesian War broke out in the 15th year after the Athenians reco∣vered Euboea, and struck a Truce for 30 years; 6 months after the Battel between the Atheni∣ans and Corinthians fought at Potidaea; in the 48 year of the Priesthood of Chryses the Argivan, when Aenesias was Ephorus, and Pythodorus Archon, in the first year of the 87 Olympiad, the 33 year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, A. M. 3573. Things were now come to that pass, that no Commerce was allowed without a Herauld, and every thing was carried on by force.
2. In the second month of the Government of Pythodorus, in the beginning of the Spring, the Thebans apprehending the approach of the War, attempted to possess themselves of Pla∣taea, as being a place very convenient for their designs: But the Citizens rose up and cut off their Souldiers, a smaller number of whom had enter'd the City than they imagin'd. This the Athenians cried out upon, as being an injury done to them who were engag'd in an Alliance with the Plateans; and in resent∣ment took the Boeotians Prisoners whereever they met them. Thus the League was mutu∣ally broke and both sides took up Arms. But most of the Grecians sided with the Lacedemo∣nians, who were then look'd upon as the Pro∣tectors of Greece. 3. All the Peloponnesians, bateing the Argi∣vans and Athenians, sided with them: And even among these the Palenians joined with them at first, and their example was after∣wards follow'd by the rest. Out of the Pelo∣ponnesus they were joyn'd by the Megarans, Phocians, Locrians, Beotians, Ambracians, Leu∣cadians, and Anactorians. The Athenians were joined by the people of Chios, Lesbos, Plataea, Messene, Neupactum, Acarnania, Corcyra, Za∣cinthus, and the other Towns: The Carians towards the Sea side, with the Dorians their neighbours, the Ionians that liv'd towards the Helespont, several Thracian Cities, and many other Towns, besides the Islands lying to the eastward between Creet and the Peloponne∣sus, together with all the Cyclades, excepting Melus and Thera.
4. The Confederates being gather'd into one Body at the Isthmus, invaded Attica, under the Command of Archidamus K. of Lacedemon. The Athenians, in order to divert them, sent Forces to plunder the Peloponnesus; and turn∣ed out the Inhabitants of Aegina, and put a Colony of their own into it. In the second Summer, when Archidamus return'd to Attica, the Country was mightily dispeopl'd by a horrible Plague, which swept off an infinite number, and among the rest Pericles. How∣ever, Potidaea was surrender'd to the Athenians in the midst of all their distress. The Pelopon∣nesians continu'd to renew their Incursions in∣to Attica every year, for six years together; in which space Mitylaene was surrendered to the Athenians, and Plataea to the Lacede∣monians. 5. In the sixth year, while Agis the Son of Archidamus was yet in Attica, Demosthenes the Athenian sail'd towards Sicily, and posses∣sed himself of Pylus a Promontory of Laconia, which he fortified strongly. The Lacedemonians were so much disturbed at this adventure, that they recall'd their Army from Attica, and bended all their Forces, both by Sea and Land, upon the taking of Pylus. In the first place, to carry on the attack more convenient∣ly, they possess'd themselves of Sphacteria an Island opposite to the Promontory. But the Athenian Navy came up with them, and being much the stronger, and more numerous, shat∣tered the Lacedemonian Fleet in the Harbour, and block'd up the Besiegers in the Isle of Sphacteria.
6. The Lacedemonians, upon this disaster, sent Ambassadors to Athens, to treat of Peace. But one Cleon, a cunning and turbulent fellow, rendered their Embassy ineffectual, so that the besieged were oblig'd to surrender; and the Athenians resolv'd to put 'em all to the Sword, so soon as the Lacedemonians invaded Attica. By this means, the Athenians became so great, that they rejected the most honourable terms of Peace. 7. But soon after, in assisting a party of Boeotians that indeavour'd to introduce a po∣pular Government, they were defeated at Delos; and were again routed at Amphipolis a City in Thrace, where Brasidas the Lacede∣monian maul'd 'em sadly. Then they began to repent of their stiffness, and were not a∣gainst proposals of Peace. But on the other hand, the Lacedemonians, who made account to make good their designs by invading At∣tica, saw thro the vanity of their hopes, and always call'd to mind the defeat they met with in the Isle; they were gall'd by the ex∣cursions of the Athenians from Pylus, and the Island Cithera, which the Athenians were Ma∣sters of, and which lay just by Laconia; they were possess'd with fears, that Argos, a most potent City, that always hated the Lacedemo∣nians, would now joyn with their Enemies, the year of their Truce being then expir'd: But after all they could not tamely sit with the Captivity of their Men that were taken in the Isle.
8. However, a Peace was struck for five years; chiefly upon these terms, that all Places and Prisoners taken on either side should be given up, excepting a few Cities. But several Cities complained of the injustice of this Peace, and instead of continuing their hatred against the Athenians, their known Enemies, transfered it upon the Lacedemoni∣ans, as being guilty of flaming Injustice. Above all, the Corinthians cried out that they were much injured; and joyned with the other Peloponnesians, and the Argives; upon the con∣sideration that the Lacedemonians had so lately struck up a Peace with the Athenians; and that 'twas to fear'd the Athenians might be brought to side with the Peloponnesians; which if they did, Corinth had unavoidably been undone. 9. The Lacedemonians deprecated the re∣sentment of the Cities; but in avoiding one inconvenience, they fell in with another. They indeavoured to comply with all the de∣mands of the Athenians; but did nothing to the purpose, for the places that were to be re∣stored were not in their own hands, but those of their allies. The Athenians charg'd 'em with many failures upon this score, and ab∣solutely refus'd to give up Pylus. But the Lacedemonians were eager to have it; and in order to the obtaining of it got Panactum from the Boeotians to be deliver'd to the the∣nians, but upon these terms, that the Town should be dismantled, and that the Lacedemo∣nians should enter into an Alliance with the Boeotians. So that the Athenians whom they in∣deavour'd
so much to oblige, had two reasons to be angry with 'em, first for dismantling the Town, and then for making a League with the Boeotians, which was directly contrary to the Rules of a close Alliance. 10. While the angry Athenians continued in suspence, whether they should think of Peace or War; Alcibiades, a youth of a noble de∣scent, and Pericles's Sister's Son, push'd 'em on to War: And the Ephori themselves were so far against Peace, that all proposals of ac∣commodation were rejected. So that the A∣thenians enter'd into a Confederacy with the Argives and some other Peloponnesians, and imployed Alcibiades to make a descent into the Peloponnesus. Next Summer, the Lacede∣monians sent their King Agis to maul the Ar∣gives; and afterwards check'd him severely for his ill success: But he having obtain'd his pardon for once, march'd against 'em a second time, and retriev'd his fame, by de∣feating them in a Bloody and most noble Battle, as Thucidydes calls it. 11. Notwithstanding this Victory, the Lacedemonians still courted the Alliance of the Argives; and indeed a League was brought about by the Ministry of their chief Noblemen, who were for an Oligarchy. But soon after, the people geting the upper-hand, look'd up∣on it as illegal; and renew'd an Alliance with the Athenians, who were under the same Republican Government. Hitherto the Lacedemonians thought themselves at so low an Ebb, that, tho the Athenians attack'd Melus their Colony (which they afterwards master∣ed,
and us'd very cruelly) and made Incur∣sions from Pylus into Laconia; yet they did not complain of the violation of the Treaty; but only allow'd their Subjects to plunder the Athenians. And these were the transactions of the Summer of the tenth year. 12. But in the fourth year of this War; the Athenians, tho at the same time otherwise ingag'd, had fitted out a Fleet for Sicily; and gave it out, as if they had design'd to assist the Leontinae against the Syracusans; but the real project was to make themselves Masters of that Isle, by vertue of which they might gall Greece more sensibly. They continued now and then to send Forces thither, and foment their Divisions: Whereupon Hermocrates the Syracusan perswaded 'em to lay aside all their animosities, and joyn unanimously in a vigorous opposition to the Athenians, who car∣ried on a design against their Liberties. 13. But all Hermocrates's Remonstrances, could not keep the Citizens of Egesta from falling by the ears with those of Selinus, whom the Syracusans sided with. Egesta had enter'd into a Confederacy with the Athenians, and desir'd Auxiliary Troops from them, offering to pay themselves. The Athenians, who were fond of any opportunity of enlarging their Do∣minions, sent some Deputies to Egesta, to enquire into the Riches and Splendor of the City. The Deputies return'd and magnified their Riches beyond their due extent: Whereupon the people resolv'd to send 'em Auxiliary Troops under the conduct of Nicias, Alcibiades, and Lamachus. And great preparations were made for War.
14. When the Fleet was just ready to put off, the Statues of Hermes or Mercurius, which stood at the Citizens Gates, were maim'd in the night-time of their Arms. This mighti∣ly incens'd the people, and inflam'd their sus∣pition of Alcibiades, who was a Man of an as∣piring temper, and seem'd to dislike the popu∣lar Government. Alcibiades dreaded that his Enemies would get him condemn'd in absence; and therefore desir'd a Tryal before his depar∣ture. But those who knew his interest with the Soldiers, had no mind to start the quarrel be∣fore he set out. But as soon as the Fleet came upon the Sicilian coast, he was recall'd, and fled to Lacedemon; whereupon he was condemn'd, and some of his friends were put to death. 15. In the mean time the Lacedemonians and Corinthians assisted Selinus and Syracusa; and Gy∣lippus the Lacedemonian prov'd a great obstacle to the projects of Nicias. Nicias indeed was not wanting in serving his Country; but being blam'd by Demosthenes for not attacking Syracusa, which was the Bullwark of the War; was influen∣ced by his authority to attack Epipolae, a very inaccessible place; and when had done his utmost, whas oblig'd to retire with loss. 16. Demosthenes, being cast down by this disaster, had a mind to be gone. But Nicias, knowing the humor of the People, who al∣ways measure things by the event, was un∣willing to put his Life and Fortune in so much danger. But afterwards upon the news that Gylippus advanced with fresh Troops, he chang'd his mind, and was just making ready to get off when the Moon happen'd to be E∣clipsed.
Then Nicias was so sway'd by su∣perstition, that he would not stir till the 27 day. Upon the glad news of their delay, the Syracusans resolv'd to cut off their retreat, or at least to oblige 'em to take another way. First of all, they attack'd their Camp, and the next day forced 'em to an Engagement both by Sea and Land. And Eurymedon, Nicias's Collegue, died in a very sharp Engagement, in the mouth of the Harbour. 17. The Syracusans having resolved to se∣cure the mouth of the Harbour with a wall, in order to prevent the retreat of their Enemies; the Athenians resolv'd upon ano∣ther Sea Engagement, and in case it prov'd unfortunate, design'd to burn their Ships and march off by Land. In pursuance of this reso∣lution they endeavour'd to joyn their Camp to their Fleet; but the Syracusans oppos'd the enterprise so vigorously, that the two Navy's fell in with one another, and there followed such an Engagement as was never heard of. After the Engagement, the Land Forces refus'd▪ to board the Ships; and therefore there was a necessity of pushing on a Land Fight. Had they gone immediately off, they had done better; but Hermonates the Syracusan manag'd 'em so dexterously, that they linger'd till the third day. 18. Their flight presented the world with a memorable spectacle, of Howlings, Sorrow, Misery, and the uncertainty of Humane Af∣fairs. Gylippus took 130 of their Ships in that Harbour; and oblig'd the rest to strike, who had fled, and divided themselves into
two Squadrons. In one day 18000 of 'em were kill'd, and 700 taken and condemn'd to the Mines, who were afterwards sold. Nicias and Demosthenes either died in Prison, or laid violent hands on themselves. And this was the upshot of the Ambition of the Athenians, who, by grasping at all, were mortified with the loss of almost every thing. 19. The more the Athenians were morti∣fied in seeing themselves baulk'd, the great∣er was the Joy and Congratulation of the other Grecians: Such of 'em as wag'd War with the Athenians, seem'd to Triumph o∣ver their most Cruel and Haughty Enemies; and such as serv'd under them were glad to be rid of the yoke of Bondage. Alcibiades, then in Exile, was busie in projecting a∣gainst his Country; but soon after he be∣came suspected to the Peloponnesians, and A∣gis, the King, whose Wife he had debauch'd, gave orders to Astyochus, his General, to kill him. Whereupon he fled to Tissaphernes, whom he alienated from the Peloponnesians, by suggesting such things to the Governour as made well for the King. 20. For he open'd to him the whole case of the Lacedemonians, and perswaded him to change the Soldiers pay from a Drachma to three Obuli; and told him he ought to stop even a part of that, in order to make the Soldiers more obedient, upon the ac∣count of having their full pay. He told him, that he ought by all means to take care that the Athenians were not quite undone by the Lacedemonians; that 'twas his interest to keep
these two Cities upon a Balance, in order to waste one another; that he ought rather to have most regard for the Athenians, who contented themselves with being masters of the Sea, without extending their Conquests further; whereas, the Ambition of the La∣cedemonians was boundless, insomuch, that they made account to free all the Grecians from the Persian yoke. 21. Tissaphernes look'd upon these suggesti∣ons as the Dictates of an Oracle, and took all his measures accordingly: So that he ne∣ver perform'd his promise of joining his Fleet with that of the Grecians, and cut the sinews of their Forces by stopping their pay. Alcibiades thought of nothing now but re∣turning to his own Country, and wrote some Letters to that effect; but insinuated that he would not willingly return, unless the Popular Government, under which he was banish'd, were abolish'd. 22. The Nobility indeed got this done for him; but matters were not yet ripe, by reason that Tissaphernes did not continue his Friend. The Athenian Army was then at Samos, and were mightily displeas'd with the change of the form of Government: Whereupon he made his address to them, and they recall'd him. Now the heats be∣tween the Army and the 400 Oligarchical Men who had the Administration of Affairs in their hands, came to that heighth, that the Athenians were again beaten at Sea, and would certainly have been quite undone, had they been engag'd with any other E∣nemies
besides the Lacedemonians, who were always lazy and backward for action. 23. Upon this disaster they endeavour'd to make Friends with the Army; and, to that end, transfer'd the Government from 400 Men to 5000, and enacted such Laws, that Thucydides says, the Republick of the Athenians was then in its best Constitution, as being equally remov'd from the Imposi∣tion of a few, and the boundless Liberty of a multitude. Affairs being thus put in or∣der, they began to chear up, and entertain bet∣ter hopes. In the mean time Alcibiades went to visit Tissaphernes, and was detain'd Prisoner by him, who mean'd by so doing to oblige the King, who, he fear'd, might be wrought up∣on by the querulous requests of the Lace∣demonians. 24. However, Alcibiades escap'd out of Pri∣son, and advancing to Cyzicum, defeated Min∣darus, the Lacedemonian General, both by Sea and Land; and took all the Peloponne∣sian Ships, insomuch that Letters were in∣tercepted, as directed for Lacedemon, which gave this Laconick account of their case. All's gone; Mindarus is lost: The Soldiers are star∣ved for hunger. We cannot tell what to do. 25. Upon this turn of Affairs, the Lace∣demonians sent Ambassadors to Athens, with proposals of Peace. But Cleophon per∣swaded the Athenians not to give them any Audience: So necessary was the Fate that awaited the Athenians. For a short time in∣deed things went pretty even with 'em, and when Alcibiades return'd, they treated
him very honourably, and made him their General. But soon after, such was the te∣merity of the Mob, that they degraded him because the Admiral of the Fleet had fought unfortunately in his absence, and nominated ten Generals for the Land and Naval Force. These ten defeated Callicratides, the Lacede∣monian, Lysander's successor, in a Sea Engage∣ment; but by reason that some of the Ships were run down, and some of the Soldiers so lost, instead of being invested with the honours they merited, were sentenc'd to die; and six of 'em, of whom Pericles, the Son of Pericles, was one, were beheaded. 26. Then the Peloponnesians perceiv'd their Affairs were in a staggering condition, and therefore resolved to take other measures, and to make Lysander Admiral. By the Laws of the Country Lysander could not be twice Admiral: But, in order to elude them, he was employ'd as Vice-Admiral under one Aracus. Lysander fell in with the Athenian Fleet in the River Aegospotamus, which lay there securely, and out of order, and of 130 Ships took 'em all, bating 8, and of 3000 Soldiers they were all kill'd, bating one A∣dimantus. 27. Lysander clear'd all the Cities of the Athenian Garrisons, which he sent home to Athens, to the end, that the City being crow∣ded with People, might be uncapable to en∣dure a long siege. He dissolv'd the Demo∣cratical Government, and introduc'd Oli∣garchy every where, insomuch that he got his own Friends to be invested with Power
in all the Cities, and by that means obtain∣ed a sort of tyranny over Greece. At last he fetch'd his Forces from Lacedemon, and inve∣sted Athens by Sea and Land, which, after standing out to the last extremity, surrender'd upon these terms. 28. The Fortifications of the Haven, and the long Walls, were to be demolish'd; all their Ships, bating 12, to be given up; their banish'd persons to be received; the Athenians were to stand and fall with the Lacedemonians, and make Peace and War as they did. Lysander possess'd himself of the Ships and Walls on the 16th day of the month Munichion: The Ships he set on fire; and the Walls were levell'd to the Ground with sound of Trumpet. Thus the 27th year, and the War it self, which took off more Grecian Captains, than almost all the preceding Wars, came to an end, in the 78th year after the Trojan War, the 4th year of the 93d Olympiad, the 19th of Darius Nothus, A. M. 3600.
SECT. VI. From the end of the Peloponnesian War, to the beginning of the Reign of Philip King of Macedonia. The space of 44 Years. 1. THE next year, in which the 94th Olympiad was celebrated, Crocina, the Thessalian being Victor, when Endicus was Ephorus, and Pythodorus Archon at Athens, 30 Men were chosen to make Laws, and ma∣nage the Affairs of the Republick. These 30 Men having got the Power into their hands, by the assistance of Lysander, thought of nothing, but establishing their own power, and introduced a more monstrous and insuf∣ferable Tyranny than was ever heard of else∣where. Blood and rapine shined through e∣every part of it: Citizens were pitch'd upon whose Estates would be a goodly spoil after they were murdered: And Theramenes their Colleague was sentenc'd to drink a draught of Hemlock, by a judgment which was so much the more injust, because it was publick. His Crime was, that he hated their monstrous wickedness, and made it his business to stop the mischievous effects of the same.
2. A great part of the Citizens went off and banish'd themselves; and their Estates were declar'd to be forfeited to the Tyrants Exchequer. Among those Citizens, there was one Thrasybulus, who at the head of 30 Men first possess'd himself of Phyle a Castle in Attica; and afterwards being fortified by the number of Men that fled thither, master∣ed the Haven; whereupon those who remain∣ed in the City, wrested the Govenment out of the hands of the Tyrants. The Tyrants sought assistance from the Lacedemonians, whereupon Lysander came presently, and be∣sieg'd the Pyraeum. But his treatment of the banish'd persons was so hard, that Pausanias the King, who envy'd him the glory of con∣quering Athens a second time, render'd all his attempts ineffectual. So that Pausanias re∣stored Athens to its former condition; he banish'd the Tyrants and put the Government into the hands of the people, and a general indemnity was concluded upon by universal consent; which according to Xenophon's re∣mark, was the great and the only bond of Peace and concord, and was admirably well calculated for those times. 3. This was the exit of the Tyranny of the 30 Men: Who, as one says, being pre∣ferr'd to sit at the Helm of Affairs by the Se∣nates Decree, put 1400 Citizens to Death, and banished more than 5000. Neither did their fury confine it self to the Town, but reach'd ev'n to Asia, and brought destruction to Alcibiades the hope of his Country: For they fear'd that one day he might come and
rescue Athens, and could promise themselves no security while he liv'd; and with that view intreated the Lacedemonians by any means to take him out of the way. The Lacedemo∣nians oblig'd Pharnabazus to perpetrate the murder, either because they dreaded him as well as the Tyrants, or out of a design to ob∣lige King Agis, whose Wife he had kiss'd. Alcibiades died in the flower of his age, when he had not seen above 40 years. He was a Man of a wonderful genius, and hand∣some to the last degree. Socrates lov'd him with a true Platonical Love; but it seems it produc'd no great effects, since it is apparent that Alcibiades was equally superiour to all Men, both in Vice and Vertue. Cyrus the lesser being kill'd in the Battel at Cunaza, im∣plor'd the assistance of the Lacedemonians. a∣gainst Tissaphernes. Accordingly they sent Thimbrones into Asia; and when they heard that a great Fleet was fitting out in Phoenicia, Agesilaus their King went himself upon the Expedition. This Agesilaus was the Brother of Agis, that died but lately; he was lame of one Leg, and worsted Leotychidas in a dis∣pute upon the right of Succession, by Ly∣sander's assistance. 'Twas shrewdly suspected that this Leotcyhidas was not the genuine Son of Agis, but was begot by Alcibiades. As soon as Agesilaus arriv'd in Asia, he found that Lysanders dignity, and the glory of his memorable actions obscur'd him: Upon which account he always was against his motions, in order to eclipse his interest, and remov'd him to the administration of other things at a
great distance. However he carried every thing before him, so that he seem'd to stand fair for the Empire of the East; when the Persians finding there was a necessity of get∣ting him out of Asia, or else they were un∣done, brib'd the Grecian Cities with Gold, to declare War against the Lacedemonians, in order to constrain him to return to the relief of his Country. 6. The Thebans were the first, that attack∣ed the Lacedemonians, and Pausanias the King and Lysander were sent to make head against them. Lysander first brought off Orchomenum from their Confederacy with the Thebans, and afterwards died in the Siege of Haliartum. He was a cruel and cunning fellow, who al∣ways promoted his own designs right or wrong, and us'd to say that when the Cast-Coats of A Lion would not serve, the skin of a Fox should be patch'd upon 'em. But Pausanias was condemned for not sending him relief according to his promise, and for several other Crimes, with which he was charged; whereupon he fled to Tegea, where he sick∣ned and died. However the Ephori, and Aristodemus Guardian to King Agesipolis, drew together 15000 Men, and routed the Confederate Army, consisting of 20000, with the loss only of 8 Men. 7. Agesilaus return'd to Greece, and routed the Confederates, in the bloody Battel at Chaeronea, where the Beotians, Athenians, Argivans, Corinthians, Eubeans, Aenians, and both the Locrians, were engag'd. He manag'd the Argives very successfully: But Conon the
Athenian, who promoted the interest of his Country in many things by the assistance of the Persians, joyned with Pharnabazus, and those two joyntly routed the Lacedemonians in a Sea-fight; and it seemed as if Conon would have pursu'd his Victory further, inso∣much that the Lacedemonians thought it fit to propose a Peace, which after several interviews was at length obtain'd. This Peace was the the first concluded upon between the Lace∣demonians, Athenians, &c. after the Peloponne∣sian War, and was called by the name of An∣talcidas the Ambassador that concerted it. But in effect it ought rather to be call'd a betray∣ing of the Grecian Cities, since 'twas upon the pretence of asserting their liberty that Agesilaus invaded Asia. 8. The Lacedemonians having thus obtain'd Peace, became very proud, and pretended to call some of their Neighbours to account, for favouring their Enemies. They oblig'd the inha∣bitants of Mantinea to throw down the Walls of their City, and retire to their Villages, and constrain'd the Phliasii to recall their own banish'd persons. They declar'd War against the Olynthians, being induc'd so to do by the complaints of the inhabitants of Acanthus and Apolloniatis, who arraign'd them of a Conspi∣racy with the Athenians and Thebans. At this time the Olynthians were justly much redoubted, for they had mastered a great part of Macedo∣nia, and possess'd themselves of Pella the Me∣tropolitan: And upon the same pretence that the Laeedemonians had formerly made use of, of rescuing the Grecian Cities, had outed
King Amyntas of almost his whole Domi∣nions. 9. Eudamidas was sent into Thrace with 2000 Men to make head against 'em. He took Potidaea, and indeed did enough con∣sidering his force. Thebidas his Brother was sent after him with an Army, who upon his Journey turn'd off to Thebes, the The∣bans being then Seditious, and possess'd him∣self of the Castle of Cadmaea, which Leontidas Polemarchus betray'd into his hands. The Confederates did not approve of this exploit; but finding that Agesilaus was an inveterat E∣nemy to the Thebans, and countenanc'd the Action, and being afraid to thwart the La∣cedemonians, sent Ambassadors of their own, who together with the three Lacedemonian ones, charg'd Ismenias Colleague to Leontidas, with a Conspiracy with the King of Persia, and sentenc'd him to death, and gave the Government of the City to Leontidas and his Complices. 10. The Lacedemonians took Olynthus, and subdu'd the Phliasii, under the Conduct of Agesilaus. But at the same time that every thing seem'd to go according to their wishes, all of a sudden the banish'd Persons recover∣ed Thebes: And by a Stratagem of their's, Sphodrias, the Lacedemonian, was induc'd to invade Attica; and Agesilaus, upon the sol∣licitation of his Son Archidamus, countenan∣ced the invasion: Whereupon the project of the banish'd Thebans took effect, that is, the Athenians were so incens'd, that they join∣ed in with the Thebans, and carried the Vi∣ctory
by Sea oftener than once. Agesilaus march'd twice against the Baeotians, but came off with the loss, as well as several others after him. By this means the Thebans were encourag'd, and being daily exercis'd in War, instead of defending themselves, began to aspire at the Empire of Greece; Fortune it self having led the way to them, and drove them upon that project. 11. In the next year, which was the 2 of the 101 Olympiad, and the 30 of the Reign of Artaxerxes Mnemon, in the Archon∣ship of Hippodamus; Artaxerxes saw it his interest to have assistance from the Grecians against the Egyptians, and with that view got 'em to make Peace one with another. But the Thebans, who were puff'd up by prosperity, refus'd to stand to the Peace, or to set the Baeotian Cities at liberty. They were animated by the Warlick genius of their Citizens, especially Pelopidas and, Epaminondas who from a poor Philosopher, rose to be the famousest of all the Grecian Generals. 12. And even those who desir'd the Peace, could not enjoy it or confine themselves to its prescriptions; for those who set up for Democracy, after they got clear of the Lace∣demonian yoak, were inveterate Enemies to the Oligarchy-men, and bloody Murders were reciprocally committed, while sometimes these and sometimes the People had the upper-hand: Neither did these Grecian feuds come to an end till they were reduc'd under one Empire.
13. However, the Lacedemonians always stood by Oligarchy, and the Atheniaas by the Popular Government: So that the Peace was presently trampled upon, and both Par∣ties took up Arms. The Thebans observing that the other two were chiefly at variance, minded their game very close, and posses∣sed themselves of Plataea and Thespia, because they seem'd to favour the Athenians; which Cities they levell'd with the ground, at the same time that Helice and Bura, two Acha∣ian Cities, perish'd by an Earth-quake, and a subsequent irruption of the Sea. 14. The next year being the first of the 102 Olympiad, in which Damon, was Victor, and Alcisthenes was Archon, Ar∣taxerxes got the Cities once more to make Peace one with another. But the The∣bans going upon the same motives as above, would not stand to it. Whereupon the Lacedemonians declar'd War against them, as the common Enemies of Greece, and were fortified by Auxiliary Troops from all the rest, insomuch that Thebes seem'd to be in a desperate condition. 15. But the Lacedemonians were not aware they had to do with Epaminondas, the The∣ban General, who routed and kill'd Cleom∣brotus their King, at Leuctra, after he had invaded Boeotia, and upon the arrival of new Auxiliaries, violated a Truce. In that En∣gagement there were 4000 Confederates and 3000 Thebans slain. This Battel happen'd in the 34 year after the Peloponnesian War, the 2 of the 102 Olympiad, 34 the of Artaxerxes
Mnemon, in the Archonship of Phrasiclis, A. M. 3634. 16. Upon the News of this defeat, the La∣cedemonians behav'd themselves with a great deal of Constancy, and sent Archidamus, their King, to invade Boeotia once more; but as soon as he arrived there, a Truce was agreed to by Jason, the Thessalian. After the Victory at Leuctria, Epaminondas had per∣swaded all the Arcadians to Incorporate in∣to one City, which was called Magalopolis. He likewise sent Messengers to Sicily, Italy, and the Euesperian Islands, and to all other Countries, in which the Messenians were dis∣pers'd, to recall them to the Seat of their Grandsires, which then retriev'd its ancient name Messene. This restoration of the Mes∣senians happen'd in the 228 year after the taking of Ira, the 3 of the 102 Olympiad, while Dyscinetus was Archon; during the whole Interval of their absence they retain'd their own Rights and the Dorick Dialect. This is Pausanias's account of the matter, but Diodorus would have Megalopolis to be built two years later. 17. The Arcadians being invaded by the Lacedemonians, sought help from the Atheni∣ans in vain, but obtain'd it of the Thebans. Epaminondas invaded Laconia, and restor'd Messene to its Primitive Splendour, and af∣ter he had been 85 days out, was attack'd upon his return, by Iphicrates the Athenian, whom he defeated and pursu'd to the Walls of the City. But, after all, he return'd too late, because the Laws provided that new
Captains should be chosen in the beginning of the month Bucatium, and was thereupon brought to a Tryal. 18. He pleaded that he was not at all unwilling to die, providing they would en∣grave upon his Tomb the great and Migh∣ty Actions he had done. But the People were so much taken with the recital of his Atchievements, that they freely clear'd him. Soon after he return'd to Peloponnesus, and, after the doing of many good services to the Con∣federates, and the taking of several Cities, attack'd Corinth, but, being repuls'd by Chabrias, return'd to Thebes. 19. The Arcadians thinking it unworthy of them to be retainers in the War, with∣drew themselves from their Alliance, and made friends with the Athenians. The Pi∣satae wag'd War with the Eleans; and claim'd a right to the Administration of the Olym∣pick Games, by virtue of some fabulous pleas. And indeed they Administred at the Celebration of the 104 Olympiad, which is therefore left out in the Catalogue of the Olympiads in the Elean Annals; and it is not certain who was then Victor. However, the Arcadians being possess'd of the Olym∣pick Temple, converted the Money they found there to the use of their Soldiers. 20. The Mantineans protested loudly a∣gainst this sacriledge, and the quarrel rose so high, that the Thebans were call'd in to prevent the fears of Arcadia's falling whol∣ly into the Lacedemonian hands. Epaminon∣das was once more imploy'd to check the
but the Arcadians (both Mantineans and o∣thers) smelling that the Thebans had a de∣sign to subdue the Peloponnesus, made their address to the Athenians and Lacedemonians, and implor'd their friendship and assistance. Epaminondas, upon the news that Agesilaus with the Lacedemonian Forces was come up to assist the Arcadians, marched directly to Sparta, which was then empty and exposed, and which he had certainly carried, had not the divine Providence, as Xenophon ob∣erves, stood in the way: For some-body or other had acquainted the King with the de∣sign, whereupon he sent speedy notice to the Citizens of the approaching danger, with promises of speedy assistance from him. 21. When Epaminondas found that his de∣sign was render d ineffectual, by the ap∣proach of the Lacedemonian and Arcadian Troops; and that Mantinea was left defence∣less, he returned with all possible expediti∣on to possess himself of it. But Hegelochus the Athenian at the head of 6000 men pre∣vented his design. But after all Epaminondas thought he could not handsomely return without an Engagement, and therefore re∣solv'd to wait the return of all the Confe∣derates. 22. He march'd towards Tegea, and ha∣ving drawn up his Army Wedge-wise, surpri∣sed the Enemy, and slew great numbers; but pursuing the fight too eagerly and se∣curely, received a Wound in his Breast,
and was carried back to the Camp with the Dart sticking in the wound: where, as soon as he found that his Shield was intire, and that his Men had carried the Victory, he or∣dered the Dart to be taken out of his body, and immediately expired. This was the Exit of one that performed all the offices of a Man and a Philosopher, and of a General: The glory and credit of Greece and Boeotia, and the ornament of their Schools and Military-arts. 23. The Character of Epaminondas will sufficiently appear, if we consider that be∣fore his time the Thebans never did a me∣morable action, and after his day they were toss'd from one rub to another, and quick∣ly made shipwrack of their whole fortune. However the issue of this War was, that nei∣ther side was Victor, tho both of 'em made a shew of the Victory by erecting of Tro∣phies; and, as Xenophon says, the divine Pro∣vidence ordered things much otherwise than Men expected. For by the intercessi∣on of Artaxerxes King of Persia, a mutual League was concluded upon by all Greece, notwithstanding the remonstrances of Agesi∣laus in order to exclude the Messenians. 24. The glory of Agesilaus seem'd to be much eclips'd by this, that when he was eager for War, he suffer'd Greece to be torn in Pieces; and when he was worn out with age served Nectanebus the Egyptian Tyrant for Money. But he preferr'd the safety of his Country to every thing, and after he
had sacrific'd his honour to his avarice in serving the Egyptian, he died upon his re∣turn, in the 84 year of his age, and 41 of his reign, the next year after the death of Epaminondas, being that in which Artaxerxes died. He was a very great Man, and infe∣riour to none for military and peaceable Virtues. 25. In this interval of time there flourish'd Hippocrates of Coos, the Prince of Physicians, Democritus of Abdera the Philosopher, So∣crates the Athenian, Plato, Sophocles and Euri∣pides two Poets, Ctesias the Physician and Hi∣storian, Aristotle of Staria the head of the Peripateticks, Demosthenes the Athenian O∣rator, Eudoxus of Cnidos the Mathemati∣cian, Zeno of Citium the head of the Stoicks, Thucydides the Athenian Historian, and Xeno∣phon, who for his Eloquence was call'd Mu∣sa attica, an excellent Philosopher, and a Man so admirably well vers'd in military af∣fairs, that his bringing back the Grecians af∣ter the death of Cyrus the lesser, seems just∣ly to surpass all the Atchievements of Alex∣ander the Great, if not in the importance of the thing, at least in the variety of Stra∣tagems and Conduct.
SECT. V. From the beginning of the reign of Philip King of Macedonia, to the Monarchy of Alexander his Son. The space of 31 Years. 1. IN ancient times Macedonia being in∣habited by the Pelasgians was called Emathia, and afterwards Boeotia. Telegonus Father to Astriopaeus that famous Warriour, who served under Priamus, reign'd in Poeonia; and Europus reign'd in the other part. But about 5 years after the death of Sardanapa∣lus, Caranus King of the Argives, the 10th from Hercules, upon advice from the Ora∣cle led a Colony into this Country, and e∣stablished his Kingdom by force. After him there follow'd 15 Kings in order, till the time of Amyntas, Son to Phalareus or Philip. 2. Amyntas being conquer'd by the Illyri∣ans, and despairing to retrieve his loss, gave a great part of the Kingdom to the Olynthi∣ans; which he afterwards demanded again, when he had brought his affairs to some tol∣lerable condition. They refus'd to give up what was freely gifted them, and tho
he obtain'd help from the Lacedemonians, yet he was worsted and lost a great part of his Kingdom, together with Pella the Metro∣polis. He had three Sons by his Wife Eurydice, namely Alexander, Perdiccas and Philip, together with one Daughter Euryone, and by Gygaea his other Wife Archelaus, with Argaeus and Menelaus who were afterwards kill'd by Philip their Brother. Alexander succeeded his Father, but Ptolomaeus Alorites robbed him both of his Life and his King∣dom, as some say through the Treachery of his Mother, who would formerly have made away with her husband, and obtain'd leave to marry this Ptolomy her Son-in-law, for the sake of the common Children. 3. After 3 years Perdiccas the brother of Alexander kill'd Ptolomy, and recover'd his ancient Kingdom: And after he had possessed it for 5 years was either kill'd in a Battel with the Illyrians, or murder'd by his Mo∣ther. He left a Son, an infant, under the Guar∣dianship of Philip his brother, in the second year of Ochus, the first of the 105 Olympiad, when Callimedes was Archon. It is said that Philip was kept as an Hostage at Thebes for some years, and suck'd in the first rudiments of his Military and Civil Virtues, in con∣versing with Epaminondas. After he had acted as Regent for some time, the Mace∣donians being threatned by War on all hands, which the authority and strength of the young King were not fit to encounter, Philip was declar'd King.
4. For the Macedonians had been sadly maul d by the Illyrians, who likewise threat∣ned another Invasion. The Poeonians made incursions upon them, and the King of Thrace employed his interest to set Pausanias upon the Throne, as the Athenians did theirs for Ar∣gaeus, both of 'em being Sons to Aeropius who had usurp'd the Kingdom. But Philip got clear of those difficulties, by winning the affecti∣ons of his people. He restor'd the military discipline, and instituted the Macedonian Battalia; he took off the Poeonians and the King of Thrace by Money, and repuls'd Argaeus and the Athenians with the force of his Arms. Nay he gain'd the good-will of the Athenians, by setting Amphipolis free, and shewing a great deal of Clemency to the Prisoners. 5. When he thought he had sufficiently confirm'd himself in the Government, he subdued the Poeonians, conquer'd the Illyrians, took Amphipolis, and after he had possessed himself of Potidaea gifted Pydna to the Olyn∣thians, in order to procure their friendship, which he thought would be useful to him. He Christen'd Crenides which was mightily enlarged by the accession of new Citizens, by the name of Philippi, and improv'd the Gold-mines of that place to that degree, that they fetch'd a 1000 Talents every year; upon which fond he began to be very great. For he coin'd this Gold into pieces which from him were call'd Philippica, and hir'd a great number of Troops, and brib'd most of the
Grecians to betray their Country. In the mean time his affairs went on the better, that the Athenians were engag'd in a Social War, so that they could not mind Amphi∣polis, and the other affairs of Greece. 6. This sociable War took its rise from the revolt of the people of Chios, Rhodes, Coos and Byzantium from the Athenians. It lasted for three years, and then was put to an end, by reason that the Athenians fear'd the Persians would joyn in with the Rebels. The famous Men in this War were Jphcra∣tes, Chabrias, and Timotheus, with whom the glory of all the Grecian Generals was sunk and buried. 7. In the preceeding year Philip had mar∣ried Olympias Daughter of Neoptolemus King of the Molossi, and Grandaughter (not Si∣ster as Plutarch would have it) to Arymbas or Aribbas. The Kings of the Thracians, Illyrians and Poeonians, look'd upon his suc∣cess with an envious eye, and attempted to do with joint force, what they could not compass separately. But Philip attack'd them when they were running up and down in disorder, and easily reduced them to obe∣dience. 8. The same year being the first of the 106 Olympiad, the 6th of Artaxerxes Ochus, in the Archonship of Elpinices, Alexander the Son of Philip and Olympias, was born at Pella, in the Month Boedromion, for he was 32 years old and 8 months when he died on the last day of the month Thargelion, save one. On
the very day of his birth, the Temple of Diana at Ephesus was set on fire by some sorry little fellow, that design'd to trans∣mit his memory to Posterity, by the hai∣nousness of the action. But it was enacted in the Pannonian or Publick Council of Asia, that none should make mention of his name, so that it is not certain who it was; some calling him Herostratus and others Lygdamis. 9. The next year, Callistratus being Ar∣chon, the Phocian or sacred War broke out. The Amphictyones had fin'd the Lacedemoni∣ans, for seising upon Cadmea without any colour of right; and likewise amerc'd the Pho∣cians in a 1000 Talents, for possessing them∣elves of Cirrhaea, a piece of ground that belong∣ed to the Delphick Temple. But Philomelus animated the Phocians mightily, by offering to prove from two verses of Homer, that in former times the Temple was under their patronage: whereupon he was made Gene∣ral with an ample and unlimited Power, and brought in the Lacedemonians to join in the War, as being injur'd at the same rate. 10. This Delphick Temple and Oracle of Apollo Pythius was a very ancient thing. For Homer says that Agamemnon consulted it before the Trojan War. The place upon which it stood was reckon'd the center of Greece, and of the World it self; and a fa∣ble was given out that Jupiter started two
Eagles, one to the East, another to the West, which met again in this place, when they had pass'd through equal distances of space. The Oracle took its rise from the Goats that were fed about the Den which made unwonted sounds and uncouth ge∣stures. 11. At first indeed one gave responses to another, without any difference; but when many people in fits of madness crouded into the Cave, a three footed Machin was inven∣ted, in which a Woman might stand secure∣ly. That Woman was call'd, Pythia, from being intorogated; the first of all was Phe∣monoe. Virgins were commonly appointed for the Office, till one of 'em was debauch'd by Echecrates the Thessalian, whereupon Women of 50 years of age were pitch'd upon, who gave the responses in Virgins habits. In former times this Temple was mightily cele∣brated, upon the account of the Oracle, the meeting of the Amphictyones, the Pythi∣an Games, and its Riches: But in Strabo's time its glory was much eclypsed. 12. Philomelus cover'd his designs with the highest pretences of Justice and Honesty, and engag'd the Lacedemonians and Athenians on his side; but most of the other Grecians thought it their duty to vindicate the ho∣nour of the Temple with their Arms, and with that view joyn'd in with the Thebans; and the Amphictyones back'd their resolution with a Decree, amercing the Lacedemonians in 1000 Talents more, for not paying the
former Fine within the limited time. But Philomelus, finding that the Forces of his Allies design'd to make head against the Thebans, seis'd upon the Treasure of the Temple, and hired Soldiers with it: But his attempts prov'd successless, for he either died in Battel, or threw himself headlong over a Rock, in order to avoid the being taken Prisoner by his Enemies. 13. Philomelus was follow'd by Onomarchus, who aided Lycophron the Tyrant of the Phereans against the Thessalonians and Philip, whom he defeated twice, and took Cheronea: But was afterwards taken Prisoner by Philip and strangl'd. To him succeeded Phayllus his Brother, who after he had brib'd the grea∣ter Cities of Greece to assist him, died of a Consumption, without doing any memorable action. In the mean time Philip took Methona, in the Siege of which he lost his eye by a Dart; and snatch'd the Power out of the hands of the Pherean Tyrants. Then ha∣ving conquer'd some Cities of the Hellespont he attack'd the Olynthians, thinking that he had strength enough to subdue those, whom both he and his Grandsires had dreaded, and whom himself had by all means endeavour'd to oblige. 14. Having defeated the Citizens twice, the Magistrates betray'd the City into his hands, which he levell'd with the ground, and sold the Inhabitants, together with the spoil, for a vast sum of Money; with which he made account to carry on his design of
bribing the Grecians to betray their Country. And indeed he found Traitors in every Ci∣ty, and did not stand to own that Gold had aggrandiz'd him more than Steel. De∣mosthenes caution'd the Athenians to be upon their Guard against this art of Bribery: but notwithstanding all their remonstrances he gain'd ground every day, by vertue of his Silver or Golden weapons: and triumphed over the Athenians themselves, in obtaining a Peace for Seven Years, having distributed Money among the popular Men, and as some say to Demosthenes himself. His design in the Peace was to gain time to get clear of his Thracian concerns, in order to bend all his force upon the worrying of Greece. 15. After his return from Thrace, the Beotians sollicited him for assistance. Where∣upon he invaded Phocis, and put an end to the War without coming to an engagement: For the greatness of his name mov'd Phalecus the Phocian General, to desert the Phocians, he and his Army having obtain'd leave to go off clear. Thus was the Phocian War put to an end after ten years, and the way of punishing the Phocians was remit∣ted to the determination of the Amphy∣ctiones. They decreed that the two fines in which they were amerc'd should be transfer∣ed to the use of Philip, in consideration of his diligence in promoting the interest of the Temple; that they should be excluded from the Temple, and allowed neither Arms
nor Cavalry, till they restored the Trea∣sures they had carried off; that all their banish'd Men should be taken up by way of reprisal, and attonement; their Towns le∣veled with the ground, and their Inhabi∣tants dispersed in Villages, each of 'em consisting of 50 Families, and lying from one another, at the distance of a Furlong; and in fine, that they should pay a yearly Tribute of 60 Talents, till the damage were repair'd. 16. This was the sentence given against all the Phocians, excepting the Abaeans who were the only Phocians that kept 'emselves untainted with the Sacrilege. In the mean time Philip's Glory increased apace; and he us'd alluring ways to get himself chosen Com∣mander of the Grecians against the Persians. For he had design'd a War against them a long time before. He conquer'd the Illyri∣ans and Thracians, and built Castles to awe them to obedience. The next year, being the 18th of Philip, Arymbas King of Molossi died, and left a Son, namely Aeacidas the Father of Pyrrhus. Philip turn'd Aeacidas, who was then a Child, out of his Kingdom, and put Alexander Brother to Olympias in his place: Some say, this Alexander was made King in the life-time of Arymbas, he being outted. 17. Then Philip attack'd Perinthus and Byzantium, but without any great success; for the Persian Satrapae relieved the former, and the Athenians and their Allies raised the
Siege of the latter: And by the Athenian interest Greece joyn'd unanimously in so firm a League, that Philip was obliged to make Peace with 'em. About this time Ateas King of Scythia was assaulted by the Istrians, and call'd in Philip to his assistance, promising him the right of Succession to his Crown, as a reward: but when the Istrians retir'd, he ate in his promise. This incensed Philip so, that he invaded Scythia▪ and took up a great Spoil; but upon his return 'twas all taken from him by the Triballi, upon which occa∣sion he received a wound in his Thigh that went quite through and kill'd his Horse. Isocrates the Orator made use of this oppor∣tunity, to write a second Letter to the King, perswading him to Peace, but all in vain. 18. For that defeat only encourag'd him to go on more briskly; so that he entred into an Alliance with most of the Grecians, and since the Athenians were the only Greci∣ans that thwarted him, he resolved to check them by force of Arms, and surprise 'em unawares. Accordingly he seiz'd upon Elatea in Phocis, whereupon the Athenians were put into a great constirnation; how∣ever they fortifi'd themselves as much as was possible fot the time, and got the Boeotians to joyn with them. The K. invaded the Boeo∣tians▪ with 30000 Foot and 20000 Horse, and being superior to his Enemy both in number of Forces and military prudence (for the Grecians at this time had no experienc'd Generals) routed them at Chaeronea. Here
concludes the liberty of Greece and its anci∣ent Glory. However, he made but a mo∣derate use of his Victory over the Athenian Prisoners, and fortified Thebes: But accord∣ing to Justin, was very severe to the Thebans. This Battel was fought at Chaeronea in the third year of the 110 Olympiad, in the Ar∣chonship of Charonides or Charondas, and the first year of Arses King of Persia. 19. The up-shot of this Victory was, that he got himself declared General of the Gre∣cians against the Persians, and a quota of Money and Men laid upon every City. The Lacedemonians were the only people that stood out, and contemn'd both him and his terms of Peace. But when he flourish'd so much abroad, his concerns at home were but in an ill condition, upon the account of his divorcing Olympias and marrying Cleopatra the Grandchild of Attalus: For she inces∣santly push'd on Alexander her Son to Jealou∣sie and hatred. Next spring the King receiv'd a response from the Oracles when consul∣ted upon the War, which was as ambigu∣ous as that given to Croesus in former times; whereupon he sent Attalus Amyntas and Par∣menio before him into Asia, under the pre∣tence of relieving the Grecian Cities. 20. Himself was to follow at the head of the Army. But before his departure, he celebrated the Nuptials of his Daughter Cleopatra with Alexander of Epirus, with a great deal of magnificence. But while he display'd his Majesty, and by his Shews
and publick Feasts ingratiated himself with the people; he receiv'd a wound in his side from one Pausanias, of which he died im∣mediately. Attalus had made Pausanias drunk, and abus'd his body, and prostitu∣ted it to others: And the poor wretch finding that all his sollicitations could not prevail with the King to redress the affront, took this way of resenting the injustice of the Judge. This was the exit of Philip, in the 24th year of his reign, and the 49th of his Life: A Man that surmounted unaccoun∣table difficulties, and purchas'd to himself so great an Empire, and instructed so ma∣ny war-like and renowned-Men, that both Mars and Mercury seem'd to wait upon him, and he justly merited a great part of the Glory that ensued upon the Actions of his Son Alexander. 21. His Son Alexander succeeded him in the 20th year of his Age, the first of the 111 Olympiad, in the Archonship of Pytho∣dorus, the first year of Darius Codomannus, A. M. 3669. He descended of Hercules on the Father's side, and Achilles on the Mo∣ther's. From his infancy his spirit was no∣ble and magnanimous; Aristotle instructed him in Liberal Arts, and when he came to be of age, he gave signal proofs of his Va∣lour. Having celebrated his Father's Fune∣ral with a Royal Pomp, he took upon him the administration of Affairs, and first all took care to punish the Regicides. He sur∣mounted all the difficulties that stood in
his way by his singular humanity, and an incredible greatness of mind, that was ne∣ver wanting in him through the whole course of his Life. 22. The Athenians conspir'd against the new King, upon the sollicitation of Demo∣sthenes; and Attalus, whom the monstrous cruelty of Olympias to Cleopatra and her young Son had incens'd to the last degree, joyned in with them. The Etolians resolv'd to restore the Acarnanians, whom Philip had banish'd. The Citizens of Ambracia turn'd out the Garrison that had been put in upon them, and those of Thebes endeavour'd to recover Cadmea. The Arcadians contemn'd the Son as much as they did the Father be∣fore, and all the other Peloponnesians were ready to vindicate their liberty. All these evils were further enflam'd by mutinies of the Nations adjacent to Macedonia, who were eager for shaking off the Macedonian Yoke. 23. But fate had decreed that Alexander should master every thing, either by Favour or Force. He took care to get himself de∣clared General of the Grecians, first by the Thessalians, and then by the Amphyctiones, and after that, having marched at the head of an Army into Boeotia, did so fright the rest that a Council was call'd at Corinth, which elected him to be General in a War against the Persians. Next spring, tho he had con∣quer'd the Thracians, and fought successful∣ly against the Peonians and Illyrians, yet
some Cities revolted, and the Thebans ha∣ving possess'd themselves of Cadmea joyn'd in with the Athenians, who were both of 'em push'd on by Demosthenes, who rail'd eter∣nally against Alexander, as formerly he had done against Philip, and honour'd him with no better Title than that of Boy and a Fool. 24. The King march'd with full speed to Boeotia, whereupon the Athenians were discourag'd; but the Thebans slighted all the offers that were made 'em, and made all prepartions for undergoing a Siege. Alexander indeed was nettled by being diver∣ted from carrying on his designs upon Persia; and in order to avoid the loss of time, of∣fer'd 'em very honourable Articles of Peace: But when he perceiv'd that all his proposals met with no other return but rallying and contempt, he laid down a resolution to pu∣nish 'em severely for their obstinacy. He easily carry'd the Town, by entring at some Gate or Door that they had neglected. By a Decree of the Amphectyones, all the Captives were either Sold or put to Death, because they had conspir'd so often with the King of Persia; bating only the Family of Pinda∣rus, whose houses were left standing by the Conqueror, and none else. By vertue of the above mention'd Decree, this celebra∣ted City was level'd to the ground, on the last day of the Athenian Sacrifices call'd Eleusinia, the 20th of the month Boedromion,
after it had stood 800 years almost in the same condition. 25. Alexander publish'd an Edict prohibi∣ting the Grecians to entertain the banish'd persons; which the Grecians did not com∣ply with. Their disobedience reviv'd the former heats, but upon their deprecating the anger of the Conqueror, who at that time had other things in his view, the diffe∣rence was stifl'd, tho not quite remov'd. This done the King return'd to Macedonia, and made all possible preparations for the Persian War, from which neither the weight of the Enterprise, nor the desire of having Chil∣dren, could diswade him. Accordingly in the Spring he march'd to the Hellespont, at the head of 34000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, according to the computation of those who speak highest of the Expedition. Aristobu∣lus says he had not above 70 Talents for the maintenance of all these Forces; Datis writes he had Provisions only for 30 days, and some other Author says, he ow'd 200 Talents at that time. 26. However before he set out, he divided almost all Macedonia among his Captains; and when Perdiocas put the question, what he would leave to himself, he made answer, that hope should be his Portion. He transported his Army to Troas in 60 Ships, and was the first who set foot in Asia, in a jumping capering manner, throwing his Spear upon the ground in the Second year of his Reign, the Second of
Darius Codomannus, the Third of the 111 O∣lympiad, in the Archonship of Enaenetus (that is in the 3d Month before he resign'd his office, on the behalf of Ctesides, under whose Government Diodorus Siculus says this Expedition was undertaken) A. M. 3670. 27. He committed the administration of his inland affairs to Antipater, and left 12000 Foot and 1500 Horse. After the King's de∣parture the Lacedemonians waited impatiently for an occasion to make a new stir; and after the Battel at Arbela most of the Cities resol∣ved to vindicate their liberty to the last ex∣tremity, before the Persians should be total∣ly cut off. Accordingly Antipater being engag'd in quelling the Rebels that Memnon had stir'd up in Thrace, the Lacedemonians made use of that opportunity to perswade the Grecians to revolt. But Antipater setled the affairs of Thrace at what rate he could, and having marched against the Grecians routed them in a bloody Battel, in which Agis the Lacedemonian King and General of the Army died among many others. 28. After this success, Antipater thought it convenient to make an end of the War, lest he should seem to carry it further than was suitable to the modesty of a Subject. He was well acquainted with Alexander's tem∣per, and knew that the Victory was only ac∣ceptable to him, when the Victor was not, and that he look'd upon his own Glory to be eclips'd in proportion to the advance∣ment of another Man's. And upon that
account, when the Lacedemonians sought Peace, he remitted them to the Council of Greece, which received the complaints of both parties, and gave the King an ac∣count of the whole matter. The Lacede∣monians gave Antipater 50 Hostages, and sent Ambassadors to Alexander to ask his Pardon.
CHAP. III. The Affairs of Sicily contemporary to the Persian Monarchy. SECT. I. The names and Inhabitants of this Island, together with an account of its affairs preceeding the Persian Empire. 1. SIcily is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, that lies opposite to Italy. Thu∣cydides says, it lies 20 furlongs off from the Continent, and that its Circumference is as much as a great Ship can sail in 8 days time. 2. It was first call'd Trinacria, from its triangular form, then Sicania, and after∣wards Sicily. The Inhabitants of it were the Cyclopes, or Lestrygones, as also the Sicani and Siculi; for the story of the one's coming from Spain, and the other from Italy, is justly look'd upon as fabulous. For the Si∣cani and Siculi were not distinguish'd by
their originals, but by the place of their re∣sidence. Several Colonies were carried thi∣ther by the Grecians, and these built several Cities. The Phenicians likewise possessed the maritim places, especially those about Lilybaeum: And the famous Sam. Bochart shews that both the Island it self, and its chief Rivers and noted places had their names from the Phenicians. 3. Justinus writes, that when the Cyclopes were extinct, Cocalus possessed the Island, to whom Daedalus the famous Athenian Ar∣chitect fled from before Minos of Crete. This Daedalus had kill'd his own Grand child and Disciple, that was like to out-do him in his Art, and went to Creet, where he incurr'd the King's hatred upon some busi∣ness that related to Queen Pasiphae. Minos follow'd him to Inycum or Camicum the Pa∣lace of Cocalus, where Cocalus's Daughters entic'd him to come into the House, and sti∣fled him in a Bath. 'Tis thought that Dae∣dalus escap'd in a Ship by Pasiphae's interest, and invented the use of Sails in the room of Oars, which were only known before; from whence the Fable goes, that he made wings to himself and fled away. 'Tis likewise belie∣ved that Icarus his Son followed the Father in another Ship, and for want of skill to manage the new-invented Sail, was drown∣ed in the Sea. Now the death of this younger Minos happen'd in the time of the Greci∣an Hercules, in the age preceeding the Tro∣jan times.
4. After Cocalus, Justin says that the Ci∣ties came into the hands of Tyrants, of which no Country was more fertil than this. But for so much as the Tyrants who oppress'd the Grecian Cities were truely Grecians, and Cocalus lived in the age pre∣ceeding the Trojan War, and that there was no Grecian Cities founded in Sicily be∣fore the 11 Olympiad, it seems plain that there was an interval of 500 or 600 years between Cocalus and the Tyrants. For it is not possible but that these Colonies must have us'd the same form of Government for several years, that the Metropolitans had, till the times of Phalaris, who usurp'd the Ty∣ranny at Agrigentum, about the 54th O∣lympiad. 5. Phalaris was born at Astypalaea, and lost his Father Laodamus when he was yet a Child. He marry'd Erythia, and was bani∣shed a little before the birth of his Son Pau∣rolas. After a great deal of adversity he was call'd in by the people of Agrigentum, at a time when they labour'd under Sedition, and had the Administration of Affairs put into his hands. As he came to the Crown by fraud and cruelty, so he maintain'd it by the same methods. Perilius a famous Athe∣nian Carver, presented him with a noble Machin, or a Bull of Brass, for burning Men alive, and himself was justly doom'd to make the first tryal of it.
6. The Tyrant confesses in his Epistles, that he put 37 Men to death in this cruel manner. He was certainly a Monster of a Man, full of unheard of cruelty and hatred, but very bounteous to his friends, and one that had such a regard for Vertue, that for the sake of that alone he would forgive of∣fences. His Life was not laid wait for, as ma∣ny of the other Tyrants were, but a com∣pany of the Agrigentins fell openly upon him, after he had display'd his Cruelty for 16 years. SECT. II. Of the Affairs of Sicily, Contemporary with the Persian Monarchy. 1. After the Death of Phalaris, the peo∣ple of Agrigentum maintained their liberty, till Thoron the Son of Aenesidamus invaded the Tyranny. At the same time Panaetius made himself master of Leontium: And Cleander of Gela. After seven years this Man was follow'd by Hyppocrates, who sub∣dued the Naxii, Zanclaei, the Inhabitants of Messana and the Leontines. He wag'd War with the Syracusians, from whom he took Camarina, and after seven years died in a Battel with the Siculi. He committed his children to the care of Gelon, who negle∣cting his trust possess'd himself of Gela,
and afterwards, when a difference arose between the people of Syracusa and their Magistrates, he being solicited to assist the Magistrates that were then in exile, wheedl'd the common people, and by degrees ap∣peas'd both parties, and usurp'd the Govern∣ment, in the second year of the 72 Olym∣piad, in the Archonship of Hibrilis, in the 31 of Darius, the same year in which the Battel of Marathon was fought betwixt the Grecians and Persians. 2. Syracusa was formerly the Seat of some Etolians, and went by the name of Ortygia. The Etolians were expelled by the Siculi, as the Siculi were by that Colony which Archias the Corinthian headed about the 11 Olympiad, in the reign of Romulus at Rome, and the time of the Messenian War. But that City was so much enlarg'd by confluences of people from all other places of the Peloponnesus, that Cicero call'd it the largest and the prettiest of all the Grecian Cities. It consisted of four Cities, namely Insula, Acradina, Tycha, and Neapolis. It had two large Havens, besides the Suburbs. The Colony that Archias brought in were ac∣customed to Aristocracy, for at that time such was the form of Government at Corinth. Afterwards the fierce and turbulent people gave rise to several seditions and alterations, and the more they avoided Monarchy, the more they were gall'd by Tyranny.
3. But Gelon made such a moderate use of his power, that he was lov'd by all and hated by none, and did so ingratiate himself with all the Siculi, that he offered to assist the Grecians, when engag'd in the bellum Medicum, with 200 Galleys, and as numerous an Army as Greece it self was a∣ble to make up against Xerxes, providing they wou'd have given him the command either of the Fleet or the Army. But that being deny'd, he bended his force against the Carthaginians, whom the Egestans had call'd into Sicily, and routed them in a bloody Battel, on the same day that the Grecians fought at Salamina, insomuch that he seem∣ed to vie with Themistocles himself. But now that I have mentioned the Carthaginians, it will not be improper to give a short ac∣count of the original of their City, and trace its rising from such small beginnings, to be able to dispute the Empire of the World. 4. Carthage was built by the Tyrians, who in ancient times were Lords of the Sea, and transported Colonies to all the Maritim places. It consisted of several parts, which were built at several times, from whence the diversity of their Epocha's arises. Ap∣pianus would have have it built about 50 years before the taking of Troy, and that by Tsorus and Carchedon, because Tsor and Zor are Phenician words for a Metropolitan, and Charchedon for the Town it self, and Carthada in the Phenician Language signifies
a new City. Strabo alledges that the Pheni∣cians transported Colonies to the Columnae Herculis or straits of Gibraltar, about the time of the Trojan War, in which time Virgil, either out of a poetick licence, or thro ignorance, makes Dido to live, and en∣tertain Aeneas in his Pilgrimage. 5. Eusebius says that by some computati∣ons Carthage was built in the 143 year after the destruction of Troy; but Menander the Ephesian, who translated the Tyrian Annals into Greek, writes that Dido built the City in the 78 year of Pygmalion, 143 years and 8 months after the building the Temple at Jerusalem, and 300 years after the destruction of Troy; so that this computation makes it 164 years later than Eusebius's. It would seem therefore that Cotho or the 1st part of the Town adjacent to the Harbour was built before the Trojan War, but Megara or Magalia, and Magaria (which signifies dewl∣ling in a strange Land) was built within 144 years after the destruction of Troy, and Byrsa or the Castle was built by Dido 166 years af∣ter that. For as soon as the Canaanites were outted of their Seats by the Israelites, and dwelt upon the Sea side under the name of Phenicians, they sent out Colonies, and conti∣nued ever after so to do, insomuch that they built several Cities besides this in Africa, par∣ticularly, Ʋtica or Ityca, which in the Phe∣nician dialect signifies Ancient.
7. Dido was the Sister of Pygmalion King of Tyre, and Wife to Sicheus Hercules's Priest. When her Husband was put to death by the King, she fled with her Riches to Africa, and so disappointed the Parricide of his Booty. The story goes, that when she arriv'd, she bought as much Land from the Libyans, as she could surround with an Ox-hide, and having obtain'd her request, cut out the hide into small thongs, and with them measur'd out 20 Acres, upon which she built a Castle, that from thence was call'd Byrsa. But the learn∣ed world look upon that story as fabulous, and alledge that the Fable took its rise from hence, viz. that Bosra, which signifies a fortified place, was euphoniae gratiae, turn'd to Byrsa, by reason that the Grecian Lan∣gue will not suffer the conjunction of the two Letters S and R. 8. At last the Queen laid violent hands on her self, in order to avoid the necessity of marrying Hiarbas King of Mauritania. This Dido, which signifies Lovely, or as some will have it, Wandering, was formerly, cal∣l'd Elissa, or a Divine Woman, and Virago. Now Virago is a Latin word, which in Greek Letters was writ Ouirago, and in Eu∣sebius we find it corrupted to Origo, which did mightily puzle Joseph Scaliger and o∣thers, who thought it referr'd to the City, and not to the Woman.
9. Carthage therefore was repair'd or enlarg'd by Dido in the 3132 year of the World, in the reign of Joas King of Judah, and Jehu King of Israel, 310 years after the destruction of Troy, 97 before the 1 Olym∣piad, and 120 before the building of Rome. At first it had Kings, but afterwards it shak'd off the Monarchy, and after that groan'd long under Sedition, and the other evils that retain to the boundless power of the people. The Philosopher compares this Republick to the Cretian and Lacedemonian Governments, as being of a mix'd kind. Polybius says it was compounded of a Regal, Aristocratical, and Democratical power: and Socrates says it was Oligarchical at home, and Monarchical in time of War. 10. In Carthage the administration of af∣fairs was committed to two Men, who were call'd Suffetes or Sophetim, the same name that was given to the Judges of Israel. These two Suffetes, did in some measure re∣semble the two Lacedemonian Kings, and ac∣cordingly Aristotle, Polybius, and others stile them Kings; however, they were only ap∣pointed for one year, upon which account Livy compares 'em to the Roman Consuls. Additional to them was the Senate, which A∣ristotle compares to that of Lacedemon; whose Derees had the authority of a Law, if back'd by the Suffetes; but if otherwise, the matter was remitted to the Common Coun∣cil. Now in this Common Council Aristotle finds fault with two things: one is, that
every little fellow was allow'd to give his Opinion and contradict the Magistrates; the other defect was, that nothing could be safely objected, against the unjustest act of that Common Council. 11. Over and above the Senate, there was another Court of 104 Members, who from the round number were call'd a Cen∣tumvirat: These are compared by Aristotle to the Society of the Ephori, and therefore are to be accounted Judges and Guar∣dians of the liberty of the people. In this Republick we likewise meet with Censores mo∣rum and Praetors, who took care of the Tri∣butes and made Laws; besides several o∣ther Magistrates. Among other errors in the constitution of this Republick, Aristotle takes notice of this, viz. That the Suffetes were chosen with regard to their Riches, and that one and the same Man had several Offices: To which we may add a barba∣rous custom of sacrificing their own Children in time of Calamity, which it seems they brought along with them from Phaenicia. 12. Another unaccountable thing was, that their Subjects were prohibited to understand Greek, by reason that one Suni∣ator had discovered their secret designs to Dionysius Major in the Greek Language. But their prohibiting Drunkenness, and presenting their Soldiers with golden Rings, was certainly laudable. The people were of a very morose temper, extreme obedi∣ent
to their Magistrates, tryrannical to their Subjects, timorous in adversity, infinitely cruel in their anger, steady and unshaken in their Counsels, but withal so faithless that fides punica became a Proverb. 13. We are at a loss to know certainly, at what time, or upon what occasion the Carthaginians first invaded Sicily. Livy says, they were first invited thither by the Islan∣ders, in the Consulships of T. Quintius Cincinnatus and Cn. Julius Mento, in the 323 year of the City of Rome, and about the 40th after Xerxes's Expedition, in the beginning of the Peloponnesian War; but he is strangely out in this point, for Gelon routed the Car∣thaginians at Himaera, at the same time that the Grecians defeated Xerxes's Fleet at Salamina. 14. Justin from Trogus, says, that after they had carried on a successless War in Sicily a long while, they turn'd the dint of their Wars upon Sardinia; and that God was an∣gry with them for offering up humane Sa∣crifices. In Sardinia they were likewise routed, upon which the Carthaginians were so incens'd, that they prohibited Mazaeus and the remains of the Army to return. But the Soldiers could not brook their exile, but besieged and took Carthage, and punish∣ed the Men that advised it. 15. Mazaeus was put to death for affe∣cting Tyranny, and Magus succeeded him, who introduc'd the Military Discipline, and by so doing laid the foundation of their
Empire. He left two Sons, namely, As∣drubal and Amilcar; under whose conduct this Common-wealth carried on a War in Sardinia, and fought with the Africans, who requir'd a yearly tribute as the ground-rent of the City, and then obtain'd it. As∣drubal died in Sardinia of his wounds, after he had made himself famous by four Tri∣umphs, and being Dictator 11 times. After his death their enemies took heart, and the Sicilians, who had been incessantly injured by them, implor'd the assistance of Leonidas brother to the King of Lacedemon, which gave occasion to a heavy and doubtful War. 16. About this time Darius the Son of Hystaspes, prohibited them by his Ambas∣sadors to offer up humane Sacrifices, to eat Man's flesh, or to burn their Dead; and with all commanded them to send Auxiliary Troops against the Grecians. Justin says they comply'd with all these his demands: But if it be so, 'tis plain from Plato, Diodorus and Pliny, that they afterwards alter'd their minds. Soon after, Amilcar was kill'd in Sicily, and left three Sons, namely, Amilco, Hanno, and Giscon: Asdrubal having like∣wise left as many, namely, Hannibal, Asdru∣bal and Sappho. 17. This is that Amilcar, who died in the Battel against Gelon, in the 6th year of Xer∣xes; and it was at the Carthagenian disaster on that occasion that we stopp'd, and made this digression of the Republick of Carthage.
There fell together with Amilcar 150000 Soldiers, and thereupon the Carthaginians were oblig'd to sollicit for Peace. Some allege that they engag'd in this War with a design to hinder the Cities of Sicily to assist the Grecians. Afterwards the Kingdom of Sicily was proffer'd to Gelon, but he rejected it, and by so doing gain'd a great deal of glo∣ry. He continu'd in his Principality 13 years. 18. Gelon dy'd in the third year of the 75 Olympiad, and his Brother Hiero succeeded, who rebuilt Catana and Chri∣stened it Aetna, their being a Mountain of that name, which at that very time did cast up fire, and break out into a flame. This Prince was at first Greedy, Cruel, Jea∣lous, and Turbulent; but the precepts of learned Men reclaim'd him. He fought suc∣cessfully with the Carthaginians: But after∣wards incurring the hatred of the Citizens, went to Catana where he died in the 2 year of the 78th Olympiad, and after he had go∣vern'd 11 years and 8 months. After Hiero Thrasybulus his Brother succeeded. He was the worst of all the Tyrants, and after 10 months being expell'd by the Syracusans, fled to Locri in the borders of Italy, where he killed himself, and by that means the Citizens retriev'd their liberty. 19. The Syracusans having thus recover'd their liberty, were quickly infested with great Seditions, by denying an equality of right in the Republick, to those whom Gelon had made free in the City, for the advance∣ment
of his own interest. But these were reduc'd by War, and at the same time all Forreigners were expell'd all the Cities in the Isle, and fled to Messana. This was the form of the Republick of Syracusa in those days, which Aristotle gives out to be a com∣position of Oligarchy and Democracy; but the weakness of their foundation did soon after appear, when Tindarides having ingratiated himself with the common people, did almost establish a Tyranny over them; for tho he was kill'd in the croud, yet others pursu'd the same design. Being surrounded with such evils, they imitated the Athenians in intro∣ducing the Petalismus, by which they doom'd those who had an uncommon power or in∣terest, to five years exile. The word Pe∣talismus took rise from their writing the names of the banish'd persons on Olive Leaves or some plate of metal. But expe∣rience taught them that this remedy was more dangerous than the disease, because when the better sort of people and those that were fit for business were sent out of the way, the administration of affairs came into the hands of scandalous and impudent fellows. At last the people being sensible of its pernicious Consequences abrogated the Petalismus. 20. This was the state of the Syracusan's affairs at home, when they set their minds on War, in which they subdued several Cities. and in regard that Leontium affected the Em∣pire of Sicily, took it and leveled it with the
ground, transporting their Gentry to Syra∣cusa, and banishing the Mob. After these domestick commotions they engaged in a War with the Athenians, in the first year of the 91 Olympiad, of which above Syracusa was thereby so exhausted in their Blood and Treasure, that it was only owing to Gelip∣pus the Lacedemonian, that they surviv'd such heavy evils, and gave the Athenians a consi∣derable overthrow. That victory did so puff up the people, that they were not con∣tented with their present condition, but af∣fected greater power. 21. Diocles, an Austere Eloquent and prudent Man, advis'd the people to appoint their Magistrates, not by voting, but by lot. At this rate the Administration of Affairs sometimes came into the hands of unskilful Men, and in regard that so wise a Man as Diocles could not but foresee that in∣convenience, 'tis thought he made that Law only to answer the present juncture, and when the Government was afterwards set∣led abolish'd it, However it is very remark∣able, that he having made a law prohibiting any Man to come with Arms into the com∣mon Council, by an oversight committed the Crime himself, and least the Law should suffer by it, presently drew his Sword and stabb'd himself. He was a rigid and impla∣cable corrector of Vice, but withal nicely just: and his Laws were so much esteemed that they were receiv'd in most places in Sicily: tho Cephalus and Polydorus were afterwards
imploy'd to make Laws, yet they were not reckon'd Legislators, but only Commen∣tators upon his Laws. 22. But all this was not sufficient to remedy the inconveniencies that attend Democracy, while Men of Sense and Prudence were kept under, and the heedless Mob were invested with power. This gave rise to jealousie, envy, and factious designs, and these to ty∣ranny it self. For Dionysius the Son of Her∣mocrates, a great Master of the art of dis∣sembling, did so wheedle the people with his harangues, that he obtain'd a Lifeguard for the safety of his Person, and by that means establish'd himself on the Throne, in the 8 year after the defeat of the Atheni∣ans, the 4th of the 93 Olympiad, the same year in which Athens fell into the hands of Lysander. 23. He first ingratiated himself with the people in the Wars with the Carthaginians. Now the Carthaginians had fought successful∣ly under the conduct of Amilcar, and As∣drubal, against the Moors and Numidians; and oblig'd the Africans to discharge the Tribute that they used to pay for the ground of their City. In regard that A∣milcar's Family was very numerous, and seem'd to threaten the Republick, they pitch'd upon 100 Senators as Commissioners to in∣spect into the actions of their Generals. Af∣ter Amilcar his Son Amilco succeeded, who after several Victories had the mortification to see his Army consumed by a Plague, and
thereupon kill'd himself. He was follow'd by Hannibal, Son to his Brother Gisgon. 24. Hannibal exercis'd his spleen against the Grecians, in resentment of his Grandfa∣ther Amilcar's death; and accordingly inva∣ded Sicily with a numerous Army, and took Selinus and Himera. But Hannibal died of the Plague, and Amilcar his Collegue took Agrigentum, a City that was admirably well provided with Men and all other things; and transported a great many Ornaments to Africa, and among the rest Phalaris his brazen Bull, which, 'tis said Scipio Africanus Minor, returned to the Sicilians, upon the taking of Carthage, 260 years after. The destruction of Agrigentum seem'd to imply the defeat of all Sicily; and thereupon the Syracusan Generals, who had been sent a∣mong others to assist the besieged, were ar∣raign'd of neglecting their duty. 25. But Dionysius openly charg'd them with Treachery, as if they could have rais'd the Siege if they would, and mov'd that they should be punish'd out of hand, with∣out waiting the time prescrib'd by the Law. From Hence he took occasion to arraign the Nobility, as conspiring with the Generals to introduce an Olygarachy; and was proud of appearing to be a Patron of the Com∣mons, and an asserter of their Liberty. By this means he ingratiated himself with the Soldiers, and first got himself made one of the Generals, and afterwards ingross'd the Post to himself, having remov'd his Col∣leagues by false accusations. Then he com∣plain'd
loudly of a great Conspiracy against him, and so obtain'd a Lifeguard of 600 Men for the safety of his Person, which he afterwards inlarg'd at pleasure, and got his enemies condemned by a publick Decree. By this means he rais'd himself from the station of a sorry little Clerk, to the quali∣ty of Lord of the greatest of all the Grecian Cities. 26. However Amilcar, having raz'd A∣grigentum, took Gela, and would have con∣tinu'd his march further, had not a griev∣ous Plague oblig'd him to make Peace with Dionysius, and transport the remainder of his Army to Africa. The Syracusans oppos'd Dionysius to the utmost, but he made a brave defence; and having brought his affairs to a settlement, renew'd the War with the Carthaginians, from whom he alienated se∣veral Cities. Next Spring the Carthagini∣ans sent Amilco with a numerous Army in∣to Sicily, who took several Cities, and laid Siege to Syracusa. 27. But the Syracusans defeated their Fleet, and took the Admiral-ship: by which Vi∣ctory they were so puffed up, that they once more attempted the recovery of their Liber∣ty. At length the Carthaginian Army was wasted with a wonderful Plague, and at the same time their retreat was intercepted by the Syracusans, insomuch that their General was oblig'd to purchase leave to retreat of Dionysius, at the rate of 300 Talents: for Di∣onysius did not desire to see the Carthaginians
lower, for fear his Subjects being secure up∣on that side, should offer to coap with their Tyrant. 28. Afterwards the Carthaginians sent fresh Forces into Sicily, and renewed the War, in which Dionysius was again the gain∣er. The Tyrant being puffed up by such ex∣traordinary success, attack'd Rhegium thrice, in resentment of some affront that the Citi∣zens had given him, and at last starved them out, and sold 'em. Having thus setled his Affairs, and being in a manner idle, he gave his mind altogether to Poetry, and among other Philosophers invited Plato to come to him, who by speaking a little freely of the duty of a Prince, was in great danger of his Life, and at length was sold for five pounds, whereupon the Philosophers ransom∣ed him. After this interval of Peace the War was renewed with the Carthaginians, with various success, but soon after a truce was concluded upon, and Dionysius died ei∣ther through hard drinking, or by the Treachery of his Eldest Son, after he had reign'd in Syracusa 58 years, in the first year of the 103 Olympiad, 366 before Christ, A. M. 3637. 29. This was that famous Tyrant, who committed his person, not to Friends but to Strangers, and to the most cruel and barbarous Men; who taught his own Daugh∣ters to Shave, in order to avoid the danger of trusting his Throat to a Barber; who took the Razour from them when they
came to be of age, and ordered them to burn off his hair with burning Walnut-shells; who came to his Wives at night, in such a manner that he try'd and search'd every thing before-hand; who did not dare to ha∣rangue the people from the ordinary Desk, but made use of a Tower for the purpose; and who shewed Democles the Parasit, the true nature of the felicity he had spoke of, by regaling him with all sorts of Plenty, and Instruments of Luxury and Pleasure, a glit∣tering Sword being at the same time hung by a Horse-hair just over his Head. 30. Dionysius marri'd two Wives, on one and the same day, namely, Doris a Locrian, and Aristomache Daughter to Hipparinus, and Sister to Dion. Dion was about to solicit the Tyrant, when a dying, on the behalf of his Nephews, that is, that they might succeed to part of the Kingdom; but Dionysius his Son by the former Wife, being then of age, smell'd the design, and, as the story goes, ob∣lig'd the Physicians to give his Father a Me∣dicine, which set him a sleeping, so that he never waked. By this means Dionysius succeeded to his Father. 31. At first he made a shew of Virtue, and was the object of all mens hopes: among other Philosophers he sent for Plato twice. Afterwards he gradually degenerated to Luxury and Laziness, and became an enemy to Virtue; he treated Plato with horrid in∣dignities, and banish'd Dion. Dion drew to∣gether a body of hir'd Troops at Corinth,
and with them invaded Sicily: when he came there, his Forces were dayly enlar∣ged, insomuch that he soon expell'd the Tyrant. But the Syracusans made an un∣grateful return to the asserter of their li∣berty, and defrauded the Soldiers of their Pay. Afterwards it happened that the Gar∣rison which Dionysius left in the Castle, sal∣lied out upon the Town, and maul'd them sadly; whereupon Dion was called in to their assistance, who came and suppress'd their Enemies, and then was made General. But he was always engag'd in mortal feuds with his rivals, and at last was circum∣vented by one Callicrates a most perfidi∣ous and villainous Man, and was murder'd by several assassins, in the 55 year of his age, and the fourth after his return from Pelo∣ponnesus. 32. After the Death of Dion, Callicrates made himself Tyrant, but after thirteen months was expell'd by Hippacinus Son to Dionysius the Elder by Aristomache. Hip∣pacinus govern'd two years, and then was follow'd by one Nasaeus, whom Dionysius outted in the midst of his security, and so recover'd the Government of Syracusa in the 10th year of his Exile. In that interval of time he had made himself master of the Locrians upon the Sea Coast in Italy, and had mightily oppressed the Citizens, for 6 years with murders and rapes. 'Twas the Repub∣lick of these Locrians that Paleucus the famous Legislator modell'd, of whom elsewhere.
33. When Dionysius retrieved the King∣dom, the Syracusans were more inclin'd for Icetas the Governour of Leontium: However the former retain'd the power. The Carthaginians took occasion to attack the Syracusans at a time when they were harassed by Seditions. The Syracusans find∣ing themselves in great straits, implor'd the assistance of Corinth, who sent Timoleon to them, a Man that was an inveterate enemy to Tyranny, and had suffer'd his own Brother to be put to death for aspi∣ring at it. When he came to Syracusa he repuls'd the Carthaginians, and with ease expell'd Icetas and Dionysius; the latter of whom came to Corinth, where he taught a School, and liv'd in great want. When Philip of Macedonia ask'd why he did not keep up the Power that his Father left him, 'tis said he made answer, that his Father indeed left him his Principa∣lity, but not his Fortune. This was the exit of the Tyranny of the Dionysius's, after it had lasted 64 years, in the second year of the 100 Olympiad, A. M. 3661. 34. However Icetas having a design upon Syracusa, brought back the Carthaginians, in order to attack the Town. Timoleon first rais'd the Siege, and cut 'em almost all off; and when Icetas and Mamercus Tyrant of Catana, had brought them back to the Island, he routed their joynt Forces, took and kill'd Icetas and his Son, and obliged the Carthaginians to sollicit for Peace.
Mamercus indeed fled, but afterwards sur∣rendered himself and was put to death. Timoleon rescu'd all the rest of the Cities out of the hands of their Tyrants, and in regard that Syracusa was almost ex∣hausted with the bloody War, took care to have it publickly proclaim'd in Greece by a Herald, that the Syracusans offer'd grounds and houses to any that would live among them, whereupon many repair'd thither, and the Inhabitants of the City became very numerous. 35. Timoleon being free from War, ap∣plyed himself wholly to settle the state of the Republick, and reviv'd the Democratical form of Government, having employ'd one Cephalus and Dionysius at Corinth to interpret the Laws of Diocles. He order'd the peo∣ple to chuse a new Magistrate every year, who shou'd be stil'd Servant to Jupiter O∣lympius, in memory of the restoration of their liberty. Afterwards he became blind, but still was not wanting in serving the Re∣publick. At last he was worn out with old Age, and solemnly Inter'd by an unversal confluence of the Sicilians. He died in the 38 year of his Government, the last of the 110 Olympiad, the last of Philip of Macedo∣nia, the 2 of Arses the Persian, the 7th be∣fore the Commencement of the Macedonian Empire, A. M. 3668.
CHAP. IV. The Affairs of the Romans contemporary with the Persian Empire. SECT. I. From the Exile of their King, and Dissolu∣tion of the Kingdom, to the second al∣teration of the Government, introduc'd by the Decemviri. The space of 57 Years. 1. AEter the expulsion of the Kings, the Administration of Affairs was put into the hands of Consuls, who were so cal∣led a Consulendo. They were first called Praetors, afterwards Judges, and at last Consuls. 2. At first the Consular power was equal to that of the Kings; for Cicero gives it the title of Regia Potestas, or Regium Imperium; and the Grecians call'd the Consuls ,
i. e. Most Excellent. This yearly power of the Consuls was much abridg'd by the Pro∣vocatio and Intercessio; the former being an appeal from the Consuls to the People, which ow'd its first rise to Valerius Popli∣cola; and the latter being the office of the Tribunes, who interceeded for the people. While the Republican form continu'd, the Consuls were reckon'd the head Magistrates, and all publick business was manag'd by them. But when the Prince usurped the rights of the Magistrates, especially of the Consuls and Tribunes; their office was to call the Senate, pass Judgments, give Guar∣dians, make Servants Free, Farm the Taxes, and to solemnize the publick Games: And besides, their names continued to give the Characteristick to the year, as before. While the Republick was in a flourishing conditi∣on, if any surprising or dangerous acci∣dent happen'd, they were invested with full power to act as they thought fit, by vertue of an Act of the Senate, conceiv'd in these words, Viderint Consules, ne quid detri∣menti Resp. capiat, i. e. May the Consuls take care, that the Republick come to no harm. 3. Those who first hansell'd the Consul∣ship, were L. Junius Brutus, and L. Tarqui∣nius Collatinus, who were made Consuls in the beginning of the 68 Olympiad, in which Ischomachus of Croaton was Victor, in the Arc∣honship of Isagrus. These two new Consuls at first had Twelve Axes carried before them, as well as before the Kings, but in order to
prevent Reflection and Envy, they order'd that one of 'em should have the Axes, and the other the Rods carried before 'em. In the mean time a great Conspiracy was car∣ried on, in order to restore Tarquinius; but Vindicius, a Servant, detected it, and Brutus beheaded Titus and Tiberius, his own Sons, as being concern'd in the same; and left the other Complices to be punish'd by his Collegue, whose Relations they were. 4. Tarquinius seem'd to be a little too favourable to these other Conspirators, whereupon Publius Valerius took care to have 'em punish'd; and the Consul himself was outted of his Place and banish'd, either by reason of his Clemency, or because they suspected him upon the account of his Coun∣try. This Cicero, a Bigott for Democracy, defends, as being a just and fair Sentence, and conducive to the good of their Coun∣try, in extinguishing at once the Monarchy and the Memory of the Tarquinii. But S. Augustin says, Tarquinius was a Good and In∣nocent Man, and that his Banishment was Unjustifiable. 5. Tarquinius's Place was fill'd by Valerius, a Man that hated the King mortally. The Consuls expos'd the King's Goods, to be Plunder'd of the People, and levell'd his Houses with the ground, and restor'd to the publick the Campus Martius, which he had engross'd. The King finding that his Embassies and Stratagems were successless,
marches against the Rebels at the head of a numerous Army of Etrurians, and came to a sharp Engagement, in which Aruns, his Son, and Brutus, were mutually kill'd in a particular Duel. But the Romans carried the Victory, and Valerius return'd in Triumph to Rome. 6. The People were angry with Valerius, for governing the Republick by himself with∣out a Collegue, and for making such pom∣pous Processions from his Stately and Prince∣ly House, as seem'd to threaten their Li∣berty. Whereupon Valerius pull'd down his House, remov'd the Axes from being a part of his Ensigns, came into the Com∣mon-Council and lower'd the Badges to the People; and after he had done many things on the behalf of the Commons, and laid the Foundation of a Democratical Government, allow'd any Man to put in for the Consulship, that pleas'd. He brought in appeals from the Consuls to the People; and made a Law prohibiting any Man, upon pain of Death, to invade the Magistracy, without the desire of the People. He reliev'd the poor, by making abatements of their Taxes. He made another Law for punishing the Con∣tumacy of Consuls; he added 164 Members to the Senate, and gave every one free li∣berty to kill any man that affected Tyran∣ny, providing the Crime cou'd be made to appear. And in regard that the People were to furnish the Charges of Wars, he
appointed two under the title of Quaestores to manage the Treasury. 7. They were call'd Quaestores à Quaerendo, because they enquir'd into the publick Ac∣counts and Misdemeanours. Some date their Original yet higher, and alledge, that both Romulus and Numa had their Quaestores. But if it was so, it would seem their Office was only to punish Criminals (as that of the Triumviri, who were afterwards appointed to inspect into Capital Affairs) and that after the Cessation of Kings they were or∣der'd to take care of the Treasury, the riches of the Publick being then more enlar∣ged. At first there were two for the Town, call'd Ʋrbani; but afterwards their num∣ber encreas'd as the Dominions of the Em∣pire were inlarg'd, insomuch that Caesar made 40 Treasurers. Their business was to Collect and Dispose of the Publick Mo∣ney, to keep the Gold and Silver Ensigns for War, to sell the spoil, and to enter∣tain Embassadors upon the Publick Charge. 8. Augustus gave 'em likewise the charge of the Acts of the Senate. The Princes had Treasurers of their own, who were called Candidati or Quaestores Principis, from whom the Quaestores Palatii derive their O∣riginal, who were the keepers (as it were) or managers of the Laws, and are now a∣days call'd Chancellors. As for the Trea∣sury it self, the Temple of Saturn was at first appointed for keeping the Publick Mo∣ney, together with the Libri Elephantini,
in which the 35 Tribes, and the Acts of the Senate were engross'd. But the Libri Lintei, or the Annals, were committed to the care of the Pontifices. Afterwards the Treasury was call'd Fiscus from the Fiscelli, and Adrian erected the first Advocatus Fisci. 9. This done, Lucretius, the Father of Lu∣cretia, succeeded Brutus; but he died after a few days, and Marcus Horatius succeeded. Horatius consecrated the Capitol on the 13 of Sept. it being then finish'd, and his Col∣legue being absent. In his Consulship the first League was made between the Romans and Carthaginians. The next year, Valeri∣us, who was sirnam'd Poplicola, from court∣ing the People, being then a second time Consul, along with Titus Lucretius Tricipiti∣nus; Porsena, King of Clusium, besieg'd Rome with a numerous Army, in order to restore Tarquinius. Both the Consuls were woun∣ded in some slight Skirmishes, and the E∣trurians were pursuing the Romans upon the Bridge, when Horatius Cocles oppos'd the Crowds of his Enemies till the Bridge was cut down behind him, and then fell in∣to the River, and swimm'd out to his own Men. 10. Poplicola and M. Horatius Pulvillus being Consuls for the next year, routed Porsenna in a bloody Battle, in which he lost 5000 men. But the honour of making an end of the War was truly due to Mutius Cordus, who having put on an Etrurian habit,
design'd to have stabb'd the King with a Dagger, but unluckily kill'd the Clerk in∣stead of his master, whereupon he put his hand into a burning fire before them all. The King was so astonish'd at his Courage, having heard at the same time that 300 more had combin'd to kill him, that he not only pardon'd the Crime, but made Peace with the Romans, broke up the Siege, and refresh'd 'em with plenty of all necessaries. 11. The War with the Sabines, who had plunder'd the Roman grounds, commenc'd in the 250 year after the building of the City, the 5 after the expelling of Tarqui∣nius, the 1 of the 69 Olympiad, in which Ischomachus was victor, in the Archonship of Acestoris, in the 18 year of Darius the Son of Hystaspes, A. M. 3501. M. Valerius, brother to Poplicola, and P. Posthumius Tu∣bertus being then Consuls. Valerius Con∣quer'd 'em twice in two sharp Engagements; and next year Poplicola being Consul a fourth time treated 'em at the same rate, notwithstanding that the Latines were join∣ed with 'em. After that, Poplicola, the dar∣ling of the Commons, died, and was in∣terr'd upon the Publick Charges, within an Enclosure that was appropriated only to him and his Posterity. But none of 'em would make use of their right, for the Corps were no sooner brought to the Fo∣rum, and the fire put under, but the dead Person was carried off and buried out of Town.
12. In the heat of the War, Actius Clau∣sus, the Greatest of all the Sabinean Noble∣men, came to Rome with 5000 Families, after he had employ'd his interest with his Countrymen, to disswade 'em from the War, but could not prevail. This Man was the original of the Illustrious Family of the Clausii or Claudii. In the same year that Poplicola died, the Sabines came up to the very Walls, and Posthumius the Con∣sul, who oppos'd 'em, lost a great number of his Men. But afterwards the two Con∣suls joyn'd their Forces, and carried an ample Victory, which would have ended in cutting off the whole Army of the E∣nemies, had not the night interpos'd. 13. Honours were decreed for the Con∣suls, upon the Account of their Noble At∣chievements: Memenius indeed had a Tri∣umph, but Posthumius had only an Ovatio, by reason of a defeat he had lately under∣gone. Now Festus derives the word Ovatio from the letter O, which the Soldiers us'd to redouble upon that occasion: But Diony∣sius derives it from the Corruption of E∣vastes the Greek Word. It differ'd from a Triumph in this, that the General entered the City at the head of the Ar∣my on foot, and not on Horseback; that he had only a Purple Gown upon him, but not a Garment, with Bars of Gold; that he had a Lawrel upon his head, but no Scepter in his hand; and if the War was either not declar'd, or put up with∣out
Blood, he was Crown'd with Myrtles. Next year the Sabines being routed again, desir'd a Peace. Camarina was likewise ta∣ken and levell'd with the ground. 14. In the 1 year of the 70 Olympiad, in which Nicaeas Opuntius was Victor, in the Archonship of Myrus, and the Consulship of Posthumius Cominius and Titus Largius, or rather Lartius, did 30 Latin Cities conspire against the Romans, upon the sollicitation of Manilius Octavius, Son-in-Law to King Tarquin. The Romans thought fit to se∣cure themselves by besieging and taking Fi∣denae; which provok'd the Latines to engage more readily in the War. At the same time the Romans were troubled with Commoti∣ons at home, occasion'd by the hard con∣dition of poor Debtors, whom their Cre∣ditors treated as slaves. 15. In the midst of these Commotions, several were debauch'd by Bribes, and en∣gag'd in a Conspiracy for the King's Re∣storation. Notwithstanding that a timely discovery was made, and the Criminals punish'd, yet when they offer'd to levy Men for the Army, there were but very few that would list themselves in the Ser∣vice. Now there was no remedying of this inconvenience, by reason of the Ap∣peals to the People that Poplicola erected: Upon which account a new Magistrate was created who had an absolute and uncon∣trouled Power for six months.
16. This head Magistrate was call'd Dictator, either because he was Dictus, or nominated, by the Consul; or because he dictated and gave the word of Command. He was nominated by the Consul by the Senate's orders, without the Consent of the Com∣mons, for carrying on a War, fastening a nail for a memorial in the time of a Plague, calling the Comitia Consularia, celebrating Games, choosing Senator's, or upon any o∣ther important occasion. Upon the no∣mination of the Dictator, the Power of all the other Magistrates, bating the Tribunes, was superseded. He nominated one of a Consular or Praetorian Dignity to be Ma∣gister Equitum, with an equal power over the Equites and Accensi. The Dictator him∣self had a full power over the People, and therefore was called Magister Populi: And all the other inferiour Officers were call'd Magistratus and not Magistri, much after the same manner as Varro derives Albatus from Albus. But afterwards Appeals were brought in from him to the People. 17. T. Largius was the first Dictator, and Sp. Cassius, Magister Equitum. The Di∣ctator frighted the People with his Maces and Axes, and having survey'd the Peo∣ple, rais'd a most numerous Army, which he led into the Field, and then made a Truce with the Enemy for one year. This done, the Latines took up Arms once more, upon the sollicitation of Tarquinius and Ma∣nilius; but were sadly routed by Aulus Post∣humius,
the second Dictator, at the Lake Rhegillus, whereupon they desir'd a Peace, and with difficulty obtain'd it. At last Tarquinius having lost all, and being aban∣don'd by the Latines, Etrurians, and other free Cities, went to Cuma, to the Court of Aristodemus the Tyrant, where he died soon after, in the 90 year of his Age. 18. The Romans being freed from War, fell in with new disorders occasion'd by the Exactions of Creditors, and the cries of the Poor, who said they were not a∣ble to pay. This gave rise to such heats, that the Plebeians refus'd to take the Oath against the Sabines, and threaten'd to re∣linquish their Country. And tho' at last they suffer'd themselves to be led out a∣gainst the Enemy, yet finding they had got no relief, they return'd home; and tho' the obligation of their Oath mov'd 'em not to flie from their Colours, yet they re∣tir'd in their Arms to the Sacred Moun∣tain. Then the Town was in a great per∣turbation, and the Senators were divided in their sentiments. At last, when they saw that a great number of Deserters went off to the Army, Menenius Agrippa prevail'd so far, that Ambassadors were sent with a power to treat without being accountable to the Senate. 19. A promise was made to the Plebei∣ans, that those who were not able to pay their debts, should be forgiven, and that hereafter things should be manag'd by the
joint consent of the Senate and Commons. Then the People were very chearful and ready to return, when Sicinius and L. Ju∣nius put it into their heads to ask Magistrates for themselves to protect them, and vin∣dicate their rights. The Ambassadors find∣ing that a business of the last importance, remitted it to the Senate, where after a vi∣gorous and hot opposition, the request was granted and solemnly confirm'd by an Act of the Senate. Accordingly the Comitia Curiata were call'd, and they elected L. Junius Brutus (that being the sirname he desir'd) and L. Sicinius Bellulus, to whom they ad∣ded C. and . Licinius and Spurius Icilius Ruga. They enter'd upon their new Office on the 13 of December, in the 16 year after the expelling of Tarquinius, according to the Computation of Dionysius Halicarnasseus. 20. These Magistrates (if I may so call 'em) were entituled Tribunes of the People, because they were chosen from among the Tribunes or general Officers in the Army. In the 297 year of Rome, their number was en∣larged to 10. They were all Plebeians, tho' Livy excepts two. At first they were in∣vested with the power of defending the Commons: And with an incredible mea∣sure of boldness, they enlarg'd the power they had received. They put a stop to the Senates Acts, and the Magistrates E∣dicts, in pronouncing only the word Veto. Afterwards they were made Sacro-Sancti, and took the liberty to call a Senate, con∣vocate
the People, make Laws, and haul the Magistrates themselves to Prison. The only relief against them was this, that one thwarted another: For their remonstran∣ces did not avail unless the whole Society consented. 21. Turbulent Men being invested with so much Authority rais'd such Disorders and Commotions, that instead of vindica∣ting rights, which was the end of their Institution, Lucan justly calls 'em turbantes jura, disturbers of rights. Sylla cramp'd their Power; but after his death their full Au∣thority was fully restor'd by the Laws of Aurelius Cotta, Pompey and Crassus, and con∣tinued such till the Government came in∣to the hands of Emperors, under whom they had only an empty insignificant name. They had neither the Purple Robe nor Serjeants, nor the Chair of State. They did not enter upon their Office in the be∣ginning of the year, neither were they superseded by the nomination of a Dicta∣tor, from whence some have conjectured that they were not Magistrates. Besides the Tribunes of the People, and those of the Celeres, there were likewise Tribuni Mili∣tum, and Tribuni Aerarii in the time of the Re∣publick. And under the Emperors, Tribuni Voluptatum, Tribuni Matrimoniorum, Char∣tariorum, Provinciarum, and Scholarum, of which see Cassiodorus's Epistles.
22. The Commons obtain'd this further privilege, that two should be chosen out of their number to serve the Tribunes, as it were; i. e. to take Cognisance of some Causes, and to take care of the Buildings and Corn. They were first called Ministri Tribunorum, and afterwards Aediles, from taking care of the Aedes or Houses, in which the Plebiscita or Decrees of the Com∣mons were lodg'd. To these two Aediles Plebis, a long time after there were two added from the Noblemen, call'd Curules, from the Chair of State that was allow'd 'em. In the 710 year after the building of Rome, Julius Caesar added two more from the Patritii, call'd Cereales, because they took care of the Provisions. Now all these six continued to the time of Constantine. The Aediles, says Cicero, are those who take care of the City, of Provisions, and of solemn Games. It seems they inspected the Fables before they were Acted, and examin'd other Wri∣tings. After any Victory, the Provisions were deliver'd by the Generals to them, as the Prisoners were to the Praetor, and the Money to the Quaestores. Livy adds, that 'twas the business of the Aediles to see that none but Roman Gods were worship'd, and those in the Roman way. 23. After these Transactions, the Plebei∣ans willingly listed themselves under the Consuls, and fought againg the Volsci. They took Longula and Polustia with ease, as well as Corioli the Metropolis, by the Valour of
Marcius, a Nobleman, that from thence was sirnam'd Coriolanus. This year the League with the Latines was renew'd, up∣on the account of their faithfulness, when the Romans were harass'd by Domestick Feuds and this War. The Senate decreed that Supplications should be made, and a third fair was added to the two La∣tine ones, one of which was instituted by Tarquinius after the Conquest of Etruria, and the other by Populius in the time of Tarquinius's Exile. At this time a review was made, and 110000 Heads were assess'd. 24. Next year a great Famine prevail'd in the Town which was occasion'd by the late Seditions. That made a heavy stir a∣mong the Commons; and the animosities of the Poor cou'd not be pacified, notwith∣standing that a Law was made in the Con∣vention, prohibiting the contradicting of the Tribunes when they harangu'd to the People. Ambassadors were sent to Sicily to buy Corn, and when they return'd with a considerable quantity, some were of opi∣nion that it should be sold to the poor at low rates, others were more harsh and thought it more proper to treat the Common People some what roughly, in regard that idle∣ness and too great indulgence had puff'd 'em up. Among those of this opinion, Marcius Coriolanus spoke most freely; who was a great Assertor of the dignity of the Noblemen, and was disoblig'd by the refusal he met with in the Comitia Consularia. He alledg'd
that they should not only cramp the Commons in allowing them no Corn, but likewise abolish the Office of the Tribunes. 25. Presently the Tribunes Indited him, and cited him to his Tryal before the Com∣mons. Indeed the Noblemen were very loath to suffer one of their number to be try'd by the Commons, but when the Tribunes gave 'em to know that they charg'd him with Affecting a Tyranny, and would make good the charge; he offer'd of his own accord to stand Try∣al. He easily clear'd himself of that im∣putation, and several Persons, whom he sav'd in the War, gave such loud Enco∣niums of his good Offices, both to them and their Country, that 'twas plainly ap∣parent, he would quickly be acquitted. 26. The Tribunes finding things in that posture, designed to attack him under-hand, whom they could not openly reach; and accordingly blam'd him for not giving the spoils he took in War to the Treasurer, according to the Injunction of the Laws, nor bringing the Money into the Treasu∣ry, but distributing it among the Soldiers. They put such a construction upon his o∣mission, as if he design'd to curry favour with the Army, and obtain a Life-guard; And tho' 'twas certain what he did was to secure and encourage the Soldiers, and alleviate the common Calamity, at a time when his Country was sunk under Sediti∣ons and Divisions, yet such was the Fury of the People, that of 21 Tribes 11 sen∣tenc'd him to perpetual banishment.
27. This was the first time that the Commons pass'd Sentence upon a No∣bleman. And after this precedent, the Tribunes kept up the Custom of Ar∣raigning whom they pleased; and the power of the Commons encreas'd every day, while that of the Senators dwindled apace, till at last the Commons were ad∣mitted to the Senate, Magistracies and Priesthoods; the Noblemen being induc'd to comply with their demands, partly out of Necessity, and partly from a principle of Prudence. In the mean time Coriolanus fled to the Volsci, and rais'd a heavy War against his ungrateful Country, and took several Places, insomuch that he threaten∣ed utter ruin to it. And no Embassies could prevail with him; till at last he yielded with great difficulty to the inter∣cession and tears of his Mother and Wife. Then he return'd to Antium and was kill'd by Tullius his Rival. Thus died a Man that out-strip'd all his Contemporaries in Warlike Glory, but by an unflexible stiff∣ness brought his Country into great dan∣ger, and at last ruin'd himself. 28. Coriolanus being kill'd, the Volsci were oblig'd to sue for Peace, and the Hernici were Conquer'd, and obtain'd a League, the Conditions of which were left to the determination of Cassius, the General. Cas∣sius allow'd 'em the freedom of the City, and endeavour'd by all means to ingratiate the Plebs, in order to make his way for Ty∣ranny.
He propos'd the Lex Agraria for distributing the Lands equally among the People; but the Noblemen joyn'd together and prevented him, and condemn'd him to be thrown headlong over the Tarpeian Rock: Which accordingly was done in the 1 year of the 74 Olympiad, in which A∣stylus the Syracusan was Victor, in the Ar∣chonship of Leostratus, and the 1 year of Xerxes; Q. Fabius, and S. Cornelius being Consuls. 29. After the death of Cassius, the No∣blemen became higher, but the Plebians at the same time encreas'd their boldness. When the War broke out again, the Tri∣bunes assisted those who refus'd to take the Oath; but in order to frustrate their intercession the Consuls translated their Bench to the Campus Martius, for without the bounds of the City they could assist none. Then they came to fifty blows and heavy threats; and a Dictator was nominated to appease the Commotion, namely, Sp. Lar∣gius, who in some measure alleviated their Domestick Evils by making Consuls that were acceptable both to the Commons and Nobility. 30. Next year being the 1 of the 75 Olympiad, in which Xerxes cross'd over to Greece, Callias being Archon, and Caeso Fabi∣us and Sp. Furius, the former the second time, and the latter the first time Consul, did the Aequi and Veientes rise up in Arms a∣gainst the People of Rome. The Veientes
induc'd all Hetruria to rebel, and defeated the Consuls oftner than once; making Ex∣cursions even to the City. Then the Se∣nate thought it necessary to secure their Territories by Garrisons: But at the same time the Treasury was exhausted, and the Taxes were not equal to the publick Charges; besides 'twas not to be expected that many would voluntarily list themselves in service for so tedious a War. Things being at this pass, the Consul mov'd that the whole concern should be committed to the care of the Family of the Fabii; ac∣cordingly these accepted the Commission, and fortified Cremera a Castle upon the out-lying Territories. 31. The Veientes being beaten had ob∣tain'd a Peace: But now they reviv'd the War, and cut off all the Fabii, to the num∣ber of 306. The story goes that all the Family and Kindred was cut off, except∣ing one young Boy, who surviv'd that di∣saster, and propagated the desolate Fami∣ly: But Dionysius plainly proves that to be false. Authors are divided upon the time of this defeat. Macrobius says it hap∣pen'd on the 16 of July; Plutarch says it happen'd after the Summer Solstice, in the month of Quintilis, about the New moon; Livius and Tacitus assign the 18 of July, and Ovid casts it on the 13 of February.
32. After the overthrow of the Fabii, the Veientes were much animated, and pe∣netrated to the Janiculum: but in a year or two's time were so often defeated, that they again desir'd a Peace. This War was but a slight one in comparison to the Civil Wars. The City was in great want of Provisions, by reason that in the preceeding year while the Veientes besieg'd the Capitol, the Romans could neither ma∣nure the ground nor keep up any Com∣merce. This gave occasion to great tu∣mults. Genutius, Tribune of the Commons, made a heavy stir about the Lex Agraria, and Volero, his Successor, propos'd another Law, enjoyning the Tribunes to be created in the Comitia Tributa. Now the Comitia Tributa differ'd from the Curiata, in this, that in these the Curiae or Wards only confirmed what the Senate had luckily Enacted; but in those, every thing was transacted without the in∣tervention of any decree of the Senate, merely by the separate Votes of the Tribes. 33. The States had a heavy debate con∣cerning the making of this Law. The Noblemen were mightily offended by the impudence of the Tribune; and their re∣sentment was further inflam'd, in regard that he requir'd the Aediles should like∣wise be nominated by the Comitia Tributa, and that all things relating to Plebeians, should be transacted there. Now the o∣pen tendency of this was to transfer the
whole Power from the Senate to the Peo∣ple. Appius, the Consul, was one of the chief opposers; the temper of his Family was always against the Plebs; he interlin'd his publick harangues with all manner of railing and opprobrious Invectives: and by that means put all again in confusion, when his Collegue Quintius had by his meek and smooth discourses almost compos'd the dif∣ferences. The Tribunes order'd the Consul to be Imprison'd, but the Patritii stood by him, and at last they came to fifty cuffs and throwing of stones, in a scandalous manner. 34. Quintius, who was all for moderati∣on, got the Tribunes to consent that the matter should be remitted to the Senates determination, the People being then pos∣ssess'd of the Capitol, where they kept a guard night and day. The Senate ap∣prov'd of the Law, and the Comitia con∣firm'd it: Whereupon the Consuls marched out at the head of their Armies, Quintius against the Aequi, and Appius against the Volsci. Each of the Consuls met with such success as they deserv'd. For Quintius's Ar∣my was prompted by the Consideration of his equity and mildness, to obey him in every thing; and did of their own accord undergo several hazards, in order to pur∣chase Glory and Honour to their General. But Appius's Army hated him, and were on purpose lazy; and when they were drawn out into the Field, refused to engage, and
loudly demanded to march out of their Enemy's Country. 35. Appius being oblig'd to take his Men out of the Enemy's Country, before he re∣turn'd to his own, exercis'd the utmost se∣verities upon the disobedient. For the Cen∣turions, whose Companies had fled, and the Standard bearers that had lost their Standards, were either beheaded or whip∣ped to death. And as for the rest, every tenth Man in the Army was drawn out by Lot, and put to death. That being the usual way among the Romans, of punishing Deserters, and those who lost or threw a∣way the Standards. 36. Next year the Senate went upon the Lex Agraria, which the Consuls and Tri∣bunes laid before them. But Appius being against it, wheedled almost all the Sena∣tors to side with him. Whereupon the Tribunes cited him to stand tryal for his Life. The Patritii were ready to employ their interest for saving the Criminal, and intreated Appius to humour the times, and take upon him a habit more suitable to his present Circumstances. But Appius said he would not condescend to any thing that was sordid or below his Dignity. He did not abate any thing of his wonted Mag∣nanimity; and when he saw that the whole City expected his Condemnation, laid vio∣lent hands on himself, a few days before the Tryal. Notwithstanding the Remon∣strances of the Tribunes, the People al∣low'd
his Son to have a Funeral Panegy∣rick upon his Father, according to the Cu∣stom of their Ancestors. 37. The Romans fought successively for some years against the Aequi, Sabini and Volsci. But in the 80 Olympiad, in which To∣rymbas the Thessalian was Victor, Phrasides be∣ing then Archon, and P. Volumnius and Ser. Sulspicius Camerinus Consuls; The Tri∣bunes made a new stir among the Com∣mons, by suggesting to them, that in a free State that was the best form of Go∣vernment, that gave equal liberty to every Man to speak and give his opinion, and propos'd that the Administration of all things, both private and publick, should be regulated by positive Laws: Designing by such motions to effect what C. Terentius, Tribune of the People, had offer'd at in the preceding year. Accordingly, without the consent of the Senate, they made a Law, ordering that ten Men, recommended by their Age and Prudence, should be chosen by the People in their Comitia, to publish written Laws upon all publick and private Affairs; that their Laws should be pro∣pos'd in the Forum; and that both the yearly Magistrates and the private Citizens should take the decisions of their mutual differences from them. 38. The Patritii would not suffer Laws to be made without a Decree of the Se∣nate to that effect; whereupon they dis∣play'd all their force in hindering the
meeting of the Comitia; and among other young Noblemen, one Caeso Quintius, Son to L. Quintius Cincinnatus, made a great figure. He spar'd no opprobious Invectives in railing against the Plebeians, and was thereupon Indicted by the Tribunes. His Father defended him but sorrily, for the Tribunes foreseeing that the boldness of Insolent youths would grow to an unsuf∣ferable heighth, if he got off with impu∣nity, arraign'd him of a feign'd Crime; the Tryal being put off he got out upon Bail, and fled from his Bail to Tuscany, but the Tribunes oblig'd the Bail to pay the Money they had engag'd for. The Father sold most of his Estate and Goods, and pay'd to the Bail the Money they had laid out for his Son, and retir'd with a few Servants to the Country, to a little Farm that was all he had sav'd of his E∣state, upon which he had a little sorry Cottage, and there manur'd the Land in a laborious and miserable condition. Grief and Want oblig'd him neither to see the City nor to entertain his Friends, nor ce∣lebrate Festival days, nor to be present at any publick Solemnity. 39. However the Tribunes were very much disappointed; for Caeso's distress was so far from checking the insolence of the young men, that they became more inso∣lent and haughty, and oppos'd the Law both in words and deeds. The Tribunes seeing they could not get the Law to bear,
made a noise of a great Conspiracy against the Commons; but Claudius, the Consul, made it appear to be a Fiction. The Do∣mestick Evils were further enflam'd by one Herdonius Sabinus, who at the had of 4000 men possess'd himself of the Capitol, and invited the Servants to take their free∣dom. The Tribunes would not suffer the disorder to be redress'd, till Valerius one of the Consuls, bound himself by an Oath to satisfie the demands of the Plebeians. Valerius was kill'd in the Siege of the Ca∣pitol, and Claudius would not rest till L. Quintius, Father of the banish'd Caeso, suc∣ceeded the deceas'd Consul. 40. 'Twas with difficulty that L. Quintius Cincinnatus was induc'd to part from his Coun∣try retreat; however he at length accep∣ted the Post, and by his Authority re∣strain'd the Sedition, and oblig'd the Peo∣ple wonderfully by his Equity and Justice. Next year he was created Dictator, to make head against the Aequi, who were possess'd of Tusculum, and within sixteen days after his entry upon that Post, re∣liev'd the Consul's Camp from a siege, defeated a gallant Army of the Enemies, demolish'd their City and left a Garrison in it, and return'd in Triumph to Rome, with the Enemy's General and several great Men bound in Chains. Then he dimitted his Magistracy, and refus'd all the honours proffer'd him by the Senate, and retir'd again to his Country Seat. Thus did he
prefer a laborious Life to that of a Prince, and was prouder of his poverty than o∣thers are of their riches. 41. Next year the Plebeians refus'd to fight against the Sabines and Aequi, unless the number of the Tribunes were enlarg'd to that of ten; which accordingly was granted. But even that did not satisfie them, for the Tribunes made a new stir by encroaching on the Authority of the Consuls for the next year. For whereas formerly the Tribunes were only allow∣ed to harangue to the People, but did not pretend to call the Senate, or give their own Votes; that honour being peculiar to the Consuls; yet one Icilius, an Active and Eloquent Man, induc'd the Tribunes for that year to call a Senate. Icilius likewise mov'd, that the Aventine Hill, which was no less than 22 Furlongs in Circumference, and belong'd to the Publick, together with the Wood which grew very plentifully up∣on it, should be given to the Plebs to build Houses upon. 42. The Tribune desir'd that his mo∣tion should be confirm'd by a Decree of the Senate; and finding that the Consuls put it off, order d an Officer to follow them to the College and call a Senate, and was not far from throwing headlong over the Rock one of the Serjeants that repuls'd the Officer, by the Consuls orders. For the Consuls could neither offer violence nor rescue the Serjeant, tho' at the same
time they were highly sensible of the Af∣front. Then they implor'd the assistance of the other Tribunes; but they had all combin'd to carry on the design with joynt force. When the Consuls call'd a Senate, Icilius appear'd and excus'd all that was done, and made it out that his Law was very useful for preventing the insurrecti∣ons of the poor, who were mov'd to Se∣dition by the Patritii, their encroaching on the publick grounds. So that he got a Decree pass'd on that behalf. 43. Tho' these Civil Commotions seem'd to be thus laid asleep, yet next year the Tri∣bunes reviv'd 'em, and then Wars broke out which did not at all injure the Republick; for this was a certain rule, that when they were engag'd in Wars, they were free from Domestick Quarrels, and when they enjoy'd Peace Civil dissensions prevail'd. The Consuls indeed were in the right of it, in proposing that the Mob should be kept under by Foreign Wars; but they were out in using the extremity of seve∣rity, and admitting of no excuse in levy∣ing Men. Upon this the Tribunes took occasion to raise the Plebs, and inveigh'd against he Consuls for ordering Roman Ci∣tizens that implor'd relief from the Tri∣bunes to be put in prison. The tumult encreas'd every day till at last they came to blows, and the Consuls were cited to their Tryal; for the Tribunes cry'd that not only their Authority was infring'd,
but their sacred persons affronted and vio∣lated. 44. The People were so furious and dis∣posed to Civil Wars, that if the Tribunes had propos'd any thing against the Consuls or the Senate, the City had certainly ruin∣ed it self: But at last the Tribunes call'd together the People, and told 'em that out of respect to several good and wor∣thy Men, they forgave the Affront given to themselves, but would prosecute and revenge the injury done to the People, and promis'd to promote the Lex Agraria, which had lain by above 30 years. A∣mong many who egg'd on the People in their Convention, none made more noise than L. Siccius Dentatus, a Man of a won∣derful Aspect, and 58 years of Age, who by recounting a great many Exploits done by him, put the People in such a ferment that they would not so much as hear those who offer'd to speak against him. 45. This man had serv'd in all Mili∣tary Posts, and receiv'd all the degrees of Honour in that Capacity. He was strong to a Miracle, and in the time of 40 years continual service had fought in 120 En∣gagements. He had 45 Wounds upon the fore-part of his body, but none on the hinder; and 12 of those were receiv'd that day that Herdinius Sabinus took the Capi∣tol. From the several Battels he had been in, he got several badges of honour. He had 14 City Crowns, which were put upon him
by the Citizens that he preserv'd: and one Siege Crown, with three Wall ones, me∣rited by scaling the Walls first and ta∣king possession of 'em; and 8 other Crowns which the Emperors presented him with for his extraordinary service in the Field, besides 73 Gold Chains, 60 Gold Bracelets, 18 Spears, and 25 great Harnesses, 9 of which were taken from Enemies that challeng'd the Romans to particular duels. This is Dionysius's List, to which Gellius adds ano∣ther Siege Crown, as many Bracelets as make in all 160, 4 Spears, and as many Har∣nesses. He calls him L. Sicinius Dentatus, and says he was sirnam'd the Roman A∣chilles. 46. Siccius told 'em he had serv'd the Republick in so many great Exploits, but the reward of his labours was anticipated by the Noblemen, who possess'd the Con∣quer'd grounds; and added several other Arguments for making the Law, and re∣jecting all suggestions to the contrary. The Assembly was presently in such a fer∣ment, that one would have thought they would have run on in a Current; when Icilius the Tribune rose, and spoke much to the advantage of Siccius, but told 'em 'twas a very unjust thing for any to charge others with Crimes that they themselves were guilty off: And in regard 'twas highly just that every Man should have the liberty of speaking his mind, he adjourn∣ed
the Convention to another day, on which every man might be in readiness. 47. The Patritii finding their requests ineffectual, design'd to oppose the Law by open force. They hinder'd the People to meet in their Tribes, took away their pitchers and ballotes, and sparing the Tribunes who made a heavy noise and crowded in among 'em, resisted their followers, and so render'd their Offices of no effect. A∣mong these, the young Gentlemen of the Families of the Posthumius's, Sempronius's and Claelius's, made the greatest stir, and hin∣der'd the Lex Agraria to be ratify'd by a Plebiscitum. 48. Tho' the Tribunes were mightily enrag'd, yet they resolv'd to Indite none but them, and put up the Quarrel by re∣deeming the Estates from the Noblemen, and restoring them to their proper own∣ers. And were just going to ratifie the Law, when the Aequi penetrated to the Tusculum, and oblig'd the People to drown their Domestick Feuds in a Foreign War. Among others, Siccius march'd out against the Enemy, at the head of 800 Veterans, who follow'd him by way of Compliment. The Consuls had a mind he should be lost, because the Nobility hated him for the Glory he had purchas'd by his Atchieve∣ments. Accordingly they employ'd him to attack the Enemy's Camp, in such a manner as would certainly have ended in his ruin. But he storm'd their Camp a∣nother
way, and then return'd to the field of Battle, where he contributed much to the obtaining of the Victory. After all was over he return'd to Rome, and laid open the whole story to the People, and procur'd the Consuls so much envy even from the Senators, that when they sought a Triumph, their demands were rejected. And in the next Convention the Commons made Siccius Tribune. 49. Siccius having celebrated the initia∣tory rites on the first day of his Magistra∣cy, endited T. Romulius the Consul for the preceding year, before the meeting, before he entred upon any publick Administra∣tion. Romulius had a haughty speech that was not suited to the occasion, whereup∣on the Tribes Voted against him; and his punishment was a fine of 10000 Asses, which Siccius had wisely advis'd. A few days after Venturius his Collegue was like∣wise fin'd in 15000 Asses. 50. So that the Consuls for this year were sadly afraid that when they laid down their Consulship, the Commons would treat them at the same rate. Upon which ac∣count they openly favour'd the Plebeians, and in the meeting of the Centuries made a Law allowing all Magistrates to fine those who were guilty of any misdemeanor with reference to their Authority, contrary to the Discipline and Laws of the Repub∣lick. Now in former times none but the Consuls had that power. However the
measure of the fine was not left to their discretion, but 'twas provided by a Statute that the largest fine should not exceed the value of 2 Oxen and 30 Sheep, and that Law was long observ'd by the Romans. 51. Then the Consuls remitted to the Senate the cognisance of the Laws, which the Tribunes labour'd mightily to have writ for the common use of the People, and for a perpetual memorial. In this affair the opinion of T. Romulius prevail'd, who alter'd his tune and alledg'd that the Commons should be humour'd: To prevent their amazement at his turning, he said he was as much against 'em as before, but only since matters were come to that pass, that the power of the Nobility did plainly decline, he thought 'twas their du∣ty to act conformably to their present Cir∣cumstances. So that he advis'd 'em to send Commissioners, some to the Grecian Cities in Italy, and some to Athens, in order to fetch from thence the best Laws and such as were most suitable to the Roman Customs and Statutes. And when they return'd, to leave it to the Senate to nominate Le∣gislators and to determine what should be the extent of their power, and how long it should endure, and, in fine, to do in all the other Circumstances of that affair as they thought fit.
52. The greatest part of the Senators approv'd of Romulius's motion. And in pursuance of the same, by vertue of an Act pass'd in the Senate, and ratifi'd by a Plebiscitum, Sp. Posthumius, Servius Sulpicius, and A. Manlius were made Commissioners for fetching Laws from Greece; and were furnish'd upon the publick cost with Gal∣leys adorn'd with all the Ensigns of the Greatness of the Roman Empire. Af∣ter three years they return'd, and the Tribunes press'd the Consuls to leave the Affair of the Laws to the Se∣nate. But the Consuls being unwilling to sink the power of the Nobility, put it off till the Comitia, in which they chose App. Claudius and T. Gentius Consuls, much sooner than usually. And then laid aside all care of the publick, as being thus com∣mitted to others, and gave no ear to the Tribunes, meaning to pass the rest of their Consulship without doing any thing. 53. The Tribunes being oblig'd to have recourse to the Consuls elect, inveigled Appius by the promises of new honours to side with the Plebeians. Appius brought his Collegue to be of the same side, and did so egg on the people with his harangues, that P. Sestius the Consul was oblig'd to call a Senate by himself, and remit the af∣fair of the Laws to the Senate, for his Collegue L. Menenius was then a dying. Appius Claudius the Consul elect, being first ask'd, according to the custom, gave his
opinion, that ten men of the noblest rank of Senators should be chosen, and invested with an annual Authority, as being entit∣led to the Administration of Affairs, to∣gether with the Consular Authority, which the Kings had formerly; and that all other Magistrates should be broke till they were restor'd again by the Laws; and that these Decemviri should take cognisance of pri∣vate contracts, and manage the publick Affairs. This was the opinion of the two elected Consuls; and was carried. 54. When the day of Comitia came, the 2 elected Consuls resign'd their Consulship; and then the people cry'd 'em up, and elected them first, to whom they added P. Sestius Consul for that year, and the 3 Commissioners P. Posthumius, Servius Sulpici∣us and A. Manlius, together with T. Ro∣mulius, who was the proposer of the po∣pular opinion, notwithstanding that the Commons had cast him before, besides C. Julius, T. Veturius and P. Horatius, in whose room Livy puts P. Curiatius: These were all Senators and of the Consular dignity. And then the Tribunes, Aediles and Quae∣stores, and all other Magistrates were broke.
SFCT. II. From the Institution of the Decemviri to the end of the War with the Privernati∣ans, which came to pass in the last year of Darius Codomannus. The space of 121 years. 1. THE second transformation of the Government of Rome, happen'd on the 15 of May, in the 302 year after the building of the City, according to Cato's Calculation, but in the 307 according to Tarrutius and Varro, which happen'd to be the 2 and 3 of the 82 Olympiad, the 14 of Artaxerxes Longimanus, the 449 before the Birth of Christ, A. M. 3554. 2. The Mace and Consular Ensigns be∣long'd to one of the Decemviri, who call'd together the Senators, ratify'd the Decrees, and perform'd all the other offices belong∣ing to the head Magistrate. The rest, to prevent Envy, were cloath'd much like the other Citizens, and had only an usher to walk before 'em. After a certain number of days every one succeeded to the place of head Magistrate by turns. They gover∣ned
the Republick with Justice and Equi∣ty, and set up the Laws in ten Tables upon the most Conspicuous part of the Forum. Dionysius says they were engraven on Brass, but Pomponius Ictus says 'twas up∣on Ivory. So did Minos in ancient times, and long after him, Solon the Athenian, write their Laws upon Tables, which were call'd Cyrbes and Axones. 3. Next year something seem'd to be yet wanting, especially that the power of the Tribunes, which gall'd the Senators so much, should be abrogated. With which view the Senators mov'd that the Decem∣viri should be created again, and carried it. The Commons chearfully consented to the motion, being seduc'd by the dissimu∣lation of Appius, who bore the credit of the whole Administration, and gain'd the People by his Complaisance and fair speak∣ing, and other Offices. The People were mightily for his continuing in the Magi∣stracy, and he seem'd with difficulty to comply with their requests; and then was openly partial to his Friends, and inveigh'd against every body else. However, he was again made Decemvir in the Comitia Cen∣turiata, and with him Q. Fabius Vibulanus, M. Cornelius, M. Servilius, L. Minutius, T. Antonius, Manius Rabulejus, all Noblemen; together with Q. Petilius, Caeso Duillius, and Sp. Oppius, Plebeians, whom Appius took in, in order to ingratiate himself with the People.
4. Appius Claudius and his Collegues re∣ceiv'd the Consular power on the 15 of May, but at that time the months were calculated by the course of the Moon, and the full Moon happen'd on that very day. They enter'd into a private Conspiracy, to keep the Government for ever to them∣selves, matters being so order'd, that all of 'em should be equal in dignity and power, that whatever one liked should be ratify∣ed and confirmed by all the rest; that the Acts of the Senate and those of the Plebs should never be made use of without a pres∣sing occasion; and that most things should be manag'd by the Authority of their Of∣fice. These Decemviri added two other Tables of the Laws to the former ten, and the whole number together were call'd leges duodecim tabularum. 5. The Decemviri manag'd all by force, and fill'd the City with Blood and Ra∣pine. They continued their power next year and either kill'd or banish'd most of the richer Citizens. The Sabines and the Aequi made use of this opportunity to in∣vade the Roman and Latin grounds; and the Decemviri being engag'd in the War against 'em, were guilty of those Crimes which brought their Tyranny to an end; for Appius, who staid in Town, finding that Siccius Dentatus, that Roman Achilles, kept a narrow eye upon the Estate of the Re∣publick, sent him to the Camp in the Quality of a Legate, and perfidiously sent
secret Intelligence to his Collegues to kill him. Then he fell in Love with the Daugh∣ter of L. Virginius, a Roman Citizen, and in order to enjoy her, adjudg'd her to be the Servant of one of his Tenants. But the Father foreseeing that his Daughter was about to be expos'd to the Tyrant's Lust, cut her throat with a knife, and went straight to the Camp, where he induc'd the Army to revolt. 6. By this means the Decemviri came to be outted by the Senate, for the Army de∣clar'd for it and the Republick. And the Consulship fell to Valerius Potitus and M. Horatius, who were very much ad∣dicted to the Commons, as it appear'd by the Laws they made. One of which pro∣vided that Laws enacted in the Comitia Tributa, should be universal, and have the same power with those made by the Co∣mitia Centuriata. Now in the Tributa the Noblemen were out-voted by the Plebei∣ans and poor Members; but in the Cen∣turiata the former always prevail'd, tho' the latter were much superior in number. A Capital punishment and the forfeiture of Estates, was provided against those who should offer to violate or abrogate that Law. 7. Virginius Tribune of the People In∣dicted Appius, and others did the same to the other Decemviri. But Appius either murder'd himself, or was kill'd by the Tri∣bunes, in Prison, before the tryal. Oppius
likewise laid violent hands on himself; the other 8 were banish'd, and Claudius who laid claim to Virginia as his Servant, was likewise sentenc'd to perpetual banish∣ment. All the rest who serv'd the Decem∣viri in their unjust designs were pardon'd. Then the Consuls fought successively a∣gainst the Aequi, Volsci and Sabini; but when they put in for a Triumph, their demand was rejected by the Senate. The Consuls took the refusal for a heavy Affront, and having call'd a meeting of the Peo∣ple, accus'd the Senate in a long harangue, and were back'd by the Tribunes, who pas∣sed their Bill, so that the People gave 'em the liberty of a Triumph, and they were that first of all the Romans that introduc'd the custom. 8. From what has been said, 'tis appa∣rent how the Commons of Rome hook'd the Authority into their own hands, and al∣most turn'd the Nobility out of any share in the Goverment. But they were not con∣tented with that purchase, but the more they satisfied their thirst, the more it was inflam'd; for they now pretended to a share of the Consulship, and when the Ae∣qui, Sabini, Veientes and Ardeates threaten'd 'em with a heavy War, the Tribunes res∣cu'd all those whom the Consuls were about to list in the service, and would not suf∣fer 'em to punish those who stood out. Nay, they threaten'd to thwart the Senate in every thing else, and to ratifie no act of
the Senate whatsoever, unless the Senate first made an Act in Confirmation of the Law they had promulgated to that effect. But Claudius, a Senator, found out a way of satisfying the Ambition of the Plebei∣ans, and at the same time keeping up the dignity of the Patritii. 9. He perswaded the Senators, when they were reduc'd to necessity, to allow the Plebe∣ians a share of the the greatest power and dig∣nity, and for that end to create Magistrates who should be call'd tribuni militum, and con∣sist of as many Noblemen as Plebeians. This project was first started privately; then the Tribunes and others hugg'd it, and liberty was given to as many Plebeians as pleas'd to put in for the Magistracy along with the Patritii. But Desire is a thing of so much levity, especially when lodg'd in a Mob, that those very Men who but now were unspeakably eager to be in the Ma∣gistracy, and, if the Noblemen had not granted their demand, would either have deserted the Town as before, or master'd it by force of Arms: That Crew, I say, when they had compass'd their end, remov'd their desire from what they coveted be∣fore, and bended it upon a contrary thing. 10. For when many of the Plebeians put in with all their might for the Office of tribuni militum; the Senate thought none of 'em worthy of that Post, and having the Votes in their own power, prefer'd the Noble and Illustrious men that sollicited for
it, namely, A. Sempronius Atratinus, L. Attilius Longus, and T. Claelius Siculus. These were the first that got the Proconsular dignity, in the 3 year of the 84 Olympiad, according to Dionysius; but according to the computati∣on of others in the 1 year of that Olympiad, the 310 after the building of Rome, and the 21 of Artaxerxes Longimanus, M. Genutius, and C. Quintius, or L. Papyrius and L. Sem∣pronius, being then Consuls. 11. At first there were 3 tribuni militum, afterwards 6 and at last 8. Indeed Pomponius Jctus says there was once 20 or above, but either he is mistaken, or the word is corrup∣ted from Seni to Viceni. When the number encreas'd and the Plebeians crept in among them, tho' they had a Consular power, and were entitled to all the badges of their Au∣thority, yet the Dignity was still reckon'd to be of an inferiour degree, and Proconsular, as 'twere. Sometimes they, and sometimes Con∣suls were chosen, till the year 388 after the building of the City, that Q. Sextius, a Ple∣beian, was elected Consul, and so they came into disuse. The first three retain'd their Government only 73 days, by reason of the appearance of some signs. And then the People chose L. Papyrius Mugalinus, and L. Sempronius Atratinus to be Consuls. 12. Next year the People likewise thought it fit to elect Consuls; and accordingly M. Geganius Macerinus, and T. Quintius Capitolinus enter'd upon their Consulship on the 13 of De∣cember; the former being then twice and the
second five times Consul. In their Consulship the Censores were instituted, whose office had been better known, had not the injuries of time rob'd us of a part of Dionysius Halicar∣nasseus his account of the same. The Consuls remonstrated to the Senate, that the conti∣nual Expeditions of the Consuls occasion'd the neglect of several useful things, par∣ticularly of the valuation of Estates, by which they knew both the number of those who were fit for Military Service, and the proportion of every Man's Estate, by which the publick Taxes were to be adjusted: For there had been no survey or assessment for 17 years, from the Consulship of L. Cornelius and Fabius; by which means many good and use∣full Men were assess'd and employ'd upon Ex∣peditions, when the idle and profligate sort were left unminded, and remov'd from one place to another, where they liv'd as they pleas'd. 13. Upon which account the Senators e∣lected two of their Members, whom they cal∣led Censores, either because the People was sur∣vey'd and assess'd (census) by them, as Varro will have it; or else because, as Festus says, every man's Estate was valu'd according to their Judgment or report (quanti illi censuis∣sent.) At first they were created for 5 years, afterwards in the 320 year after the building of Rome, the term of their service was redu∣ced to a year and a half. At first they only survey'd and assess'd the People; but after∣wards they were employ'd to inspect into the
manners and conversations of the Citizens, so that it was in their power to cut off those whom they found Criminal from any right to sit in the Senate or in the Tribes, and re∣duce them ad Aerarios, so call'd because they were only reckon'd Citizens in so far as they pay'd Aera, by way of a Tax for their heads. In process of time the Censors likewise farm'd the publick Revenues, and took care of the publick Buildings, and the High-Roads, and regulated the charges of the publick Sacrifices. There were also Deputy Censors in the Co∣lonies, who sent them an account of the num∣ber and the estates of the Inhabitants, to be inserted in the publick Tables. After the second Punick War, the Censors were in∣vested with a Consular Dignity, and wore the Ensigns of that office, and indeed were reck∣on'd a degree better than they. 14. In the mean time the Plebeians being push'd on by the Tribunes, took it very ill that they were not allow'd inter-marriages with the Nobility, and laid claim to an equal right. This stir'd up Sp. Maelius to aspire at the King∣dom by distributing Corn in the time of a fa∣mine; but L. Quintius Cincinnatus being made Dictator in the 80 year of his Age, employ'd C. Servilius Hala, Major General of Horse to kill him, and pull down his House, in the 315 year after the building of the City. The Tribunes resented his death, and mov'd that they should choose the tribuni militum next year, that so the Plebeians might then creep into that Post; but they were disappointed. In this
year, Fidenae a Roman Colony surrender'd it self to Tolumnius, K. of the Veientes, and upon his advice maltraited the Roman Legates. Upon the War against them Mamercus Aemi∣lius was made Dictator, and under his Com∣mand Corn. Cassus kill'd Tolumnius, and was the second that obtain'd the opima spolia. 15. Varro derives opima, ab opibus; but Plu∣tarch, ab opere. They were Consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius, so call'd because the spoils were carried in a feretrum, or à feriendo. There were but three dignified with that honour before Plutarch's time; namely, Romulus who kill'd and pillag'd Acron, K. of Caerina; Cassius who did the same to Tolumnius, K. of the Ve∣ientes, and Marcellus who obtain'd the like success over Britomartus or Virdumarus, K. of the Gauls. Fidenae was soon taken, but revol∣ted again, and the tribuni militum were sent to subdue 'em, but being all invested with equal power, and dissenting from one another, they made but an ill hand of it. Whereupon Ae∣milius was made Dictator a third time, and Cassus, Master of the Horse: and these two de∣feated the Etrurians, and took Fidenae. 16. The Consuls and Tribunes of the Army succeeded mutually, according as the People pleas'd. Soon after the Tribunes got three Quaestores and one Tribunus militum, chosen out of the Commons. The Veientes having perswa∣ded the Fidenatians to revolt, continued still in War with them, and the siege of Veii last∣ed 10 years. In the 10 year of that siege Fu∣rius Camillus (who had been twice Tribune of
the Army, and Censor) was chosen Dictator. Camillus easily carried Veii, and returned to Rome in Triumph, riding in a Coach drawn by 4 white Horses, which honour was reck∣oned peculiar to Jupiter, and he was the first of all the Romans that arrogated it to himself. By this action he drew an odium upon himself, which was much enflam'd by his hindring the Commons to return to Veii, when they sepa∣rated from the Nobility. Upon which the Commons were so incens'd against him that they banish'd him, as if he had cheated the Treasury of the spoil taken in the Etrurian War, and fin'd him in 15000 (or rather 1500) Aera, which were then only in use among the Romans. 17. Camillus being banish'd, extended his hands towards the Capitol, and pray'd that if he was injur'd his ungrateful Countrymen might have occasion to repent, that it might be seen how much the Romans would miss him in his absence. Which happen'd not long after. The Galli Celtae being confin'd in too narrow bounds, sent out several Colonies in quest of new seats. The Posterity of those who set∣led between the Pyrenean Mountains and the Alps, having tasted the Italian Wine, had a mighty itch to subdue the Country that pro∣duc'd such noble liquor; and accordingly cross'd the Alps, and remov'd to that part of Italy, which the Hetrusci were formerly pos∣sess'd of; and afterwards being call'd Senones, came under the Command of their K. Brennus, and besieg'd Clusium, a City of Tuscany. The
Clusians implor'd the assistance of the Ro∣mans, and they sent three Ambassadors all of 'em of the Family of the Fabius's, to bring the Affair to an Accomodation. The Am∣bassadors finding that the Gauls could by no means be perswaded into Peace, without they got part of the grounds, were angry and march'd out of the Town to fight. As soon as Brennus was inform'd of their motion, he cry'd out, that they violated the Law of Nations, and march'd towards Rome. 18. He demanded that the Ambassadors should be deliver'd up to him, but 'twas re∣fus'd. This he took for an Affront, and in resentment of the same, defeated the Tri∣bunes of the Army, upon the River Allia. Finding Rome abandon'd by most of the Ci∣tizens, he sack'd it, and besieg'd the Capitol. Camillus being then at Veii, was chosen Gene∣ral by the banish'd Romans: and being confir∣med by those who kept the Capitol, routed the Gauls and put 'em to flight. And thus Rome, which had been surpris'd and taken by the Gauls on the 15 of July, was recover'd a∣gain on the 13 of February, in the 365 year after the building of the City, and the 16 of Artaxerxes Mnemon. 19. The Tribunes of the People made a noise again about separating and removing to Veii; and in order to remedy that evil, the Se∣nators desir'd Camillus to retain the Dictators place for the whole year, tho' that was un∣precedented. Camillus detain'd the Com∣mons and induc'd 'em to rebuild the City;
which being done in a hurry, it seem'd rather to be a heap of houses one upon another than a regular City; and the Conduits which before were plac'd in the streets were then put un∣der ground. Next year Camillus was made Dictator a second time, and Conquer'd the Aequi and Hetrusci, and oblig'd the Volsci to surrender after they had continued the War 70 years. 20. Three years after that Camillus being made Tribune of the Army defeated 'em a∣gain, as also the Latines who had continued true to the Romans from the Battel at Rhe∣gillum to that time. These things inflam'd the envy of M. Manlius who had purchas'd great glory by defending the Capitol, and en∣larged it by liberal Presents to the People, in order to win their Affections, and make his way for Tyranny. But Corn. Cassus the Di∣ctator, or else Quintius Capitolinus, who, Livy says, was still Major General of the Horse, kill'd him; upon which the Commons were much incens'd. 21. Afterwards the War was carired on successfully against the Latins and the Volsci; but the Commons complain'd heavily of the debts. The Tribunes animated 'em, but Fa∣bius Ambustus, a Nobleman, enflam'd their am∣bition much more, for having married one Daughter to a Nobleman, and another to a Commoner, the latter took it ill that she wan∣ted the honours that her Sister had, and he made answer that her Family would in time be likewise honourable. He likewise concer∣ted
measures with Licinius Stolo, his Son-in-Law, and L. Sestius, about giving the Plebeians a right to be Consuls. These two men being made Tribunes, rais'd such tumults, that for 5 years there was no head Magistrate. Indeed the Sedition lasted 9 years, and it had come to a∣nother separation, had not Camillus's Autho∣rity weigh'd in some measure with both sides. Then Camillus was made Dictator a 5th. time, and routed the Gauls again, upon the River Anien. 22. But upon his return to Rome he encoun∣ter'd great difficulties, for the Commons were up again about the Consulship, and were not far from doing violence to his Person, when dignified by the highest Magistracy, and shi∣ning with the Glory of his great Atchievments. So he perswaded the Senators to humour the times, and to make a Plebeian one of the Con∣suls. But at the same time the Patritii were allow'd to choose a Praetor to judge Causes within the City, out of their own number. Matters being thus accomodated, a Temple was dedicated to Concord, which Camillus had formerly vow'd. A 4th. day was added to the Latin-fair, and the greater games were celebrated, two noblemen being appointed to serve in the room of the Aediles, who re∣fus'd to execute their office upon that occasi∣on, and these Noblemen were call'd Curules from their Chair of State. Some will have that Chair to be call'd Curulis from the Coach upon which it stood; but others derive the occasion from Cures a Sabine City. The form
of it, as 'tis stamp'd upon medals and Coins, resembles the Spanish Chairs, which at this day great men make use of. It had crooked feet, and steps to get up by; and was cover'd with Ivory, with several things Engrav'd upon it. 23. The Praetor was so call'd à praeeundo, and at first the Consuls and most Magistrates went by the same name. The Consuls being for the most part taken up with military business a Praetor was appointed to sit as Judge. And about 112 years after the first institution, a∣bout the 500 year after the building of Rome, another was added, who was call'd Peregrinus, from taking cognisance of foreign Causes. Afterwards when Sardinia, Sicily and Spain became Provinces, the number of the Praetors was made equal to that of the Provinces, till it came to 18 and above. Afterwards it de∣creas'd again as the Empire declin'd, and by a Law made by Valentinianus and Marcianus was reduc'd to three. The Town Praetor was like∣wise call'd Governor, because in the absence of the Consuls he executed their Office, and took care of the Games, Sacrifices, and decisions of Causes. They had the same badges of honour with the Consul, bating that there were only six rods carry'd before 'em. By reason of their power and dignity and the solemnity of their institution, Livy calls 'em Collegues to the Consuls. 24. The first Plebeian Consul was L. Sex∣tius: The first Praetor was Sp. Furius, Son to Camillus: The first Aediles Curules were Cn. Quintius Capitolinus and P. Corn. Scipio. L.
Aemilius Mamercus was Collegue with Sexti∣us, for the Nobility. And thus the Consul∣ship return'd to its former course after an in∣terval of 23 years; and 'twas then the 88 in number from the Expulsion of the Kings. But the Tribunes of the Army were for ever kept out, after they had govern'd the Repub∣lick 48 times, and the administration of affairs had been 15 times devolv'd from Consuls up∣on them, and from them upon Consuls. Be∣sides these alterations, the Government was toss'd from the Kings to the Consuls, from the Consuls to the Decemviri, and from them to the Consuls again, and 20 Dictatorships in∣terven'd, besides an infinity of interregnums, during which the Regents govern'd with a Consular power for five days. So many were the changes and alterations that happen'd af∣ter the banishing of Tarquinius their King, in the space of 134 years. 25. The Noblemen were so disoblig'd by the Plebeians their invading the Consulship, that the Senate made no preparations a∣gainst the Gauls. The Plebeians on the other hand were angry that the Noblemen had 3 Magistracies in their power, and look'd with an envious eye upon the power of the Praetor. Whereupon the Commons were allow'd to be capable of the place of Aedilis Curulis. Next year a grievous plague rag'd, by which Camillus and many others were swept off. And no remedy being found, the Stage Plays were Instituted, and Actors were brought from Etruria, who were call'd
Histri, from whence the word Histrio takes its rise. Soon after M. Curtius threw himself head∣long, at a time that they fought successfully against the Hernici, Galli, Hetrusci and Latini. 26. After the Plebeians had enjoyed the Consulship 9 years, the Noblemen taking it ill that C. Martius Rutilius had been made Di∣ctator in the preceding year, translated him to their rank. And this was so far resented by the Commons that the Nobility was obli∣ged both to restore the Consulship, and to pay the debts of the poor out of the Treasu∣ry. And in the very next year a Plebeian was made one of their Censors. 27. Hitherto the Romans had not carried their Arms far; but now they began to reach beyond their wonted bounds, being solicited to assist the Campanians against the Samnitians, whom Valerius the Consul defeated and forc'd to make Peace. They likewise made War with the Latines for assisting the Enemies of the Samnitians, who had thus become their Allies. In this War Decius. Mus sacrificed himself for the good of the Roman Army, by crouding in amongst the thickest ranks of the Enemies, who cut him to pieces. T. Manlius also (who was sirnam'd Torquatus, from defeat∣ting and taking a Chain from a Gaul in a Duel) beheaded his own Son for fighting without his Command, notwithstanding that he came off with the Victory. From thence hard precepts were call'd Manliana; but when Manlius return'd after the defeat of the La∣tines, the young men would not go out to meet him.
18. The Consuls for the next year maul'd the Latines again, who had revolted upon the taking of some grounds from them. The Se∣nate being at that time somewhat unjust to Aemilius, one of the Consuls, and desiring to have a Dictator, he nominated Q. Publius Philo for his Collegue, whose Magistracy gall'd the Senators sufficiently, especially up∣on the score of three Laws which he made. The first of which seem'd to alter the whole form of Government, for its tenor was that the Plebiscita were obligatory upon the Qui∣rites. The second provided that whatever was enacted by the Comitia Centuriata should be propos'd by the Senators. The third ap∣pointed one of the Censors at least to be a Plebeian. These Laws were made in the 416 year after the building of the City, in the 1 of Arses King of Persia, and the 23 of Philip of Macedonia. 29. Next year all Latium was subdu'd, and the Ships belonging to the Antiates were taken from 'em, the beaks of which were put up in the Church where the harangues were made, from whence it was call'd Rostra. Next year after that, Q. Publius Philo, a Ple∣beian, was made Praetor, and the Nobility made but little resistance, having at that time lost all their priviledges and the badges of their dignity. Soon after the Sidicini and Ausones were Conquer'd and upon a new sur∣vey of the Citizens two new Tribes were made, viz. the Metia and the Scaptia, for re∣ceiving new Citizens.
30. At the same time 130 Women were convicted of Witch-craft, and put to death; and in regard that was reckon'd a Prodigy, a Dictator was nominated to fasten a nail for a memorial of the same. Then a War broke out with the Privernates, who had been push'd on by Vitruvius Gallus, a great Man a∣mong the Faudani. In the first year they were worsted, in the next Vitruvius was ta∣ken, and Privernum came into the hands of the Romans. Vitruvius and his Complices were beheaded; and the other Citizens were allow'd the freedom of the City. Now the first year of this War happen'd to be the last of Darius Codomannus, the last of the Persian Kings, the 424 after the build∣ing of Rome, in the Consulship of L. Papy∣rius Crassus for the second time, and L. Plau∣tius Venox or Venon.
THE ELEMENTS OF HISTORY. BOOK III. Of the Macedonian Empire, and Things Contemporary with it. CHAP. I. From the beginning of the Macedonian Empire, to the Death of Alexander the Great. The Space of Six Years and Ten Months. 1. WHEN Alexander look'd upon the Corps of Darius, he wept over them. Having pursu'd Bessus to no pur∣pose, he return'd to Hecatompolis, a City in Parthia, where he encourag'd the Soldiers to go on; finding them very eager to return to their own Country. Then he march'd against
the Mardians, and forc'd them to give up Buce∣phalus, which Damaratus, the Corinthian, had gifted them. When he came to Zadracarta, the Metropolitan of Hyrcania, the Story has it, That he embrac'd Thalestris, Queen of the A∣mazons; but neither Ptolomy, the Son of La∣gus, nor any creditable Writer of those times, mentions that Adventure; and Alexander him∣self never mention'd it in his Letters, or other Interviews with Antipater. 2. From thence he march'd into the Coun∣try of the Arii and Sarangaei, where a Conspi∣racy against him was discover'd: And Philotas, the Son of Parmenio, lost his Head, either for declining or delaying to Reveal it. And Par∣menio himself, Governour of Media, who was then 70 Years Old, and had done the King many good Services, underwent the same Fate; because he was suspected, either to be Guilty, or to design the Revenge of his Son's Death. At that time, Bessus at Bactra had ta∣ken upon him the Title of Artaxerxes, King of Persia; whereupon Alexander set out, and ha∣ving passed over the Mountain Paropamisus, came to Bactra, where Bessus was betray'd, and deliver'd into his Hands; and he gave him up to Oxyartes, Darius's Brother, to be Tortur'd to Death. 3 About this time, he Destroy'd the City of the Branchidae, with all the Inhabitants; as a Punishment for the Crime committed by their Ancestors 150 Years before, in giving the Treasure of Apollo Didymaeus to Xerxes upon his flight, and following him to this Place where they settled. Having passed over the River
Tamais, which falls from the Mountain Cauca∣sus into the Caspian-Sea, he receiv'd a Wound in his Thigh; but after all, the Scythians were constrain'd to Surrender themselves by an Em∣bassy, and he possess'd himself of Marcanda, of which the People of Sogdiana had formerly made themselves Masters, by cutting off the Mace∣donian Garrison. At this place, being Drunk with Wine, he kill'd Clytus, who had check'd him for slighting the Actions of Philip his Fa∣ther, and with some warmth had spoke of his Glory in a lessening way. 4. Next Spring, in the beginning of the 10th Year of his Reign, he made himself Ma∣ster of the highest Rock in Sogdiana, where Oxyartes, (a Lord of that Country) liv'd; whose Daughter Roxana he fell so deeply in Love with, that he marry'd her out of hand. Having thus advanc'd the Condition of his Af∣fairs, and reduc'd his Enemies, he arrogated to himself divine Honours, which Callisthenes, the Philosopher, Son to Aristotle's Neece, re∣fused to pay him, and thereupon lost his Head. Afterwards, he march'd towards India, and made himself Master of the Hill Aornos, which only Hercules before him was able to cross. 5. In the 11th Year of his Reign, which was the 4th after the Death of Darius, he passed over the River Indus, and invaded India. Om∣phis, or Mophis, the King of this Country, pre∣sently surrender'd himself, and Alexander al∣low'd him to go by the name of Taxiles. Abi∣sarus also, King of the Highlanders, by Em∣bassy surrender'd himself and his Kingdom. Then Alexander march'd against Porus, who
reign'd beyond the River Hydaspes. He cross'd the River without much difficulty; and soon after came to a Battle, in which the Indian King was mounted upon an Elephant, and made a terrible Figure; and Alexander had his Horse shot, lost many of his Men, and was sav'd by his Officers. Porus did not give over fighting till all his Men forsook him. The Conqueror admir'd his Valor, return'd him his Kingdom, and enlarg'd it with the Addition of other Countries. Alexander gave Orders for build∣ing two Cities, one call'd Nicaea, in the very place where he defeated Porus; the other near to the River call'd Bucephalaea, in memory of the Horse Bucephalus, who dy'd at this place, being 30 Years Old. 6. Having Conquer'd many Nations, he came to the River Hyphasis or Hyparis, the utmost limits of his Victories: For he could not by any means persuade his Men to cross it. At this place he order'd the Camp to be made three times larger than usually; he caus'd Beds to be made five Cubits wide; and Mangers, Arms, Bridles, and other Accoutrements of a prodigi∣ous largeness. He return'd to the River Hydas∣pis, and sail'd towards the Ocean; his Men be∣ing divided on the two sides of the River. He set out in the beginning of November, receiv'd Homage from the Sibari, kill'd several others that refus'd to submit, and march'd against Malli and Oxydracae, with whom he had a bloo∣dy Battle, that put him in great danger of his Life: For he himself scal'd the Walls of the Castle of Malli, and leap'd down on the inside. Whereupon the Barbarians shot Darts
at him upon all hands, and he receiv'd a Wound in his Lungs; And by the loss of his Blood and Spirits fell into a swoon, which stopt the Bleeding. 7. After the recovery of his Wound he sail'd to the place where the Rivers Hydraois and Acesines meet, and from thence to the Indus. Together with the other Indians, he subdu'd the Brachmans, and propos'd hard questions to them. After Ten Months sailing he came to the Island Pattalena, where the Indus is divided into two Channels: From thence he set forward, and after Encountring several Storms, arriv'd at length in the Ocean, where he sacrific'd Bulls and perform'd other Acts of Devotion to Nep∣tune, in order to procure a happy Voyage to the Fleet, which he order'd Nearchus to sail with thro' the Ocean and Persian Bay as far as to Euphrates and the Tigris. Having left his navy at Pattala, he pass'd thro' the Countreys of the Arabitae, Oritae, and Gedrosii. 8. He Encounter'd Greater Difficulties in the Country of the Gedrosii, than in all his Pro∣gress in Asia: For thro' the scarcity of Water, Violence of heat and want of Provisions, he did not bring home one quarter of the forces he Transported to Asia. 'Tis said, he was forewarn'd of those Difficulties; For he was inform'd that Semiramis escap'd out of this Country only with 30, and Cyrus only with 7 Men, after they had offer'd to invade it. But that only whetted his Ambitious desires of outdoing their Glory. Having surmounted these Incredible Difficulties he arriv'd at Caramania. In the mean time, Nearchus being beaten by
the Patalenians, made his way thro' a Rock to bring his Fleet into the Ocean, pass'd thro' the Countrys of the Arabitae, Oritae, Gedrosii and Iththyophagi, came into the Persian Bay, and arrivd at Ormus. There he had advice that the King was about five Days Journey off from that place: so he set out, and gave the King an account of his expedition, and then re∣turn'd to the Navy with Orders to continue his course to the mouth of the River Euphrates and from thence to Babylon. 9. The King sent his Army into Persia, by Sea, under the Command of Hephestion: and vent himself over Land: Upon the Road as he came to Chalquera, he distributed Money to the Women, according to the Custom of the Per∣sian Kings; and repair'd Cyrus's Tomb. During his abode in Persia, he punish'd many Criminals; he Marryed Statira the Daughter of Darius, pay'd the Macedonians Debts, which did scarce amount to 10000 Talents; and bestow'd gifts upon every Man, in proportion to his Merit. 10. But his own Soldiers were not at all satis∣fied: for after he had Sail'd down the River Eulaeus into the Ocean, and return'd along Ti∣gris as far as Opis, he call'd together all his Soldiers, and allow'd the invalids to return home, and promised mighty things to those that wou'd continue with him to finish the War: Now this they look'd upon as a con∣tempt and slighting of them. They consider'd that he inur'd himself to the Persian Customs, and put on their habit; that the Barbarians, were listed into the Company of his Friends;
that 30 young Men were pitched upon in the Provinces and bred to the Macedonian disci∣pline, whom he call'd Epigoni. Upon these con∣siderations they conjectur'd that their Country and Customs were slighted, and desir'd to be dismiss'd, intreating the King to carry on the War with the sole assistance of Jupiter Hammon his Father. 11. The King was mightily disturb'd upon this Occurrence. He gave Orders that 13 of the Soldiers who were presently taken up, shou'd be thrown headlong into the River. The rest he overlook'd, and shut himself up in the Tent for two Days without seeing any Body. On the third day, having Ordered the Mace∣donians to keep within their Trenches, he fill'd the best Posts of the Army with Barbarians; which gall'd the Macedonians so sensibly, that for three days together they imploy'd the hea∣viest lamentations in suing for a Pardon; which at length with great difficulty they obtain'd. Then he dismissed all those who were not fit for War, and not only paid down their Arrears, but furnished them with Provisions for their Jour∣ney, and distributed a Talent to every Man. He likewise sent Craterus to Govern Macedonia, as successor to Antipater, who was to bring up the Auxiliary Troops. At length he arriv'd at Ecbatana the Metropolitan of Media, where Hephestion thro' drinking was seis'd with a Fea∣ver, and not complying with a thin spare Diet, dyed in 7 days time. The King was so afflicted with his Death, that he Crucified Glaucus his Physician, and appointed an universal Mourn∣ing, in which the City partak'd by removing the Ornaments off from their Walls.
12. Having Conquer'd the Cosseans he went to Babylon notwithstanding the remonstrances of the Caldeans, who told him that Bel had foretold that his arrival in that place wou'd be fatal to him. There he gave Audience to the Ambassadors that were sent to him out of Asia, Europe and Africa He apyly'd himself to the build∣ing of a new Fleet, in order to view Arabia, and caus'd a new Haven to be built at Babylon. In the mean time he went down the Euphrates to Pallocopa and from thence to the borders of Arabia, where he Order'd a Town to be built; then he return'd to Babylon, deriding the Re∣monstrances of the Chaldeans, and design'd to settle the seat of his Empire there. But soon after by hard drinking he was seiz'd with a Fea∣ver and died on the 11th Day. He Liv'd 32 Years and 8 Months, and Reign'd 12 Years and 8 Months. He surviv'd Darius 6 Years and 10 Months. He dy'd the first Year of the 114 Olympiad, 322 Years before Christ, A. M. 3681. CHAP. II. Of the Affairs Transacted by Alexander's Officers after his Death, till the Empire was divided, and the respective Gover∣nours were stiled Kings. The Space of 17 Years. 1. ALexander left one Son, namely Hercu∣les his Bastard, by Barsine Daughter to Artabazus the Persian. Roxana Daughter
to Oxyartes was with Child when he Dyed, and after some time brought forth a posthu∣mous Son, whom they Christen'd Alexander. He had likewise a Bastard Brother Arideus the Son of Philinna a Larissean; and Cleopatra his Sister King Epirus's Widow was also alive. After long disputes about the Election of a Successor, the Officers at last agree'd, that Arideus shou'd be declar'd King; and that Perdiccas, to whom Alexander gave his Ring when he Dyed, shou'd be Guardian to the King, whose Intellectuals were but weak. 2. Then the Provinces were divided among the Officers, and Ptolomaeus the Son of Lagus made himself Master of Egypt without any dif∣ficulty. Perdiccas, envying his possession of so large a Country, gave the command of Cappa∣docia and the other Provinces to Eumenes, and March'd at the Head of an Army towards Egypt, carrying Arideus and Alexander along with him. In crossing the Nile he took no care of his Soldiers, so that some of them were swallowed up by the Waves, and others devoured by Crocodiles; upon which he was kill'd by some Horsemen, at the end of a 3 Years Regency. By the interest of Ptolomeus, Pithon and Arideus were Elected to serve in his room: but Pithon was so disturbed with the Calumnies of Euridice Wife to Arideus, that he resign'd his Govern∣ment, and Antipater succeeded him. 3. Antipater gave Antigonus the Command of the Army, to make Head against the Eumenes, who being left in Asia by Perdiccas, had kill'd Craterus in the Field, and was declar'd an Enemy by the Army. Antigonus Conquer'd Eumenes
not by force but by stratagem, and besieged him in the Castle of Nora. But Antipater being Dead, and Polysperchon the Antientest of Alex∣anders's Officers, being left successor, Antigonus began to aspire at the whole Empire, and, in Order to make Eumenes his Friend, broke up the Siege, and took an Oath of him, which Emmenes, in Antigonus's absence, accommodated to his own meaning. Antigonus finding the Oath turn'd to his purpose endeavour'd to re∣niew the Siege, but it was in vain. In the mean time Cassander the Son of Antipater con∣certed measures for possessing himself of Macedo∣nia, and enter'd into a league with Ptolomaeus and Antigonus, the latter of whom promis'd to im∣ploy all his interest on his behalf, and pretended a great deal of Friendship, thinking thereby to have a fairer opportunity of making himself Master of Asia. 4. Polysperchon, in Order to make a stronger interest against Cassander, makes Eumenes his Friend, whom Olympias had frequently intreat∣ed by Letters, to stand by the Royal Family. Eumenes enlarg'd the number of his Forces, by Marching into the upper provinces, where the Governours joyn'd him with an Army of 18700 Foot and 4600 Horse. Antigonus pursu'd him and came to an Engagement in the Country of the Paraeteceni, and lost several of his Men; but the Victory was doubtful because Antigo∣nus's Men bury'd their dead first. After this battle the War was carry'd on by both Partys by stra∣tagems till after some time, that they came to a second Battle, in which Eumenes obtained the Victory; but the Conqueror was basely deli∣ver'd up by his own Men, with his Hands ty'd
behind his back, and after 3 Days fasting was kill'd. He was a very cunning Man, and in Warlike affairs was inferiour to none; he Dyed in the 8 year after Alexander's Death. 5. Olympias being brought back by Polysper∣chon and Aeacidas King of the Molossi, to Ma∣cedonia, together with Alexander her Grand-Child, made away King Arideus with his Wife Eurydice, the Daughter of that Amintas whom Phillip his Uncle and Guardian outted of his Kingdom, and Alexander robb'd of his Life. O∣lympias did likewise Murder Nicanor the Bro∣ther of Cassander, and hundreds of his other Friends. Cassander March'd from the Peloponne∣sus with an Army, and blocked up the Queen in Pydna; at last she was forc'd to surrender her self, and Cassander delivered her to those, whose Friends she had cruelly put to Death, to be punished with the loss of her life. In the mean time Antigonus does in the East what he pleases, he took off the Head of Pytho Gover∣nour of Media, for Ploting against him, and so frighted Seleucus Deputy Governour of Babylo∣nia, with calling him to give account of his Mony, that he fled into Egypt accompany'd by 50 Horse. 6. Seleucus was wellcomly receiv'd by Ptolo∣maeus, and manag'd Matters so, that an univer∣sal confederacy was concluded against Antigonus. They demanded that Cappadocia and Lycia shou'd be given to Cassander the Governour of Ca∣ria, Phrygia adjacent to the Hellespont to Lysi∣machus, all Syria to Ptolomy, and Babylon to Seleu∣cus; and to give the above mention'd Go∣vernors, together with the others that were outted of their Governments, a share of the
Treasure that came into his Hands after the Death of Eumenes. Antigonus rejected  Conditions of Peace, and having enter  a league with Polysperchon, apply'd himself ol∣ly to the management of his own Affairs. 7. Ptolomeus, having pacifi'd Cyprus and Cyre∣re, defeated his Son Demetrius in a Bloody Battle Fought near to Gaza a Town of Coelosyria. Seleucus return'd to Babylon with 800 Foot and 20 Horse, and with these made himself Master of the Town. After that, he enlarg'd his Forces, and possess'd himself of Susiana, Media and other Countrys: So that he invested himself with the Power and Majesty of a King, and upon that account some Date the Aera of the Seleucidae or Grecians from this Year, it being the First Year of the 117 Olympiad, the 309 Year before Christ, the 12th Year after the Death of Alexander, A. M. 3694. 8. Antigonus sent his Son Demetrius against Seleucus; in Opposition to whom Ptolomeus sent Calles to beat him out of Syria: but Demetri∣us defeated him, and by so doing wip'd off the former Discredit. He took Babylon which the Enemy had forsaken, and possess'd himself of one Castle, leaving Archelaus to Master the other Fortifications. The time pre∣scrib'd by his Father being Elaps'd he re∣turn'd to the Sea▪ and as he lay before Hali∣carnassus was beaten by Ptolomy, and so ob∣lig'd to bid an Eternal Adieu to the upper Pro∣vinces. Upon which account the Chaldeans, and perhaps the Writer of the First Book of the Maccabees, Date the Seleucian Aera from this Year.
9. Soon after a League was concluded between Ptolomaeus, Cassander, Lysimachus and Antigonus, upon these Terms, viz. That Cassander should have the Command of Europe, Lysimachus con∣tinue Master of Thracia, Ptolomy retain Egypt and the other Countrys he was already possess'd of, till Alexander the Son of Roxana should be of Age, and that Antigonus should Command Asia and give Laws to the Grecians. This League quickly came to nothing, for every one catch't what he could come at; which they were the more capable to do, because he who was their Master, and seem'd to be over them all, was taken off. For. Cassander under∣standing that the People were best affect∣ed to Alexander, and spoke openly of bring∣ing him out of Prison and setting him upon his Fathers Throne, took care that both the Mo∣ther and the Son shou'd be secretly made away. Thus was the Posthumous Alexander wickedly cut off, 13 Years after his Fathers Death. 10. Hercules the other of Alexander's Sons, whom the Macedonians look'd upon as Spuri∣ous, being then 17 Years Old, was call'd from Pergamus to Macedonia, by Polysperchon, who envy'd the Principality of Macedonia to Cassan∣der. But when it was drawing towards a bat∣tle, Cassander by large Promises perswaded Polysperchon to cut off the Youth. Cleopatra also having Rejected Antigonus who Courted her, as having a Greater Affection to Ptolomy, and upon that account designing to flee from Sar∣dis, was taken off by his means. Soon after Demetrius rescu'd Athens from the Clutches of Demetrius Chaleraeus; and defeated Menelaus
Ptolomy's General in Cyprus, and pursu'd him to Salamina where he block'd him up. Ptolo∣maeus himself came to relieve him, but he had the Mortification lo loose 8000 Men with his whole Navy, bating 8 Ships, with which he fled to Egypt, leaving both the Town and Island to Demetrius. 11. Antigonus puff'd up by the Glory of this Victory, accepted of the Regal Title and Dia∣dem, tender'd to him by his Friends, and con∣ferr'd the same Honour upon Demetrius. On the other Hand the Egyptians, that they might not seem to despair of their Interest, did like∣wise declare Ptolomy their King. In like man∣ner Seleucus, Cassander and Lysimachus, desir'd to be invested with the same dignity, the Off-Spring of Alexander being now totally Extin∣guish'd. CHAP. III. From the Time that the Officers were call'd Kings, to the Death of Seleucus who outliv'd the Rest. The Space of 40 Years. 1 ANtigonus was encourag'd by his late Suc∣cess over Ptolomy to entertain the hopes of turning him out of Egypt. Accordingly he drew together some Troops at Antigonia, a City in Syria standing upon the River Orontes, and march'd with 'em to the Mouth of the
Nile; But finding no Ford for the passage of his Army, and that his Men were in Danger of being Corrupted by the Enemy, he was ob∣lig'd to return. Neither did he succced better in his Expedition against the Rhodians. But Demetrius being sent into Greece, rescu'd the Cities from the Yoke of Polysperchon and Cas∣sander: The latter of whom was so struck with fear that he sent Ambassadors to sue for Peace, but finding that Antigonus wou'd accept of no Terms, but that of delivering him∣self and all he possess'd upon Discretion, he Egg'd on Lysimachus, Ptolomoeus and Seleucus, to Repress the Boldness of the Tyrant. 2. Next Spring the Forces of these Princes were led forth to a fatal battle. Antigonus ap∣pear'd at the Head of an Army of 70000 foot, 10000 Horse, and 75 Elephants. The Confede∣rate Army consisted of 64000 Foot, 1500 Horse; 400 Elephants and 120 Coaches. Antigonus boast∣ed that with the throw of a Stone he wou'd disperse that Convention of Kings, like a flock of Birds; But in the Time of the battle he became very sad, and talk'd to his only Son, which he never did before, and Recommend∣ed him to his Army. The battle was fought at Ipsus a Town in Phrygia, in which Demetrius wretchedly ruin'd his Fathers Interest by his Temerity, in pursuing Antiochus the Son of Seleucus, whom he had put to flight, so far, that the Elephants intercepted his return; so that he cou'd neither return to his own nor assist his Father, who waited long for relief, and at last was kill'd by Darts in the 23 Year after the Death of Alexander, the 6 Year after he had
taken upon him the Title of a King, the 4 Year of the 119 Olympiad, A. M. 3704. 3. The Conquerors divided the Dominions of Antigonus among themselves; but it seems Ptolomaeus and Seleucus got the greater Part, and the differences they had concerning the Divisi∣on of the spoil were left undetermin'd to their Successors. Ptolomaeus possessed himself of Syria, Cyprus, and soon after of Cyrene, and gave his Daughter Arsinoe in Marriage to Lysimachus. Seleucus built the Town Seleucia and Antiocha so call'd either from Father or Son, to which he Transported the Inhabitants of Antigonia. He Married Stratonice the Daughter of Deme∣trius. Next Year Cassander King of Macedo∣nia dy'd of a Dropsy, his Body being Terri∣bly overrun with Lice, after he had Reign'd 19 Years, in the 26 Year after the Death of Alexander, A. M. 3707. 4. He left 3 Sons by Thessalonice Daugh∣ter to Phillip; Namely, Phillip, Antipater, and Alexander. Phillip succeeded his Father, but was quickly cut off by a Consumption. Anti∣pater kill'd his Mother because Alexander was her Favorite, tho' she conjur'd him by her Breasts to spare her Life: Upon this Wicked Action, the two Brethren fell out, and both of 'em call'd in Kings for their Assistance, and by this means were at once dispossess'd of Ma∣cedonia and of their Lives: Thus it pleas'd God to Punish the Wickedness of Cassander, as the very Heathen Authors have observ'd. Deme∣trius, whom Alexander had call'd in, possess'd himself of Macedonia, and was very bent upon beating Lysimachus out of Thracia. But Pyrrhus
King of Epirus, by invading Thessaly, divert∣ed him and gave him a great deal of Trouble. Afterwards Demetrius made Peace with him, having many Great Projects in his head, and applying himself warmly to concert Measures for the Recovering of his Fathers Dominions. 5. He made Greater Preparations for War, and rais'd a Greater Army, than any that had ap∣pear'd in one Body from the Death of Alexan∣der to that day. It consisted of 100000 Foot, and 12000 Horse, besides 1500 Ships. This frighted Seleucus, Ptolomy, and Lysimachus, so that they enter'd into a Confederacy, and with joint in∣treaties perswaded Pyrrhus to break the Peace. Lysimachus invaded Macedonia upon the Thra∣cian side, and Pyrrhus upon that of Epirus pos∣sess'd himself of Byrrhea, and was declar'd King of Macedonia by Demetrius's Army. But Lysimachus coming up claim'd a right to part of the Kingdom, and obtain'd it, Pyrrhus being Jealous of the Inconstancy of the Macedo∣nians. 6. Demetrius being thus turn'd out of Mace∣donia, and toss'd up and down by hard For∣tune, was at last oblig'd to Surrender himself to Seleucus his Son in Law. Seleucus gave him a very Civil Reception, and allow'd him his Liberty. At first he diverted himself with hunting; but afterwards forgetting his former dignity, he gave himself up to drinking and to the dice; and 3 Years after was seiz'd with a distemper which kill'd him, in the 54 Year of his Age. Soon after Lysimachus turn'd Pyrr∣hus out of Macedonia, as being a stranger; and upon the Sollicitation of his Wife, kill'd A∣gathocles
his Eldest Son. The Wife of Aga∣thocles and others, whose Relations were kill'd for Regrating his Death, press'd Seleucus to Revenge it upon the Tyrant. Lysimachus, in or∣der to avoid such an Inconvenience, cross'd o∣ver to Asia, where he dy'd in a sharp battle fought in Phrygia, and having lost 15 of his Children before, by his own Death, compleat∣ed the Ruine of his Family. He dy'd in the 80th Year of his Age, 4 Years after his Pos∣session of Macedonia, 40 Years after the Death of Alexander, in the 2 Year of the 124 Olym∣piad, A. M. 3722. 7. Seleucus was mightily puff'd up by his Victory, especially considering that he was the only Man of Alexander's Officers then alive. He gave Asia to his Son Antiochus, and set out for Macedonia, designing there to make his Exit. But after he cross'd the Hellespont he di∣rected his course towards Lysimachia, and at a place call'd Argos was perfidiously murder'd by Ptolomaeus Ceraunus, the Son of Ptolomy by Eury∣dice the Daughter of Antipater. Ptolomaeus had fled from Egypt to Lysimachus his Brother in Law, upon his Younger Brother's being pre∣ferr'd to him; and upon the Death of Lysima∣chus made his address to Seleucus, who gave him a kind Reception, for which he did him this grateful turn. He distributed Money to Seleu∣cus's Army, and was declar'd King. Afterwards in a Sea fight he defeated Antigonus Gonatas the Son of Polyorcetes, who attempted the Recovery of Macedonia; and so establish'd himself upon the Throne.
CHAP. IV. The State of the Kingdom of Macedonia: From the Death of Seleucus, to the Captivity of Perseus and the overthrow of the Kingdom. The space of 130 Years. 1. PTolomaeus, to Establish his own Crown, Courted the Friendship of the Neigh∣bouring Kings. He Married his own Sister Arsinoe; Afterwards having Murder'd the Children in the Arms of the Mother, he like∣wise gave her a divorce. About this time se∣veral of the Gauls, finding the Bounds of their own Country too Narrow, sally'd out in quest of New Seats under 3 Leaders. One Compa∣ny directed their course to Thracia under the Conduct of Cerethrius, the other came into Pan∣nonia under the Command of Brennus and Acicho∣rius, and the 3 setled in Macedonia being head∣ed by Belgius or Bolgius. Ptolomy rashly en∣gaging with the last of these was taken pris'ner by his Enemies, and miserably butcher'd, after he had been Master of Macedonia for a Year and a half. 2. Meleager Ptolomy's Brother succeeded him, but at the end of two Months the Macedoni∣ans turn'd him out as unworthy of the Crown, and declar'd Antipater the Son of Philip King in his Room, who was afterwards call'd Etesias, by reason that he possess'd the
Crown only 45 Days. Then one Sosthenes drew together a body of Men, and check'd the Gauls, but declin'd the Title of a King, requir∣ing only an Oath of fidelity to him as their Cap∣tain. In the mean Time Brennus having notice that Bolgius was possess'd of such a goodly Spoil, invaded Macedonia with a Numerous Army, and defeated Sosthenes who oppos'd him. Having laid Mac d nia waste, he march'd into Greece with 152000 Foot and 20400 Horse. Each Horseman had two Servants who follow'd him, and succeeded to his Post when he died. This Custom was call'd Trimarkasia or rather Trimara∣sia, for in the Anglo-Saxon and Teutonick Lan∣guages the word Mare signifies all sorts of Horse. When the Gauls march'd to Delphi, to pull down the Temple, as the Story goes, they were all knock'd down Dead by Thunderbolts, downfalls of Rocks, and such other means. 3. Sosthenes died after he had govern'd two Years, and Antigonus Gonnatas, having made Peace with Antiochus Soter, obtain'd Macedonia, and routed the Gauls whom Brennus had left to secure the Country. At this Time the Gauls, who had left Brennus when he invaded Macedo¦nia, and had made Incursions into Thracia, and had scatter'd themselves up and down several places of Asia; gather'd into one Body, and assisted Nicomedes against Zypaeus who had pos∣sess'd himself of part of Bithynia. Having con∣quer'd him, and pillag'd the Countreys round about, they divided the Lands, and planted them∣selves upon the River Halys, at a place which they Christen'd Gallograecia or Gallatia, in the 3d Year of the 125 Olympiad, A. M. 3727.
4. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, having carried on a successless War in Italy and Sicily for Six Years, returned Home, and expelled Antigonus Gonnatas; but did not possess the Kingdom Two Years; for he endeavoured to restore Cleonymus the Spartan, whom the Citizens had expelled; and being at Argi upon that Account, was killed with a Stone thrown by an old Wo∣man, whose Son he was about to kill. By this means, Antigonus recovered Macedonia. After∣wards, the Soldiers revolted from Antigonus to Alexander, the Son of Pyrrhus, who expelled him: But his Son Demetrius re-instated him in his Throne, and expelled Alexander out of Ma∣cedonia, and kept him for some time out of his own Kingdom. Antigonus Gonnatas died when he was 80 Years old, 36 Years after his first accession to the Crown of Macedonia (but he was Governour of some Grecian Cities Ten Years before) the 2d Year of the 134 Olympi∣ad, A. M. 3762. 5. Demetrius his Son succeeded. He aliena∣ted the Etolians from himself, by solliciting Agron, King of the Illyrians, to relieve the My∣dionians, whom they at that time Besieged. He died Ten Years after. He left Philip his Son a Minor, and Antigonus the Brother, or else the Uncle of the deceased, was made his Guardian, who behaved himself so meekly and generously, that he was afterwards declared King. Upon the Death of Demetrius, the Gre∣cian Cities lifted up their Heads, and having shak'd off the tyrannical Yoke, joyned in with the Achajans, who were mightily esteemed by their Neighbours for their Prudence and Ju∣stice,
having united into one Body, in the 124 Olympiad, and stirred up other Cities against the Macedonians. 6. Aratus the Sicyonian joyn'd his own Country to Achaia, and prov'd a great or∣nament and support to the interest of the Achaians, in freeing Athens from the Macedo∣nian Yoak. But the Etolians were jealous of their Prosperity, and Cleomenes King of Lacedemon sided with 'em, who wanted any occasion of a War, in order to compleat the ruin of the Ephori which he had already projected. In effect the War was too hard for the Achaians, so that they were oblig'd to beg assistance from Antigonus Doson. He restor'd their tottering interest, and put a stop to Cleomenes's progress, who had already taken several Towns, and after several succesful attempts routed him in Battel to that degree, that he threw off all hopes, and fled from Lacedemon to Alexandria. Antigonus us'd the Lacedemonians very civilly, and restor'd their Ancient Laws; but in the midst of his Glory was oblig'd to return to Macedonia, the Illyrians having invaded it. He went, and routed the Illyrians, but by shouting and crying aloud, fell into a spitting of blood, which threw him into a deep con∣sumption, and Cut the thread of his Life, after he had Govern'd Macedonia Ten Years, 100 Years after the death of Alexander, in the Second Year of the 139 Olympiad, A. M. 3782. 7. Antigonus being Dead, his Grandchild Philip succeeded. He was then 16 Years old. In him was the Sibylline Prophecy verifi'd, which foretold, that, as the Glory of Macedonia ow'd
its first beginning to Philip, so Philip should one Day put an end to it. The Etolians were free'd of their fears when Antigonus died, and look'd out for any occasion of renewing the War with the Achaians; and at last by continually affronting them and their associats, occasion'd a confederat War. Aratus call'd in Philip to assist him. Philip took Ambracus which the Etolians had formerly taken from the People of Epyrus; then he invaded Etolia and laid the Country waste: Whereupon he was call'd home to defend Macedonia from the incursions of the Dardani, and the cruelty of Scopas the Etolian Praetor, who was then in Macedonia, and put all to fire and Sword. 8. The Dardanians were scar'd by the news of his return, and retir'd to their own Country. When he arriv'd he possess'd himself of several fortified places, and carried on the War against the Etolians with a great deal of success. After all, when he heard that Hannibal the Carthaginian had routed the Romans at the lake Thrasimenus, he was over perswaded by Demetrius the Pharian, who had formerly fought for the Illyrians against the People of Rome, to neglect the Etolians, and mind the business of Illyricum, from whence he might pass into Italy, and by that means obtain the Monarchy of the whole World. Upon this project, he got an end put to that War, upon these terms, that each party should retain what they mutually possess'd. Besides, Angelaus a Citizen of Neupactum sollicited the Grecians to mediat for an accomo∣dation, fearing they should become a prey either to the Carthaginians or Romans. Thus was that War concluded, after four Years standing, in the sixth Year of Philip, the first
Year of the 141 Olympiad, A M. 3789. 9. Philip was altogether taken up with the Project of aggrandising himself, that Demetrius had suggested to him, and with that view, fit∣ted out a Fleet, in order to attack the Romans: But, upon their Arrival, his Marrines were siezed with such a fear, that he was obliged to retire. He sent an Ambassade to make a League with Hannibal the Victor, which was a∣greed to upon these Terms, viz. That Philip should sail towards Italy, with about 200 Ships, in order to lay their Maritim Places waste; and to attack them both by Sea and Land; that Italy, when conquer'd, should wholly become a Prey to Han∣nibal and the Carthaginians, that Philip should have the Liberty to attack who he pleased of all that passed into Greece; and that he should continue Master of all the Places he possessed on the Conti∣nent, or in Islands. He was contented with these Terms. However, the Ambassadors, upon their return, were taken by the Romans; and others were afterwards sent, who brought the King certain Advice of the Confederacy. 10. Philip was so transported with this Scheme, that he became a downright Tyrant. He be∣gan to offer Injustice to the Grecian Cities; be∣ing advised so to do by the above mentioned Demetrius, who told him, That he ought to possess himself of the Peloponnesus, especially the two Horns of that Beast, as he called it, meaning the Castles of Corinth and Messene. Pursuant to this Advice, he endeavoured to set the Messenians by the Ears among themselves, and used them unkindly; and poyson'd Ara∣tus for resenting the hard Treatment. After∣wards,
he attack'd the Cities of Illyricum: But Laevinus, the Roman Praetor, beat him out of Appollonia, and obliged him to return to Mace∣donia, with the Loss of 3000 Men. Upon his Retreat, he made himself Master of several Towns; but Laevinus made his Reprisals, by bringing the Etolians off from their Confedera∣cy with him. However, he carry'd on the War against the Romans with tolerable Success, ever, till Sulpicius, the Roman Praetor, defeated him at Elis, and the disorderly Condition of his Affairs in Macedonia called him Home. 11. His Adventures against the Etolians were Successful for three Years. At length they be∣ing destitute of the Roman Assistance, which they trusted most in, were fain to accept of a Peace upon the King's own Terms. Soon after Sempronius, the Proconsul, succeeding to Sulpi∣cius, did likewise make Peace with him in the name of the Romans, through the Mediation of the People of Epirus. The Articles of this Peace were, That the Cities Parthini, Diama∣sum, Bargalum and Eugenium, should continue in the Roman Hands; and that Attino should be under the Protection of Philip, pursuant to its own desire. In this League, the King in∣cluded Prusias, King of Bithynia, the Achaians▪ Baeotians, Thessalians, Acarnanians, and those of Epirus: The Romans upon their side, included the Trojans, Attalus King of Pergamus, Pleura∣tus King of Thracia, the Eleans, Messenians, and Machanidas, Successor to Nabis, the Lacedemo∣nian Tyrant. For the latter was killed in Bat∣tel by Philipaemenes, who then began to defend his Country vigorously.
12. Philip being always accustomed to Action and fond of Glory, was uneasy under Peace. He envy'd the Fame of Philipaemenes so much, that he sent Assassins to take away his Life; by which Attempt, he procured to himself many Enemies. He entered into a League with An∣tiochus Magnus, and both of them conspired to turn young Ptolomy out of his Kingdom; but, as Polybius writes, they were scar'd by the Ro∣mans from pursuing their Design, and were af∣terwards punished for it. Being in Friendship with the Etolians, he scrupled not to snatch Ly∣simachia and Chalcedon out of their hands, with∣out the least colour of Justice: He likewise sub∣dued the Town of the Caunij, which the Rho∣dians took so ill, that, from that time, they be∣came his Enemies, and joyned in with Attalus. Notwithstanding the multitude of Projects he was engaged in, and the heavy Disasters he had met with; yet he kept up an invincible Spirit, full of great hopes, and had the Courage to wage War with the Romans, which they de∣clared against him after the end of the second Punick War, about 14 Years after his League with Hannibal, in the 23d Year of his Reign, the first Year of the 145 Olympiad. 13. The Romans charged him with the Vi∣olation of the League, in injuring the Etolians, and other Confederates, and succouring Han∣nibal and the Carthaginians in Africa. The Athenians being Besieged by the King, begged the Assistance of the Romans; Attalus and the Rhodians complained that he attacked the Gre∣cian Cities in Asia. P. Sulpicius Galba was sent into Macedonia, while Philip invaded the Cher∣sonesus
of Thracia, where the Abydians did a very memorable Action in standing out to the last Extremity. The King did not succeed in attacking Athens. In the mean time he endea∣voured to make the Etolians his Friends, and made use of all Means to win their Favour; but they, who at first were doubtful, were ea∣sily determined to side with the Romans, when they saw the King twice routed by the Consul. 14. The next Year, Tapsulus being Consul, nothing was done. But Titus Quintius Flamini∣nus his Successor, after an Interview to no pur∣pose, defeated him, and took several Places in Thessaly. At length, Philip finding that the Achajans deserted him, and sided with the Ro∣nans, and that the Consul went on in storming and taking Towns, obtain'd a Truce of Two Months, and sent Ambassadors to Rome to treat of Peace. The Grecians likewise sent their Ambassadors to complain, That the King would not deliver Chalcis, Demetrias and Co∣rinth, which Towns he called the Fetters of Greece. Upon these Remonstrances, the Se∣nate would not grant him Peace; but ordered Quintius to carry on the War. Quintius rout∣ed him at Cynocephale: Upon which Disaster, he desired a Truce of four Months, in order to send an Ambassador once more to Rome. 15. At last, the Senate and People of Rome gave him Peace upon these Terms, viz. That he should restore all Greece to its absolute Liberty; deliver all the Prisoners and Deserters; give up all Deck'd Ships, bating five and a great One; and pay half the Sum of one Hundred Talents that Year, and the rest within Ten Years. Ten Men were
sent along with Flamininus into Greece, to ad∣just the Concerns of the Cities, who were all overjoyed with the Motion, excepting the Eto∣lians, who censured the Decree, and cry'd out, That Greece had only chang'd her Masters, since Corinth, Demetrias and Chaleis were in the Ro∣man Hands. 16. Philip finding himself pinch'd by Necessity and hard Times, was very uneasy under his Condition; especially considering, that he had not the Liberty of punishing the Rebels; that he was oblig'd to restore the Towns he had taken to their rightful Proprietars; and that he was forced to yield to the querulous Re∣monstrances of the Thessalonians, of the Atha∣manians, and of Eumenes King in Asia. He was mightily incensed, that the Romans were so very favourable to his Son Demetrius, whom he had sent thither as an Hostage; as if they had valued the Son's Friendship more than the Father's. This Jealousy was inflamed by Per∣seus, the elder Son, who suggested, that Deme∣trius aspired to the Crown; and by suborn'd Witnesses, carried the Charge so far, that the innocent Youth was put to Death, by the com∣mand of the jealous and credulous Father. A∣bout a Year or two after, the King fell into a fit of Melancholly and Grief for the want of his Son; upon which occasion, the whole Con∣spiracy was brought to light, by the Care and Diligence of Antigonus his Kinsman. Where∣upon he was so oppressed with Grief and Sor∣row, that he recommended Antigonus to the Macedonians, and cursed Perseus, and then died after he had reigned 44 Years, 146 Years after
the death of Alexander, the 2d Year of the 150 Olympiad, A. M. 3826. 17. Had Philip lived longer, he had settled Antigonus on his Throne. But Perseus being acquainted with his Father's approaching Fate by his Physician, took timely care to crush his Enemies, and possessed himself of the Govern∣ment. His Father left every thing in readiness for carrying on a War against the Romans, so that Perseus was engaged in it by way of Heri∣tage: And indeed, he made it his only Busi∣ness to provide for it, making use of all Op∣portunities to keep under the Roman Allies. But when they appeared in Arms, he quickly recanted, and sued for Peace; but could not ob∣tain it, the War being already decreed. 18. He engaged Genthius, King of the Illyri∣ans on his side; but murder'd the Opportunity of doing Things to the purpose, by denying him Mony, of which he had great store, to car∣ry on the War. It had been an easy matter to rout Marcius Philippus the Consul, who then made head against him, by reason of the diffi∣culty of his Passage, and want of all manner of Provisions. But Perseus seemed to be conquered before they came to Fight, and resolving to flee, deserted all the narrow Passes, and gave his Enemy liberty to advance. He gave Orders for burning his Fleet at Thessa∣lonica, and throwing his Treasure at Pella into the Sea. Marcius was succeeded by L. Aemilius Paulus, a second time Consul, who routed the King and his Army, consisting of 39000 Foot and 4000 Horse, not far from Pydna; and took the King Prisoner, together with his Mo∣ther
and Children, and carried him to Rome in Triumph. He died at Rome, after he had been two Years Prisoner, having reigned 11 Years. Then the Macedonians were made free, and this was the end of that Kingdom, in the 156 Year after the death of Alexander, the 2d Year of the 153 Olympiad, A. M. 3837. CHAP. V. The Kingdom of Asia and Assyria. From the Death of Seleucus, till Syria became a Roman Province. The space of 220 Years. 1. ANTIOCHƲS, the Son of Seleucus, fell so deeply in Love with Stratonice his Mother-in-Law, the Daughter of Demetrius, that it threw him into a Feaver. Seleucus, being acquainted with the matter by Erasistra∣tus his Physician, freely resigned his Wife to his Son, and put the Kingdom into their Hands, designing to return to Macedonia and die there. But Ptolomaeus Ceraunus, as I told you before, killed him by the way, in the 23d Year after his being Invested with the regal Dignity, the 42d Year after the Death of Alexander and the 73d of his Age. He was sirnamed Nicanor, or Nicator, with regard to the Victories he ob∣tained; and 'tis said, had an Anchor imprinted upon his Thigh, and his Posterity was noted by the same Mark.
2. Seleucus being Dead, his Son Antiochus succeeded. He was sirnamed Soter, for repul∣sing the Gauls, who over-run a great part of Asia, when they were called in by Mithridates, King of Bithynia. He gave his Daughter Apa∣mea in Marriage to Maga, King of Cyrene, and Brother to Ptolomaeus Philadelphus; Upon whose Sollicitation, he violated the Treaty of Alli∣ance with the King of Aegypt; but was pre∣vented in accomplishing his designed Invasion, by the Forces which Ptolomy sent into Asia. He likewise waged War with Eumenes, King of Pergamus, but with little Success. 3. This Eumenes was Nephew to Philotaerus the Eunuch, who was Keeper of Lysimachus's Treasure at Pergamus, and revolted from him at the time when he ordered his Son Agathocles to be put to Death, and possess'd himself both of the Place and the Mony, while the Kings were worrying one another. Afterwards, he converted his Lordship into a Kingdom, and left it to his Nephew. Antiochus built two Ci∣ties, called Apameae, from his Mother and Wife. He murdered one of his Sons, and left the other to succeed him. He Died in the 19th Year of his Reign, the 2d Year of the 129 Olympiad, A. M. 3742. 4. Antiochus Soter was followed by Antiochus his Son, whom the Milesians impiously sirna∣named Theos, because he rescued them from the Tyrranny of Timarchus. 'Twas in his time, that the Parthians first revolted; who being originally banisht out of Scythia (for Parthus, in the Scythian Language, signifies a banished Man) were in an obscure and contemptible Condition, when the
Medes and Persians sat at the Helm of Affairs. They were conquered by Alexander, but after his Death slighted his Captains, and subjected themselves to the Government of one Stesagenor a Stranger, but a Friend to the Macedonians. They served Eumenes, Antigonus and Seleucus, and continued Obedient to the Successors of Se∣leucus, till now, that they Rebelled, being Hea∣ded by Arsaces; and slew Agathocles, the Go∣vernour of these Countries, for offering Sodo∣my to Tiridates, the Brother of Arsaces; and expelled the Macedonians. About the same time, Theodotus, Governour of 1000 Bactrian Cities, likewise Revolted, and in Imitation of his Example, the People of the East withdrew themselves from the Macedonian Yoke. 5. He waged War with Ptolomaeus Philadel∣phus, whose Daughter Berenice he married, ha∣ving Divorced his Wife Laodice, by whom he had two Sons, namely, Seleucus and Antiochus. It is thought, that the Prophecy of Daniel poin∣ted to this Marriage, viz. That the Daughter of a Southern King should come to a King of the North for Peace, but should not retain the Strength of her Arm, neither should the first, or his Arm stand. For when Philadelphus died, Antiochus took in Laodice again, who, fearing the Levity and Inconstancy of her Husband, poisoned him in the 15th Year of his Reign. 6. Laodice conceal'd the Kings Death till the Kingdom was Transferr'd to her Son Seleucus, and besieg'd Berenice her Rival in Daphne. The Cities of Asia were mov'd with Compassion towards the besieged Queen, and Ptolomy set out with all Possible Expedition to Relieve his
Sister; but she unfortunately surrender'd before the Relief came up, and was perfidiously mur∣der'd together with her Son. The Cities de∣testing such a Barbarous Action Revolted and sided with Ptolomy, who marched further into Syria, kill'd Laodice, made himself Master of Caelosyria, Syria and Seleucia, overrun almost all Asia as far as Bactra; and had certainly possess'd himself of all Seleucus's Dominions, had not a Domestick Sedition diverted him from so great an Enterprise. Seleucus had fit∣ted out a Fleet in order to Retrieve his Cities, but it was all lost by Shipwrack: By which misfortune the Cities were so much influenc'd, that of their own accord they surrender'd them∣selves. 7. Seleucus finding that the loss of his Ships had produc'd such mighty Effects, declar'd War against Ptolomy, and after a Successless adventure was oblig'd to flee into Antiochia, where he was again reduc'd to the same Straits, but did not meet with the same Relief. He call'd in Antiochus his Brother to assist him, who tho' very Young, was so eager in making use of this Opportunity, to possess himself of the whole Kingdom, that he signaliz'd his courage in invading Countries and taking Pla∣ces, and was thereupon sirnam'd Hierax. Pto∣lomy having no mind to Engage them both at once, concluded a Peace with Seleucus for 10 Years. Peace being concluded Antiochus hir'd the Gauls, and with them march'd against his Brother and conquer'd him. The Gauls, fan∣cying that Seleucus was kill'd in battel, Resolv'd to put to Death all the race of Seleucus,
and to that End made an Insurrection against Anciochus himself, but at last they were gain'd by Arms of Gold. Asia being thus pull'd in Pieces, Eumenes the Bythinian annex'd part of it to his Dominions. 8. Asaces, upon the News of Seleucus's mis∣fortune, compleated the Revolt of the Parthians; for having made an Irruption into Parthia with a Company of Robbers, he kill'd Andragoras their Governour; and possessing himself of that Country join'd to it the Kingdom of Hyrcania; and brought his affairs to that pass, that after a few Years he routed Seleucus, and setl'd himself in the Government. The Parthians Celebrated the Day of that Victory every Year, and dated their Liberty from it; and Arsaces was as much esteem'd by them, as Cyrus was by the Persians, or Alexander by the Macedonians; and succeed∣ing Kings were call'd by his Name. Now the beginning of the Reign of Arsaces, is cast into the 1 Year of the 135 Olympiad, 510 after the building of Rome, the 2 of Seleucus, the 3 of Ptolomaeus Euerges, A. M. 3761. 9. Tho' the Interest of the Seleucidae de∣clin'd every day, and the two Brothers were e'en almost outted of their Governments, yet they Neglected their Forreign concerns, and renew'd a Civil War, in which Antiochus was at last conquer'd, and fled first to Ptolomy and then to Artamenes the Cappadocian his Father in Law; but but neither of them could secure him, so that he fell into the Hands of the Robbers and was kill'd. About the same time Seleucus being outted of his Kingdom, ended his days by a fall from his Horse, having Reign'd about
10 Years, in the 98 Year after the death of Alexander, the 3 Year of the 138 Olympiad, A. M. 3779. He was sirnam'd Callinicus from his Victories, and Pogon from his beard. 10. He left two Sons, Seleucus and Antiochus. The former (call'd Ceraunus) succeeded his Fa∣ther in the 7 Year of Antigonus Doson. He indeavour'd to recover that part of Asia on this side of the Taurus which Eumenes K. of Pergamus possess'd, but was poyson'd by Apa∣turius of Galatia, and Nicanor, when he had scarce Govern'd Three Years. Achaeus his General, Nephew to Queen Laodice, punish'd the Parricides, and manag'd affairs so dexte∣rously that he reduc'd all Asia to Obedience, and was so well belov'd by the People, that he might have possess'd himself of the Kingdom with ease, but he would not cheat Antiochus Seleucus's Brother of his Right. This Antio∣chus was afterwards Sirnam'd the Great. While his Brother liv'd he resided in the upper Pro∣vinces; But now he was call'd to Babylon in the 15 Year of his Age, to take upon him the Administration of Affairs; Accordingly he came, and made Achaeus Governour of the Country he had lately Recover'd, Molon Go∣vernour of Media, and Alexander Governour of Persia. 11. Antiochus was quickly pinch'd with great Troubles, upon the Account of the overgrown power of one Hermias, a Court-favourite, which Molon and Alexander, his Brethren, took so ill, that they alienated the upper Provinces from their Allegiance. The King designed to march against them; but Hermias over perswaded
him to turn his Arms against Ptolomaeus Philo∣pator, who thinking himself Secure upon the account of Antiochus's Youth, was entirely wra∣p'd up in his Pleasures. But that War procee∣ded but heavily; and in the mean time Molon carried on his rebellious Designs, so that the King was obliged to return. Whereupon, he quashed the Rebels without any Difficulty, and took timely care to put Hermias to Death, finding him engaged in Seditious Designs. At the same time Achaeus, having laid by his for∣mer Modesty, took upon him the Diadem and regal Title. However, Antiochus renewed the War with Ptolomy, upon the account of Caelo∣syria, which the Aegyptians continued Masters of, from the time that it was taken by Euergetes when he went to rescue his Sister Berenice. 12. He got Seleucia by Treachery, and made himself Master of several other Places; but up∣on Advice of Achaeus his Advances, he agreed to a Truce, in order to an Interview concern∣ing Peace. But many Objections being started on both sides, neither Prince would yield to the other; so that the War broke out again next Spring, and Antiochus reduced several Ci∣ties. After one Year, Ptolomy advanced to Ga∣za with 70000 Foot, 5000 Horse, and 73 Ele∣phants. Antiochus made Head against him with 72000 Foot, 6000 Horse, and 102 Elephants: And defeated the Enemy; but, out of a juvenile Ardor, pursued him too far, and when he returned, found his whole Army rout∣ed, and was fain to retire to Raphia and go Home. All Caelosyria surrendered it self to Ptolomy the Victor. Antiochus, fearing he would
pursue the Victory, sent Ambassadors with Proposals of Peace. The Embassy found Pto∣lomy very inclinable to Peace, and entirely de∣voted to his Luxury and other Vices, notwith∣standing the Opportunity he was then presented with, of turning Antiochus out of his Kingdom. 13. Antiochus, being rid of all Fears upon that hand, marched against Achaeus, and block∣ed him up in Sardes. Achaeus being deceived by the hopes of Favour, and betrayed, fell into the hands of the King, and was brought to con∣dign Punishment for his Rebellion. About a Year or two after that, Antiochus made a Pro∣gress into the upper Provinces, reduced several Countries, and mastered some Towns and Prin∣cipalities on this side of the Mountain Taurus. He managed the Administration of Affairs with so much Prudence, that his Subjects had a great Opinion of him, and by that means were more easily kept in their Duty. When Ptolomaeus Philopator died, he and Philip K of Macedonia, conspired against the young King, possessed themselves of Judea, and quickly lost it again: He likewise invaded the Territories of Attalus K. of Pergamus, but the Romans commanded him Home. 14. He was resolved at this time to obey the People of Rom, because he found himself not able to coap with them: But soon after, there prevailed such Jealousies between him and them, as at last broke out into a War. For after the Conquest of Caelosyria, he attacked the Grecian Cities in Asia, which the Romans took under their Protection, and order'd him to desist; thinking, that if he succeeded in Asia, he would
extend his Conquests to Europe; especially con∣sidering that Hannibal, whom he had enter∣tained, sollicited him to invade Italy. Antiochus in order to Fortify himself by Alliances, gave his Daughter Cleopatra in marriage to Ptolomy, with Caelosyria as her Dowry; and his other Daughter Antiochis to Ariathres, King of the Cappadocians. The Roman Ambassadors ha∣ving pressed for Peace in vain, he joyn'd in with the Etolians, who, after the Conquest of Philip, fell out with the Romans about the Di∣vision of the Spoil, and departed from their Alliance, and now stirr'd up all the Neighbou∣ring Princes against them. 15. When he passed into Greece, he married a Woman of a mean Birth, and suffer'd his Army to be enervated by the Softness of the Place. At the Streights of Thermopylae he was routed by Glabrio, the Roman Consul, and fled to Ephesus. The Consul mastered Phoris, Bae∣otia and Eubaea. Then Antiochus, applying his mind to Sea Affairs, was often beaten at Sea, and oblig'd to break up the Siege of Pergamus, without doing any thing to the purpose. Upon the approach of Scipio with a great Army, he marched his Garrisons out of Lysimachia, which might have given the Romans a great deal of Trouble, and, like a Mad-man, suffered the Consul to have a free Passage into Asia. 16. Antiochus sent Ambassadors to the Con∣sul with Proposals of Peace; but the Consul de∣manded, That he should reinburse the Charges of the War, and not only part with Aeolia and Jonia, but with all Asia besides, on this side of the Mountain Taurus. He look'd upon these
Terms as too hard, and therefore resolved to try the Fortune of a Battel; but being over∣come, was forc'd to submit to Terms that were much the same with those above-mentio∣ned. After that Disaster, he was wont, as Cicero tells us, to say, That he was obliged to the People of Rome, for freeing him of too great a Charge, & leaving him the moderate Compass of his own Kingdom. Two years after, he made a Progress into the upper Provinces, and Sack'd the Temple of Jupiter Belus in Elymais; which Wickedness did so incense the Inhabi∣tants, that they slew him and his whole Army. Some say, that after he crossed the Taurus, he was killed by his own Companions, for beat∣ing them in his Drink. He Died in the 36th year of his Reign, the 2d year of the 148 O∣lympiad, 185 years before Christ, A. M. 3818, in the Consulship of M. Aemilius Lepidus, and C. Flaminius. 17. Antiochus Magnus being Dead, his Son Seleucus Philopator succeeded, in the 35th year of Philip King of Macedonia. He kept close at Home for fear of the Romans, and after 12 years, was killed by Heliodorus. He left one Son, a Child, called Demetrius, whom he had sent to Rome as an Hostage, in the room of his Brother Antiochus; for sometimes the Romans oblig'd 'em to shift their Hostages. Antiochus, upon his return, possessed himself of the King∣dom. He was called Epiphanes by the Syrians, because he recovered the Kingdom of the Seleu∣cidae from Heliodorus. Others call'd him Epima∣nes, with allusion to his phanatical Gestures. But the Angel of the Lord stil'd him a mean Man.
18. Antiochus Epiphanes, being the Uncle of Ptolomaeus Philometor, who had lately succeeded his deceased Father, declared himself Guardian to the young Prince: And in order to make away with him, and to fetch the Administrati∣on of Affairs into his own hands, made four several Journeys into Aegypt. But the Plot being discovered, the Romans, upon the Solli∣citation of the Egyptians, sent C. Popilius Lae∣nas, with two others, as Ambassadors to him. When they came to an interview, he demand∣ed, in the name of the People of Rome, that Antiochus should depart from Alexandria, which he was just going to block up. Antiochus re∣quired time to consider of the Proposal; but Laenas made a Circle of Sprigs round about him as he stood, and told him downright, that he must give his Answer before he step'd out of that Compass. He being well acquainted with the Power of the Romans, was thus frighted in∣to a Promise of Peace. 19. As soon as he returned from Aegypt, he besieged Jerusalem, and carried it, and put 80000 Jews to the Sword, and sold as many, in Resentment of the Joy they had expressed upon the Sham-News of his Death. Having pillag'd the Temple, and carried off 1800 Talents he left some Tyrannical Ministers behind him, who heavily oppressed the People. Two years after, he sent thither one Apollonius, a very cru∣el Man, with Orders to put to death all the Men that were of Age, and to expose the Women and Children to Sale. At last, being repulsed from Aegypt, he issued forth an Edict, enjoyn∣ing all his Subjects, under the pain of Death, to
observe the Religion of the Greeks; and sent some Men up and down the Countries, to oblige them to perform that sort of Worship. Into Judaea he sent an old Athenian, with Orders to consecrate their pillaged Temple to Jupiter O∣lympius, and the other Temple built on Mount Gerizim, to Jupiter Hospitalis; and to prohibit the Inhabitants to use the Mosaick Law. Accord∣ingly, the Idol of Jupiter Olympius was set up in the Temple, and the holy Scriptures commit∣ted to the Flames, which all the Inhabitants were prohibited to keep by them, or to approve of. 20. But many of the Inhabitants refusing to comply with his impious Demands, chearfully suffered Death; and others followed Mattathi∣as the Priest, who drew together a Company of Men, oppos'd the King's Tyranny, pulled down their Altars, and circumcised the Jewish Children. But a Year was scarce elaps d, when Mattathias died. He was the Son of John, the Grand-Child of Simeon, the great Grand-Child of Asmonaeus or Hasmonaeus, whose Poste∣rity were called Hasmonaei after him. David the Psalmist, King, and Prophet, by Hasmannim means Ambassadors or Princes. And the Mo∣dern Jews call the Roman Cardinals Hasmannim or Hasmonaei. 21. Mattathias was follow'd by his Son and Successor Judas Maccabaeus, who conquered and killed Apollonius, Governour of Samaria; whose Death the King resented so much, that when he could not perform his designed Journey himself, he sent several Officers against him with a nume∣rous Body of Forces: But Judas, by Virtue of the
Divine Assistance, routed them all, march'd to Je∣rusalem, purged the Temple, which the Hea∣thens had possess'd for three years, offered Sa∣crifice upon a new Altar, and celebrated an An∣niversary Feast of Dedication for 8 Days. 22. Antiochus having made a Progress into the upper Provinces in order to raise Mony, conquer'd Artaxias King of Armenia, and took him Prisoner. But upon the News of the de∣feat of his Men in Judea, being full of Wrath and Revenge, he made all possible Preparations for a speedy return. But it pleas'd the Divine Majesty, to Punish him with such a horrible distemper, that the Worms grew out of his Body while he was yet alive, and his putrified Body became such a Nuseance that the Army could not bear the smell on't. Some say that he Repented out of a Sense of the Just Judg∣ment of God, and wrote very Civil Letters to the Jews. He Nominated Philip his School-fellow as Guardian to his Son, and dy'd in the 12 Year of his Reign, the 149 of the Seleucidae, the 1 Year of the 154 Olympiad, A. M. 3841. 23. Antiochus Epiphanes was follow'd by his Son and Successor Antiochus, a Child of 9 Years of Age, whom the Syrians Christen'd Eupator, with Regard to his Father's Virtue. Lysias, who formerly had the charge of his Education turn'd out Philip, and manag'd all as he pleas'd. In the mean Time Judas fought Successfully against the Neighbouring Princes and Gover∣nours. Lysias envying his Glory March'd against him at the Head of a Numerous Army, think∣ing to blot out the Ignominy that the for∣mer
Disaster had drawn upon them. But the adventure proving Successless, he made Peace with the Jews: which was afterwards Violat∣ed by Timothy and some other Captains, who renew'd the war; but were routted, together with the Arabs, Nomades, Edomits and Philistines. 24. These adventures did so provoke Anti∣ochus Eupaor, that he drew together a most Numerous Army, invaded Judea, took Beth∣sura, and besieg'd Jerusalem; but the Warlike Preparations of Philip who design'd to make good his Right to the Regency with force of Arms, recall'd him and oblig'd him to make Peace with the besieg'd. Indeed he quickly crush'd Philip; but soon after he himself was forc'd to undergo the same fate by Demetrius the Son of Seleucus Philopator, who fled from Rome in order to possess himself of the King∣dom. Demetrius having gain'd the Kingdom was Christen'd Soter, and endeavour'd by all means to get into Favour with the Romans. He sent Bachides to make head against the Jews, and after him Nicanor, who at first Treated Judas with all manner of Civility, but after∣wards being check'd by the King prov'd Trea∣cherous to him. He cast forth many Impious Expressions in the Temple, but being kill'd in battel was punish'd for his Blasphemy. The Jews Consecrated the 13 Day of the Month Adar to the Memory of so great a Victory, as the Author of the last Book of the Maccabees informs us, who in Recounting that Story Comprehends an Epitome of the 5 Books of Jason a Jew of Cyrene.
25. Upon the News of the Death of Nica∣nor, Demetrius sent Bachides to Judaea, toge∣ther with Alcimus, who was willing to Enter∣prize any thing against his Country, in hopes to obtain the Priesthood. The Army they brought with 'em was very Numerous; which Judas Engaging with a Disproportion'd force, was kill'd, after he had Govern'd the People 6 Years, in the 2 Year of Demetrius Soter, the 152 of the Seleucidae, A. M. 3844▪ Jona∣than his Brother being Elected in his Room, Repuls'd the Heathens and gave Laws to the People. In the mean Time Demetrius gave himself altogether to Luxury, and, by that Means, drew upon himself the Hatred of his People; which, assisted by the Interest of Atta∣lus, Ariarathres and Ptolomy, suborn'd a young Man of an obscure Birth, who pretended to be the Son of Antiochus Epiphanes, and aspired to the Crown. 26. His Name was Balas or Balles; but his honorary Name was Alexander. Heraclides, whom the King had turned out of his place of being Master of the Babylonian Treasury, car∣ries him to Rome, and procures a Decree of the Senate, for assisting him and Laodice, Daugh∣ter to the same Antiochus, in the Recovery of their Father's Kingdom. Balas drew together an Army, and routed Demetrius, who died va∣liantly in the Field, in the 12th year of his Reign, the 161 of the Seleucidae, the 2d of the 157 Olympiad, A. M. 3854. 27. While the Event of the War was yet unde∣termined, both of 'em courted Jonathan's Friend∣ship, promising several Priviledges to the Jew∣ish
Nation. But Alexander promised him the Office of High-Priest, with the purple Dignity and a Crown of Gold. Accordingly, in the 7th Month of the 161 year of the Seleucidae, and 9 years after the death of Judas Maccabaeus, the Chair having remain'd vacant 7 years from the Death of Alcimus, was Jonathan invested with the sacred Robes. He was the first of the Asmonaei, descended of a priestly Family, tho' not of that of the High-Priest; the immediate Heir where∣of was Onias, who, being devested of the Dignity of his Ancestors, caused a Temple to be built in the Aegyptian Province of Heliopolis. 28. Alexander Balas, having settled himself upon the Throne, married Cleopatra, the Daugh∣ter of Ptolomaeus Philometor. But his dissolute and luxurious Way of Living, furnished De∣metrius Soter with an opportunity of aspiring to his Father's Kingdom. Jonathan the Jewish High Priest made Head against Demetrius, with some Forces brought from Apollonia, and routed him in a bloody Battel. But Ptolomy, who at this time was possessed of a great part of Syria, took away his Daughter from Alexander, and married her to Demetrius; and re-established him in the Kingdom of his Forefathers. Alex∣ander being routed in the Field, fled to Aba, where his Head was cut off, and sent to Ptolomy, after he had reigned 6 years. Ptolomy received the Complement with a great deal of Joy, but died about three days after of a Wound in his Head. 29. Demetrius, having recovered his ancient Kingdom, was sirnamed Nicanor or Nicator. He established Jonathan in the Priesthood, and
slighted all the Charges given in against him. He disbanded his Troops, thinking that Syria was peaceable; but soon after, one Diodotus Tryphon, one of Bala's Captains, brought Anti∣ochus, the Son of Bala, out of Arabia, and de∣clared him King; and having routed Demerius and his Army, obliged him to retire to Seleucia. But Tryphon, after he had worsted Demetrius, took up a Resolution of transferring the Kingdom to himself; and in order to compass that end with less Opposition, put to Death all that were of contrary Sentiments, took Jonathan Prisoner, and killed him, and at last made away with the Child Antichus by the help of his Physicians. He courted many Allies all about, but obtain∣ed none. Jonathan being dead, his Brother Si∣mon succeeded, who took the Castle of Jerusa∣lem by Storm, sent an Embassy to Rome, and af∣ter he had officiated as Priest three years, was by a public Writ declared High-Priest, and Prince of the Jews (till such time as God should raise up a true Prophet) and invested with the regal Power and Dignity. 30. Demetrius, having fled to Seleucia, and having no mind to sit Idle, made War with the Parthians, by whom he was taken. During his Exile, Tryphon's Army mutiny'd and sided with Cleopatra his Wife. She, having received Advice, That her Husband was married to Rhodoguna, the Parthian King's Daughter, offe∣red herself in Marriage, together with the Kingdom, to Antiochus, the Brother of Deme∣trius. This Antiochus was sirnamed Sedetes. He was glad of the Opportunity of Reigning, and with that view married Cleopatra, and tur∣ned
out Tryphon, who fled into Apamea his own Country, and was there murder'd. Antiochus sent Cendebaeus into Judaea; whom John, the Son of Simon, defeated. Soon after, Simon was per∣fidiously murdered by Ptolomy, the Son of Abub, whom he had made his Son in Law, and Gover∣nour of the Province of Jericho. Upon these News, Antiochus came to Jerusalem and besieged it so vigorously, that, in a Sabbatick Year, the Besieged were reduced to extream Want. At last, they petitioned for Peace, and had it upon these Terms, viz. That they should lay down their Arms, level the Walls with the Ground, and should pay 5500 Talents, together with Tribute for Joppa and the other outlying Towns. 31. Antiochus waged War with the Parthi∣ans, and obtained several Victories, and redu∣ced several Provinces, which the Insolence of his Soldiers provoked to Revolt; after which, himself was killed in an Engagement with Ar∣saces. Arsaces, in order to divert him from Parthia, had set at liberty Demetrius his Bro∣ther; and after the Victory, endeavoured to recall him, but found it too late: For he made the best of his Way to Syria, and with ease mastered the Kingdom. But the Antiochi∣ans took it ill, and sollicited Ptolomaeus Physcon to send some Prince to take Possession of Syria. Ptolomy suborn'd one Zabinas or Zabi∣naeus, Son to one Protarchus a Merchant, who gave himself out to be the Son of Alexander Balas. This Youth, who was nam'd Alexan∣der, defeated Demetrius near to Damascus. De∣metrius being Rejected by his Wife Cleopatra and
her Sons, fled to Tyrus, where he thought to take shelter in the Temple as being a Sanctuary, but was kill'd by the Intreagues of Cleopatra or Za∣bina, in the 189 Year of the Seleucidae, the 1 Year of the 164 Olympiad, A. M. 3881. 32. Demetrius had two Sons by Cleopatra; Namely, Seleucus whom his Mother put to Death, for a spiring to the Crown without her leave, and Antiochus who was Sirnam'd Grypus from his hooked Nose. Alexander demean'd himself meekly towards his Subjects, and by that means ingratiated himself with the Peo∣ple; but Ptolomy being touch'd with his Ingra∣titude, gave his Daughter Tryphaena in Marriage to Antiochus his Sisters Son, and lent him Au∣xiliary Troops with which he Routed and slew Alexander. Cleopatra was not pleas'd with her Son's Victory, because it thwarted her design of Engrossing the Government to her self; up∣on which account she offer'd him a Poyson'd Draught, but upon the discovery of the de∣sign, was oblig'd to drink it up her self. An∣tiochus Reign'd peaceably for 8 Years after his Mothers Death, till Antiochus Cyzicenus, his own Mother's Son by Antiochus Sedetes, turn'd him out of Syria. But the next Year he return'd, and possess'd himself of half the Kingdom, and continu'd Possessor notwithstanding the Perpetual War between the two Brethren. At last Grypus was kill'd by the means of one He∣racleon, in the 45 Year of his Age, and the 26 of his Reign, 15 of which he Reign'd Joint∣ly with his Brother,
33. Antiochus Grypus left 5 Sons; The El∣dest of whom, Namely Seleucus, cut off his Uncle Cyzicenus, after he had Reign'd 18 Years. But Antiochus Pius Son to Cyzicenus, turn'd Se∣leucus out of Syria, and oblig'd him to retire to Cilicia, where he was burn't alive by the Mopse∣atae, for demanding Money of them. Antiochus and Philip his Sons, who were Twins, Resent∣ed their Father's Death, in levelling Mopsu∣estia with the Ground, but were afterwards de∣feated by Antiochus Pius. Antiochus was drown'd in the River Orontes, upon his flight. Philip put in for the Crown; But Ptolomy gave it to Demetrius the Fourth Brother; with whom he wag'd a Bloody War, both upon the account of Syria and Damascus. The Syrians finding themselves gall'd by the Wars of the Seleucidae, call'd in Tigranes King of Armenia, who possess'd Syria for 18 Years. 34. Antiochus Pius being expell'd Syria, lurk'd in Cilicia. Selene his Wife with 2 Sons, is said to have Reign'd in Phaenicia and some part of the lower Syria, till she was taken and put to Death by Tigranes. Tigranes govern'd Syria for 14 Years by the Ministry of Magadates, whom he was oblig'd to recall when Lucullus the Roman de∣feated him, notwithstanding the Assistance he had from his Father in Law Mithridates King of Pontus. Upon this Juncture, Antiochus Asiati∣cus, the Son of Pius, was by Universal consent invested with the Government of Syria for 4 Years; at the end of which Pompey the Great, having conquer'd it, Tigranes, outted him of his Heritage, notwithstanding the Good Services he had done to the People of Rome, and con∣fin'd
him to Commagena. Thus was Syria reduc'd to the form of a Roman Province, in the 2 Year of the 179 Olympiad, the 250 of the Seleucidae, 270 after the battel at Issus, by which it was ad∣ded to the Dominions of Alexander the Great, 61 before the Christian Date, A. M. 3942, in the Consulship of M. Tullius Cicero and C. An∣onus Nepos CHAP. VI. The Affairs of the Kingdom of Aegypt; From the Death of Ptolomaeus Lagus to the exit of Cleopatra; And the re∣ducing of Aegypt to the form of a Ro∣man Province. The space of 254 Years. 1. THo' Ptolomy had several Children by his Wife Euridice, the Daughter of Anti∣pater; Yet, he left the Kingdom to Ptolomaeus his Son by Berenice who waited upon Eurydice, and while he was yet alive took him in for share of the Government. This Ptolomaeus, who was Sirnam'd Philadelphus for being in Love with his Sister Arsinoe, outstripp'd his Fa∣ther in Riches and Greatness. He was a Man of Learning, and Erected a Library of 300000 Volumes, among which were the Holy Scrip∣tures, which Eleazar the High-Priest, pursuant to the King's Orders, sent to him, together with the 72 Interpreters, who are said to have trans∣lated it into Greek in 72 days without any diffe∣rence.
2. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus slew 2 of his Bre∣thren. He had likewise a quarrel with Maga, his Mother's Son by one Philip of Macedonia, whom his Mother had preferr'd to the Go∣vernment of Cyrene, He wag'd War with An∣tiochus Theus, which at last was put to an end by the Marriage of Berenice to Antiochus, as I intimated above. Then he gave himself up to a dissolute life, and entertain'd the vain hopes of Immortality: But Death disappoint∣ed him, after he had Reign'd 38 Years by himself, and one more Jointly with his Father, in the 2 Year of the 133 Olympiad, A. M. 3758. 3. In the 16th Year of Antiochus Theus, Pto∣lomaeus Euergetes Son to Ptolomaeus Philadelphus by Arsinoe the Daughter of Lysimachus, suc∣ceeded his Father. This Prince invaded Syria, in order to Relieve his Sister then block'd up by a siege, and Master'd all Asia, but, as I told you above, was oblig'd to return home to quell some Domestick Mutinies. While he was in Asia, Berenice his Wife Daughter to Maga his Uncle, made a vow of giving her hair to the Gods if he return'd safe, which Conon a Mathe∣matician that flourish'd at that time Fabulously gave out to be Translated to Heaven, and to Countenance the Fiction invented the Star that to this day goes by their Name. In this Prince's Reign Phoenix is said to have come to Heliopolis. Cleomenes King of Lacedemon being Routed and put to flight by Antigonus Doson, fled to him, and receiv'd from him a promise of Auxiliary Troops in order to the Recovery of his King∣dom; But the Death of Ptolomy prevented the
performance of his promise, when he had Reign'd 24 Years, in the 2 Year of the 139 O∣lympiad, A. M. 3783. 4. Ptolomaeus Euergetes was follow'd by Pto∣lomaeus Philopator, ironically so call'd, if we cre∣dit Iustin, who says he slew both his Parents. This Prince was so drown'd in Pleasure that he Neglected the Republick, and from thence was Christen'd Tryphon. Finding that his Brother Maga had obtain'd a Great Interest in the Ar∣my by his Mother's Intreagues, he made away bo h one and the other. He defeated Antiochus Magnus in battel and recover'd Caelo-Syria, Up∣on his return he Visited the Temple of Jeru∣salem, and had the boldness to approach to the Inner Places of Sanctity, where, by the Divine Vengeance, he was seiz'd with such Horrour and Confusion, that it was with much difficulty that he came to himself again. When he re∣turn'd to his Kingdom he persecuted the Jews who dwelt there, and slew Eurydice his Sister that he might have the freer use of Agathoclea his Concubine. He laid aside all the badges of Majesty and listed himself a drudge to all manner of Vice, while Agathoclea, together with Agathocles her Brother and Euanthe her Mother, manag'd the Government and dispos'd of every thing as they pleas'd. 5. Ptolomaeus had always the Good Fortune to surmount all difficulties. Cleomenes the Spartan, having escap'd out of Prison stirr'd up the Peo∣ple to retrieve their Liberty▪ but finding the attempt Successless slew himself, which, ac∣cording to Polybius, was a custom among the Lacedemonians. Afterwards the People Re∣volted,
but were quickly reduc'd to their wont∣ed Obedience, so that the King retain'd his Dignity. He persecuted the Jews, and in or∣der to bring 'em off from the Worship of God, tortur'd several and put many to Death; and expos'd the rest to be devour'd by 500 Elephants, who were rescu'd from the Clut∣ches of the Beasts by the Ministry of 2 Angels. Then the King alter'd his mind, and endea∣vour'd to oblige them. He died in the 18 Year of his Reign, the 1 Year of the 144 Olym∣piad, A. M. 3801. 6. In the 20 Year of Antiochus Magnus, Pto∣lomaeus Epiphanes Son to Ptolomaeus Philopator by his Sister, being then 5 Years Old, succeeded his Father. The People put to Death Agatho∣cles with his Sister and Mother, and made A∣ristomenes Acarnanes Guardian to the King, who was very happy in the Administration of Affairs. Philip King of Macedonia and Antiochus Magnus King of Asia conspir'd toge∣ther against Ptolomy. Antiochus possess'd him∣self of Judea, Caelosyria, Phaenicia, and several other places in Cilicia and Caria: But being afterwards engag'd in a War with the Romans, he gave his Daughter Cleopatra in Marriage to Ptolomy, with Judea and Caelosyria as her dow∣ry; designing thereby to secure an easy passage into Egypt, and to avoid the Inconvenience of leaving an Enemy behind him. 7. Scopas an Etolian, General to Ptolomy's forces, did likewise conspire against him, but he and his Complices were quickly cut off. At first he acted up to the Character of a Good Prince; But afterwards the flattery of
Wicked Courtiers prevail'd so far upon him, that he poyson'd Aristomenes, after all the Good Services he had done to him and the Re∣publick, and by so doing incurr'd the hatred of his People. At last, in order to carry on a War with Seleucus Philopator, he enter'd into a league with the Achaians; But his Ministers fancying that the Charges of the War wou'd Rob them of their profits, took him off by poison, after he had Reign'd 24 Years, in the 1 Year of the 150 Olympiad, A. M. 3825. 8. He left 2 Sons and as many Daughters. The Eldest of the Sons, Nam'd Philometor, suc∣ceeded the Father in the 18 Year of Seleucus Phi∣lopator. When this Prince was about to make good his claim to Coelosyria by force of Arms, his Uncle Antiochus Epiphanes prevented him, by making a descent upon Egypt, and turning him out of his Kingdom. Philometor being expell'd, the Alexandrians declar'd his Brother King, and Christen'd him Euergetes, which Name was afterwards turn'd to Cacergetes by Reason of his Wicked Life. He was likewise stil'd Physcon, with Allusion to his big belly. Afterwards Philometor return'd, but the Citi∣zens expell'd him. Antiochus, under the pre∣tence of restoring him, continued the War, but finding himself not able to carry Alexandria, went off to Syria; and left all Egypt to Philo∣metor, excepting Pelusium, which he reserv'd as a door for him to enter by when the 2 Bre∣thren shou'd have exhausted their strength up∣on one another. But they pack'd up the Mat∣ter, and reign'd together Peaceably. Antiochus
took this so ill, that he made another descent upon Egypt, but was order'd by the Roman Ambassadors to quit both Egypt and Cy∣prus. 9. But the Brethren soon fell out, and Phi∣lometor being expell'd by the other, repair'd to Rome, where he obtain'd from the Senate an order for his Restoration. Euergets finding the Romans kind to all Suppliants, went in Person to Rome, and obtain'd the Addition of Cyprus to his Dominions. And ev'n that did not satisfy him, for he afterwards undertook a Second Journey, but what the Result of it was we do not know. While Philometor Reign'd, Onas a Jew Son to Onias the 3 Priest, finding his Family turn'd out of the Priest∣hood, obtain'd a Decree for building a Tem∣ple in the Province of Heliopolis, which Resem∣bled that of Jerusalem in every thing, bating that, instead of a Candlestick, it had a Lamp hung upon a Gold Wire, which darted its beams all about in Imitation of the Sun. The Jews and Samaritans disputed the antiquity of their Temples in the presence of Ptolomy; And the Samaritan Orators being worsted, were Punish'd with the loss of their Heads, pursuant to the Contract mutually agreed to be∣fore hand. At last Philometor receiv'd a wound in his head, in a battel with Alexander King of Syria, of which he dy'd, after he had Reign'd 34 Years, in the 3 Year of the 158 Olym∣piad, A. M. 3859.
10. After his Death the Method of Successi∣on in Egypt was alter'd. Whereas formerly the Son succeeded the Father, Physcon oblig'd Cleopatra his Brothers Widdow to marry him, and slew his own little Son in the Arms of it's Mother the very day of the Marriage. The progress of his Reign was all of a piece with the beginning; cruelty and barbarity shin'd thro' every part of it; every Place was fill'd with detestable Murders, and Mercy was shown to none. The Alexandrians took his Wicked Actions so much to heart, that most of 'em deserted the City, which he afterwards fill'd with New Citizens. But he quickly render'd himself so odious to them, that they set his Palace on Fire, and banish'd him, and put the King∣dom into the hands of Cleopatra his Sister. But afterwards he made Friends with his Sister and Repossess'd the Kingdom. He dy'd, when he had Reign'd 29 Years by himself, in the last Year of the 156 Olympiad, A. M. 3888. 11. He left 3 Sons and as many Daughters. By his latter will he gave Cyprus in Legacy to Apion his bastard, and left Egypt to his Wife to be dispos'd of to which of his Sons she thought fit. She fancying that Alexander the Youngest would be most Obedient to her, design'd to give him a share in the Government; but the People being against it, she sent for Lathurus, whom she afterwards expell'd, and pursu'd with that Ardour, that all his Interpri∣ses in Judea and Coelosyria were render'd abor∣tive. She made it her business for some Years to undermine Alexander; but he smelling the
design kill'd her, and was afterwards punish'd for his parricide in being banish'd by the A∣lexandrians, The Citizens of Alexandria re∣call'd Lathurus, from whom the Egyptian The∣bes Revolted, but was afterwards Reduc'd in the 3 Year of his Reign. Soon after that he dy'd, about 37 Years after his Father's Death, in the 1 Year of the 175 Olympiad, A. M. 3925. 12. 'Tis not certain who succeeded Lathurus. 'Tis probable Alexander the Youn∣ger Son to the other Alexander, Married his Daughter Cleopatra, and Reign'd along with her 18 days, but, having kill'd her on the 19th, was expell'd by the Alexandrians and fled to Tyre, where he ended his days after. 15 Years exile, having left the People of Rome his heir, in the Consulship of M. Tullius Cicero and C. Antonius Nepos. After Alexander was ex∣pell'd, the Alexandrians declar'd the Son of Lathurus their King, who was call'd Dionysus and Auletes, because he was addicted to the Rites of Bachus, and to the Flute. This Aule∣tes was a bastard, as well as his Brother the King of Cyprus; For Pausanias tells us that Lathurus left no Legitimate children, except∣ing one Daughter. After a few Years his Subjects outted him of the Kingdom, because he would not attempt the Recovery of Cyprus, which the Romans had taken from his Brother; or rather, because he exacted a great Sum of Money from them, with which he purchas'd the Friendship and Alliance of the Romans.
13. Auletes being outted of Alexandria came to Rome, but all his Sollicitations for Assistance were Rejected, by Reason that the Sibylline books did not seem to Countenance it. From thence he went to Ephesus, and with a goodly Sum of Talents engag'd Gabinius Governour of Syria to Restore him. After his Restoration he did no Memorable Action; bating, that after Four Years he died in the 2 Year of the 182 Olympiad, A. M. 3954. He had two Sons and as many Daughters, and order'd the Elder of both Sexes, who were joyn'd in Marri∣age, to Reign together. After Three Years, this Prince, who was call'd Ptolomaeus Dionysus, turn'd out his Sister Cleopatra; but she returnd from Syria at the head of an Army, and he march'd out to make head against her, and pitch'd his Camp at the Mountain Cassium, and the Pelusian Mouth of the Nile, at which Time Pompey being Routted by Cesar in the plains of Pharsalia, fled to him. But he, by the advice of Theodatus his Preceptor, receiv'd Pompey into a Boat, and slew him; Thinking thereby to win Coesar's good will. 14. But Caesar, by demanding the Money that Auletes ow'd to the Romans, incurr'd the hatred of the Alexandrians, and while he made it his business to bring the King and his Sister to a good understanding, Pothinus carried on a War against him. For Cleopatra's sake he Encounter'd many difficulties. At last, the Alexandrians being worn out by many Successive Disasters, he master'd their Camp; and their King himself retiring into a little boat, was drown'd in the River, by the Crouds of Peo∣ple
that pour'd into the boat and sunk it. Cae∣sar carried Alexandria without any difficulty, for the Citizens surrender'd themselves upon Dis∣cretion. However he did not annex Egypt to the Roman Dominions, but return'd it to Cleopatra his Miss. She Married her Brother, who was then 11 Years Old, and after 4 Years poyson'd him, in order to engross the Govern∣ment to her self. 15. She was mightily given to Amours; not only with Caesar to whom she bare a Son, name∣ly Caesario; but after his departure with Pompey the Son of Pompey the Great. When Cassius and Brutus the Murderers of Caesar were cut off by the Triumviri, Antonius went into Syria; where she met with him, and perswaded him to go with her to Egypt, where they were both entirely wrap'd up in Lechery and Debauche∣ry. Antonius was so strangely bewitch'd that he divorced his own Wife, and was not a∣sham'd to bestow the Roman Provinces upon Cleopatra and the Children she bore to him; And requir'd that the Senate should Ratifie the gifts. The Senate justly receiv'd his Demands with Contempt and Derision, and at last re∣solv'd upon a War against them under the Conduct of Octavius Caesar. Cleopatra would needs be present at the Sea Engagement at Actium; And was the first that turn'd her back and fled. 16. Upon this Disaster she order'd her Ships to be carried over into the Bay of Arabia, de∣signing by the help of them to avoid Captivity, when she came to be outted of her Kingdom. But Antonius, not having received the News of
the Revolt of the Land Forces, diswaded her from that Project. Then they return'd to their wonted Luxury, and invited all that were fearless of Death to enjoy themselves in the present use of all agreeable Pleasures. But she did not fail to Court the Favour of Caesar, by betraying into his hands Pelusium with the Navy and Cavalry. Antonius indeed suspected her Treachery, but was wheedled by the fair Insinuations of a Flattering Woman. When Caesar was just upon the borders of Egypt, she suborn'd People to tell Antony as if she had laid Violent Hands on her self, for fear of the Conquerour: Upon which News Antony stab'd himself in the Belly. Then she bewail'd his Death with many moans and heavy Lamen∣tations. 17. Caesar had a strong mind to take Cleopa∣tra alive; Which would have prov'd an un∣heard of Accession to his Triumph. And in∣deed she came into his hands alive, but as soon as she found that all her Artifices, which had subdued so many great Men before, could not prevail with the Conquerour; and that he de∣sign'd in a short Time to send her into Italy; She concerted a way to bereave him of his prey, and to avoid the suffering of any thing unwor∣thy of her Crown and Kingdom: That is, she died by the Application of Serpents to her Breasts, as if she had slept her Life away. She was a Woman of a Masculine Spirit, and richly endow'd with the Gifts of Nature. She liv'd 39 Years, and Reign'd 22 Years after her Fa∣ther's Death, and kept company with Antony 14 Years. Her Exit concludes the Kingdom
of the Ptolomy's, which was then reduc'd to the form of a Roman Province. Thus was the Macedonian Empire quite Extinguish'd, a∣bout 300 Years after the Death of Darius Codomannus, and the Commencement of the Monarchy under Alexander the Great; 293 Years after Egypt was possess'd by Ptolomaeus the Son of Lagus, in the 3d Year of the 187 Olympiad, 28 before the Christian date, A. M. 3975. in the Consulship of M. Licinius Crassus, and Octavius Caesar, who was then Con∣sul the Fourth Time. Affairs Contemporary to the Macedoni∣an Empire. CHAP. VII. The State of the Kingdom of the Jews, or the Principality of the Asmonaei. From the departure of Antiochus Sidetes out of Jerusalem to the beginning of Herod's Reign. The Space of 98 Years. 1. ANtiochus Sidetes march'd from Jerusalem against the Parthians; and when he came to battel, receiv'd a wound of which he died. John the Prince and High Priest of the Jews accompanied him, and was sirnam'd Hyrcanus from defeating the Hyrcanians. At this time the Seleucidae were still disputing their right to the Kingdom; from whence he took occasion to settle himself in the Government and master'd several Cities in Syria, and sub∣dued
the Idumaei whom he oblig'd to comply with the Circumcision. He renew'd the League which Judas Maccabeus made with the Romans, and took and destroy'd Samaria. He had great debates with the Pharisees; and was much more Favourable to the Sadduces; Whereup∣on the People Revolted, but were quickly re∣duc'd to Obedience. He is said to have Pro∣phesy'd that his two Elder Sons would quickly be possess'd of the Government. He was Ce∣lebrated, for being at once a Prince, a Priest, and a Prophet. He died in the 31 Year of his Reign, 104 Years before Christ, the last Year of the 160 Olympiad, A. M. 3899. 2. Since I have mention'd the Pharisees, I reckon 'twill not be improper to give some ac∣count of the different Sects of the Jews. The first mention that Josephus makes of the Phari∣ses, is in the 9th Chap. of the 13 Book of his Archaeologia. 'Tis not to be doubted, but that those Sects were reviv'd after their return from Babylon. Some were of the Opinion, that they ought not to depart from the Letter of the Law; Those were call'd Karraim. Others thought it their Duty to add other Voluntary Performances, and were therefore call'd Hasi∣dim or Saints. Out of this Sect, there Rose yet another, that were reckon'd much holyer than the other Hasideans, and by Reason of their Separation were call'd Peruschim or Phe∣ruschim, and by the Grecians Pharisees. Now, as the Pharisees sprung from the Hasidim, so the Sadduces ow'd their Original to the Karraei, and took their Name from Sadoc. Antigonus the preceptor of Sadoc, and the Disciple of Si∣meon
Justus, Taught, that we ought not to serve God, like Mercenary Servants that work for a Reward; meaning, that the Principle of our Duty should be Love, and not the hopes of a Reward. 3. But Sadoc (or Saiduc) and Baithus wrested this Pious Opinion to an ill meaning, as if they expected no Future Reward, and denied a Future State. This was the Original of that heresy, according to the Rabbi Abraham. But Montacutius our Countryman brands that ac∣count as Fabulous, and derives the word Sad∣duces from Sader, Justitia. There was a Third Sect that took rise from the Pharisees, call'd Essaei or Esseni; but we are at a loss where to fix its first date. Some are of the Opinion; they were call'd Essaei from , or from the Syrian word Haesi, from whence the Greek word is deriv'd. Now the Hebrew word sig∣nifies those who live retir'd from all Noise, which quadrates admirably with the Essaei, who affected a Pythagorean Silence, and retreated to remote Solitary Villages. Others derive their Name from Asa, a Hebrew word that signifies to heal, because they studied Physick. Howe∣ver this Sect was Posteriour to the Pharisees, and accounted holyer; and seems to have ta∣ken its rise about this Time, when the Hyrca∣nian Sadduces retir'd to a desert, in order to avoid the anger and envy of the Phari∣sees. 4. However Hyrcanus left 5 Sons; the El∣dest of whom was sirnam'd Aristobulus Philel∣len, and Succeeded his Father. He converted the Principality into a Kingdom, and put on
the Regal Diadem, about 481 Years after the return of the Jews from Babylon. He starv'd his Mother to Death, who was sharer with him in the Government, and slew one of his Bre∣thren, the rest being kept up by his Wife. He subdued the Ituraei, and oblig'd 'em to comply with the Jewish Rites; and in the space of one Year ended his days in great Trouble of Mind. Jannaeus or Alexander his Brother suc∣ceeded him, and slew one of his Brethren for raising Sedition. Having settled his Affairs at home, he besieg'd Ptolomais, but was routted by Ptolomaeus Lathurus, who invaded Judea. But after all, Cleopatra oblig'd her Son Ptolomy, to make Peace with Alexander, and proceed no further. 5. After the departure of Lathurus, Alexan∣der invaded Caelosyria once more, and carryed several Places, and levell'd Gaza with the Ground, which was betray'd into his hands. In a fight with the Arabs, he lost almost his whole Army, and narrowly escap'd to Jerusalem; where his Subjects Rebell'd and made War with him; but at last were master'd and Se∣verely punish'd. He enlarged his Dominions by considerable accessions in Syria, Phaenicia, Idumaea, and other Countries; Where he pos∣sess'd himself of a great Number of Cities most of which are mention'd by Josephus. At last by a fit of drinking he was thrown into a Quartan feaver, which continued upon him Three Years; but notwithstanding his illness he did not Neglect his concerns, till at the siege of Ragola in the Country of the Geraseni, it master'd him and put an end to his days, in the
27 Year of his Reign, the 49 of his Age, the 3 of the 173 Olympiad, 76 Years before the Birth of Christ, A. M. 3927. 6. When he was upon the point of Death, he advis'd his Wife Alexandra not to publish his Death, till she had taken the Castle; and after that to return in Triumph to Jerusa∣lem, and deliver his Corpse to the Pharisees to be treated with what Indignities they pleas'd; and to give ear to their Counsel; because he and his Father had lost the good will of their People by quarreling with the Pharisees. Alex∣andra following this Scheme Ingratiated her self with the Pharisees. Her Husband left her the Kingdom, notwithstanding that he had two Sons by her, namely Hyrcanus and Aristo∣bulus. But the Pharisees were so indiscreet and over-forward in persecuting their adversa∣ries, that a Rebellion ensued, and Aristobulus made use of the Opportunity of aspiring to the Crown, and acordingly took upon him the re∣gal Title, his Mother being then sick. The illness she was then under, quickly took her off in the 9 Year of her reign and 73 of her age. She was a Woman of matchless Wisdom, Cou∣rage, and Application. 7. Hyrcanus was invested with the Priesthood in the 3 Year of the 177 Olympiad, in the Consulship of Q. Hortensius and Q. Metellus Creticus. But was routed and outted of his Kingdom by his Brother in a battel fought near Jordan. Then he retreated to a Private Life, and oblig'd himself by an Oath to lye still; but Antipater, Governour of Idumaea, rous'd him from his lazyness, and for fear of Alex∣ander's
Power, perswaded him to flee to Aretas King of Arabia. Aretas was easily induc'd to invade Judea; and accordingly laid siege to Jerusalem, but was repuls'd by Scaurus the Treasurer of Pompey the Great, whom Aristo∣bulus had brib'd for that purpose with 400 Ta∣lents. 8. Soon after, each of 'em sent Ambassadors to Pompey, who was then at Damascus; but the Jews wanted to be rid of the Kingly Govern∣ment, and laid heavy charges against 'em both. Pompey was Favourable to Hyrcanus, be∣ing disoblig'd by the Violent Measures of Aristobulus; and by reason that he found him carrying on his Projects after the interview, pursued him to Jerusalem, and laid a siege to the Temple where his Friends took Shelter, tho' Aristobulus himself return'd to Pompey. The Temple was taken by Pompey in the Third Month, on the Day of the fast Celebrated in Memory of the Wheel which Jehojakim burnt, in the 179 Olympiad, 62 Years before Christ, A. M. 3942, in the Consulship of C. Antonius and M. Tullius Cicero. 9. Pompey Reinstated Hyrcanus in the Priest∣hood and Principality; but upon Conditon, that he should not meddle with the Regalia. He put to Death the Authors of the Rebellion, and made the Jews Tributary to the People of Rome. He took from 'em the Cities they pos∣sess'd in Caelosyria; and set a Governor over them, and carried off Aristobulus. Thus was that Nation confin'd within its own Boundaries, which had been so lately Transported with their Victories. Vpon the Journey to Rome, Alexan∣der
the Son of Aristobulus gave his keepers the slip and return'd to Judea; Where he drew together a body of Men, and attack'd Gabinius who defeated him and took him prisoner. Nay, Aristobulus himself fled from Rome, and retir'd to Judea, where he reviv'd the same War; but was equally unfortunate, for Gabinius took him Prisoner and sent him back to Rome. A∣lexander got his Liberty, and in another battel lost his Army. Crassus succeeded Gabinius; And as he passed thro' Judea on his Journey to Parthia Rob'd the Temple of 20000 Talents; but was soon after punish'd for his Sacrilege by the Circumvention of his Enemies. 10. Caesar, having drove Pompey and the Senate out of Italy, sent Aristobulus at the head of two Legions to subdue Syria: But Pompey's faction got him poyson'd on his Journey, and his Corpse lay long above Ground. Soon after Alexander was beheaded by Pompey's Orders. About this Time Antipater Governour of Idu∣maea was much Redoubted and Fortified by Alliances with several Princes. He had 4 Sons by Cypris a Noble Arabian Lady, Namely, Phafaelus, Herod, Josephus, and Pherorah; and sent 'em all into Arabia, while he wag'd War with Aristobulus. 11. Antipater assisted Caesar who was then en∣gag'd in the Alexandrian War. Caesar rewarded him with considerable gifts, besides that of the Stewardship of Judea. He confirm'd the Preisthood to Hyrcanus who had done him Good Services, and overlook'd all the charges laid against him by Antigonus the Son of Aristo∣bulus; And allow'd the Walls of Jerusalem to
be repair'd. Antipater, finding Hyrcanus to be a dull unactive Man, made Phasaelus his Son Governour of Jerusalem, and set Herod over Galilee, who at that Time according to Josephus was not above 17 (or rather 27) Years Old. 12. Herod, who from his Infancy gave proof of a Noble Spirit, slew Ezekias a Famous Robber that infested Syria, for which the Jews call'd him to account: He appear'd, but with a guard of Soldiers, and was absolv'd by Hyr∣canus. But he took their bringing him to a tri∣al so very ill, that he would have Revenged himself upon the Judges, had not his Father and Brethren disswaded him. Soon after Cassius being engag'd in a War with the Trium∣viri, came to Judea; Where he exacted a Sum of Money. About that time An∣tipater was poyson'd by one Malichus; and his Sons conceal'd Malichus's Crime, till the Criminal aspiring to the Principality of Judea, was, by the order of Cassius, brought to con∣dign Punishment, both for his Ambition and Parricide. 13. Herod was the Person that put Malichus to Death: For which the Jews Arraign'd him before Antonius; but he with a Sum of Money got off, and turn'd every thing to the advan∣tage of his Affairs. The Parthians having then made themselves Masters of Syria; An∣gonus the Son of Aristobulus hir'd 'em to Effect his Restoration, for 2000 Talents and 500 Women. Accordingly they laid siege to Jeru∣salem, and when Hyrcanus and Phasaelus were sent to them upon an Embassy, keep'd 'em Pri∣soners.
14 But Herod escap'd out of Jerusalem and fled to Arabia, where he indeavor'd to pro∣cure Succor; but finding his Sollicitations in∣effectual, boldly went to Rome, and Repre∣sented his deplorable case to Antonius. Anto∣ny, out of Respect to his Father's Memory, but chiefly in Regard of the Money that was tender'd, perswaded the Senate to give him the Kingdom; And was back'd by Octavius Caesar. Thus was he declar'd King to the Consternation of all, who before was so sensi∣ble of his own Incapacity for the Post, that he had resolv'd to petition for the Crown on the behalf of Alexander the Son of Aristobulus, and brother to Mariamna his Wife. In Seven Days Time he set out from Italy, in the 1 Year of the 185 Olympiad, 37 Years before Christ, A. M. 3965. in the Consulship of C. Asinius Pollio, and Domitius Calvinus, who was then a Second Time Consul. 15. Silon and Venidius were order'd to assist Herod in procuring the Kingdom. He first laid siege to Jerusalem, but upon the approach of the Winter lodg'd his forces in their Win∣ter Quarters; and being diffident of Ventidius, went to wait upon Antony, who at that Time was at Samosata upon the Euphrates. Antony gave him an Hon urable Reception, and Re∣commended him to the care of Sosius. So that about Five Months after Jerusalem was taken by 11 Legions and 6000 Horse. Antigonus be∣ing taken prisoner, Antony, upon the Sollici∣tation of Herod, order'd him to be beheaded at Antiochia. This was the exit of the Asmonaei, about 98 Years after Judea's freedom from the
Syrian Yoak; and the Administration of Affairs was put into the hands of Herod a Forreigner. Jerusalem was taken in the Third Month, on the same fast day on which the Temple had been taken by Pompey about 27 Years before, the last Year of the 185 Olym∣piad, in the Consulship of M. Agrippa, and Ca∣nidius Gallus. CHAP. VIII. The Affairs of Sicily, Contemporary to the Macedonian Monarchy. From the Death of Timoleon to the Wars of Si∣cily; or to the first Punick War. The Space of 73 Years. TImoleon's Laws and Constitutions tended so much to Encourage Democracy, that the Commonalty Arrogated a boundless Liber∣ty; and Sicily did not long enjoy the Advan∣tages of Peace; For when the due Authority of Princes was taken away, the Kingdom was expos'd to the Impositions of Tyrants, among whom Agathocles stands highest in the Roll, both upon the account of his Sagacity, and Cruelty, and the Greatness of his Actions. His Father was one Corcinus a Potter who laid him out in his Infancy, by Reason that the Oracle had foretold he would be the Au∣thor of Great Calamity in Carthage and Sicily: But his Mother sav'd him. He was so hand∣some
a Youth, that Dymas the Gene∣ral of the forces kept him, and at last made him Adjutant General; After that, he Married Dymas's Widdow. He attempted to storm Croto an Italian City; but being disap∣pointed came to Syracusae, where he seem'd to indeavour to make himself Tyrant, and was thereupon banish'd, But soon after he drew together an Army; which frighted the Citi∣zens so that they Recall'd him, and oblig'd him by an Oath to offer at no Infringement up∣on the People's Power. 2. After his return he Wheedled the Vul∣gar People by his Harangues, which breath'd nothing but downright Democracy; and was presently made General. Then he march'd his Army into the City, and slew a Great Number of the Noble Men, charging them with the Affectation of Aristocracy. At this Rate 4000 were kill'd, and thereupon 6000 fled, and the unruly Mob Elected Agahocles to be Sole Commander. By this intreague he got the Power into his hands, and pre∣tended to a great deal of Humanity and Meekness. But having drawn together a most Numerous Army, overrun all Sicily, and de∣clar'd War against the Carthaginians; and find∣ing himself Worsted in the Island invaded A∣frica as being naked and expos'd, and as soon as he arriv'd set his Ships on Fire, designing thereby to cut off from his Men all possibility of fleeing, and oblige 'em to be brave upon the foot of despair.
3. The Carthaginians were astonished by his boldness; and he maul'd 'em often, for now their Affairs went cross in Sicily it self. for Amilcar their General was taken and kill'd before Syracusa, and his Army split into two Factions. Whereas Agathocl s stiffled all the Mutinies in his Army, and frequently went off with the Victory; and perfidiously murder'd one of the Officers of Alexander the Great, who had possess'd himself of Cyrene, and Improv'd all Opportunities of inlarging his Dominions; and whom he had Wheedled to come over to him upon the Prospect of shar∣ing in the Common Spoil. Then he declar'd himself King, and having left Archagathus his Son in Africa return'd to Sicily, and re∣duc'd the Cities which had Revolted and En∣tertain'd the banish'd Rebels. But soon after his Affairs took another Course. 4. For Dinocrates appear'd in Sicily at the head of so Numerous an Army, that he durst not Engage him. And in Africa the Carthagi∣nians cut off Bomilcar who usurp'd the Tyran∣ny; and defeated Archagathus and Recover'd several Places. Whereupon Agathocles was re∣call'd by his Son; but before he left the Island, he put to Death most of those whom he sus∣pected, in order to prevent their Future Insur∣rections. As soon as he arriv'd in Africa, he found the Carthaginians much too hard for him, and Resolv'd to flee. But Archagathus smel∣ling the design, and seeing himself upon the point of being left in the lurch, push'd on the Army to mutiny, so that they took hold of the Tyrant, and bound him with Chains:
But afterwards he got 'em taken off, and made his escape to a Ship, in which he fled away. Upon the News of his Flight, the Soldiers slew both his Sons. 5. Upon his return to Sicily, he display'd all manner of cruelty upon the People of Aegesta; And among other Contrivances for Torturing, invented a Machine in which he burnt Men alive, as Phalaris had done before in his Bull. But soon after he found himself so pinch'd by Unsurmountable Difficulties that he design'd to resign the Tyranny; but when Dinocrates offer'd to Usurp it, he made head against him and defeated him, He expell'd Cassander King of Macedonia out of Corryra; He took and destroy'd Croto, and kill'd a great many of the Citizens; but was fearfully maul'd by the Brutii. He enter'd into a Confederacy with Demetrius Poliorcetes, who was then Governour of Ma∣cedonia; and was Just designing another Ex∣pedition to Af ica, when Archagathus his Grand Son kill'd him, as taking it ill that Agathocles the Tyrant's Son was prefer'd to him, whom he likewise made drunk and kill'd. Agathocles was not quite expir'd, when Oxythenius Demetrius s Ambassador laid him in his Grave, in the 72 Year of his Age, the 28 of his Reign, (according to his own Brother Antander, as well as other Au∣thors) in the 2 Year of the 123 Olympi∣ad, A. M. 3718.
6. Agathocles being taken out of the way, the Syracusans Retriev'd their Liber∣ty: Which Maenon Aegesthanus, who Execut∣ed the Parricide, indeavour'd to invade and to Usurp the Tyranny; and likewise kill'd Archagathus: But his Measures were broke by the Conclusion of a Peace between the Citizens of Syracusa, and the Carthaginians with whom he joyn'd. The Mercenary Troops were discarded by the Citizens, and thereupon overpower'd the Inhabitants of Mes∣sene and possess'd themselves of the City; which in their own Campanian Language was call'd Mamertina from Mars. This happen'd when a Campanian Roman Legion being sent to assist the Rhegians in the time of the War between the Romans and Tarentines, did with equal perfidy possess themselves of Rhe∣gium. Not long after the Syracusans being engag'd in a War with the Africans call'd in Pyrrhus King of Epirus from Italy: Who at first manag'd Matters happily; but at last grew cruel, and by that means was disap∣pointed in his Measures and so return'd to Italy. 7. After the return of Pyrrhus to Italy, the Syracusan Army, without any precedent, chose two Praetors out of their own body, Namely Artemidorus and Hiero. Whereupon the Peo∣ple were much incens'd, as taking it very ill that the Army should Usurp their Power. But at the same time confirm'd the Magistracy to Hiero the Son of Hierocles, out of Regard to his Humanity and other Virtues. He ex∣pos'd the Turbulent Mercenary Forces to the
Excursions of the Mamertins, and by that means infeebl'd them so that he afterwards Reign'd in Security. After a few Years he Vigorously attack'd the Mamertins, and de∣feated them to that degree, that they were thinking to surrender, when Hannibal the Car∣thaginian, envying Hiero's Prosperity, cunning¦ly diverted him from carrying on the siege, and at the same time gull'd the Mamertins. 3. However Hiero, upon his return to Syracusae was declar'd King, as a Reward for his Valor. But Hannibal possess'd himself of the Castle of Mamertini; and Join'd with Hiero in attacking the City. Upon this Combination the Mamertines implor'd relief from the Romans: But the Senate having lately Resented the Per∣fidiousness of the Campanian Legion by putting them all to Death, Refus'd to assist them who were guilty of the same Crime: But the Peo∣ple, whose Authority then prevail'd, being advis'd by the Praetor, that it was their interest to possess themselves of Sicily, in order to Gall the Carthaginians more sensibly and Enlarge the bounds of their Empire; and that the Soldi∣ers whom the Tarentin War had quite Exhausted, wou'd be considerable gainers by this War; Upon these Suggestions, I say, the People gave orders for levying an Army, and sending 'em Auxiliary Troops 9. This was the first Original of the first Sicilia or Punick War, the account of which will come in under that of the Roman Affairs. It happen'd in the 22 Year after the Death of Agathocles, the 1 Year of the 120 Olym∣piad, the 490th after the building of Rome,
the 19th of Antiochus Soter, the 21 of Ptolo∣maeus Philadelphus, A. M. 3741, in the Con∣sulship of Appius Claudius Caudices and M. Fulvius Flaccus. CHAP. IX. The Roman Affairs Contemporary with the Macedonian Empire. Sect. 1. Reaching from the War with the People of Priver∣num to the 1 Punick War, which was their First attempt out of Italy. The space of 66 Years. 1. AFter the taking of Privernum, the Ro∣mans declar'd War against the Palaepo∣litani. It was one and the same Chalcidensi∣an Colony thut Inhabited both Palaepolis and Neapolis, upon the Maritim side of Italy. The People of Palapolis trusted in their own strength join'd to that of the Samnites; and were further Encourag'd, by a Plague that rag'd among the Romans. Accordingly they attack'd the Romans who liv'd about Falernum, and frequently gall'd them: But were after∣wards conquer'd and oblig'd to surrender, and the Samnites lost 3 Towns. But the Taentini stood out longer, and in the War with them L. Papyrius Cursor being made Dictator, mov'd that Fabius Rutilanus, Major of the Horse,
should be beheaded for Engaging the E∣nemy without orders, tho he came off suc∣cessfully; and it was with difficulty that the Intreaties of the People diswaded the Dictator from putting the design in Execution. 2. Papyrius defeated the Samnites; whereup∣on they desir'd a Peace, but met with a Refu∣sal. But not long after they surpris, d the Ro∣man Army at the straits of Caudium, and ob∣lig'd 'em to accept of such Terms, as were unworthy of the People of Rome; insomuch that the Senate Refus'd to Ratifie 'em, and re∣new'd the War, in which the People of Sam∣nis were often worsted; and L. Decius Mus, being made Consul a 4th time, and being Engag'd in a battel with them and the Galli Senones, sacrific'd himself for the Army, by Rushing in among the thickest files of his Enemies, about 44 Years after his Father in the War with the Sabins had by his own Con∣trivance undergone the same fate. 3. 'Tis to be Remark'd that the Romans had 30 Triumphs upon the War with the Samnites; That is, the Consuls had 26; L. Papyrius the Dictator 2, P. Philo the Procon∣sul one, Fabius another Proconsul one, the Family of the Fabii 4, and that of the Papyrii 5. Now this War commenc'd in the 410 Year after the building of the City, and was put to an end in the 481; So that it con∣tinu'd 71 Years; and the Romans never En∣gag'd with an Enemy that stood out longer against them, and with more vigour.
4. In the mean time, while the Romans are Engag'd in forreign Wars, Domestick Facti∣ons prevail at home, which were at last ap∣peas'd by allowing the Plebs a share in the Priesthood and the Augural Dignity: And then the Lex Provocationis was Renew'd a 3 Time. But soon after the People mutiny'd upon the account of the Debts, and Separated from the Patricii, retiring to Janiculum. Q. Hortensius the Dictator in order to bring back the Peo∣ple Enacted a Law, investing the Plebiscita with a Legal Force Capable to Control the Quirites. Now this Concession had been twice Granted before, viz. in the 305 Year of the City when L. Valerius and M. Horatius were Consuls, and in the 416 when Q. Publius Philo was Dictator, Florus is certainly out upon this head, in saying that the 3d Separation of the Plebs was occasion'd upon the account of Ma∣trimony. 5. After a Few Years the Romans Engag'd in a War with the Tarentins. The Tarentins were descended of the Parthenii who settled in that Country when they were expell'd Spar∣ta▪ They Roll'd in Luxury and Pride; they attack'd the Roman Fleet, they kill'd L. Valeri∣us the Duumvir and offer'd Indignities to L. Posthumius their Ambassador. Whereupon the Romans declar'd War against them, and they call'd in Pyrrhus King of Epirus to their Assistance. This Pyrrhus was the first that brought Elephants to Lucania, from whence the Romans call'd them Lucanian oxen. By the help of which he routed Laevinus the Consul, took 1800 Romans prisoners, and
having drawn together some Auxiliary Troops March'd towards Rome, putting all to Fire and Sword, as far as Praeneste within 18 Miles of the City. But when he weigh'd the Matter seriously, he consider'd that the conquest of the Romans was a very difficult at∣tempt, and thereupon in the next Year sent Cineas (a Man of Extraordinary Eloquence) as Ambassador to Sollicit the Senate to make Peace, and enter into a Confederacy with him. 6. The Senate was not against the Peace, till Appius Claudius, who was then blind and decrepit thro' Age, and had been Consul a Second Time 17 Years before, came into the Court, and Frighted them out of the thoughts of a Confederacy: So great was the Con∣stancy and Vigour of that Man's Mind, that upon that occasion he was not wanting either in Publick or Private Officers: At the same Time C. Fabricius Luscinus, whom Cicero com∣pares to Aristides the Athenian, did his Coun∣try very good Service. He was sent to Pyrrhus to Treat about the Ransoming of the Prisoners, and was Sollicited to Treache∣ry by very large Offers and Promises; but Generously slighted 'em all. Nor was this all. A Deserter came to him, and told him he could poyson the King, but he sent him back prisoner to his Master. Pyrrhus obtain'd some Victories over the Romans; but they did not avail him, for the Romans were still the more animated by their losses. At last the Sicilians implor'd his Assistance against the Carthaginians, and he willingly Cross'd
over to the Isle, thinking there to meet with a Fairer Opportunity of carrying on his designs. 7. But finding himself disappointed, he re∣turn'd to Italy, where Maximus Curius Denta∣tus Routed him entirely and oblig'd him to Retire to his own Kingdom. The Romans purchas'd such Great and Extensive Glory, by the Noise of this Victory, which spread it self far and Wide, that Ptolomaeus Philadel∣phus sent Ambassadors to desire a Confedera∣cy with them. The Tarentins finding them∣selves unable to carry the Castle in which Pyrrhus had left a Garrison, or to obtain Peace from the Romans; did, in the 3d Year after Pyrrhus's departure, Court the Assistance of the Carthaginians; but that did not avail them so much as to prevent their being con∣quer'd. For the Castle first surrender'd it self, and soon after the Town came into the hands of the Romans, who allow'd the Ci∣tizens to live in Peace, and Levell'd the Walls with the Ground, in the 482 Year after the building of the City, in the Con∣sulship of L. Papyrius Cursor and Sp. Carvilius Maximus, who Triumph'd upon the Conquest of the Samnitians and Tarentins. 8. The Romans having lately subdu'd the Lucanians and Etrurians, were now Masters of almost all Italy. Soon after, the Campa∣nian Legion that had possess'd it self of Rhegium, was taken, and put to Death. The Picen∣tes were conquer'd and allow'd to live in Peace. Colonies were then carried out to Ariminum and Beneventum. At the same time the Silver
Mony was first Coin'd at Rome, upon the finding of a Great quantity of Silver in a Castle belonging to the Samnites. This hap∣pen'd 5 Years before the First Punick War, in the 14th Year of Antiochus Soter, the 16th of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, 267 before the Chris∣tian Date, A. M. 3736, 485 after the build∣ing of the City, when C. Fabius Pictor and Q. Ogulnius Gallus were Consuls. Sect. 2. From the Commencement of the first Punick War, to the War with Antiochus Magnus, or the First Invasion of Asia. The space of 37 Years. 1. AFter the Conquest of Pyrrhus and the Tarentins, the Romans became so formi∣dable, that they Master'd all Italy and Sicily. They had lately subdued the Ʋmbri and Salen∣tini, and the Number of their Treasurers was thereupon Enlarg'd to the Rate of 8. Then Appius Claudius Cross'd over with an Army to Sicily, and first Routed Hiero and then the Carthaginians, and so rais'd the siege of Mamertini. Next Year Hiero was so fright∣ed by the Roman Preparations, that he made Peace with them upon these Terms, that he should deliver up the Captives and pay 100 Talents of Silver. 2. Marcus Valerius Maximus who was Con∣sul along with Manlius Octacilius, took Messana, and from thence got the Sirname of Messala. He likewise brought a new Clock from Catana
to Rome, about 30 Years after Papyrius Cursor was Dictator in the City. The People made use of this, tho' very Imperfect, for 99 Years, till the Time that M. Philippus the Censor brought another Compleat one and plac'd it just by it, much about the same Time that Scipio Nasica divided the day into hours, by the help of Water Glasses. Plinius tells us, from Varro, that Barbers were First brought from Sicily to Rome, by P. Sicinius Menas, about the 454 Year after the building of the City; and that before that Time the Romans never shav'd their Beards. Scipio Africanus was the First that Countenanc'd the Custom by shaving himself every day, and afterwards in Imitation of him, no Man us'd a Razour oftner than Augustus. 3. Next Year the Roman Generals took Agrigentum after a long siege, L. Posthumius and Q. Mamilius being then Consuls. This success did so puff them up that they Re∣solv'd to apply themselves to Sea Affairs; for hitherto they had never touch'd upon the Sea. And at first indeed the success that attended their Descents upon Sardinia and Corsica favor'd the design; and at the same Time their Arms were Victorious by Land. But when Africa was made the seat of the War; Notwithstanding that the Consuls in their passage defeated the Enemies Fleet, and that one of 'em, Marcus Attilius Regulus, Routted the Carthaginian Army and took Tunis; yet the same Consul was soon after Routed and taken Prisoner by Xantippus the Lacedemonian who serv'd the Carthaginians,
and of his 30000 Men very few escap'd. And the Consuls for the next Year, upon their return from Africa would needs make a shew of their spoil and expose the Signs of Victory, and in gratifying that humour Counteracted the Measures of their Pilots; insomuch that a storm arising Reduc'd the Number to 464 Ships to that of 80. And after all, those who were Consuls about 2 Years after, sailing towards Africa, un∣derwent the same fate, and lost 150 Ships, upon an Island call'd Meninge not far from the lesser Syrtis. 4. After so many and so Great Disasters at Sea, the Senate Resolv'd not to attempt a∣ny thing further that way. The next Year L. Caecilius Metellus and Cn. Furius Pacilus the Consuls, were sent at the head of the Legions: And the first of the two Routed the Carthagi∣nians in a bloody battel and kill'd 20000 of their Men, so that they were oblig'd to sue for Peace. Accordingly the Carthagini∣ans sent Ambassadors to Treat of Peace and the Ransom of the Prisoners; among whom was M. Attilius, who was doom'd to this Sentence, that if he did not obtain their De∣mands, he should return to be laid in Chains. But when he came to Rome he advis'd the Se∣nate to the contrary, and shew'd them that it was a thing unprecedented among the Ro∣mans: And after that, in order to make good his promise to the Enemy, return'd to Carthage, where he was quarter'd and tortur'd to the last degree. Some say he was Crucified; Eutropius says they us'd all sorts
of Punishments upon him; and others say he was put to Death by being kept a∣wake with various Instruments of Tor∣ment. 5. The Romans fitted out a Fleet, and besieg'd Lilybaeum; but their Navy was soon after shatter'd, and Amilcar Barcas the Car∣thaginian plunder'd Italy. After that the Ro∣mans did not meddle at Sea for Seven Years, till Amilcar provok'd 'em to fit out a New Fleet, and try the last turn of Fortune. In this their forlorn attempt, they defeated the Enemy at the Aegates Islands so that they were obliged to sue for Peace, and accept of it upon these Terms; viz. that that they should quit Sicily and all the Isles between it and Italy; that they should not make War with the Syracusans or their Al∣lies, that all the Prisoners should be deli∣ver'd up, and 2300 Talents pay'd in a cer∣tain space of Time. This was the end of the first Punick War after it had lasted 24 Years, 5 Years after Lilybaeum was first besieg'd, in the 513 Year after the building of Rome, the 4 of the 134 Olympiad, the 6 of Seleucus Callinicus, the 6 of Ptolomaeus Ever∣getes, the 239 before Christ, A. M. 3764, when A. Manlius Torquatus was Consul for the Second Time together with Q. Lutatius Cerco. 6. The Carthaginians desir'd a Peace, on∣ly in order to make further Provisions for War; but they quickly fell in with Greater Dangers, than any that the War with the Romans could have occasion'd. For the hir'd
Soldiers gather'd into a body, and before they would Separate requir'd more Arrears than the whole Republick was able to pay. They were push'd on by the Suggestions of some Profligate Fellows who rais'd Trou∣bles in order to get off with Impunity: And a heavy War ensued which they call'd the Lybian and African; and which they could not get clear off till after Three Years, and that with difficulty. 'Twas then that Experience convinc'd 'em, that no trust should be Repos'd in Mercenary Soldiers drawn up into one body, and that their own Subjects should not be so Cruelly Treated, as they had been formerly. 7. In the next Year after the Punick War, be∣ing the 514 after the building of the City, the Year preceeding the birth of Ennius, C. Claudius Centon and M. Sempronius Tudita∣nus being then Consuls, the first Comedies and Tragedies were made by Andronicus a Greek Poet, who was call'd Livius, from Li∣vius Salinator, in 160th Year after the Death of Sophocles and Eurypedes. Before the inven∣tion of Comedies and Tragedies Satyrs were in use among the Romans, and before the Introduction of Satyrs the Verses usual among them were those call'd Fescennini. In the 4 Year after this, the Secular Games were Ce∣lebrated a Third Time; they were call'd the Great and Terentine Games from Terentum a place in the Campus Martius where Manius Valesius did first Celebrate the same. In the mean time it is observ'd that all Secular Games were call'd Terentini, but all the Teren∣tini
were not Secular; or else there were two sorts of Secular Games, one the Greater which were Celebrated every 110 Years, and the other the Lesser, which were Celebrated every 100 Years, of which more at large in our larger History. 8. In the 6th Year after the Punick War, the Temple of Janus was shut a Second Time, for Titus Manlius Torquatus had lately conquer'd Sardinia, and the Romans were alto∣gether free from War. The next Year, be∣ing the 520 after the building of the City, Sp. Carvilius Ruga divorc'd his Wife which was the first divorce that happen'd in Rome. Carvilius pleaded that he did it in order to have Children by another Woman; but notwith∣standing the Plausible Plea, the People Re∣sented it with a great deal of Displeasure and Hatred. In the same Year M. Porcius was born in the confines of Tusculum; he was call'd Catus and diminutively Catulus with Allusion to his Sagacity and Parts. The same Year, Cn. Naevius, who wrote the first Punick War in Saturnian Verses, Pub∣lish'd Fables to the People. 30 Years after that, he died having made his own Epitaph himself, with Arrogance enough, which Gellius takes notice of together with those of Plautus and Pacuvius. 9. After 6 Years a War broke out with the Illyrians, and the Temple of Janus was open'd. Teuta the Queen of the Illyrians, and Widow of Agron who had thrown him∣self into a Mortal Pleurisie by hard Drink∣ing, gave her Subjects the Liberty of Pirat∣ing;
accordingly they took Phenice a Town of Epirus, and Robb'd the Italian Merchants. Now the Queen was so far from Remedying the Disorder, that she order'd one of their Ambassadors to be kill'd for discoursing the point freely with her. Whereupon War was declar'd against her, which Fulvius the Consul carried on so Dexterously, that the Cities of Illyricum were either surrender'd or storm'd, and Teuta was put to flight, who sued for Peace, and obtain'd it upon these Terms, viz. that she should pay a Yearly Tribute, that she should quit all Illyricum excepting a few Places, and that she should not sail be∣yond the River Orissus with more than 2 barks and those unarm'd. 10. The Illyrians continu'd their allegiance for 9 Years, till the 535th Year after the Building of the City; in which they revolted, and were subdu'd by Aemilius Paulus and Marcus Livicus then consuls, and Demetrius Pharius, who had usurp'd the Kingdom, was outted, and a certain Sum of Mony was laid upon the People to be pay'd Yearly to Pineus the son of Agron. This was the end of the War with Teuta, which Florus pursuant to his usual custom misplaces in bringing it in after the Gallick Cisalpine War. For in the very Year in which Peace was concluded upon, with Teuta; C. Flaminius the tribune of the People mov'd that a Law should be made adjudging the Land of the Cisalpine Gauls to be distribu∣ted among the People; upon which they were so incens'd that they resolv'd to under∣goe all extremities, rather than be outed of
their seats and banish'd their Country. This War happen'd, in the 526th Year after the Building of the City (not the 522d as Polybius writes) when Q. Fabius Maximus and Sp. Carvilius Maximus, were both of 'em a Second time consuls. 11. The Gauls call'd in the Insubres to their assistance, who brought in the other Transal∣pine Gauls upon the Rhosne, who were call'd Gesatae, upon the Foot of a national War. Presently 50000 Foot and 20000 Horse made an irruption into Tuscany. Upon the News of the invasion, Rome was Thunderstruck with fear and grief, for they look'd upon the Gauls as their fatal Enemies. Then Lists were taken of all those that were fit for War, and all the Italians made such preparations for the War in which not only the Roman Empire, but their own Houses and Families were in Danger; that with incredible ex∣pedition they drew together an Army of 700000 Foot and 70000 Horse. Thus writes Polybius; but Fabius Pictor who was then pre∣sent says the Romans had 880000 Men in Arms. 12. The Roman Generals surpris'd the Gauls when they were putting all to Fire and Sword in Tuscany, and engag'd them on all sides. And the Gesatae, whose Bodies were Naked and expos'd, immediately fled and disorder'd the rest. In this encounter there were 40000 Gauls kill'd and 10000 taken Prisoners, among whom was Concolitanus the King, the other King, namely Averoestus, having laid Violent hands on himself. Upon this disaster the Gauls desired a Peace; but
M. Claudius Marcellus and Cn. Cornelius Scipio, being consuls for the next Year, oppos'd them, as designing to reserve to themselves the Glory of carrying the War further. 13. Accordingly the consuls besieg'd Acerrae in the Country of the Insubres, and the Gauls laid siege to Clastidium, where they came to a Hot Engagement, and were sadly maul'd Marcellus having kill'd Dardomaras the Gesatian King was the Third Man that brought off the Opima Spolia, which he consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius, notwithstanding that Numa had ordered them to be consecrated to Quirinus. The triumphal motto imply'd that the Germans together with the Galli Insubres were conquer'd, so that it seems the Gesatae were call'd Germani by some mistake. Some alledge they were call'd Gesatae, from a particular sort of Dart us'd among them, because in the Teutonick Language, their Name was Gaests, that is Geusts, for they serv'd upon Pay. Thus was that War brought to an end after 6 Years. 14. The Second Punick War begun 3 Years after the Gallick War. Hannibal the Son of Amilcar Barcas was made Carthaginian General: When he was 9 Years of age his Father took him along with him into Spain, and bound him by an Oath upon a Sacrifice never to be∣friend the Romans. Hannibal subdu'd all Spain on the other side of the River Iber excep∣ting Saguntum. The Saguntians acquainted their Allies the Romans with the Progress he he had made; and thereupon Ambassadors were sent but they cou'd not diswade him from attacking Saguntum. For he saw very
well thro' their design, viz. that they hop'd to make that place the Seat of the War, and so keep it at some distance, to the end that Italy, might be secur'd, and they might have leisure to get clear of the Illyrians. 15. The Saguntians endur'd all sort of extremities, and shew'd in themselves a Noble instance of valor and constancy; but at last it was taken. Then the Romans sent Ambas∣sadors to Carthage, to demand Hannibal as being Guilty of Violating the league, and in case the demand was not satisfied, to declare War, which accordingly was declar'd and accepted. So that the 2d Punick War com∣menc'd in the 536th Year after the building of the City, the 6th of Antiochus Magnus, the 5th of Ptolomaeus Philopator, in the 24th Year after the conclusion of the Peace, in the Consulship of P. Cornelius Scipio, and Tib. Sempronius Longus. This War is describ'd by Polybius, from whom Livy Copied out the 23d Book of his History, almost word for word. 16. Hannibal in the 26th Year of his Age, having subdued all Spain, March'd thro' France at the Head of 50000 Foot and 9000 Horse, and cross'd the Alpes, and in the 5th Month arriv'd in Italy, having left Hanno to Guard the upper Countries. Upon his Jour∣ney he lost a great part of his Army, the number being reduc'd to 18200 Foot and 6000 Horse. He routed Scipio and Sempronius the Consuls upon the Ticinus and Trebbias, and afterwards Flaminius at the Lake Thrasimenus. These disasters put the People of Rome into a con∣sternation,
whereupon they nominated Q. Fabius Maximus to be Vice-dictator, the consul being then absent so that a dictator could not be nominated. Fabius by his de∣laying and putting off, put a stop to the Violence and fury of the Enemy, but upon his return met with a sorry reception from the Tribunes and some others, who were Angry with him for protracting the War. Where∣upon they took occasion to make Terentius Varro Consul; Who was an imprudent for∣ward Man, and in Spite of the remon∣strances of the Wise L. Aemilius Paulus his colleague, would needs engage Hannibal at Cannae, where the Roman Army was almost to∣tally cut off. 17. This defeat occasion'd such a conster∣nation in the City, that the richer Citizens thought of Fleeing and departing Italy, but P. Cornelius Scipio, Son to P. a Youth of a brave Spirit, who was then scarce 24 Years of Age, encourag'd 'em to stay. Nay all the estates gather'd into a Body, and went out to meet Varro the Author of the defeat, and thank'd him for gathering up the scatter'd remnant of the forces, and not despairing of the state of the Republick. 18. Had Hannibal march'd straight to Rome, he might easily have storm'd the Castle of the War, and so made an end of his business. But, as Maherbal the General Major of the Horse did not stand to tell him, he knew how to obtain a Victory but did not know how to use it. For he led his Army to Capua, where he suffer'd 'em to be debauch'd and
enervated by Luxury and the redundancy of all necessaries: insomuch that the saying was not a miss, viz. Capua was a Cannee to Hannibal. 19. While Hannibal was thus negligent of his concerns, the Romans took courage, and the Carthaginian interest began to decline. Hannibal himself was oblig'd to break up the Siege of Cumae, and to retire from before Nola. The Romans acted successfully in Spain, Sicily and Sardinia. In Sicily M. Claudius Marcellus Besieged Syracusae; for after Hiero died in the 90th Year of his Age, the Syrcacusans had revolted from the Romans. However they stood out a long while by Vertue of the Machines which Archimedes the Famous Mathematician made to keep off the Enemy. At last after a 3 Years Siege the Romans master'd the City at a time when the Citi∣zens were careless; and among others Archi∣medes himself was kill'd, who was so taken up with writing some things in the sand, that he was not sensible that his country was in the hands of its Enemy. 20. Marcellus lamented his Death so soon as he knew of it, and order'd him to be bury'd. Cicero says he not only spar'd the Town, but adorn'd it, insomuch that he left it at once a Monument of his Victory Meekness and Clemency: but Livy says that he acted a great many ugly things, as being instances of extreme Anger and Peevishness. At the same time the Scipio's, designing unseasonably to put an end to the Spanish War, divided their forces; and were cut off, together with almost
the whole Army by the Celtiberi. But their Death was handsomely resented by L. Martius the General, who took the like occasion of attacking the Carthaginians when they were divided and secure, and routed 'em to that degree, that 37000 of 'em were kill'd, 1830 taken prisoners, and a great booty carried off. 21. In Italy the Romans besig'd Capua, and Hannibal fruitlessly attack'd the Castle of Tarentum; but finding himself unable to raise the Siege of Capua, march'd towards Rome it self, where Thunder and Lightning pre∣vented an Engagement; so that he Com∣plain'd much of himself and his hard For∣tune and return'd to Rhegium. By this means the Campanians were depriv'd of all hopes of relief, and Capua was surrender'd to the Romans. 22. It was Warmly and Tediously disput∣ed, whether the Town should be destroyed or not: But after a long debate they agree'd to preserve it: but in order to prevent any possibility of their Future Rebellion, they were depriv'd of their Land, Magistrates, Senate, and Publick Councils, without leav∣ing it the Face of a Republick; and 'twas appointed to be a place for buying and pre∣serving of Fruits, a Receptacle of Husband∣men, and a Magazine for the product of the Campanian Ground. This Misfortune hap∣pen'd to Capua, after it had stood about 260 Years, in the 8th Year of the War, the 543 of Rome, the 13th of Antiochus Magnus, the 12th of Ptolomaeus Philopator, in the Con∣sulship
of P. Sulpicius Galba and Cn. Fulvius Centumalus. 23. About the same Time P. Corn. Scipio was appointed Successor to Claudius Nero who had suffer'd himself to be overreach'd by Asdrubal. When every body else de∣clin'd the Office of Proconsul by Reason of its Weight and importance, Scipio of his own accord Listed himself a Candidate for it in the 24 Year of his Age. Next Year Laevinus the Consul took Agrigentum and subdued all Sicily, but his Colleague Marcel∣lus was afterwards surpris'd and kill'd by the Carthaginians. 24. Soon after Asdrubal Hannibals Bro∣ther, March'd at the head of Auxiliary Troops from Spain to Italy, and was beaten and kill'd upon the Road by M. Livius Sa∣linator and C. Claudius Nero at the River Metaurus. But Hannibal was Ignorant of what happen'd: For tho' Nero was Encamp'd just over against him, yet he was not sensi∣ble that he had march'd off, to the Assist∣ance of his Colleague, till the Consul Return'd and threw Asdrubals Head into the Cartha∣ginian Camp. 25. In the mean Time P. Scipio went on successfully in Spain, where his Father and Uncle had lost their Lives before. After he had Recover'd the whole Province he Return'd to Rome, and being made Consul desir'd of the Senate that Africa should be allotted to him for his Province, to the End that he might carry the War into their own Territories. Q. Fabius Maximus, an An∣cient
Gentleman, was mightily against the motion; his Opinion was that it was not proper to go to Africa but to fight Hannibal where he was. On the other hand Scipio's Plea was, that if the Carthaginians were attack'd within their own Territories, they wou'd be oblig'd to recall Hannibal from Italy, since their hopes and Security were founded upon him. After a long Debate the Senate allots Sicily to Scipio, and allows him to Cross over to Africa, if the Interest of the Republick requir'd it. 26. Next Year Scipio went from Sicily into Africa, and made good his promise to the Senate; for he defeated the Carthagini∣ans several Times, and maul'd 'em so much, that they Recall'd Hannibal. So that he who had Rang'd over Italy full 16 Years, and had pitch'd his Camp under the Walls of Rome, was oblig'd to return home, tho' un∣willing and full of sorrow; and afterwards being routed by Scipio advis'd the Carthagi∣nians to ask a Peace. Scipio was very much concern'd for Fear the Consuls of this Year, who had an Eye upon Africa, should rob him of the Glory of concluding the War. 27. A Peace therefore was concluded up∣on, by the Consent of the Senate, upon these Terms; viz. that the Carthaginians should enjoy their Liberty and their African lands; but should quit Spain and all the Isles of the Mediterranean Sea that ever were dis∣puted; that they should deliver up all the Deserters, all their Ships bating 10 Galleys, all their Tame Elephants, and shou'd Tame
no Elephants for the Future; that they shou'd Wage War with none without the consent of the People of Rome; that they shou'd restore all to Massanissa King of Numi∣dia, and enter into a Confederacy with him; that in the space of 50 Years they should pay 1000 Talents of Silver, and pawn 100 Hostages for Security. Thus was the Se∣cond Punick War brought to an end after 18 Years, and from thence Scipio was Sirnam'd Africanus. 28. Peace being concluded with the Car∣thaginians, the Romans not only carried on their Wars in Italy, Istria and Lusitania; but were likewise Engag'd in a heavy War with Philip King of Macedonia, being call'd into the Assistance of the Grecians, whom he oppress'd: Besides, Philip had given the Romans occasion to be angry 10 Years before, by entring into a League with Hannibal. Galba and Tappulus the Consuls were first sent against him; and after them Quintius Fla∣mininus, who at the End of his Consulship had his Command continu'd to him, for the Tribuni Plebis did justly alledge that the shifting of Generals every Year was a great obstacle to the success of their Affairs. Fla∣mininus defeated Philip at Cynocephalae, where∣upon he ask'd for Peace, and upon the Sen∣ate's desire the Liberty of Greece was re∣stor'd.
Sect. 3. From the War with Antiochus to the overthrow of Carthage; from which Time the Romans thinking themselves secure began to Degene∣rate. The space of 45 Years. ANtiochus King of Asia and Syria had invad∣ed the Kingdom of Attalus the Roman Allie; he had attack'd Egypt and assaulted the Grecian Cities upon the Pretence that they were once Subject to the Asiatick Kings. The Romans taking these motions into their Consideration, began to entertain some Jealousies of him, which were further Enflam'd by Hannibals's proceedings. For, he Visited the King, and egg'd him on to the War. Besides, the Etolians had a great Hand in pushing on Antiochus, for when Philip was beaten they and the Romans had some dispute about the Spoil, and finding their avarice baulk'd, were found of an opportunity of resenting it. 2. M. Acilius being sent against Antiochus defeated him at Thermoylae: but the Honour of putting an end to the War was reserved for L. Cornelius Scipio; who was chosen con∣sul, and tho' his colleague C. I aelius Nepos, did earnestly desire the province of Greece, yet he obtain'd it, and withal, leave to go into Asia; by the interest of his Brother Africanus, who promis'd to go along with him in the quality of Lieutenant General. Scipio having conquer'd Marius, de∣feated the King in Asia, and oblig'd him to
ask for Peace, as I Intimated at large above. He likewise subdued the Etolians and made Peace with them. About that time the the Romans wag'd War with the Galati under the conduct of Manlius the consul, and his Army upon their return brought home the first seeds of Luxury to the City. 3. After 3 Years Scipio Africanus was ar∣raign'd of cheating the State, by impropriating the spoil taken in War; and the Tribunes appointed a day for his Trial. This great Man who had done so many and such great services to the publick, was afraid to stand Trial, and having forbid the Court, went up to the Capitol to return thanks to the Gods for his Victory; and then retir'd to Linternum, where he dy'd in the 4th Year of his exile, in the same Year that Philopaemenes the Achaian General died, as also Hannibal himself who had fled to Prusias King of Bithynia. For Philopaemenes being taken by the Messenians was constrain'd to take a Draught of Poyson: and Hannibal finding that Quintius demanded him; and that it was not possible for him to escape, kill'd himself with Poyson that he carried in his Ring. 4 About the same time L. Scipio (who from his Victory over Antiochus was Sirnam'd Asiaticus) was likewise charg'd with cheating the State. Next Year the wicked misteries of the Bacchanalia were brought to light, by which many were offer'd up as sacrifices, and several other Monstrous Crimes were com∣mitted. Afterwards a War broke out with he Ligurians▪ and Corsica was subdued. Soon
after, the Second Macedonian War or that with Perseus, commenc'd in the 583th Year of the City, 24 Years after the conclusion of the Peace with Philip, and 17 after that with Antiochus. 5. Philip King Macedonia had taken it very ill that the Romans shou'd pinch him so much, and design'd to revive the War: but Death prevented him, and Perseus his Son succeeded. Perseus had formerly been disoblig'd by the Romans and willingly embrac'd the War, as part of his heritage. But L. Aemilius Paulus in his Second Consulship, defeated him and took him Prisoner, together with his Wife, Mother, and Children; and led them in triumph, from whence he was Sirnam'd Ma∣cedonicus. At that time Macedonia became a Roman Province, as I intimated above, in the 586th Year of the City, in the Consul∣ship of L. Aemilius Paulus and L. Licinius Crassus. 6. Soon after, one Andriscus, of a mean descent, gave himself out for the Son of Perseus and declar'd War against the Romans, but being routed by Q. Metellus the Praetor, fled to Byzus King of Thrace, who deliver'd him up. At last the 3d Punick War broke out; for the Romans took hold of any oc∣casion of Quarrelling with the Carthaginians. Indeed the Carthaginians cou'd not sit with Idleness, but started disputes concerning the property of some Neighbouring Lands, and had thereupon declar'd War against a'most all their Neighoeurs, especially Massanissa King of Numidia, who was an Allie of the People
of Rome. The Romans being chosen Arbitra¦tors were partial to the King, and upon Massanissa's sollicitation declar'd War against Carthage. But were divided in their Opinions, whether the City should be de∣stroy'd or preserv'd. 7. Some were of Opinion that they shou'd not destroy it, by reason that if Carthage were out of the way, civil and domestick feuds, wou'd prevail amongst them. But M. Porcius Cato was of another Opinion, viz. that the Republick of Rome wou'd ever be in Danger, if that City were not totally de∣stroy'd; and this Opinion was most approved of. But Cato himself being then 85 Yea'rs of Age dy'd while they were yet debating the point. Cicero lists him among the An∣cient orators, and places him next to M. Corne∣lius Cethegus, who, he says, is cry'd up by Ennius. 8. Among many other injunctions, given by the Romans to the Carthaginians, this was one that they shou'd abandon the City, and build another if they pleas'd at 10 Miles distance from the Sea. The Carthaginians were resolv'd to undergo the last extremity rather than comply with so hard a precept. Several consuls were imploy'd against 'em; at last the business of destroying Carthage was committed to the care of P. Scipio Aemilianus, Son to P. Aemilus Macedonicus, and Grand∣son to Scipio Africanus. This Scipio having restor'd the military disciplin laid a close Siege to the City▪ and when he had taken it set it on fire, and level'd it w th the Ground.
This exploit gave him the Sirname of Afri∣canus, in the 3th Year of the War, after Car∣thage had stood 700 Years, in the 608 Year after the Building of Rome, the 3d of the 158th Olympiad, the 1 of Ptolomaeus Physcon, A. M. 3859, in the Consulship of Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and L. Mummius Nepos. Sect. 4. From the overthrow of Carthage to the War with Mithridates, which gave occasion to the first civil War. The Space of 58 Years. 1. ABout the same Time, the Romans de∣clar'd War against the Achaians, be∣cause they offer'd Indignities to the Legates that were sent to dissolve the Republick of the Cities. Metellus being then in Macedonia was the first that attack'd them After him L. Mummius the Consul came, and being Con∣queror in a battel, had all Achaia surren∣der'd to him, and by Virtue of an order from the Senate burnt and Raz'd the City of Corinth, which Cicero call'd the Glory of Greece. About the same Time Viriatus pos∣sess'd himself of Lusitania. This Man from a Shepherd was made a Huntsman, from a Huntsman a Robber, and from a Robber a Commander of a Gallant Army, with which he wag'd War with the Romans for some Years, and on some occasions very successful∣ly: But at last was kill'd by Caepio the Consul, and after that D. Junius Brutus Reduc'd all Lusitania as far as to the Sea.
2. In the mean Time the Romans were sadly maul'd by the Numantines who Rejected the Articles of Peace given in by Mancinus their Consul as being Ignominious. Where∣upon the Romans made P. Scipio Aemilianus A∣fricanus Extraordinary Consul, and Commit∣ted the charge of the War to him. He went to the Army, and finding them softned by Luxury and averse to hardships, reviv'd the Ancient Severity of their Discipline; and by that means took Numantia and raz'd it, after it had sustain'd the Shock of 40000 Romans for 20 Years together, and had ex∣pos'd both themselves and their City to the Flames, in the 14th Year after the Destruction of Carthage, the 621 after the building of the City, A. M. 3872, in the Consulship of P. Mutius Scaevola and L. Calpurnius Piso. 3. About the same time the Slaves in Sicily revolted, and gather'd a great body of forces, and it was with some difficulty that P. Rutilus Nepos the Consul quell'd 'em. Hitherto the singular Modesty and Vertue of the Roman Generals, and the Formidable Power of the Carthaginians, had so over-aw'd the People, that all their feuds and Differences never went to the height of blood or Slaughter. But now the Asiatick Triumphs tainted them with so much Security and Luxury, that envy, feuds, factions, and privat Hatred gradually prevail'd upon them, and at length broke out into civil Wars. 4. For in the foremention'd Year, at the same time that Numantia was subdued by Scipio, Tib. Sempronius, Tribune of the People,
occasion'd great disorders in the City by mak∣ing a Law prohibiting any Man to possess above 500 Acres of publick Land, and ad∣judging the overplus to be equally distributed among the Poor. The Noblemen were mightily incens'd at this Law; but he propos'd yet another, adjudging all the Mony left by Attalus King of Pergamus. by way of Le∣gacy to the People of Rome, to be distributed in like manner. This Juncture stagger'd the Senate, insomuch that they did not see how to get rid of the difficulties that attended it. But Scipio Nasica calling upon every one that ten∣der'd the good of the Republick to follow him, went up to the Capitol, and slew Grac∣chus when haranguing to the People, together with many others. This was the first Blood that was shed in Rome thro' Sedition, and the source of their Civil Wars. 5. At the same Time the Romans were En∣gaged in a War with Aristobulus in Asia, who being the Bastard Brother of Attalus the King of Pergamus, that left the People of Rome his heir, possess'd himself of the Kingdom, and Defrauded the Romans of their Legacy. But M. Perpenna the Consul Defeated him, and having block'd him up in Stratonice, took him Prisoner; and Aquilus carry'd him to Rome, where he was strangl'd in Prison. Next Year being the 626 after the building of the City, Paulus Scipio Africanus minor having seem'd to Rub hard upon the People in the Lex Agraria, was kill'd in the night time as he lay a bed in his own House, and that by his own Relations; as it was believ'd; and was
privatly buried; and notwithstanding the Greatness of his Character there was no in∣quiry made into the manner of his Death. Cicero entitles him to Eloquence and singular integrity. 6. About 12 Years after the Murder of Tiberius Gracchus, his Brother Caius underwent the same fate. For being made Tribune of the People, he not only Justify'd the Lex A∣graria with a great deal of Warmth, but Transferr'd the right of Publick Judgment from the Senatours to the Equites, who now began to appear in a Distinct Rank, which was after∣wards brightned by the care and glory of Cicero. Besides Caius being frustrated in his design of carrying a Colony to Carthage, Return'd to the City and Endeavor'd to sow a New Sedition among the People; but Opimius the Consul with his Friends fell up∣on him and kill'd him in the attempt. But his head was not at all sacred as Florus writes, for he had laid down the Tribune∣ship before he was kill'd. Cicero crys up both the Brethren for Eloquence, but especially Caius, whom he gives out for the most Inge∣nious and Eloquent of all the Romans, and whose Orations he advises the Youth to peruse, as being proper not only to what, but to feed and nourish their Minds. 7. About the same Time Fabius Maximus Grandson to Paulus Aemilius by a Son of his that was adopted into the Family of the Fa∣bii, subdued the Allobroges, Arverni and Ru∣teni in Gaule; and Metellus together with Mi utius Triumph'd over the Scodisci, a
People that were Originally Gauls and inha∣bited Thrace, and had Routed the Roman Army Commanded by Cato. But soon after a heavy War broke out with Iugurtha King of Numidia, who had kill'd Adherbal his Cou∣sin after he had taken him in to be partner in the Kingdom. Iugurtha gain'd both the Senatours and many of the Generals by his Mony; L. Caecilius Metellus made head a∣gainst him, and when the War was almost brought to an end, Caius Marius his Le∣gate cunningly got himself made Consul, and Numidia alloted to him for his Pro∣vince, and so made an End of that affair. Bocchus King of Mauritania, being Father in Law and an Ally to Iugurtha, was first Conquer'd. Then Iugurtha was taken by Stratagem and led in Triumph, and by the Senate's orders was kill'd in Prison, after he had carry'd on the War 7 Years. 8. In the time of this War with Iugurtha, the Cimbrsi who inhabited the Chersonesus Cimbrica or Holsatia, joyn'd in with the Germans who were call'd Teutones from Teuton or Tuiscon the Patriarch and Native God of their Country. These Two Nations joyn'd to∣gether, made up a body of incredible force, which made incursions into Illyricum, Italy and Spain, and gall'd the Romans mightily. But after they had defeated somtimes the procon∣suls, and somtimes the Legates, they were at last cut off by C. Marius who was then a 5th time Consul. And such was the end of the C mbrian War after it had lasted 12 Years, in the 3d Day of August, in the 653d Year of
of the City, in the Consulship of C. Marius and M. Aquilius Nepos. 9. About the same time L. Apuleius Saturninus, whom the Senat had remov'd from being Treasurer, took occasion to resent the affront, (being made Tribune of the People) by starting new Mutinies upon the Lex Agraria. But the Consuls took him Prisoner, and the Equites fell upon him and his complices, in the very Court, and kill'd 'em. About 8 Years after that, Drusus the Tribune, indeavoring to oblige both the Senators and the Equites, by making a new Law giving to either state the Power of passing Judgments, incur'd the hatred of them both; and when he endeavor'd to promote the Lex Agraria, and give the Italians the Freedom of the City, was Murder'd by an unknown Hand in the entry of his own House. 10. The Italians had undergone many difficulties, and done considerable services to the Empire of Rome; for which they were con∣tinually fed with the hopes of being admitted into the City, but the execution of it was still put off. This gave rise to such animo∣sities, that a heavy War broke out, which they call'd Sociale, Marsicum and Italicum. The War continued 2 Years with Various success; till at last the Italians were reduc'd and con∣quer'd by Sylla the Consul, and allow'd the Freedom of the City, in the 666 Year after the building of Rome, in the Consul∣ship of L. Cornelius Sylla and Q. Pompeius Rufus.
Sect. 5. From the War with Mithridates, and the first civil War, to the conspiracy of Pompey, Crassus and Caesar, which sunk the Popular form of Government. The space of 28 Years. 1. MIthridates was King of Pontus, a Coun∣try in Asia so call'd from the Euxine Sea, upon which it was adjacent. This Prince is said to be desended of one of the 7 Persians, that cut off the Magicians who usurp'd the Kingdom after the Death of Cambyses. He was Sirnam'd Eupator and Dionysus. He slew his Brother, and his Mother that was left par∣tner in the Government. When the Romans were engag'd in the Cimbrian and Italian War, he did not stand to affect the Empire of Asia. He first possess'd himself of Paphlagonia, and then of Cappadocia, having kill'd Ariarathes their King, and put one of his own Sons in his place. 2. But the Cappadocians could not brook the yoke, and therefore call'd in Ariarathes Son to the late Ariarathes; but he was soon after ex∣pell'd by Nicomedes King of Bithynia and there∣upon dy'd. Nicomedes suborn'd a Youth that gave himself out to be Ariarathes's Brother: and sent his Wife (who was Ariarathes's Mo∣ther) to Rome to be evidence that she bore 3 Sons to Ariarathes. Upon these News Mi∣thridates likewise sent People to Rome, to make it out that the Youngman who had lately govern'd Cappadocia was the Son of Ariarathes.
3. The Senate of Rome, thought it fit to in∣terpose in these matters, and accordingly restor'd the Kings that Mithridates had outted. But he continu'd to carry on his design, posses∣sing himself of Bithynia, Phrygia, Mysia, Lycia and Pamphylia and the other provinces, as far Jonia. He took Oppius and Aquilius the Roman Legates, the latter of whom he put to Death by pouring melted Gold down his Throat, for he took all occasions to twit the Romans with their avarice. The Romans were so incens'd at this action, that they declar'd War against him, under the conduct of Q. Conelius Sylla; but Sylla being then engag'd in putting the Italian War to an end, C. Marius, who was the 6th Time. Consul, ob∣tain'd another Act, commiting the War to his care. Upon the News of this, Sylla came to Rome, and got Marius expell'd the City and declar'd an Enemy. Marius lurk'd for some time in the Marshes about Mintunae, and after∣wards cross'd over to Africa in a little sorry Boat, in great Danger of his Life. 4. While Sylla was absent in Asia, L. Cor∣nelius Cinna the Consul began to make a stir, and carry on seditious designs. But Cn. Octavius his collegue turn'd him out, and expell'd him the City. However Cinna after he was expell'd strengthned his party, and joyn'd in with C. Marius who upon that occa∣sion had return'd from Africa. Insomuch that with joint forces they besieged Rome upon the side of the Ianiculum, and by reason that the Citizens were both Lazy and treacherous, got into the City, and fill'd the streets with
blood and rapine. Then they declar'd them∣selves Consuls, and display'd a great deal of cruelty in the execution of that Magistracy. Cinna gave orders for the Death of M. Anton∣ius an excellent orator; and Marius serv'd Q. Catulus at the same rate; but after all, he dy'd, about a Month after the commencement of his Magistracy. 5. In the mean Time Mithridates slew 80000 Romans and Italians in one Day, and made all Necessary Preparations for War. But Sylla came into Greece, and took Athens together with the Piraeum, and obtain'd 2 Victories over Archelaus the King's Gene∣ral, so that Mithridates was under a Necessi∣ty of desiring a Peace. Accordingly Sylla made Peace with the King and so put an End to the War. Then he Return'd into Italy, but, a little before his Return, Marius being Consul a 7th Time dy'd. After the Death of Marius, Cn. Papyrius Carbo stood by Cinna: And both of 'em Join'd in with the adopted Son of Marius in order to thwart Sylla, but they were, all of 'em, put to flight. 6. Sylla having compass'd his End pursued his Enemies with a great deal of Warmth; and after he had expos'd to Publick view the List of the banish'd Persons, sold their Estates, and depriv'd their Children of any Right to Places of honor and trust. Then he was made perpetual Dictator, and dis∣pos'd of every thing at Pleasure, and clipp'd the Power of the Tribunes. When he sold the Citizens Estates, he said in the Pub∣lick
Meeting that it was his own spoil that he sold. He was so Inveterate against C. Ma∣rius, that he order'd the remains of his Corps that lay by the River Anio to be scatter'd▪ and after that was the first of all the Patricii that order'd his own Body to be burnt, per∣haps out of fear that the like affront might be done to himself after Death. After so many and so great exploits, he resign'd the Magi∣stracy and said that he was ready to answer for all he had done. Then he retir'd to the Country to lead an unactive Life, and dy'd at Puteoli of the Lousy distepmer. 7. Q. Sertorius was one of those who were banish'd; a Man Famous for his Steddyness and Knowledge of War. This Man rais'd a heavy War in upper Spain, and defeated several Ro∣man Generals, and master'd several Cities. After the defeat of Metellus, the Administra∣tion of the War was committed to Cn. Pom∣peius, a Youth of a brave Spirit: After seve∣ral dubious encounters, Sertorius was perfidi∣ously Murther'd by Perpenna his own General, and Pompey became Master of Spain in the 10th Year after the commencement of the War, the 681 after the building of the City, in the Consul∣ship of C. Cassius Varus, and M. Terentus Varro the most learned of all the Grecians and Romans 8. In the mean time Murena being left in Asia, and coveting a Triumph, renew'd the War with Mithridates upon slender grounds; but was order'd by Sylla to forbear, and there∣upon Peace was concluded for 3 Years with the King, and his Son of 4 Years of Age was given as an hostage, and part of Cappadocia was all∣otted
him. 7 Years after that were scarce elaps'd, when the War broke out afresh, and that upon this occasion. Mithridates had often desir'd of the Romans that their league with him should be engross'd, but finding that his Sollicitations were not regarded, perswaded Tigranes King of Armenia his Son in Law to invade Cappadocia, who carried off 300000 Men from thence and built Tigranocerta the Metropolis of that Country; and when he found that he cou'd not obtain a Pardon, enter'd into a league wirh Sertorius, and pos∣sess'd himself of Bithynia, whose King Ni∣comedes had made the People of Rome his Heir. 9. In the 680th Year of the City, while Licinius Lucullus and M. Aurelius Cotta were Consuls, Lucullus fell upon the King who was then besieging Cyzicum, and having cut off his Army turn'd him out of Bithynia and Paphlagonia, and oblig'd him to retire to Pontus, from whence he fled to Tigranes. Lucullus continuing to pursue his Enemy, defeated the joint forces of both the Kings in several Battels; but the Mutinies that were cunningly Fomented in his Army, hinder'd him to put an end to the War. For he was recall'd, and the War committed to the care of Glabrio. The next Year being the 9th after Lucullus had come to that province, it was devolv'd upon Pompey, he being strengthen'd by Ci∣cero's interest, who made a Noble ha∣rangue to the People in praise of him.
10. While Lucullus was carrying on the War in Pontus, one Spartacus a Thracian, a fencer, being joyn'd by 70 more of his own Station, possess'd himself of Vesuvius a Hill in Campania, and gave a Free reception to all fugitives, and committed Robberies in the Neigbouring places. He routed Claudius the Praetor and P. Varinus, and having drawn together an Army of 70000 Men, had some thoughts of storming Rome it self; but M. Licinius Crassus the Praetor defeated him in a Battel, and brought him to condign Punish∣ment for his ambition. Pompey suppress'd the remainder of his forces, when they were be∣ginning to make head again, in the 3d Year before he engag'd in the Piratick War. 11. A great company of Pirates did so in∣fest the Mediterranean Sea, that neither Sailers nor those who dwelt on the Sea-side were safe. These Pirats were first set up by Mithridates; but when Peace was first made with him, the advantage they made by their way of Living mov'd them to continue in it. They consisted of Syrians, Cyprians Pamphylians and others, who were call'd Cilices beecause they sculk'd in some Creeks of Cilicia. Murena and Servilius had appear'd against 'em, but to little purpose; for their impudence grew to that height, that they made a descent upon Italy, and carry'd off several Noble Ladyes, and, what was yet more Disgraceful to the Romans, two Armies together with the Standards. 12. Then Gabinius Tribune of the People made a Law appointing Pompey to make Head against 'em with full power for 3 Years. And
allowing him 500 Ships, 120000 Foot, 5000 Horse, 25 Legats, 2 Treasurers, and 6000 Attick Talents. Pompey did so cover the whole Sea, that when one Legate gave chase to the Pirats, the others fell in with 'em so that they cou'd not escape; and himself sail'd up and down like an Emperour of so many Kings, over∣seeing the whole work. By his singular diligence and application, he clear'd the Sea in 40 days, and oblig'd all the Pirats to put in to Cilicia, where he storm'd their forts, and took almost 400 Ships and 120 Castles, and slew 10000 Men, and so made an end of the War in less than 3 Months time. He carry'd himself civilly enough to the conquer'd, Priso∣ners who were Translated to other seats at a considerable distance from the Sea. But Q. Metellus was very cruel to those who lurk'd in Creet; for Metellus subdued that Island, which boasted before that it was never conquer'd; and thereupon got the Sirname of Creticus. 13. When this War was almost at an End, C. Manilius Tribune of the People, made a Law, giving to Pompey the Command of all the Roman Armys, the Province of Asia, and the Management of the War with Mi∣thridates and Tigranes; Notwithstanding all the Grudges of the Noble Men, who took it very ill that the whole Roman Empire shou'd without any Precedent be put into the hands of one Man. However Pompey put Mi∣thridates to Flight, and took Tigranes King of Armenia, whom he rais'd from a suppliant and dejected Condition, and set the Diadem upon his head after he had laid it down,
adding some few Injunctions for him to ob∣serve. He likewise check'd his Villainous Son that had conspir'd against his Father's life, and at last put him to Death. Then he con∣quer'd the Itureans and Arabians, and reduc'd Syria to the form of a Roman Province. 14. Mithridates fled to Colchis and at last to Scythia. But at the same Time that he was projecting great things, and making a descent upon Italy, Pharnaces his Son whom he doated much upon debauched the Army from him. When he found himself beset with Unsurmountable Difficulties, and that he cou'd not Reclaim his Son, he laid Vio∣lent hands on himself. Cicero says, he was the Greatest King since Alexander. The War with him commenc'd about 20 Years before, when Cn. Pompeius Strabo and L. Porcius Cato were Consuls; and was put to an end when M. Tullius Cicero and C. Antonius Nepos were Consuls, in the 691 Year of the City, the 2 of the 179 Olympiad, the 61 before Christ, and the 3942 of the World. 15. The News of his Death were brought to Pompey, upon his March towards Jerusa∣lem against Aristobulus. When Pompey had adjusted the Affairs of Judea, Pontus, and the other places in the East, 5 Years being spent in the Expedition, he return'd to Rome Crown'd with Glory, and Triumph'd for 2 Days together. L. Catilina and several others enter'd into a great conspiracy against the Republick; in the same Year that Mithridates dy'd, and the Temple of Jerusalem was taken. This Catilina was a Profligate Nobleman,
that had spent all his Estate in gratifying his lust, and follow'd this new way of plotting in order to repair his Fortune. 16. Cicero pump'd the account of the whole Affair out of Fulvia, with whom Catilina kept Company. After the Crime came to Light by Cicero's Singular Industry, Catilina was expell'd the City; then he drew together a body of Profligate Fellows in Etruria, and was Routed by C. Antonius Cicero's Collegue in a battel, wherein he fought stoutly and was kill'd. Publick thanks were return'd to Cicero for his Diligence and Service in that Affair, and by Cato's interest he was first Sa∣luted Pater Patriae. Cicero in his Writings frequently crys up the Service he did to his Country on this occasion; but when he speaks of Catilina's Genius, he says there never was such a Monster upon Earth, patch'd up of such contrary Humors and Appetites. 17. 2 Years afterwards C. Julius Caesar was sent as Praetor to Ʋpper Spain. This Juli∣us was born, in the 654 Year of the City, on the 12th Day of July, in the Consulship of C. Marius and L. Valerius Flaccus. He Marry'd the Daughter of Cinna by whom he had Julia, which mightily disoblig'd Sylla insomuch that he scarce ever forgave him▪ He suck'd in his first knowledge of War under M. Thermus the Praetor, by whom he was sent to Bithynia to fit out a Navy, and is said to have been overfamiliar with Nicomedes the King. Hav∣ing made a Considerable Progress in the art of War he went to Spain in the quality of Treasurer; and as he went round the Coun∣try
in the Execution of his Office, came to Cadiz, where he met with the Statue of A∣lexander in Hercules's Temple, and after he had viewed it, was much troubl'd that he had done no Memorable Action at that Age in which Alexander had made himself Master of almost the whole World. After this he long'd extreamly to return to his own Coun∣try, thinking to have the Opportunity of advancing his Fortune in Rome. 18. When he return'd to Rome, he kept company with seditious men; but finding that their projects did not take, got himself made Aedilis, and put in for the Post of being sent to Compose the affairs of Egypt: but the Noble Men oppos'd him, and baulk'd his de∣sign. Soon after, by Virtue of his liberal pre∣sents he got in to be Pontifex. In his Pretorship, 'tis thought he favor'd Catilina, and assisted Caeci∣lius Metellus in making of seditious Laws. Being burthen'd with Debt, he gave security and got away to Spain, where he spent his time, not in adjusting the Affairs of the Country, but in extending his conquests and purchasing to himself a large Field of Triumph. But his itch for Honour was so precipitant, that he wanted mightily to be made Consul; and for so much as the Sessions of the Consular Con∣vention approach'd, desir'd leave to return to the City before his triumph. But that cou'd not be granted to one that desir'd a triumph; so that he preferr'd the Consulship to it, and came to the City, and put himself up for a Candidate.
19. After many Debates, and Factious ad∣vances, he obtain'd the Consulship by Pompey's Interest. For Pompey, mortally hated the Magnates, who favour'd Lucullus in every thing. Lucullus cry'd out, that he was injur'd, and censur'd Pompey's actions, desiring a rati∣fication of what himself had done in the Province. Things being at this pass, Pompey was sorry that he had dismiss'd his Army, but since his repentance was too late, struck up with Caesar, and assisted him in procuring the Consulship, upon condition that if he com∣pass'd his end, he should ratify what Pompey had done. 20. Pompey and Crassus had been at odds from the time of their joint Consulship: but Caesar reconcil'd them, and all the 3 conspir'd together to suffer nothing to be done in the Republick, that they did not agree to. Varro wrote a Book upon the conspiracy, and stil'd it conspiratio tricipitana. This was the original of the Civil Wars, for as much as it sunk the Authority of the Senate and Noblemen. Acinius Pollic. begins his Book of the Civil Feuds, and Diodorus Siculus dates the original of Caesar's greatness from this Year, which was the 694 after the building of the City, the 1 of the 180 Olympiad, the 58th before the Birth of Christ, A. M. 3945, when Herod was Ar∣chon, and Q. Caecilius Metellus and M. Afranius Consuls.
Sect. 6. From the commencement of the first Triumvirate to the perpetual dictatorship of Iulius Caesar. The space of 16 Years, 1. Caesar being made consul by Pompey's in∣terest, and his presents of Mony, ex∣pos'd the alliance and Kingdoms of the People of Rome, to Sale. To appease the Plebs, he distributed the Publick grounds in Campania among them; and by force introduc'd a Law for the purpose obliging every one to swear to the observation of the same upon pain of Death He seldom consulted the Senat upon any thing; but apply'd himself for the most part to the People, and endeavor'd by all means to oblige them, insomuch that he obtain'd the Province of Gaul for 5 Years. In order to unite Pom∣pey more firmly to his interests, he married his Daughter Julia to him. L. Calpurnius Piso and A. Gabinius who were chosen Consuls for the next Year, were entirely devoted to his in∣terest. Vatinus and Clodius were made tribunes. Tho Clodius had debauch'd Caesar's Wife, he not only forgave the adulterer, but assisted him in procuring the tribuneship, out of spite to Cicero, who incessantly rail'd against the Triumviral conspiracy, and by way of a thankfull return, for the good services he had done him in procuring the province of France. 2. Clodius being a Nobleman could not be a candidat for the trbuneship; till, in order to be reveng'd upon Cicero, who arraign'd him
of adultery with Caesar's Wife, he got him∣self adopted by a Plebeian; and being by that means made tribune, enacted a Law, entailing banishment upon whoever had given orders for the Death of any Roman Citizen, before he was Tried. Then he arraign'd Cicero, who by the Senat's consent had kill'd Cethegus Lentulus and Catilina's other complices, in prison; so that Cicero being forsaken by Pompey was ban∣ish'd; but before he went off made a haran∣gue to the People and the Equites, in which, 'tis said, he recommended his Family to their care; but that Oration which commonly passes under Cicero's Name, is a taudry impertinent discourse and scarce suited to the Spirit of the Latin Language. Accordingly Gothofredus thinks, that whoever attributes that Harangue to Cicero, do's, as if he put a coarse and ragged Garment upon the Shoulders of a rich King. 3. Cicero being banish'd, Clodius had like∣wise a spite against Cato, and by vertue of a Law for the purpose, sent him to turn Ptolomy King of Cyprus out of his Kingdom. Cato made a large treasure of Mony out of the Estate of the King, who upon approach of the Roman General laid violent hands upon himself. However Clodius began to twitt the Noblemen, and then Pompey repented of his deserting Cicero; and sollicited for his return. After 16 Months banishment, Cicero was re∣call'd with an universal joy, and made a Har∣angue to the Quirites, in which he return'd thanks to his Friends. Then he charg'd L. Piso and A. Gabinius with his banishment, and made it out that they betray'd him; and pro∣nounc'd
two Harangues against them, in one of which he advis'd the Senate to take the provinces of Syria and Macedonia out of their hands; and withall, not to re∣call Caesar who was then riding at the Head of success in France; but to offer him the Empire, in order to enable him to put the War to a happy end. 4. For Caesar had engag'd and routed the Helvetians who had shifted the place of their residence, and planted in France, as being a more fertile Soil: after that he defeated Ariovistus King of the Germans in a Battle not far from the Rhine; For that Prince was very troublesome, not only to Gallia Celtica, but to the Haedui who were the Roman Allies. Hav∣ing reduc'd all Gallia, he cross'd the Sea, and invaded Brittain: for when the first 5 Years were expir'd, Pompey and Crassus having by a mu∣tual Compact possess'd themselves of the Con∣sulship, enlarg'd his time to other 5 Years. Crassus had Syria and the management of the Parthian War allotted him; and Pompey had Africa and Spain with the 4 Legions. 5. the Island of Brittain, was call'd by the Latins Albion and Romania, by the Gre∣cians , and . It was known to the Phae∣nicians who us'd to export great quantities of Tinn from thence, whereupon among the Grecians, the Britanick Islands went by the Name of Cassiterides; and among the Phaeni∣cians Barat Anac, or the Land of Tinn. Caesar gave out this for the cause of the War; that the Brittons had sent assistance to the Gauls.
He first oblig'd them to surrender, and engage to pay a Yearly Tribute; but next Year they rebell'd, and he return'd and reduc'd 'em to obedience. Cicero says, Caesar sent him Letters from Brittain dated the 1st of Septr. which came to his Hands on the 27 of that instant. Caesar's first Expedition into Brittain happen'd in the 699th Year after the building of the City, the 53th before the Birth of Christ, the 3950 of the World, when Cn. Pompeius Magnus and M. Licinius Crassus were, both of 'em, a second time Consuls. 6. When Crassus march'd against the Par∣thians, the People express'd a great deal of anger, and their Tribunes curs'd him. Upon the Road he pillag'd the Temple of Jerusalem, and committed a great many hainous Crimes: but when he cross'd the Euphrates he was beaten, and perfidiously kill'd in an intervew; thus was he brought to condign punishment for his Sacrilege. 'Twas this Crassus who was wont to say, that no Man was rich but he that could maintain an Army of 4 Legious upon his own Incomes. While he waged War with the Parthians, Ptolomaeus Auletes King of Egypt being forced out of his Kingdom by his own Subjects, came to Rome, where he stay'd a long while, but could not obtain assistance, because the Sibylline Books seem'd to prohibit the Romans to make War in Egypt. Then he return'd to Ephesus, and with a round Sum of Mony engag'd Gabinius, Ʋnder-Consul of Syria to effect his Restoration. Gabinius sav'd his Life by bribing the Judges; but was arraign'd of cheating the State, and banish'd.
7. The Romans, at this time, were arriv'd at that height of Avarice and Wickedness, that they had quite departed from the measures of their Ancestors; and all their Magistracies eitheir sold, or come at by the means of Scold∣ing, Cudgells, Stones, Daggers or Swords. The Consuls were eclyps'd by the Heads of the triumviral Conspiracy; Both the Pro∣vinces and the Administation of Affairs were out of their Hands; so they e'en minded no∣thing but enlarging their Estates by selling the Republick. Upon a warm Debate among the Candidates for the Consulship, T. Annius Milo, who was one of the Number, slew Clodius as he met him upon the Road. Pompey was not mov'd with all this: He hop'd to be made Dictator; and Cato observing that all their Eyes were fix'd upon him, got him made sole Consul; designing thereby to bring him in as accountable for his Actions. 8. In his presence Cicero pleaded for Milo, or rather would had plead for him; for 'tis said that he was so over-aw'd by Pompey's Soldiers and Clodius's Friends, that he wrote that Oration afterwards, which is now extant. However Milo was banish'd. The Gauls who but lately had been reduc'd, took occasion to rebell again, upon the news of these Com∣motions in the City, and the hopes that Caesar would be detain'd in Italy; but Caesar punish'd 'em again for their boldness. After the conclusion of the Gallick War, which hap∣pen'd in the 8th Year, the Civil War between C. Caesar and Pompey broke out.
9. Julia the Wife of Pompey, and the Bond of Peace, if not of Friendship, died in Child∣bed together with her Child. Caesar was hated by the Senat for carrying things by violence; but Pompey gain'd a great Interest among them by his Humility and civil Carriage. Caesar apprehending what circumstances his Affairs were in, desir'd leave to put in for the Consul∣ship: but that could not be Granted, without he dismis'd his Forces. He thought he was not safe if he quitted the Army; however he made this proposal, that both he and Pompey should give up their Armies together; but that being rejected, he march'd with incredible expedition at the Head of his Forces from France to Italy, and master'd several Towns in Flaminia, partly by favor, and partly by storm. 10. Upon the News of this, Pompey, toge∣ther with C. Marcellus and L. Lentulus, fled from Rome to Brundusium a Town of Apulia, upon the Seaside. Caesar march'd thither; but before he came up, the Consuls had cross'd the Sea to Dyrrhachium; and soon after Pompey follow'd them. Caesar considering that he had not a fleet fit for pursuing them, came to Rome, and call'd together the Senate, to whom he complain'd of his Enemies, and propos'd terms of Peace. The Senat being a little slack on the matter, he went to Massilia, where the Gates were shut upon him. Where∣upon he fitted out a Fleet and besieg'd it by Sea and Land; and having left Deputy Generals to manage the Siege, march'd himself into Spain where Petreius Afranius and Varro
Pompey's Generals surrender'd themselves toge∣ther with the whole Army. 11. Then he return'd to Massilia, which was then reduc'd to a desperat Condition, and surrender'd it self. In his absence; M. Lepidus the Praetor made him Dict∣ator, whereupon he went to Rome, call'd a Convention, and was made Consul along with P. Servilius Isauricus. Then, having settled his Affairs in the City, he cross'd over to Greece, and at last gave Pompey a signal overthrow in the Pharsalian Plains in Thessaly, and turn'd him out of his Camp, notwithstanding that Pompey's Forces did much out-number his. Pompey fled to Egypt, to Ptolomaeus Dionysius the Son of Auletes, the Guardianship of whom had been allotted to him by the Senat. He hop'd to find assistance in that Kingdom, upon the score of his guardianship; but the King being under age, his Relations were influenc'd by Theodotus, his Preceptor, to receive him into a Boat and kill him, either because they dreaded some Com∣motion might ensue upon assisting, him, or else because they contemn'd his mean Con∣dition. 12. Caesar pursuing Pompey, came to Alex∣andria with 3200 Men; where he receiv'd the first News of Pompey's Death. Ptolomy was at that time engag'd in a War with Cleopatra, his Sister. Caesar being at Alexandria fell in Love with Cleopatra, and advis'd her and her Brother not to dispute by force of Arms, but to remit their Differences to his determinati∣on, upon the consideration that he was made
Consul for 5 Years, Dictator for one whole Year, and Tribune for Life, and that in for∣mer times an alliance had been contracted with Auletes the King's Father, with the Authority of a Law and a Decree of the Senate. 13. But the Kings Favorites dislik'd the Mo∣tion mightily. They cry'd out, that it was unworthy of the King's Majesty to plead his cause at another Tribunal. Insomuch that War was declar'd against Caesar under the Name of the Alexandrian-War: but Caesar after several Encounters obtain'd the Victory, and did not indeed turn Egypt into a Province, but gave it to Cleopatra (who bore Caesario to him) in conjunction with her Younger Bro∣ther, for the King was drown'd in the River upon his flight. 14. From thence he march'd into Syria, and after that to Pontus, where he routed Pharn∣aces the Son of Mithridates, and pacify'd Cappa∣docia, Armenia, Gallograecia, Pontus, and Bithynia. Then he return'd to Rome, and at the next Winter solstice cross'd over from Lilybaeum to Africa; notwithstanding that the Head Sooth-sayer had advis'd him not to go before the middle of Winter. After the Pharsalian battle, Scipio and Cato, Great-Grand-Son to M. Porcius Cato, had fled thither, and drawn to∣gether a considerable body of Horse, and en∣gag'd Juba the King in their Quarrel; Upon which account Caesar, went upon this Expedi∣tion, and cut them all off. 15. But Cato laid violent Hands upon himself, in order to avoid his being taken Prisoner. Cicero defends the Action, and
in regard that Nature had given him an in∣credible measure of gravity, says, 'twas better for him to do so than look a Tyrant in the face. Cato was a stoick, and sometimes defended very akward Opinions in the Senate, as if, says Cicero, he had been bred up not upon the dregs of Romulus but upon Plato's Politicks. Afterwards Caesar came to Rome, and had a triumphal Procession upon his Conquests of France, Egypt, Pontus, and Africa. Then he engag'd in the War against S. Pompeius, and marching to Spain defeated him. 16. But before he went into Spain, he took care to have the model of the Year corrected, which from him was call'd Julian. When he re∣turn'd from Spain to Rome, he dimitted his Consulship a third time, and appointed Con∣suls elect for 3 Months. The first were Q. Fabius Maximus and C. Trebonius; the latter of whom dy'd on the last day of the Year, and Caninius Rebilus succeeded for the few Hours that remain'd, whom Cicero jestingly calls a most watchfull Consul, because he did not sleep during the whole time of his Consulship. Then the Senators indeed appointed Caesar to be perpetual Dictator, and Emperor indeed, in so far as that word implies the greatest power in the Common-wealth. For the military Affairs and the raising of Mony depended in∣tirely upon him; and all the Magistrats were at his beck, and oblig'd by Oath not to oppose his Decrees.
Sect. 7. From the perpetual Dictatorship of Julius Caesar to the end of the second Triumvirat, and the Reign of Octavius Caesar or Caesar Octavi∣anus. The space of 15 Years. 1. Caesar was a 4th time Consul along with M. Antonius, who, being Tribune of the People, had imploy'd all his Interest for his advancement, and made a Law, changing the Name of the Month Quintilis to Julius, for Caesar's Honor. But now that Caesar began to affect the title of King, and to change the form of the Republick, and take the admi∣nistration of Affairs wholly into his own hands; Conspiracies broke out against him, and in the 5th Month after his return to Rome, on the 15th day of March, was he kill'd in Pom∣pey's Court, by those very Men whom he had lately oblig'd by his favor, and pardon'd for appearing against him in the War with Pom∣pey; namely Marcus and Decimus Brutus, C. Cassius, Cn. Domitius, C. Trehonius, Q. Tullius Cimber, the 2 Servilus's, Casca, Hala, and seve∣ral others. 2 Cicero giving a Character of Caesar and Pompey delivers his Opinion thus: In the late War, had Pompey relented somewhat of his gravity, and Caesar a great deal of his ambiti∣on, we might have had a solid Peace and the form of a Republick: All agree that Caesar was justly intitl'd to Clemency: and Cicero himself (tho' upon this point he is very wavering and
inconstant) allots him the qualities of a ready Wit, a good Memory, Literature, thought and application. However when the case of his Murder came before the Senate, Cicero took care that all were pardon'd, and Provinces giv'n to the Assassins. 3. When Caesar's latter will was open'd, 'twas found that Decimus Brutus was nomi∣nated among his Heirs of the 3d Form, pro∣viding the rest did not Administer; and that he left a vast Sum of Mony to be distributed equally among the People. He left Octavius the son of C. Octavius who had marry'd the Daughter of M. Attilius Balbus by Julia Caesar's Sister; this Octavius, I say, was left Heir to the thirds of his Estate. He was born when Cicero was Consul, and lost his Father when he was 4 Years of Age. He study'd Philosophy at Apollonia, and was about to be call'd home by Caesar in order to go upon the Parthian War, when he got notice of his Death, and the Heritage that was left him. When he came to Rome, he expected that Anthony wou'd assist him in resenting the Murther of his Father; but when he went to wait of him, met with a disdainful reception; and when he found that he wou'd not advance him the Mony to be giv'n to the People ac∣cording to Caesar's Will, sold his own Heri∣tage, and by so doing did mightily ingratiate himself with the People. 4. 'Twas apparent that Antony minded nothing but promoting his own Interest and making himself King: upon which Consider∣ation the Senat loaded Octavius Caesar with
marks of Honour and Respect, designing to make use of him in opposition to the Tyrant: but when Antony was worsted, slighted and affronted him, most of the Senators being of Pompey's faction. Caesar resented this affront so much, that he shar'd the Government with Antony and M. Lepidus, and erected a Tri∣umvirate, in which it was mutually agree'd upon, that they shou'd ruine their Enemies. The greatest scruple was upon the murder of Cicero; for Anthony wou'd do nothing unless that were agree'd to in regard that Cicero had ail'd against him in his Harangues in a very provoking manner; and Caesar indeed stood out for two days, but at last consented to Antony's motion. 5. The Triumviri banish'd 300 Senators and Equites under the pretence of resenting Cae∣sar's death: and among the rest Cicero, the great∣est Pattern and Glory of the Roman Wit and Eloquence, was put to death, when he had liv'd 63 Years, ten Months and 5 days He was born at Arpnum the 2d day of January, the 648th Year after the building of the City, in the Consulship of C. Attilius Seranus and Q. Servilius Cepio, Pompey being born on the 1st of October in the same Year His Father was a Gentleman descended of Tullius Attius King of the Volsci. Many others were cruelly mur∣der'd, and their Estates worried by the Trium∣viri; and in regard the Men's Estates, did not satisfy 'em, they fell upon the Women's. In the mean time Cassius and Brutus, who seem'd to stand for the Republick against them, were worrying their Provinces in Asia,
in order to fetch Money for the Charges of the War 6. At last, the two Armies engag'd at Philippi, a Town of Macedonia. Cassius fought unfor∣tunately, and stood upon a Hill attending the event of the Day, but having sent a Messenger to see how things were, and he not returning so speedily as he expected, he apprehended that his Colleague was likewise defeated, and order'd one of his own Servants that he had made Free, to cut off his Head: but was scarce expir'd, when the Messenger return'd with the News that Brutus was Conqueror. Brutus order'd his Corpse to be interr'd, for fear his men shou'd be discourag'd by such a Spectacle; and being cast down himself, resolv'd to starve out the Enemy, whom he then be∣sieg'd. 7. But Antony, who was reduc'd to great Want, was under a necessity of fighting, and challeng'd him to Battle. Brutus cou'd not in Honour decline Battle, so that they came to an Engagement, in which they were so eager, that they laid aside their Darts, and disputed the point with their Swords. Brutus seeing his Army routed and put to flight, kill'd himself, and with him fell the popular form of Govern∣ment, which seem'd to have yet a Being while and he Cassius did not despair of the Victory, as being possess'd of the whole Roman Empire from Macedonia to the Euphrates, with 20 Legions of Foot, 20000 Horse, 200 long Ships, and an infinite Sum of Money. 8 After the Triumviri had carry'd this Victory, Caesar being sickly return'd to Italy;
Antony being met by Cleopatra in Cilicia went along with her to Egypt. Caesar being in Italy di∣stributed Grounds to the Soldiers: but Fulvia Antony's Wife, and Lucius her Brother being then Consul, were touch'd with Envy upon his ingrati∣ating himself so much with the Soldiers, and de∣clar'd a War against him, which was call'd Per∣unsium from Perusia the Seat of the same However Caesar got over this Difficulty, and being Jealous of Antony, possess'd himself of Spain and Gaul, which were his Provinces, and the Feuds were inflam'd by daily Emergencies, till by the intercession of Pollio and Maecenas they were either remov'd or laida sleep. 9. For Antony having enter'd into a new League, marry'd Octavia, Caesar's Sister; where∣upon there ensu'd a new division of the Roman Empire, by which Caesar possess'd all the Western parts on that side of Codropolis a City of Illyricum; and Antony got all from thence to the Eastward. Antony engag'd in a War with the Parthians, and Caesar in another with Q. Pompeius who was master of Sicily and a gallant Fleet, by Virtue of a Law made by Antony, which ingratiated him much with the People. Africa was allotted to Lepidus, but in regard he had offended Caesar, he was confin'd to the boundaries of that Province. 10. Sextus Pompeius infested the Sea, and did so straiten the Town for Provisions, that the People were in a great ferment, and the Triumviri were oblig'd to make Peace with him, in the same Year that Herod was declar'd King of Jewry. But soon after that Treaty came to nothing, upon Antony's keeping the
Peloponnesus which by right belong'd to Pom∣pey: and the Feuds between Antony and Caesar broke out a-fresh, but by Octavia's in∣tercession were compos'd for that juncture. Caesar attack'd Pompey several times to no pur∣pose, but at last defeated him and turn'd him out of Sicily. Whereupon Pompey fled to Phrygia, and was kill'd by Antony's Friends. Pompey being out of the way, Lepidus endeavor'd to make himself Master of the Army and the whole Island; but his own Men betray'd him into the hands of Caesar, who divested him of all Authority: and thus was one of the Heads of the Triumviral Conspiracy lop'd off. 11. In the mean time Antony had pre∣sented Cleopatra (whom he had fetch'd into Syria) with Phaenicia, Caelosyria, Cyprus, a great part of Cilicia, Arabia, Nabathaea, and that part of Judaea which brings forth Balm; and he was fall'n into such a luxurious way of living, that the People were mightily incens'd against him, and Caesar did not fail to inflame their indignation, especially considering that he desir'd the Senate to ratify his Gifts to Cleopatra. Whereupon War was declar'd against Cleo∣patra, but not against Antony himself, for fear least the Romans, who were along with him, being reduc'd to desperate Circumstances, shou'd attempt any thing against the Republick. After several Defeats, Antony was ruin'd in a Sea-fight at Actium, upon the News of which, the Land Forces seeing no body to head them, went over to Caesar.
12. Antony was oppress'd with sorrow for som teime, but soon after got over it, and re∣turn'd to his former Luxury. At last when he found that Caesar rejected all proposals of Peace, and that Cleopatra had betray'd the Cavalry, together with the Fleet; and that Caesar was approaching to Alexandria; he laid Violent Hands on himself; and afterwards when Cleopatra understood that Caesar was proof against all her Charms, and design'd to carry her to Rome in triumph, she finish'd her das in like manner. By this means Egypt became a Province of Rome, and was committed to the Government of Cornelius Gallus. Authors tell us, that in the Reign of Ptolomaeus Auletes, the Yearly produce of this Province a∣mounted to 12050 Talents; but when it came into the hands of the Romans, it was reckon'd to be yet more fertile, by reason of their Commerce with India, and Aethiopia. 13. Coesario, Son to Julius Caesar and Cleo∣patra, was put to Death upon the advice of Arius a Philosopher, who thought it not safe to have more Caesar's than one. Caesar took in M. Tullius Cicero, Son to the Orator, as Collegue to him in the Consulship, designing thereby to stifle the resentment of his Fathers Death. Cicero expos'd to publick view Caesar's Letters concerning his Victory over Antony, in the same place where his Fathers Head and Hands had been expos'd. How∣ever the Macedonian Empire sunk with Cleopatra, and therefore the Affairs con∣temporary
to that, end at this Period, viz. in the 294th Year after the Death of Alx∣ander the Great, the 3d of the 187 Olym∣piad, the 724 after the building of the City, the 14th after the Death of Julius Caesar, the 28th before the birth of Christ, A. M. 3975.
THE ELEMENTS of HISTORY, BOOK IV. The Roman Monarchy. CHAP. I. From the Monarchy of Octavius to the Death of Tiberius. The space of Six∣ty Six Years. 1. THe Roman Empire had now swallow'd up the Macedonian, together with all the King∣doms, Republicks and Principalities, Contempo∣rary to it, excepting the Parthian Kingdom, which had not yet subjected it self; but when its domestick Divisions brought it under, they, did not long continue in obedience. Rome was now oppress'd with it's own weight, and being of a full rank complexion, stood ex∣pos'd to danger; every one made a noise of Liberty, but no body injoy'd it. Every man endeavor'd to procure a Principality to him∣self, according as his Wit, Power, or Riches cou'd carry him out. In their Councils and Conventions, every thing was expos'd to Sale; their Magistracies were obtain'd either by Money or open Force. Now there was
no way of remedying those Evils, but only a Monarchy, which could curb the boundless Power of the Mob, and the aspiring temper of seditious Men. 2. Caesar Octavianus had weighed all these things with himself; and was very anxious for his own Safety and Honour. When he return'd to Rome he consulted Agrippa and Maecenas upon the form of the Government. Agrippa alledg'd that the full Authority ought to be put into the hands of the People; that whoever invaded the Popular Power had been punish'd for their Ambition, and that it was a very considerable Argument, that the Gre∣cians and Romans, under a popular form of Government, had done such mighty things. But Maecenas plainly made it out that the shapeless form of Democracy had lately deriv'd disgrace upon the Republick; that all their domestick Losses and civil Wars, were only owing to the overgrown Power of the Peo∣ple, which Ambitious and Turbulent Men had made use of for their own ends; and by that means all were debauch'd by Faction, Partiality and Bribes. 3. And after all, this was the true state of the matter, with reference both to the Grecians and Romans: For after the Grecians disclaim'd Monarchy, they never knew where to fix. The Harangues of Factious Men toss'd 'em to and again, as the Winds do the Sea; and the Constitutions of all their Cities were such, that Aristotle approv'd of none of 'em. For now and then Innovations still prevail'd, and Barbarous Murders were committed, while
one Party stood for Oligarchy, and the other for Democracy. Besides, while they butcher'd one another in Civil Wars, they never did any thing of moment abroad, till at last Aelxan∣der's Yoke united them. 4. In like manner the Romans had no sooner ex∣pell'd their King but Sedition prevail'd among them, and grew to that height, that the Com∣monalty separated thrice from the Nobility; and in the space of 134 Years there happen'd 37 Innovations, and for 5 Years together there were no Magistrats. All their great Atchieve∣ments were accomplish'd by Generals that were intrusted wholly with the charge of the War, and a full Authority; who were not thwarted by Colleagues of different Sentiments, but us'd rather to give then receive Laws. In the beginning, the Government was still in the hands of Kings, till Ambition and Seditious Heats invented other ways of liv∣ing. So that Monarchy seems justly to be deriv'd from the Power of Governors, and that from the paternal Authority. 5. Octavius was not very eager in taking the Government into his hand; but Maecenas push'd him on; proving by the Instances of Pompey, Marius, Sylla, and others, that if he quitted the Government, his Person was not safe. He added many Arguments, which contain'd a lively description of the ensuing Administration. Caesar subscrib'd to his Opinion, and invested himself with the Title of Em∣peror, which signifies the suprem Power, and in that sence was giv'n to his Father and all his Posterity. He was made Censor along with
Agrippa; and in his 6th Consulship made a review of the People, in which the number of the Citizens was reckon'd 4063000. He endeavour'd, by all means to ingratiate him∣self with the People, and in regard that several unjust and harsh things had been enacted in the Civil Wars, especially in the time of the Triumvirate, repeal'd them all in one Edict. 6. Being made Consul a 7th time, he ac∣quainted all the Senators of his Party, with his Design, and came into the Senate-House, where he recited a Harangue from his Papers, and pretended to lay aside all manner of Authority: Whereupon all the Senators press'd him to continue it, and at last, with great difficulty, he seem'd to comply with their earnest Demands. By this artifice he establish'd himself in the Government, and then distributed most of the Provinces, reserv∣ing the strongest and best fortified to himself. 'Twas mov'd in the Senate, that a more ho∣norable Title than that of Caesar, should be thought of for him; and Manacius Plancus pitch'd upon Augustus, which all of 'em ap∣prov'd of. Then they made a Law, which the Laywers call Lex Regia, transferring the whole Authority of the Senate and People to him. The Provinces were distributed on the 23th day of January; and upon the fourth day after that, was he Sirnam'd Caesar Augustus: But the Romans date the Epocha of the August∣us's from the 1st day of that January, in the 7th Consulship of Octavianus Caesar, the 727th Year after the building of the City, the 2d of
the 188th Olympiad, the 13th of Herod the Great, the 25th before the Birth of Christ, A. M. 3978. Octavius Caesar and M. Vip∣sanius Agrippa being then Consuls. 7. Augustus being thus entrusted with the Government by the consent of the People, apply'd himself much to the modelling of the State, and made several new Laws. He often imparted his designs to others, and in some things follow'd their Advice. But he chiefly consulted the Consuls; or his Colleague, when he was Consul himself. He pitch'd upon one Man from each Magistracy, and by Lot drew 15 of the Senators, to assist him for 6 Months in the administration of Affairs. Some things indeed, he laid before the Senate: but he chose to communicate the Difficulties and Mysteries of State, only to a few. Some Causes were remitted to the Senate, who gave their re∣sponse by Legates, but the greater number was left to his Privy Council. Sometimes he call'd a Common Council, but his Will was there a Law. He nominated some Magestrates himself, and left the nomination of others to the People; but only took care that none crept into Offices by Fraud and Circumven∣tion. 8. Next Year Augustus pacify'd Spain, and shut the Temple of Janus the second time; but the commotions of Egypt quickly open'd it again. After that, he march'd into Greece, and then into Syria, and recover'd the Stan∣dards from the Parthians which Crassus and Antony had lost, and likewise obtain'd the delivery of the Legates from Pandion and
Porus King of the Indians. While Augustus stay'd at Athens, he met with Virgil the Poet, who had retir'd to Greece, to perfect his Aeneids. Augustus brought him back with him; but in taking a view of Megara, in a very hot Season, he was seiz'd with an Illness, which the navigation inflam'd, so that he dy'd at Brundusium, on the 22d day of September in 52d Year of his age, the 735th after the building of Rome, in the Consulship of C. Sentius and Q. Lucretius. 9. Augustus had a Daughter nam'd Julia, by Scribonia his Wife. He divorc'd Scribonia, and too kin livia Drusilla, Wife to Claudius Nero in her Room, tho at the same time she was big-belly'd; for within three Months after the Mar∣riage, he brought forth Drusus, having formerly born Tiberius to Nero. Augustus had no Issue by Livia that liv'd any considerable time. He gave his Daughter Julia in marriage to Mar∣cellus Son to Octavia his Sister; and after his Death, to Agrippa, to whom she bore three Sons, namely Caius, Lucius, and Agrippa Post∣humus, besides Agrippina and Julia two Daugh∣ters. Agrippa had a part of the Authority of a Tribune, and govern'd Syria ten Years; and after he had pacify'd Pannonia, return'd to Campania, where he died. Then Tiberius was order'd to marry Julia, and to divorce his Wife Agrippina Daughter to Agrippa. 10. Tiberius and Drusus (two brethren) subdued the Rhaeti and Vindelici in Germany, as also the Pannonians and Frisians. But Drusus having penetrated a great way into Germany, and just enter'd upon his Consulship
along with L. Quintius Crispinus, sell off from his Horse and dy'd in the 745 Year after the building of Rome. He left two Sons namely Germanicus and Claudius. In the same Year, Augustus reform'd the Model of the Year given by his Father Julius, and chose rather to have the mouth Sextilis in which his first Consulship commenc'd, to go by his name; than September, in which he was born. Soon after, Tiberius conquer'd the Germans by Stratagem, and retir'd to Rhodes, upon the account of his Wife Julia's wantonness, which was then arriv'd at such a pitch of Impudence, that her Father banish'd her to the Isle Pandataria; for he was so much out of humour upon her Debauchery, that he im∣prudently expos'd it to the Senat. Indeed he was afterwards conscious of his Error in so doing, and us'd to say, that, had Maecenas or Agrippa been alive, he had ne're been guilty of such an oversight. Now Maecenas had died, about 4 Years after the Death of Agrippa. 11. Augustus had just pacify'd all the Na∣tions about, and shut the Temple of Janus a third time, and made a review of the People within his Empire, when Jesus Christ, Lord of all things, came to the World. Authors are not agreed upon the time of his Incarnation, by reason of the great difficulties that arise from the various versions of the Scripture, the uncertain succession of the Judges, the different forms of Years, and various com∣putation of those periods of Years mention'd in the Scripture. However, the Evangelist teaches us, that Christ was about 30 Years of age in the 15th Year of Tiberius. So that
Caesar Augustus liv'd 15 Years after the birth of Christ; and if we date the Commencement of his Empire from the Death of Julius Caesar, he reigned in all 57 Years, and our Lord was born in the 42 of his Reign; but if we date it from the Death of Antony and Cleopatra, the Birth of our Lord must be cast into the 28th of his Reign, that is, the 4003 Year of the World, the 752 of Rome, the 3d of the 194 Olympiad, in the Consulship of Caesar Augustus (for the 13th time) and M. Plautius Silanus. 12. Herod who had then reign'd about 37 Years, design'd to make away with Christ, by giving orders to kill all the Children in the Neighbourhood, under two Years of age; but miss'd his Aim. Now to carry down the thread of the Jewish History after this inter∣ruption; Herod had possess'd himself of the Kingdom, and took care to have Aristobulus slain as he was a swimming. This Aristobulus was brother to Mariamne his Wife, and Heir to the Kingdom of Jewry, whom Herod had turn'd out of the Priesthood. Tho' Herod sided with Antony, yet after his defeat and Death, he gain'd Caesar's favor by his magnificence. Soon after he murder'd Mari∣amne his beloved Wife; and repented of the Action too late; upon which occasion he be∣came Mad, and acted unspeakable cruelty. 18. In the 7th or 8th Year before the birth of Christ, he repair'd the Temple of Jerusalem very magnificently. He likewise raz'd Davids Tomb, after which time his
Interest began to decline. He put his Bre∣thren Aristobulus and Alexander to death, upon their being arraign'd of a Conspiracy, by those who mean'd to rise upon their ruine. After their Death, Antipater the Son of another Wife, and Pheroras the King's Brother, con∣spir'd against him. Not long after the King was seiz'd with a horrid Distemper of which he died, after he had given orders for the Death of Antipater, and attempted to lay violent hands on himself. He died in the 72d Year of his age, the 27th of his Reign, about 2 Years after the birth of Christ, in the 1st Year of the 195 Olympiad, the 754th after the building of the City, Caius Caesar and L. Aemilius Paulus being then Con∣suls. 14 He left his Kingdom to his Son Archelaus. But Augustus gave him only the half of it, and adjudg'd the other half to Antipas and Philip, his brethren. So that Archelaus pos∣sess'd Idumaea, Judaea, and Samaria, toge∣ther with the Cities of Caesarea, Sebaste and Joppa; out of which he rais'd a yearly tribute of 500 Talents. Antipas possess'd the Country beyond Jordane and Galilee, which fetch'd him 200 Talents a Year. And Philip got Bathanaea and Trachonitis, with 100 Talents. While things were thus concerted at Rome; the Jews being destitute of a King, were mightly disorder'd by Seditions and Tumults, which were afterwards put down by the arrival of Varus from Antiocha. There was a Young Man, that gave himself out for Alexander the Son of Herod by Mari∣amne;
but Augustus discover'd the Cheat. After ten Years Archelaus was banish'd to Vienna in Gaul, upon the account of his Tyranny; and his whole Estate was confis∣cated: Then Cyrenius being sent into Syria possess'd himself of the same; and from thence one Judas a Gaulonite, and Sodoe a Pharisees, took occasion to rebell. At this juncture the Princes of Judaea fail'd, and it began to be govern'd by Procuratores; the first of whom was Coponius, to whom succeeded M. Ambiriotus, and after him Annius Rufus. 15. Augustus adopted Caius and Lucius his Grand-Sons, and gave 'em the Title of Princes of the Youth. But Lucius being sent into Spain died there; and about 18 Months after, the like fate happen'd to Caius upon his return from Armenia in Italy. Then Tiberius and Agrippa Posthumus were adopted in their room. The former of whom was order'd to adopt Germanicus the Son of Drusus, in order to prevent his ambitious Attempts. Tiberius conquer'd the Germans, and reduc'd the Panonians and Dalmatians; but was denied a Triumph, by reason that the Legions were almost all cut off in Germany by Arominius General of the Cherusci, under the conduct of Quintilius Varus, which Augustus took so much to heart that among other marks of his Grief, he us'd to dash his head against the Gate, and Cry out, Redde Legiones Quintili Vare. 16. Tiberius was then sent to put things to rights in Germany, and after 3 Years, Germa∣nicus Caesar succeeded him. Tiberius Triumph'd thrice, and was invested with a power over
the Provinces and Armies, equal to that of Augustus; and after he had exercis'd that Power three Years, obtain'd the Monarchy it self, upon the Death of Augustus, which happen'd on the 19th Day of the Month of August, (the same Day that gave date to his first Consulship) in the 76th Year of his age, the 767th of the City, the 2d of the 198th Olympiad, the 57th after the Death of Julius Caesar, the 15 after the Birth of Christ, when Sextus Pompeius and Sextus Apuleius were Consuls. 17. Notwithstanding that Tiberius had sufficiently fortify'd this Government, by the intrest of his Mother Livia, who by some was charg'd with Poysoning her Husband; yet he seem'd to be very unwilling to take the Government upon him, and 'twas after the repeated intreaties of the Senate, that he at length comply'd. At first, he made a shew of Modesty and Singular Temperance; and did nothing upon his own bottom, but had recourse to the Senate, upon things of any im∣portance. He envy'd Germanicus mightily; who had purchas'd much Glory by his At∣chievements; and banish'd him under the pre∣tence of sending him to compose some Tumults in the East; and afterwards made away with him by the Ministry of Piso. Germanicus was an excellent Man, and the Darling, not only of the Romans, but of the Barbarians them∣selves. He had three Sons by Agrippina the Daughter of Agrippa and Julia, namely, Nero, Drusus and Caius, with as many Daughters. He died in the 34th Year of his age, the
next after that of his Consulship, M. Junius Silanus and C. Norbanus Flaccus being then Consuls. 18. After a few Years, Tiberius was punish'd for this his Patricide, in the Death of his Son Drusus, of which Sejanus was the Author. Now he had rais'd this Son of his to an in∣discreet pitch of greatness, and Loaded him with unripe and unseasonable Dignities. At last he laid aside his Mask, and took up his undisguis'd temper; and without minding the Government of the Repulick, gave himself wholly to cruel and voluptuous measures; and in a word, behav'd himself so, that, 'twas ap∣parent Theodorus Gadareus his Preceptor, had not spoke amiss, when he said that his Pupill was , that is, a Lump of Clay steep'd in Blood. 19. In the 12th Year of Tiberius, Pontius Pilat succeeded Valerius Gratus the fourth Go∣vernor of Judaea; who by exposing the Image of Caesar in the Publick places, occa∣sion'd so much Sedition in Judaea, that he could not appease it, till he sent away the Images to Caesarea. In the beginning of the 15th Year of Tiberius's Reign, Pontius Pilat being then Governor, did John the Baptist begin to preach in the Spirit of Elias, and be∣sides many other deeds, baptis'd our Lord Jesus Christ, who being full of the Holy Ghost, enter'd immedieatly upon the office of our Saviour. Having seen three Passovers in the course of his Ministry, he was sacrific'd at the fourth, and so became our true Passover.
20. Upon the death of Christ, the Sun was darken'd, either by the interposition of the Moon, (tho' indeed the Passover was always solemniz'd at Full Moon) or else by the Imprisonment of its own Light. This Eclipse is mention'd in the Heathen Kalen∣dars, and among other Historians by Phlegon Trallianus, Adrianus's servant made Free. Jose∣phus, that noble Jewish Historian, gives a Memorable Testimony of Christ; and seve∣ral Heathen Authors write of him. Upon his coming into the World, the Oracles were silenc'd; and in regard that, according to Plu∣tarch, the great Pan was said to dye in the time of Tiberius, by him we are to understand Christ, our great Shepherd. The Sybils spoke of Christ; and Pilat acquainted Tiberius with his Miracles. 21. After our Lords Ascension, the A∣postles, among other things, appointed 7 Dea∣cons. James the brother of our Lord, Sir∣nam'd the Just, was first made Bishop of Je∣rusalem, and Saul, who persecuted the Christi∣ans with extream cruelty, was converted to the Christian Faith. Then Pilat was sent to Rome to be try'd upon the disaster of the Samaritans. And the Jews were banish'd Rome by reason of their unsufferable avarice. 22. About 2 Years after the Death of Christ, Philip the Tetrarch (a modest sort of Man) died without Issue; and his Principality was added to Syria. Tho Aartabanus King of Parthia contemn'd and derided Tiberius, yet Vitellius was order'd to make peace with him. Vitellius came to Jerusalem and turn'd
Josephus, who was Sirnam'd Caiphas, out of the Presthood; to whom Jonathas the Son of Aninas, succeeded. Artabanus sent Darius his Son to Rome, as an Hostage: but before his arrival Tiberius dy'd, to the great satisfaction of all the People, who triumph'd as much upon his Death as upon the conquest of an Enemy. His Death happen'd on the 16th day of March; after he had reign'd 22 Years, 7 Months, and some days; in the 78th Year of his age, and the 790th after the building of Rome, Cn. Acerrenius Proculus and C. Pon∣tius Nigrinus being then Consuls. CHAP. II. From the Death af Tiberius to the Death of Nero, the last Emperor of the Family of the Caesars. The Space of 20 Years. 1. TIberius left one Grand-Son, nam'd Tibe∣rius, by his Son Drusus: but prefer'd Caius the Son of Germanicus, either for some Astrological Reason (for that Prince was much given to Astrology) or else thro' the interest of Macro his Libertus, with whom Caius had ingratiated himself; tho' at the same time, 'twas thought, that Tiberius was took off by Macro's assistance. 2. Some alledge that Tiberius cunningly no∣minated Caius as Successor, to the end that his own wickedness might be drown'd in the Mon∣strous Crimes of his Successor. The Army
were very ready to receive their new Prince, as being come of a Family, which they Pitied upon the account of the injuries and affronts put upon it by Tiberius; for indeed Caius had only avoided the Effects of Tiberius's Cruelty by dissembling his anger, and tamely sitting with affronts; so that 'twas a very true saying, that was bandy'd about, viz. That there never was a better Servant, nor a worse Master than Caligula. 3. Caius made Agrippa Son to Aristobulus, and Grandson to Herod the Great, King of that Country which Philip the Tetrarch pos∣sess'd. He banish'd Antipas together with his Wife Herodias, to Lions; and Pontius Pilat to Vienna, where he laid violent hands on himself after two Years exile. At first Caius behav'd himself meekly; but afterwards he became a downright Monster. In the very first Year, he spent all that infinite Sum of Gold, that Tiberius had gather'd in the 23 Years that he reign'd: He arrogated to himself divine Ho∣nours, and display'd incredible cuelrty. 4. When he sentenc'd Persons to dye, he order'd 'em to be put to Death gradually, that they might be sensible they were dying; and wish'd that all the People had but one neck, that he might cut it off. Many had de∣sign'd to kill the Tyrant; but at last Cassius Chaereas, Captain of the Life-guards, put the de∣sign in execution on the 23d of Ianuary, after he had reign'd 3 Years, two Months and 8 Days, and liv'd 29 Years, in the 794th Year after the Building of the City, the 42 after the Birth of Christ, when himself was Consul
a 4th time along with C. Sentius Saturninus. 5. After the Death of Caligula, the Senators indeavor'd to revive the Power of the People and Senate; every one designing to make him∣self great, by throwing the Republick into its former difficulties. But the Army was of another mind, and were in the right of it, in asserting that a Monarchical Government was condu∣cive to the interest of the Republick, tho at the same time, all of 'em had an Eye to their private Interests. However the Praetorian Soldiers had a mighty itch to dispose of the Empire, and accordingly gave it to Tiberius Claudius Drusus, Brother to Germanicus Caesar, and Son to Drusus, who had despair'd so much of his Life, that he kept himself incognito. 6. Claudius beheaded Chaereas, and enlarg'd the dominions of Agrippa, who put the Apostle James to Death, and died himself miserably by the Hand of an Angel. He restor'd some Princes, and took the right of Freedom from the Rhodians, and Lycians. In his Reign the Brittons Rebell'd, and he went upon an Expe∣dition against them, and after he had master'd part of the Island, return'd in Pomp to Rome, and had a most splendid Triumph. He in∣flicted just Punishment upon Messelina his Wife, and the Leudest Woman that ever was; and married Agrippina his Grandchild, who had born Domitius Nero to Domitius Aenobardus her former Husband. Afterwards, upon his Wife's sollicitation, he adopted this Domitius whom he had made his Son in Law; notwith∣standing that he had a Son of his own, name∣ly Sritannicus, about 2 Years Younger than
Nero. The Brittons, after his departure, Re∣bell'd, oftner than once, but were soon con∣quer'd, and Caractacus the greatest of the Brittish Kings, was brought Prisoner to Rome. 7. Claudius, in the 12 Year of his Reign Gifted the Provinces of Philip and Lysanias to Agrippa junior; and took Chalcis from him, after he had possess'd it 4 Years. He restor'd the Rhodians to their former Freedom, and Free'd the Trojans of all Taxes, as being the origi∣nal of the Roman Nation. Not long after, his Wife poyson'd him. He was a dull foolish Man, always afraid when alone; and a down∣right Slave to his Servants that he made Free, especially to Narcissus and Pallas. And this was the exit of a Prince, that in a narrow com∣pass of time, put to Death 35 Senators and 300 Gentlemen. He died after he had reign'd 13 Years, 8 Months, and 20 days, in the 807th Year of the City, the 55th after the Birth of Christ, M. Acilius Asinius Marcellus, and M. Acilius Aviola being then Consuls. 8. Claudius's Successor was Domitius Nero, whose Mother Agrippina had conceal'd the Death of her Husband, till she confirm'd the Empire to her Son. The beginning of his Reign was at∣tended with such high Panegyricks upon him, that Trajan the Emperor said that none had come up to the due measure of Praise that Nero merited in the first 5 Years of his Reign. But at length his Mother endeavor'd to engross the Empire to herself, whereupon he embar∣qued in a Quarrel with her; and laid aside his Mask. He Poyson'd his Brother Britannicus, as being a Rival. He fell in Love with Poppaea
Sabina Daughter to P. Ollius, and upon her desire order'd his own Mother to be kill'd; and such was the meanness of the Roman Spirits at that time, that both the Senate and People ap∣prov'd of the Execrable Murder. 9. After this piece of wickedness, he stood at nothing. He sent Curbulo to Armenia, where his Arms were successful; and he set upon the Throne Tigranes Grandson to Archelaus the Cappadocian. Next Year the Brittons re∣volted, and Threw down Camalodunum a Ro∣man Colony, and Verulam one of their Freé Towns; and 'twas with difficulty that Suetonius reduc'd 'em. Turpilianus succeeded after Sue∣tonius, and cloak'd his own Lazyness with the specious Name of a Peace. Next Year Al∣bianus succeeded Festus Governor of Judaea who follow'd Felix. About the same time Agrippa gave the Priest-hood to Ananus the Son of that Annas, who not only serv'd in that Office himself, but left 5 Sons that succeeded, in order, to the same post; tho' such a thing was never precedented before. This Ananus Junior, put to Death James the Just, the Brother of our Lord; and by so doing disoblig'd all good Men, as Josephus testifies; and in consideration that the Priests had no Power of Life and Death, Agrippa turn'd him out of his Office. 10. Not long after, Nero married Poppaea, and addicted himself to such wicked Lusts, that he serv'd Pythagoras as a Wife, and Married Sporus another of his filthy Companions, as if she had been a Woman. He set Rome on fire, and in the habit of an Actor sung the destruction of Troy about Streets; and rais'd the first perse∣cution
against the Christians, having arraign'd 'em of all Criminal Actions. While the Prince went on in this fashon like a Monstrous Beast, a Conspiracy was carried on against him by Cn. Piso; but the Conspiracy being detected, the Author of it was put to Death, together with the Poet Lucanus and his Father Mela; wtih his two Uncles namely Annaeus Novatus or Junius Gallio, so call'd from his a∣dopting Father, and L. Annaeus Seneca, Nero's Praeceptor, the History of whose Life is more credibly given by Lipsius than by Dion the Historian. 11. Nero being derided by his Wife Poppaea for Acting kick'd her to Death tho' Big∣belly'd. He wanted neither Luxury nor Vice sufficient to verifie that saying of Domiti∣us, when he receiv'd the news of his Son's Birth, viz. That nothing could spring from him and Agrippina but what would be Execrable and Monstrous, and pernicious to the Republick; for one would think that he was a compound, not only of the Vices of his Family, but of all the Vices of his Nation. He built a Noble and Magnificent House, and laid out a prodigious Sum of Money upon it. He begun likewise to dig thro' the Isthmus of the Peloponnesus. 12. As he pass'd thro' Attica upon his return from the Olympians Games, in which he gave the Grecians proof of his being a strong Singer and a good Coachman; he receiv'd advice from Cestius Gallus Governour of Syria of the Re∣bellion of the Jews; who lying under the guilt of Christ's blood, were almost crush'd by the Tyranny of their Governors, especially of
Florus, who arriv'd to that Pitch of Impudence and Impiety, that he order'd a Herald to pro∣claim throughout the Country, that any Body might Freely Rob and Murder with impunity: designing thereby, to push the Jews to a Re∣bellion, in which he might better cover his own Crimes. 13. By this means the Jews were provok'd to Rebell, and were kill'd in several places; and those of Jerusalem chose Generals to them∣selves in order to an open War. Nero was long undetermin'd who to send against them, but at last pitch'd upon Vespasian who had been brought up among military Affairs from his Infancy, and whom he had but lately re∣mov'd from his presence, for censuring the Prince's Acting, as being unworthy of the Majesty of Nero. But after two Years stay in Greece, as Nero was returning to Italy a Conspi∣racy was Hatch'd against him by C. Julius Vindex, originally a Gaul, of the rank of a Se∣nator, and Ser. Sulpicius Galba. who Govern'd the Province of Tarracona in Spain. Galba ac∣cepted of the Imperial dignity offer'd him by the Soldiers, and march'd straight to Rome. In the mean time Nero was declar'd an Enemy by the Senate, and with great difficulty comply'd with the Advice of his Friends, in ordering Epaphroditus his Libertus to be his executioner. This was the fatal exit of one that had plainly intimated that one day he would sink the whole rank of Senators. He kill'd himself on the 10th of June, when he had reign'd 13 Years, 7 Months and 28 days, in the 32 Year of his Age, the 821 after the building of the City, the 69th of
Christ, in the Consulip of C. Silius Italicus the Poet, and M. Valerius Trachalus. 14. Nero being the Author of the first per∣secution of Christians, Paul the Apostle was Beheaded at Rome in his reign; and Peter was crucified. Linus is said to have succeeded Peter in the Chair of Rome. And Simon Cleo∣pas to James the Just Bishop of Jerusalem. After the Apostles, Euodius was the first that Govern'd the Church of Antiochia, to whom suc∣ceeded Ignatius the Disciple of John the Apostle. In the Chair of Alexandria, Anianus succeeded Mark the Evangelist, in the 8th or 9th Year of Nero's reign. CHAP. III. From the Death of Nero, to the Death of Domitian, the last of the Vespasian Fa∣mily. The Space of 27 Years. 1. AFter the Death of Claudius, the Roman Empire was reduc'd to such wretched Circumstances, that 'twas in the Army's Pow∣er to nominate the Emperor. From whence by an odd Catastrophe the credit and Glory of the imperial Station was Transfer'd from the Ancient Roman Families to Strangers; and Fel∣lows of a Scandalous rank were perfer'd to that dignity. Some of 'em were Spaniards, some deriv'd their Original from Pannonia, Dacia, Dardania, Dalmatia, Gallia, Thracia, and some from Cappadocia.
2. Besides, the Emperors themselves were in a doubtfull condition, for their dignity and safety depended upon the Legions and the Army, and not upon the Senate and People. Insomuch that it may be reckon'd a Wonder, that any were found to engage in so Hazardous and uncertain a post. For between the Death of Caius Caesar who was Murder'd in the pre∣sence of the Senate, and the reign of Charle∣maigne, there were about 30 Emperors kill'd, and 4 more laid violent Hands on themselves. The Soldiers had always something to charge upon them; they were equally uneasy under the good and the bad; and upon the least oc∣casion gather'd into a Body and cut the Throats of those whom they themselves had forc'd to accept the Diadem against their Wills. Indeed the Senate dreaded the Emperor, but the Em∣peror himself was altogether at the beck of a heedless Army. 3. This masterly Humor did chiefly prevail after the Death of Caesar, in those Veteran Legions which he made use of in Gaul, Spain, and Africa: And Cicero regreating the case, says, 'Tis true, these Legions are brave; but the sense of the services they've done in ensuring the Liberty of the People of Rome, and enlarging the Honor of the State, has made 'em too presuming, and in∣spir'd 'em with a humor of Levelling all our Coun∣sels to their force. But Galba, who by this method was prefer'd to be Emperor, did not make good the hopes that were conceiv'd of him, when in a private Station. Indeed had he ne∣ver reign'd, he had been reckon'd worthy of an Empire: for he seem'd rather to be Free from
Vice, than to be entitled to Vertue. His severity procur'd him the Odium of the Army; so that Otho took care to have him slain on the 14th day of January, in the 73 Year of his Age, after he had reign'd 7 Months. 4. Galba being kill'd, M. Salvius Otho was declar'd Emperor by his Soldiers; and in re∣gard that Vitellius was at the same time chosen Emperor by his Army, laid violent hands on himself, in order to prevent the Dammage that might accrue to the State from their mutual Contention. Vitellius usurp'd the Empire, and minded nothing but gratifying his Appetite; he cry'd up Nero in all his Actions, and imita∣ted him as his Pattern. He was so drown'd in his Pleasures, that he would neither speak, nor hear any Person speak of War; Nay, he prohibi∣ted the spreading about of any Reports to that purpose; till at last he was frighted out of that humor by the arrival of Vespasian, who upon the desire of the Legions in Judaea, had made himself Emperor. This Vespasian, had maul'd the Jews in several Encounters, who were miserably divided into many Factions; Nay, he had subdu'd the whole Country, excepting three Castles and Jerusalem. After that, the Armies of several Provinces invited him to take upon him the Government of the Empire, and at last he comply'd with their Requests, and march'd towards Italy. Whereupon Vi∣tellius was affronted, kill'd, and Thrown into the Tiber, in the 57th Year of his Age, after he had reign'd 8 Months and 5 Days. 5. In the mean time some Commotions hap∣pen'd in Germany and Gaul, which at length were
compos'd by the conduct of Petilius Cerealis. The Sarmatians also had cross'd the Ister, and put the Roman Provinces to fire and Sword; but Rubrius Gallus beat 'em off, and kill'd many of 'em. Titus, the Son of Vaspasian, being left by his Father in Judaea, continued to carry on the War, and after a long Siege took Jerusalem. Josephus, who was an Eye-witness, gives us strange Accounts of the Divisions of that miser∣able People; and the Calamity and Extream want they were in. The City and Temple were set in a Flame, on the 8th of September, in the 2d Year of Vespasian, he and his Son Titus being then Consuls; 38 Years after the Death of Christ, whose blood lay heavily upon them. Now Jerusalem was taken six times. viz. by Asochaeus the Egyptian, Nebuchadnezar, Antio∣chus Epiphanes, Pompey, Herod and Sosius, and at last by Titus: and it was twice raz'd, namely, once by Nebuchadnezar, and at last by Titus. Between this 'its last overthrow, and David's first taking the City from the Jebusites, there interven'd 1179 Years, but the City was of 2177 Years standing. 6. The number of the Jewish Prisoners a∣mounted to 97000, and 1100000 besides died in the time of the Siege. Vespasian sold the Ground, and laid upon the People a Yearly Tribute to be pay'd to the Capitol instead of the Temple. At length the War was put to an end by P. Sylva, who took the Castle of Messada; and when the Jews in Egypt and Cyrene rebell'd, their Temple, which Onias had built, was shut up, and the Rebels were presently crush'd, Jonathan their General being taken, who
among others laid a false Accusation against Jo∣sephus the Historian, and thereupon was whip'd and burnt alive. Josephus has carried down the thread of their Wars to this time, and had a Statue erected for him, his Books being thought worthy to be kept in the publick Library at Rome. At last he finish'd his Volumes of Jewish Antiquities is the 15th Year of Dominian, and the 56th of his Age, according to his own re∣lation in the close of that work. 7. The Lex Regia was renew'd on the behalf of Vespasian, by which the Power of the People was transfer'd to Augustus, and his Successors. He made Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, Byzantium, Samos, Cilicia and Comagene, Provinces of the People of Rome. He was entitled to Modera∣tion and Clemency, but reckon'd a little greedy; he was a great Promoter of Liberal Sciences, and was the first that ordered Plublick Sallaries the Teachers. He died of a bloody-flux in the 69 Year of his Age, the 10th of his Reign, the 832 after the building of Rome, and the 79th of Christ, Titus being then Consul, together with his Father, who had been Consul six times before. 8. Titus succeeded his Father on the 23th of May, having been educated along with Britan∣nicus. In his privat capacity he was suspected of Ambition, Luxury, and other Vices; and in a word was look'd upon as another Nero. But when he became Emperor he dispell'd all their Jealousies by the agreeableness of his Con∣versation, and by a Lucky Turn became the Darling of Human kind. He died to the infinite loss and Grief of the whole Empire, after he had reign'd two Years and 20 days, in the 42d
Year of his Age, the 834th after the building of the City, and the 81st of our Lord, M. Plautius Sylvanus and M. Annius Verus being then Consuls. 9. After Titus, Domitian his Brother succeed∣ed, who was deem'd for killing him, tho' he had formerly obtain'd a Pardon for designing the same Crime. He resembled rather Nero, Caligula, or Tiberius, than his Father and Brother. At first his cruelty was only display'd upon the Fliees which he us'd to run through with a Bod∣kin, but afterwards he laid aside his modesty and became very cruel; and Antony being fretted by his Affronts and Vices, rebel'd in up∣per Germany. Domitian fought successfullly with the Chattians, Dacians, and Sarmatians, and tri∣umph'd over them. At last being hated by all, he was kill'd by his own Servants, on the 17th of September, in the 55 Year of his Age; the 15th of his Reign, the 849th after the building of the City, and the 96 of our Lord, T. Ful∣vius Valens and C. Antistius Vetus being then Consuls. In his time, Statius Juvenal, and Martial, the Poets, flourish'd. 10. Dionysius the Arcopagite was made first Bishop of Athens by the Apostle Paul. After Linus the Martyr, Cletus or Anacletus and Cle∣mens succeeded in the See of Rome; Abilius succeeded Anianus first Bishop of Alex∣andria; then Andrew the Apostle, Stachys, One∣simus, Polycarpus and Eleutherius, who was chosen in the 2d Year of Domitian. Domitian was the Author of the 2d Persecution of the Christi∣ans in which John the Apostle was banish'd to the Isle of Patmos, where he writ his Revela∣tions;
and in that Book makes mention of the Nicolaites; for many heresies prevail'd in the Church at that time. Eusebius would have Simon Magus to be the first Head of the He∣reticks. However not only the Nicolaites, but the Cerinthians, Menander, Basilides, and their Disciples, and Carpocrates with the Gnosticks, his Retainers; and the Ebionites, did then disturb the Church of God.
CHAP IV. From the Death of Domitian to the Death of Pertinax and the Sale of the Roman Empire. The space of 97 Years. 1. 'TIs said that Domitian Dream'd that a Golden Head and Neck grew out of his Shoulders; which was plainly verified by the Virtue and modesty of the succeeding Princes, tho' they were Forreigners. Next to Domitian was Cocceius Nerva who joyn'd the People's Liberty to his Government, which none had done before him. He adopted M. Ʋlpius Trajanus and scarce liv'd 3 Months after, for by a violent fit of Passion he was thrown into a Fever, of which he died on the 26th of January, after he had liv'd 65 Years, and reign'd one Year 4 Months and 9 Days; in the 851 Year, after the building of the City, and the 98 of our Lord; Trajan being then a 2d time, and he a 9th time Con∣sul. 2. The Emperor Trajan reduc'd the Dacians twice. He went upon an Expedition into Armenia and Parthia; and the Parthians surrender'd themselves to him, from whence he was Sirnam'd Parthicus. He extended the
Limits of the Roman Empire very far. But when he wag'd War with the Church of Christ, his Interest began to decline, and most of the People he had subdued, rebell'd against him, es∣pecially in Armenia and Mesopotamia. The Parthi∣ans also rejected the King he gave 'em. Upon his return to Italy, the Jews rebell'd in several Places, and committed horrid Murders, and great Earthquakes happen'd. At last, he died in Cilicia of a Bloodyflux, after he had reign'd 19 Years, 6 Months, and 15 Days, in the 870 Year of the City, and the 117 of our Lord. In his Reign Plutarch, Lucian, Pliny the 2d, Suetonius, L. Florus and Cor. Tacitus flourish'd. 3. Trajan was follow'd by Aelius Adrianus Son to his Cusin German, who was perfer'd by the Interest of Plotina the Emperess. He conquer'd the Jews, who had rebell'd upon the account of a Temple built to Jupiter Olympius at Jerusalem, which he had allow'd to be inhabited. He visited Gaul, Germany, Brittain, and Spain; then Mauritania, Parthia, Asia and Greece, and return'd by Sicily to Rome. Then he went the 2d time to Africa and return'd to Rome; and after that went thro' Greece and Asia to Arabia and from thence to Egypt. In Adrian's time the Church under∣went some persecution, which was after∣wards taken away upon the Remonstrances of Quadratus and Aristides, by Letters sent from the Emperor to Minutius Fundanus pro∣consul of Asia, which are publish'd by Justin Martyr in his 2d Apology. This Emperor
was extream curlous, and a great pursuer of Knowledge, but very illnatur'd to Men of better Learning. He died of a dropsie which threw him into a violent fit of Anger, on the 11th of July, after he had reign'd 2 Years and 11 Months, and liv'd 62 Years, in the 981st Year after the building of Rome, and the 138 of Christ, Sulpitius Camerinus and Quintius Magnus being then Consuls. 4. There flourish'd in his time Ptolomaeus of Alexandria the Prince of Astronomers, A. Gellius or Agellius, Justinus the Epitomiser of Trogus, and several other Learned Men. The Lawyers in his time were Alburnius Valens, Tuscianus, Vindius Verus, Ʋlpius Mar∣cellus, Arrianus, Tertullianus, Salvius Julianus, L. Volusius Metianus. Adrian did first adopt L. Verus who died in the Year preceding his Death, on the first of January, being the first Day of his 2d Consulship, L. Verus had a Son call'd Lucius, and was order'd to adopt Marcus; but these two being very Young, Adrian himself adopted Antoninus whom he order'd to adopt Lucius and Marcus. So he call'd a Senate, and recommended Antoninus to them. 5. Antoninus was Sirnam'd Pius, with re∣ference to his regular conversation. He courted Peace, and endeavor'd to oblige eve∣ry one: and by the means of his humanity and letters kept the forreign Kings and Peo∣ple in order. He was an excellent Philoso∣pher,
insomuch that he was call'd Cymini Sector. He was kind to the Christians upon the remonstrances of Justin Martyr and some others; and Publish'd an Edict on their be∣half. He died on the 7th of March, having reign'd 22 Years 7 Months and 26 Days, in the 1 Year of the 235 Olympiad, the 914th after the building of Rome, and the 161st of out Lord. In his time, besides several Law∣yers and Justin a Christian Philosopher, there flourish'd Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, Galen a Physician of Pergamus, and Aelianus the Historian. 6. Antoninus Pius was follow'd by Marcus the Son of Annius Verus, who was Sirnam'd the Philosopher, and took in L. Aurelius Verus his Cousin, to be Partner with him in the Empire. This was the first time that two with equal and joynt Authority Govern'd the Romans: But they were of very different tempers. Lucius carried on the Parthian War with success. Marcus manag'd things at home: But at last upon the Death of Verus, got the whole Empire to himself, and Fought successfully against the Germans. He likewise defeated the Marcomanni, Sarmatae, Vandali and Quadi, who invaded Pannonia. For at that time most of the Nations from Illyricum to Gaul had con∣spir'd against the Romans. The 4th Persecu∣tion of the Christians was rather owing to Verus than to Marcus. When the Roman Army was almost choak'd with Thirst in an expedition against the Quadi, the Legio
Melitina which consisted of Christians, ob∣tain'd rain by Vertue of their Prayers, and carried the Victory by the Thunder and Lightning that Heaven pour'd down upon their Enemy, from whence they were Sirnam'd Fulminatrix. 7. This mov'd Marcus to favor the Christ∣ians; and to write Letters to the Senat and People, vouching for the truth of the Story. Aurelius Victor writes that this Emperor gave the Freedom of the City to all the Subjects of the Empire; but others attribute that Action to Antoninus Pius. Now the Romans us'd to present their Subjects with 4 Degrees of Privilege, viz. Jus Latij, Jus Coloniae, Jus Municipij, and Jus Civitatis. of which see our Institution of History. However Marcus died at Vendibona on the 17 of March, in the 58 Year of his age, and the 19th of his Reign, the 932d after the building of the City, and the 180th of our Lord; Arrius Praesens being then a 2d time, and Aelius Gordianus the first time, Consul. 8. After Marcus Aurelius an excellent Prince, Commodus Antoninus his profligat son succeeded, upon whose solicitation some allege the Father was kill'd by his Physicians. For some time he made use of the Counsellors that his Father had recommended to him, but soon after Listen'd to Flatterers, and fell in with scandalous and Naughty Measures. He employ'd Generals to conquer the Mores and Dacians, and to Pacifie Pannonia, Ger∣many
and Brittain, while himself spent his Life in all manner of Filthyness and cruelty. At last a list of the Names of those whom he had prick'd down for to be put to Death, fell into the Hands of some, who kill'd him on the last Day of the Julian Year, in the 22d Year of his age, the 13 of his reign, the 945th after the building of Rome, and the 192d of Christ; himself being then a 7th time, and Helvius Pertinax a Third time Consul. 9. After Commodus, his Son Helvius Per∣tinax succeeed, whom the Assassins had cho∣sen, before the publication of the Emperor's Death. Helvius was unwilling to take the Em∣pire upon him. He gave great hopes of an ex∣cellent Prince. But by discouraging the Raps and Violence committed by the Soldiers, in∣curr'd their displeasure; and they calling to mind the Liberty that was indulg'd 'em under Commodus, fell upon him and slew him, on the 85th Day of his reign, in the 69 Year of his age, Q. Sosius Falcon and C. Julius Erucius Clarus being then Consuls. 10. John the Apostle died at Ephesus in the reign of Trajan, Simeon Cleophas being crucified, was follow'd by Justus Judaeus, Zachaeus, Tobias, Benjamin, and John. In the 11th Year of Trajan, Alexander succeeded Euaristus Bishop of Rome, who suffer'd Mar∣tyrdom; and when Alexander underwent the same fate Cistus succeedcd him; then fol∣low'd in order Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pias and
Anicetus. From the Death of Christ, to the 18th Year of Adrian, there were 18 Bishops in the See of Jerusalem, and all of 'em Jews. Marcus was the first Gentile Bishop. After Abilius, Cerdo began to Govern the Church of Alexandria in the first Year of Trajan, who was follow'd by Primus, Justus, Eumenes, Marcus, Celadion, Agrippas, Julianus and De∣metrius, In the See of Antioch Ignatius the Martyr was follow'd by Heros, and he by Cornelius in the 12 Year of Adrian. 11. About the 110 Year of Christ, The∣bulis was the first Patron of Heresy in the Church of Jerusalem. At the same time, the Church was disturb'd by the Ophites, then by the Caini, Cerdon, Valentinus, Marcion, Marcel∣lina, Montanus; the Secundiani, Ptolomaei, Marcosij, Colobasij, Heracleonitae, Archontici, Encratitae, Severiani, Marcionitae, Pepuziani, Artotyritae, Atogi, Adamitae, Theodotus, Arte∣mon, Marcianus and Noetus.
CHAP. V. From the Death of Pertinax, and the exposing of the Kingdom to sale, to the Murder of Maximinus, the first Emperor that was con∣firm'd without the consent of the Senate. The space of 45 Years. 1. PErtinax being slain, the Soldiers expos'd the Kingdom to sale, and one Vidius Juli∣anus, a Lawyer of the Consular Dignity and a very rich Man, purchas'd it at a great rate. At the same time L. Septimius Severus reign'd in Pannonia; he was originally an African, an active Sagacious Man. Upon the news of the Murder of Pertinax he was saluted Emperour by his own Soldiers, and invaded Italy. Then the Senate be∣ing call'd, adjudg'd the Empire to him, and death to Julian, after he had reign'd 7 Months and pay'd an over-purchase for his Death. 2. Severus being made Emperor resolv'd to crush Niger Governour of Syria his Rival: And in or-order to avoid the inconvenience of leaving an E∣nemy behind him, wheedled Clodius Albinus with the Title of Caesar; this was a Person of noble de∣scent, who govern'd Brittain and affected the Prin∣cipality: However Severus pleas'd him with that Title till such time as he had routed Niger in the East, and upon his return defeated him likewise. He invaded Arabia but did not compass his end; but upon his return march'd into Parthia and took Ctesiphontes the Metropolis. He subdu'd the Jews in Syria and conquer'd Abagatus King of the Persians. He fortify'd Britain by running a
Wall a cross the Island to the Sea; and having subdued the People of that Country, at last en∣ded his Days at York. This Emperor was ad∣mirably well vers'd in Military Affairs and seem'd to match the most renowned Atchievements of the greatest Emperours. He rais'd himself from the lowest degree to the highest pitch of Ho∣nour, and upon his Death-Bed was wont to have this Expression in his Mouth, I have been all things and nothing avails me. He dy'd on the fourth of February, after he had reign'd 18 Years and liv'd 66, in the 964th Year of the City, and the 211th of Christ, in the Consulship of Q. E∣pidius Rufus and Pomponius Bassus. 3. Severus left 2 Sons, as joynt Successors, namely, Antoninus Bassianus who was call'd Ca∣racalla from a Barbarian Habit that he gifted to the People, and Geta. But Antoninus kill'd his Brother in the Bosom of his Mother, for he had always been at variance with him ev'n in his Fa∣ther's Life-time. Then he display'd his cruelty upon all the rest, and made War against the Par∣thians and Armenians, and is said to have kill'd Papinianus president to the Praetorium, because he wou'd not justify the Parricide. About this time there flourish'd several Lawyers, most of 'em Papinianus's Scholars. At length Opilius Macri∣nus, being afraid that Antoninus had a design up∣on him, made away with the Emperour on the 9th Day of April, after he had reign'd 6 Years and 2 Months, in 1st Year of the 249th Olympiad, the 970th after the building of the City, the 217th of Christ, Brutius Praesens and Extricatus being then Consuls.
4. After the Death of Bassianus the Throne was vacant for 2 Days; then the Empire was giv'n to Macrinus, who made Peace with the Parthians, and wrap'd himself up in Luxury and Softness at Antiochia, insomuch that the Soldiers contemn'd him, and were induc'd by the promises of Maesa Sister to Julia Severus's Wife to give the Empire to Bassianus his Grandson by Soaemis his Daughter. This Bassianus was Priest of the Sun, and from his God was Sirnam'd Heliogabalus, but was the worst of all the Emperours. Upon the Sollicitation of his Grandmother he adopted Ale∣xianus, his Cousin, and when he had reign'd 5 Years and liv'd 18, was slain for his Scandalous way of living. 5. Alexianus or Alexander, being modestly e∣ducated by his Grandmother Maesa and his Mo∣ther Mammaea, became a stout Man. In the 4th Year of his Reign, Artaxerxes the King of Persia outted the Parthians of their Kingdom, and made as if he wou'd recover the ancient Empire. But Alexianus routed him in a Bloody Battel, and likewise recover'd Mesopotamia which Heliogabalus had lost. He carried on a War in Mauritania, Illy∣ricum and Armenia, by Deputies. Then he march'd in Person against the Grecians who were laying Gallia wast, and was kill'd by his own Soldiers at Mentz on the 4th of October, after he had liv'd 29 Years and reign'd 13, in the 988 Year of the City and the 235 of Christ, in the Consulship of L. Catilius Severus and L. Ragoni∣us Quintianus. 6. Alexander was follow'd by Maximinus the Thracian, by whose contrivance he was kill'd. This Man was first a Cowherd, then a Soldier, and at
last was declar'd Emperour by his own Soldiers. He was a prodigious big Man, and took care to cram his Belly accordingly. He bended all his force against Germany, where he burnt the Villa∣ges far and near, cut off a great number of his E∣nemies, and took a great many more, and en∣rich'd his Soldiers. Having reduc'd Germany he return'd to Sirmium, and design'd not only to at∣tack the Sarmatians, but to subdue all the Coun∣tries to the Northward to the very Sea-side, when he was surpriz'd with the news that some had slain the Carthaginian Governour, whom they ha∣ted for his extraordinary Parts, and oblig'd Gordia∣anus the Proconsul, a Man of 80 Years of Age, to take upon him the Purple Dignity. 7. The Senate confirm'd the Action, and de∣clar'd against Maximinus, as being an Enemy. But Gordianus unseasonably gave way to privat feuds, and by that means disoblig'd Capellianus Governour of Mauritania, and when he found himself like to be worsted by him, first kill'd his Son and then strangl'd himself with a Halter, af∣ter he had been invested with the Dignity 36 Days. In the mean time Maximinus marches to Rome in order to be reveng'd on the Senate: upon the news whereof the Senatours declar'd Maxi∣mus and Balbinus Emperours, and gave 'em the charge of the War against Maximinus. Maximi∣nus besieg'd Aquileja, and as he lay asleep in his Tent, was kill'd together with his young Son by his own Soldiers. This was the Author of the 6th Persecution of the Christians, and the first Empe∣rour that sway'd the Scepter without the aproba∣tion of the Senate. He dy'd after he had reign'd
3 Years in the 991st Year of the City, and the 238th of Christ. 8. In the 2d Year of Marcus Aurelius, Anice∣tus Bishop of Rome was follow'd by Soter, and afterwards by Eleutherius Victor. In the first Year of Severus, Zephorinus succeeded Victor, and after him in a successive Order, Callisthus, Urbanus, Ponti∣anus, and Fabianus whom Damasus gives in for the 20th Bishop of Rome. Some reckon up 13 Bi∣shops in the Chair of Jerusalem from Marcus to Narcissus. When Narcissus went off Dios suc∣ceeded, then Germanion and after him Gordius, who govern'd the Church when Narcissus return'd and was restor'd to his Dignity. But in regard that his old Age render'd him uncapable for busi∣ness; Alexander was made his Suffragant, and af∣ter his Death became Bishop. In the Chair of Antioch, Cornelius was follow'd by Theophilus, Maximinus, Serapian, Asclepiades about the 1st Year of Caracalla, and Philetus. About the 11th Year of Alexander after Demetrius, Heraclas be∣gan to govern the Alexandrian Church. In the time of Severus there flourish'd Tertullian a Car∣thaginian Presbyter, Clemens of Alexandria O∣rigen's Praeceptor, and Minutius Faelix.
CHAP. VI. From the Death of Maximinus to the Monarchy of Constantine the first Christian Emperour, who translated the Seat of the Empire to Byzantium, or Constantinople, a City in Thrace. The space of 86 Years. 1. THE Senat and People of Rome were over∣joy'd with the News of Maximinus's Fate. And as for the new Emperors, every thing succeeded according to their Wishes, and wou'd have continued so to do, had not their mutual Jealousie and Feuds stood in the way. For the Lifeguard-men, who always hated those whom the Senat chose, finding that they were always quarrelling with one another, met with an op∣portunity of executing their Designs upon them. 2. They were kill'd after they had govern'd 2 Years, and then the Government was put into the Hands of Gordianus a Youth, who, in the 4th Year of his Empire, march'd thro' Maesia and Thrace against the Persians, and defeated the E∣nemies of the Romans in those places. From thence he march'd thro' Syria to Antiochia, which was then in the Persian Hands. There he had frequent Battels, and conquer'd Sapor King of the Persians; so that the Persians, who were almost formidable to Italy, were thus confin'd within their own Territories. At last, in the 6th Year of his Empire, he was circumvented and killed by Philip the Pretorian Governour, who had rais'd a Mutiny among the Soldiers. But 'tis said that all his Assassins murdered themselves with
the same Swords with which they attack'd him. 3. Gordianus was follow'd by M. Julius Phi∣lippus an Arabian of Trachonitis, Son to a fa∣mous Captain of the Robbers. But after 5 years he underwent the same Fate. For Quintus Tra∣janus Decius being sent to appease a Mutiny a∣mong the Soldiers, received the Purple Dignity from the Soldiers, and routed and kill'd Philip in a Battel at Verona, who was then carrying on a War by Legates with the Scyphi that infested the Roman Provinces. Decius being confirm'd in the Empire by the Consent of the Senators, first appeas'd the Commotions of Gaule, and then ha∣ving recommended the Care of the Republick to the Senate, went with their Consent, along with his Son, upon an Expedition against the Scythians, who infested Thrace, and several other Roman Pro∣vinces both by Sea and Land. He had the better of 'em in several Battels; and, having forc'd up his E∣nemy into a narrow place, had certainly come off with the total Victory, had not Gallus-Hostilianus Governour of Maesia discover'd his Designs to the Enemy; by which means it came to pass, that the Father and Son were circumvented and kill'd. This Emperor was the Author of the 7th Persecu∣tion of the Church of God; and reign'd 2 Years and a half. 4. Vibius Gallus Hostilianus being saluted Em∣peror by one Legion, and the remains of the Ar∣my, made a Peace with the Scythians, promising to pay them a yearly Tribute; which was an ig∣nominious and scandalous thing, and unsuitable to the Majesty of the Romans. By this means the Scythians became bolder, and violated the
Peace, in plundering Dardania, Thrace, Macedo∣nia, and Asia, and pillaging and razing several Cities. Afterwards many follow'd the Scythian Example, some in declaring War, and some in rebelling against the Romans. 5. The Parthians having routed and put to flight Tiridates their own King, penetrated into Syria, and possess'd themselves of Armenia. The Scythians indeed became very insolent under Suc∣cess; but Aemilianus Governour of Maesia having animated his own Men with large Promises, and hopes of Reward, routed them upon the Borders of Sarmatia, and pursu'd them a great way into their own Countrey: Whereupon the Army declar'd him Emperor. Then Gallus march'd against him, but was kill'd, together with his Son Volusianus, his Partner in the Empire, after he had reign'd one Year. 6. In the mean time the other Army which was then in the Alps, bestow'd the Empire upon Valerian, a Man of a Noble Descent. Upon the news whereof, Aemilianus's Soldiers, resolving to avoid trouble, slew their own Emperour, and stood for Valerian; who, after he was made Em∣peror, sent Letters to the Senate, engaging to re∣scue Thrace and Mesopotamia out of the Hands of the Enemies, to recover Armenia, and to beat off the Enemies of the Romans on all hands. But in the Persian War, thro' the Negligence of some of his Captains, he was taken Prisoner by Sapor, King of the Persians: For so it pleased God to resent the Death of his own People, against whom Valerian had carry'd on the 8th Persecution. Sa∣por's Neighbouring Princes and Confederate Na∣tions intreated him to deliver up the Royal Pri∣soner,
remonstrating to him, that the Romans al∣ways made the most vigorous Resistance when they were worsted. But all these Remonstrances could not prevail with him; for, it's said, he made use of him as a Foot-stool when he mount∣ed his Horse; and at last flea'd the Skin off him, and so left him to end his Days in Misery. 7. Valerian being taken Prisoner, his Son Gallienus succeeded, and put a stop to the Per∣secution, that his Father had begun against the Christians; but the Romans did not get off so ea∣sily from the Vengeance that follow'd the shed∣ding of so much innocent Blood. For Gallienus neglected the Affairs of the Republick, and gave himself wholly to his Pleasure; insomuch that the Soldiers chose new Emperors to themselves in the Provinces, to the number of 30 Tyrants; but they all came to nothing, partly by Gallienus's Opposition, and partly by their own mutual Dif∣ferences. At last, in the Reign of Gallienus, the Goths possess'd themselves of Thrace, laid Mace∣donia waste, and besieg'd Thessalonica, and the Scy∣thians invaded Bithynia Cappadocia and Asia, and advancing from the Euxine Sea to the Ister, at∣tack'd the Roman Corporations. 8. But the Emperor was so lazy, that when he heard of the revolt of the Provinces and of the Publick Calamity, he always answer'd in a ridi∣culing and contemptuous manner, as if the Re∣publick cou'd have subsisted and he maintain'd his Dignity, without any inconvenience upon that account. By this his contemptuous Carriage he gain'd many Enemies both at home and abroad. Besides, the Scythians and Goths, and a great ma∣ny other Nations join'd with them, conspir'd
against the People of Rome to the number of 320000; but Flavius Claudius at last defeated them in Maesia and several other Places. 9. For Gallienus was kill'd after he had reign'd 6 Years along with his Father and 9 by himself; and Claudius succeeded him, who was originally a Dalmatian, a Man of extraordinary Virtue, and one that merited a longer Life; for he was kill'd at Sirmium when he had scarce reign'd 2 Years. Quintilius his Brother was put into his Room, but he being too good and too grave a Man, his Soldiers kill'd him about 7 Days after. Then Valerius Aulerianus reign'd. He had been employ'd by Claudius to expell the Goths out of Thrace, and after his Death was invested with the Purple Dignity by the Soldiers. This Valeri∣us wag'd War with the Insubres very successfully, and after he had conquer'd the Goths march'd to Rome, and having punish'd several Persons for their Seditious attempts, undertook a War in order to recover the Provinces in Syria and to the Eastward, which Zenobia a Woman of Courage and Resolution was then possess'd of, as being Guardian to her own Children, the Provinces be∣ing remitted to her care by Odenatus her Hus∣band, who made a great Figure in the time of Gal∣lienus. 10. Wherever Caesar went, he routed the Ene∣mies of the People of Rome, in Illyricum, Thrace and several other Places, and at last when he came to the Queen's Country, after some doubt∣ful and dangerous Engagements, routed the Army and took her Prisoner, notwithstanding that she had made a very vigorous resistance as confiding in the assistance of the Persians and Armenians.
The chief Town of that Country was Palmyra, the Citizens whereof rebell'd after Caesar's return into Europe, and kill'd the Governor and set up a Garrison of their own. Whereupon the Emperor return'd, took the City, raz'd it to the Ground, and put all to the Sword without sparing either Age or Sex. After that he reduc'd Aegypt which had then revolted, and added Gallia once more to the Roman Dominions. This done, he made a triumphal Procession at Rome, and then march'd thro' Illyricum, and wag'd War with the Persians; but upon his Journey was kill'd by his own Do∣mesticks. 11. After his Death there was an Interregnum for 8 Months, both the Senate and the Soldiers mutually declining the election. At length Taci∣tus was elected, who in the 6th Month dy'd at Tarsus of a Feaver. Upon his Death-bed the Senators desir'd him not to leave the Succession to his own Children, but to some Man of Probity and Virtue. The Man he pitch'd upon was Pro∣bus, who being approv'd of both by the Army and the Senate, master'd Gallia, and defeated the German Francks who inhabited it, in several Bat∣tels. 12. In Illyricum he conquer'd the Sarmatians and several other Nations, and as he pass'd thro' Thrace retain'd all the Barbarians by the Glory of the Romans, and the greatness of their Atchieve∣ments. He reduc'd Asia, and the sole fame of his Actions mov'd the Parthian King to sue for Peace. He made a Peace with the Persians, and as he return'd from Persia to Thrace, translated the conquer'd Forreigners to the Roman Ground, some of whom prov'd true, and others rebell'd,
but most of 'em were afterwards crush'd, and the rebellions which happen'd in France Spain and Britany were likewise quell'd. After that he march'd thro' Illyricum in order to wage War with the Persians, and upon the Road was per∣fidiously murder'd by his own Men. 13. At this time the Republick was in a flou∣rishing Condition. The People were every where peaceable and easy, insomuch that Probus hap∣pen'd once to say that he had no occasion either for Legions or Garrisons, and it was that saying that push'd on the Soldiers to fall upon him. Next to him M. Aurelius Carus succeeded. He was of Harbon a gallick Province. He suppress'd the Sarmatians, who became insolent upon the Death of Probus and threatned Italy. After that he march'd against the Persians, master'd Meso∣potamia, took Ctesiphon and Colchis the noblest Cities in Parthia. After that design'd to carry his conquests further, but was kill'd by a Thunder∣bolt in his own Tent near the River Tigris. 14. His Younger Son Numerianus was along with him; his other Son Carinus was Governor of Gallia. Numerianus return'd to the West, and as he sat in a Chair was kill'd by Arius A∣per his Father-in-Law; and Valerius Diocletianus succeeded him; whom Carinus engag'd in se∣veral Battels, but at last was defeated, and mur∣der'd by his own Men for his Petulancy. 15. Dioclesian finding himself beset with Sedi∣tions and Troubles, took in Maximian for his Collegue. Maximian compos'd the Commotions of Africa; as Dioclesian did those of Egypt by putting to Death the Heads of the Rebellion.
He likewise recover'd Brittain in the 20th Year after its revolt, and in order to fortify the State of the Republick and prevent the Commotions that might arise upon adjusting the Succession of the Empire, adopted Galerius. In like manner Maximian adopted Constantius Chlorus. 16. Dioclesian sent Galerius against Narses the Persian King; but the expedition was so unluc∣ky, that he lost the greatest part of his Army. Then the Emperor order'd him to rally and revive the War, whereupon he routed the Enemy, and carried his Conquests to that Hand further than any Emperor, excepting Trajan. He took Ctesi∣phon, master'd all Assyria, and recover'd the 5 Provinces beyond the Tigris, that had revolted in the time of Trajan. 17. Dioclesian having put things to rights in Asia, return'd to Europe, where the Scythians, Sarmatians, Alani, Bastarnae, Carpi, Catti and Quadi were then living peaceably. He rais'd the 10th and horrid Persecution against the Christi∣ans. Then both he, and Maximian upon his de∣sire, resign'd the Crown; and made Constantius Emperor of France, Spain, Italy and Africa; and Galerius Emperor of Illyrium, Greece, and Asia. 18. Constantius died at York in the third Year of his Reign. Galerius adopted Severus and Max∣imian his Sister's Sons. In the mean time Max∣entius was declar'd Emperor by the Life-guards at Rome. Maximian slew Severus, and took in Licinius to be his Colleague. Between these two there arose great Commotions, and thereupon the Roman Noblemen invited Constantin the Son of Constantius to rescue the City from the Tyranny of Maxentius. Constantin had been kept as an
Hostage by Gallerius at Rome, but escap'd out of Custody and was then in France. He march'd in∣to Italy with part of the Forces, and at last ad∣vanc'd towards Rome, and cut off Maxentius's Army, himself being drown'd in the River as he fled. 19. All the other Enemies of the Church ha∣ving come to an untimely and deserved end, the Empire was devolv'd upon Constantine and Lici∣nius. But afterwards a War broke out between the two Emperours, in which Licinius was defeat∣ed; whereupon he was by universal consent ba∣nish'd to Thessalonica, where he was afterwards kill'd by Constantine's orders for carrying on turbulent designs. Some write that the War was occasion'd by Licinius his persecuting of the Christians, notwithstanding the repeated advice and intreaty of Constantine to the contrary. For when Constantin came to the Throne, he embrac'd the true Religion, and became a Refuge and Rock of Security to the Christians, who were then so much harass'd, and e'en almost totally cut off. 20. By this time the Roman Empire was decre∣pit thro' Age, and groan'd under its own Weight. When it was of such a sound jolly Constitution that cou'd have secur'd its Health, Constantin ob∣lig'd it to shift its residence to a sickly Place, where it was seiz'd with a fatal Distemper. The Emperour translated the Seat of the Empire to Byzantium a City in Thrace, which he chri∣sten'd New-Rome, and invested with equal Titles of Honour. It was by this means that the Em∣pire was divided into the Eastern and the We∣stern, and so its strength began to dwindle and decay. The occasion of the division was, that
Constantin at his Death gave distinct Provinces to his 3 Sons. 21. Fabianus Bishop of Rome was follow'd by Cornelius after 1 Year; Cornelius having suf∣fer'd Martyrdom Lucius succeeded; then Ste∣phanus, who was put to Death by the order of Valerian, then Sextus who was beheaded at the same time that Stephen the Deacon suffer'd Mar∣tyrdom, then Dionysius, then Faelix, Eutychianus, Caius, Marcellinus, Marcellus, Eusebius, Milti∣ades, and Sylvester who was Bishop of Rome in the time of the Council of Nice. 22. After Alexander, Mazebenes govern'd the Church of Jerusalem, and after him in order Hy∣meneus, Zambdas, Hermon, and Macarius. In the Chair of Antioch, Zebinus succeeded Phile∣tus; after him Babylas, Fabius, Demetrianus, and Paulus Samosatenus, who deny'd the divinity of Christ, and was thereupon excommunicated and depos'd in the second Senate held upon that occasion in the Reign of Valerian. The Fa∣thers elected Domnus to succeed him; after him succeeded Timeus, Gryllus, Derotheus, Tyrannus, Vitalis, Phisogonus, and Eustathius who fell in with the Sabellian Heresy and was condemn'd by an act of the Council of Antiochia. 25. In the Church of Alexandria, Heraclas was follow'd by Dionysius the Disciple of Origen, Max∣iminus, Theonas, Petrus who was crown'd with Martyrdom in the Reign of Dioclesian, Achillas, and Alexander who was a Member of the Council of Nice, and by his curious Discourses of the sacred Trinity gave occasion to Arius one of his own Presbyters to start his Heresy. In the 5th Year of Philip, Cyprianus succeeded to Donatus Bishop of
Carthage, who was banish'd oftner than once. In the 4th Year of Valerian, Origen dy'd; who was a Man of extraordinary Wit, a severe Life, unweary'd application and wonderful Learning; but was tainted with some impure Doctrins, as S. Augustine and others have demonstrated. 26. Manes a Persian, from whom the Maniche∣ans deriv'd their name, began to propagate his Heresy in the 1st Year of Probus, being the 277 of Christ. But his opinion did not make so great a Stir, as the wicked advances of Arius, which were not only condemn'd in several Synods, but in a Solemn Council call'd by Constantin's order at Nice a Town in Bithynia, where 318 Bishops were present, that came not only out of Europe and Asia, but likewise from Egypt and Libya. This Council was held on the 19th of June. Nosias was president and sign'd the Canons first; but no creditable Author makes mention of more than 20 Canons. Thus did the Church of God triumph not only over the Worship of Idols and Barba∣rous Persecutions, but likwise over Heresies. . FINIS.
