L1440 R226718 99899533 154035
A LETTER From AMSTERDAM To M. C. in LONDON. Discovering the taking of Sr. Thomas Armstrong With the narrow Escape of My Lord Gray and Mr. Eerguson at LEYDEN IN HOLLAND. WE live in an Age not over prone to admire and take notice of any Instances of Divine Providence either in our Preservation from dangers, our Deli∣verance out of them, or our falling into them, for so great is the security of some Men that they are unwilling to apprehend any danger till they fall into it, and if they escape for a time will hardly believe that they were ever in it. Such is the Case of this ungrateful Rebel, an Arch Traytor, Sir Tho. Armstrong, who having escaped the hands of Justice for a time thought himself secure, but the hand of Providence that has in Mercy protected our most Gracious Soveraign from all Wicked Devices, hath at last in Justice lay'd hold on this desperate Renegade, and will in time bring him to just and Exemplary Pu∣nishment. The nature and manner of his being taken, being then my self at Leydon the same day, I will Discover as short as I can. Sir Thomas Armstrong with the Lord Grey and Mr. Ferguson hav∣ing lain some Months at Berlin & being suspected upon the ac∣count of their Privacy, we had notice sent by Juan van Farrenberg, at whose House they then lay, of some suspected Persons, English
Men, that had lain in his House for some time by the name of Bowman, Bethel and Jekiel. Mr. Chudly, his Majesties Envoy at Amsterdam, having notice thereof made his Application to the States for a Warrant to seize them which was granted, but before they got to Berlin (whe∣ther they had private Information or their Fears suggested) they were remov'd, and got to Bremond, there they stayed a while, and might have stayed longer had not their zeal or curiosity to see the Duke of Monmouth in Brussels, engaged them to take a Pil∣gramage into Fanders. After this they came to Amsterdam, where having supply'd them∣selves with Trowling Money (for the Bully at this time had thrown away his false Dice) they went to Leyden which is 12 miles from Amsterdam. Here they had not been 3 days when the Envoy having again notice of it procur'd a Warrant for the secureing of them. Whither they had any Information, or suspected any thing, the Lord Grey and Ferguson made their escapes. But Sir Thomas Armstrong resolving to Dye upon the spot before he was taken ad∣ventured to stay longer. The Persons sent to seize him, being so Commanded by the En∣voy, were resolved to take him if possible alive. For which Cause they made no attempt upon his Lodging, but having notice, he was to go by Water, they posted themselves for his Reception at the place where he was to take Boat. Where after they had wait∣ed 4 days, at last they spyed him coming, who was no sooner in the Boat but 4 of them leapt in after him and the rest in another Boat so secur'd him that he cou'd neither do them nor himself any preju∣dice, though he several times declar'd he wou'd sonner be kill'd then taken, drew out his Knife to Stab himself, and attempted se∣veral times to throw himself over Board. Having thus secured and prevented him from doing any mis∣cheif to himself, they soon made to Rotterdam, where one of his Majesties Yats was ready to receive them. On Board of which he is now coming to London fast bound in Chains for fear of doing Violence to himself, where you may expect him in a short time, and it is expected the Lord Grey and Ferguson will follow in a few days after, they being now in close search of them. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for J. S. 1684.
