N13 E354_3 R201092 99861657 159877
A LETTER FROM New-Castle, CONTAINING The substance of severall Speechcs made by his Majesty, AND By Duke Hammilton, the Earle of Lennerick, and the Earle of Calender: With divers passages of their proceedings for the setling of both Kingdomes, and disposing of his Majesty. Septemb. 14. 1646. Examined by the Originall Papers, and printed and published according to ORDER, and for generall satisfaction. LONDON, Printed for E. E. the 15. of September, Anno Dom. 1646.
A LETTER FROM Newcastle Published for Generall satisfaction. SIR, THE King being returned from Tinmouth Castle, Wednesday the 2. Instant at night, His Majesty came to his Quarters in Newcastle; Monsieur Belliver, the French Em∣bassadour still with him, we heare that Montrill is dispatched by the Estates of France, but he is not yet returned hither, whether he goes first to meet
the Lord Digby or not I cannot advertise you; But he is expected here. On Thursday September the 3. His Majesty had notice that Duke Hamilton, the Earle of Cra∣ford, Linsey, the Earle of Castles, the Lord Balma∣rinoth, and 6. other Barrons, and Burgesses, would be at Newcastle the next day, with divers papers from the Estates of Edenborough that day His Ma∣jestie spent some time in private, and tooke a little recreation at Goffe. On Fryday September the 4. the Quarters were made ready for the Reception of the Com∣missioners accordingly as was thought fit, and they were received into the Towne with very much gladnesse, by many who pray that they may prevaile with His Majestie. On Saturday the 5. the Commissioners ac∣quainting His Majestic that they were come from the Estates of Scotland, and that they desired that they might have audience, which was appointed by His Majestie. On the Lords day; September the 6. His Ma∣jesty heard wholsom doctrine preached unto him, addresses of godly Ministers, to perswade him to harken to the requests of his Kingdomes. The Commissioners had also two of their Ministers preached to them, one in the fore noone, and the other in the afternoone to give encouragements (out of Gods Word) to go on in labouring what they may in the work of the Lord, assuring them,
that however they shall not lose their reward. On Munday the 7. we had some complaints here, that there were Countrie people who had bin at Faires in these parts who had suffcred by som unrulie Souldiers, which I know you cannot be ignorant that such things will be where Armies quarter. On Tuesday the 8. (and so also severall times before that) the Commissioners have been with His Majestie, and divers passages have fallen be∣tween them, amongst the rest. Yesterday being Wednesday the 9. of this pre∣sent September, 166. There were severall speeches made, the first was delivered by the Duke of Hamilton, who when they were come to His Majesty on the said Wednesday; and received Audience, His Lordship spake to this effect before His Majestie. That they were againe returned to His Majestie from the Kingdom of Scotland, and that they were commanded by the Committee of Estates at Edenborough (from whom they had received an order for that purpose) to desire the King. First, that out of the deepe sence of the bleeding miseries, and calamities of His Kingdomes, His Majestie would be pleased to take the Covenant, and subscribe to it; And 2. That His Majestie will likewise signe the Propofitions, that were presented to him at Newcastle by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, it being the onely way to make His Majesty happy, and to settle all the Kingdoms in Peace;
And withall, that hee was come partly to cleere himself, and that Family whereof he is, by reason that there are rumours spread abroad, that they shuld be the men on whom (at this time as things now stand) his Majestie did much rely on, for the carrying on of his designs against the Parliaments of the Kingdomes (against which his Lordship doth protest, and therefore further told his Maje∣stie.) That for his part, as the two Kingdomes were joined in so blessed a union, against those who have sought to destroy them; so he would (to the uttermost of his power) joine with them, to op∣pose any that should in any kind kinder so great and good a work. After that Duke Hamilton had done speaking, (which he performed with much wisedome, gra∣vitie, and freenesse) The Earl of Lanerick (who was then present) spake to this effect following: That the Transactions of the affairs of the King∣domes are now gone so farre, that they would bee very sodainly put to it to consider what to do with (and how to dispose of) his Majesty; for the Armie being now to go home, and that they were to de∣liver up all the Garrisons in England, and all of them to return into their own Countrey of Scot∣land, That therefore they should consider what to doe in this case, because when they are going a∣way, what could they then do with his Majestie? And then making a pause a while, his Lordship,
spake further to this effect,) That if they should take the King to Scotland, they have no place to put his Majestie in, but the Castle of Edenbo∣rough. Thn the Earl of Calender spake, after that the Eal of Lanerick had done speaking; the substance of whose speech was thus: That he desired his Majestie to consider of what evill consequence it is, to refuse to hearken to his Parliaments; propounding, what could his Maje∣stie expect, That if any person, or persons whatso∣ever had perswaded him, that he had a considera∣ble Partie in this Armie, and also at home to joyn with him; surely he was much mistaken: For the greatest Malignants of them all, either in the one Kingdom, or in the other, have their mouths now stopped, in beholding the two Kingdoms now joi∣ning o lovingly together. Divers other passages there were in the Confe∣rence, too large for me to insert here: And at last, the Duke Hamilton told the King, that hee was commanded by the Committee of Estates, to speak something to his Majestie, which of him∣self he durst nor, seeing he tendered his Majestie so much; yet in obedience to his Commands, it was his duty to speak it. But his Majestie rose up and said, That he knew the businesse very well, and that hee would speak of that some other time. On this present Thursday the 10. of Septemb:
The Ministers sent from the Kingdome of Scot∣land were with the King, and spent much time with his Majestie; the businesse that they were up∣on, was about Ecclesiastical matters, to cleer some points to his Majestie, in matter of Conscience, which took up some time, though very little see∣ming to be prevalent, in what they so laboured for; yet they are resolved to do what they can, and go on to the utmost in what lies in them, and leave the event to God. To morrow the Commissioners intend to bee with the King again, to confer with his Majestie, in point of honour. By the next, you shall be fur∣ther advertized from Your Servant to his power, E. N. Newcastle the 10. of Septemb. 1646. FINIS.
