o526a 45504496 171812
AN Admonition to the English, CONCERNING Their Near Approaching Danger, and the Means to Escape it. BY A Gentleman of Quality of LANGUEDOC. To which is added, Archbishop Ʋsher's Prophecy concerning the same Matter, attested by the Lord Chief Justice Hale, and another Person of Honour, with some Observations concerning it. Translated from the French Copy. Licens'd Feb. 25. 1690. THe Original French of the following Admonition I received lately in Holland of the Author, whose Name is thereunto subscribed; a Gentleman of an Ancient Family in Languedoc, whose Seat is an ancient Castle of the same Name with himself, about three English Miles from Montpeilier, with a considerable Revenue thereunto belonging. But he was forced to leave it, and all hat he had, after two years Imprisonment, for his Religion. And this is his Condition at present. The Author of those Admonitions, which he mentions, was his Younger Brother, who died near three years since, of about Forty eight years of Age, a Person, as he saith, of great Piety and Credit, and of extraordinary Knowledge of things absent and future. And of him our Author received both Admonitions before  of the things here said to have happened to him, and an Explication afterward of the Mysteries of them, and the Signification thereof. He is not without Witnesses of the truth of what he relates; but they are dispersed into several Parts, and some of them now in England. It was the Author's Desire to have it communicated to the English as soon as might be, and my Good-will to my Country, and desire to serve them, inclined me to lend him my Assistance therein without much difficulty, both because it doth agree so much with the known Predictions of Bishop Usher, and because the State and Course of Affairs seem to agree but too much with both, in a manifest tendency to the Accomplishment of them. And that the Reader may not be so much di∣sturbed, as admonished by it, for his better Direction and Instruction how to use it, I thought fit to subjoyn the principal part of the Bishop's Predictions: Which I can assure the Reader to be no Imposture, but True and Genuine, from the Testimony of two Witnesses beyond all Exception: The one, the late Lord Chief Justice Hale, who, when I shewed it him in Writing before ever it was Printed, and desired his Judgment of it, told me he had heard him say the Substance of it, the Substance of it (repeating those words) twenty times with a great deal of confidence: The other, a Person whom I ought not to name without License, but of great Honour by Degree, and much greater by real Worth and Vertue, to whom the words were spoken by the Bishop, and who committed them to Writing, and was pleased to favour me with the perusal of the Original.
Avis pour les Fidelles d'Angleterre. IL faut être dans un grand aveuglement pour ne s'être pas apperceu, que la colere de Dieu paroit alummée depuis long temps presque sur toutes les parties de l'Europe, de sorte qu'il semble que Dieu vueille comme par un nouveau deluge exterminer toute chair; puisqu'il n'est que trop vray qu'elle s'est portée á toute sorte d'excess. L'indignation du Tout-puissant a commencé á le respandre en particulier presque sur tous ceux, qui portent le nom des Protestans. Ces raisons devoient nous porter a nous amen∣der & nous corriger de nos vices; Mais le Ciel & la terre sont Temoins que nous n'avons sçeu qu c'estoit d'affliger nos Ames & amender le train de nôtre vie; C'est aussi pour cela que les jugemens de Dieu (dont nous n'avons tenu Con∣te, Lorsque leur decret a tant & tant de fois si epouvantablement enfanté) se sont tous jours r'enforcées. L'Experience nous la fait voir en France, n'ayant pas profité des avis qui nous avoyent ête donnes. Il y a plus de vingt ans que je receus une let∣tre, qui m'apprennoit nos malheurs & me mar∣quoit le moien de les prevenir, qui êtoit d'as∣sembler les Intendants Pasteurs & Anciens de I'Eglise & leur dire de faire faire, une Jeune de trois jours á la premiere Eglise qui seroit atta∣quée & qu'on en verroit les effets. Je negligai cet avis, non sçachant d'ou il venoit. Mais en∣viron dix ans apres l'ayant sçeu, & v river bien de choses qui m'avo  marquées, j'en parlay á ces Msseurs, qui  poyent pas: Ce quis a fait  acheuse suittes.  en Anglerre plusieur Mstres qui estoi∣ent presens Lorsque je ur vis voir la lettre, qui m'avoit êté envoyée. Madam de Turene, Monsieur de Rouvigny, & Monsieur Gaches Ministre de l'Eglise de Cha∣ronton curent les mêmes avis que moy, le Sy∣node en eut en suite & l'auteur voyant qu'on n'en profitoit pas m'ecrivoit en ces Termes. Un Vaisseau agitè d'une rude Tempete est en piteux êtat. Lorsqu'nn Enfant, n'avant su eveiller les Ma∣telots pout sortir les eaux qu'il y voioit entrer, est
en-fin obligé de crier; sauve qui peut. Malheur á qui n'aime le Seigneur Jesus & ne porte tous les jours ce Divin Crucifié dans son Ceur. Il y a environ huiet a neuf ans que je receus un coup de Foudre de jour; j'avois été averti de ce coup trois ans avant qu'il tomba sur moy & par trois diverses fois: Ce coup fut suivi environ six semaines apres d'un coup de Tonnerre, qui tomba de nuit (dont même etoit averti.) Je fus obligé de faire eveiller tous ceux, qui estoyent chez moy au lict: Nous fusmes au lieu ou je faisois precher; je faisois lire la parole de Dieu, lorsque le Tonnere tomba sous mes pieds: Le lieu ou nous estions estoit pavé & les rochers au dessous: Ou entendoit gronder le Tonner sous moy qui estois elo∣igné d'eux neanmoins, dans le même endroit, aussi fort qui'l a accoutumé de faire; Il y fut assez de tems; Nous ne discontinuasmes pas pourtant la lecture de l'Ecriture sainte. Ces furent des coups terribles & mysterieux presages & avantcourreurs des maux pres á fondre sur la France & sur l'Angleterre: Il y a en Angleterre plusieurs Personnes qui estoyent chez moy lorsque ces choses se passerent: Ils en ignoroyent le Mystere, mais je puis bien prou∣ver ce que j'avance. Etant en Etat de quitter la Province ou je faisois mon sejour, il y a environ cinq á six ans, l'auteur des avis, qui a rêcu d'une vie si chre∣tienne qu'on ne luy sçauroit rien imputer & á qui Dieu a fait de Graces si extraordinaires que je ne pense pas que depuis plusieurs siecles on ait oui parler de semblables, me donn un depôt cachete, & me dit le tems que je devois l'ouvir; Il avoit au commencement de cet êcrit. O Roy un plus grand Roy que Toy te commande songe aut conte que tu dois rendre plutôt que tu ne penses: Et a fin, O Angleterre si tu te rends com∣plice du crime Tu auras part á la peine. L'orage est furieux rempli d'horreur & de carnage, Tachez á le prevenir á fin que votre Contree soit une Contree de paix, une Isle for∣tunée, & un jardin d Eden: C'est le souhait de Votre tres obeissant Serviteur, Saint Jean. Guettes Israel c'est ici le tems de veiller & de prier, C'est le tems de cries á plein gosier & de ne se point epargner, sonnez du Cornet en Sion, Reveillez les Peuples endormis, Insistez en tems & hors tems, & Ditez hardiment á Jerusalem, qu'elle fe repente á fin qu'il y ait Paix pour elle & non une souddain destruction: Car le Ton∣nere a grondé.
An ADMONITION to the Christians of England. HE must be very blind, who perceives not that the Wrath of GOD hath long since been kindled against all parts almost of Europe; so that he seems resolved to destroy all Flesh again as it were with a New Deluge, since it is but too true, that they have abandon'd themselves to all kind of Wickedness. But the Indignation of the Almighty hath begun to manifest it self more especially against those who are called Pro∣testants. And by these means ought we to have been induced to Repentance and the Reformation of our Manners. But Heaven and Earth are Wit∣ness, that we have not so much as known, or well considered, What it is to afflict our Souls and amend our Lives. Hence it is that the Judg∣ments of God, which we so little regarded, though the Decree hath again and again brought forth so terribly, have been daily more and more in∣creasing. This we in France have been made to see by Experience, since we neglected the Admo∣nitions which were given to us. It is now twenty years and upwards, since I received a Letter, which admonished Me of Our approaching Miseries [in France,] and the Means to prevent them: Which were, to call to∣gether the Governours of our Church, and acquaint them that they should appoint a three days Fast in that Church, which soever should first be attach'd, [by Process by our Enemies;] and they should see the Effects thereof. But I neglected that Advice, not knowing whence it came. But abut ten years after, when I understood that, and saw the Event of much of that which was foretold, I acquainted those Gentlemen with it: But they regarded not what I said. Which made the Consequence so sad. There are now in England divers Ministers, who were present when I shewed the Letter which was sent me. The same Advice which was given to me, was sent also to Madam Turene, and to the Sieur Ruvigny, and to Mr. Gache Minister of Cha∣renton, and to the Synod of Languedock. And when the Author, who sent these Admonitions, understood that nothing was done thereupon, he wrote thus to me: Very unhappy is that Ship, which being sha∣ken in a grievous Storm, the Mariners will not be roused even by a Child to pump out the
Water, which he sees running in, till he be forced to cry out, Every one shift for himself. Wo to him who loves not our Lord Jesus, and doth not carry the Divine Crucified One daily in his Heart. About Eight or Nine years since a sudden stroke as of Thunder struck me down in the Day-time (about Eight in the Morning) according to three several Warnings thereof given to me three years before. This was followed about six Weeks after by a Thunder in the Night: Whereof I had also been admonished. Whereupon I called up all who were in Bed in my House; and we went into the Room where we used to have Prayers, and there read the Scriptures. While that was doing it Thundered under My Feet, though the place was paved and upon a Rock. We all heard the Noise of Thunder (directly) under Me (who was at a distance from them, though all in the same Room) as loud as it used to be in the Air, and for some time. Yet we left not off our Reading the Scrip∣tures. They were terrible Claps, and mysterious Presages and Forerunners of the Calamities, which are ready to break out upon the Kingdoms of France and England. There are in England several per∣sons who were at my House when these things hap∣pened: They understood not the Mystery of them: but I am able to prove what I here declare. About five or six years since, when I was to leave the Countrey where I dwelt, the Author of these Admonitions, (who lived so Christian a Life as none could blame, and whom God had favoured with such extraordinary Graces, as few, I believe, in several Ages have heard the like,) deposited with me a sealed Paper; and told me the time when I should open it. In the begitning were these words: O King, a greater King than thee commands [or rules] thee: conside of the Reckoning thou art to make, sooner than thou thinkest. And in the End, O England, if thou make thy self partaker in the Crime, thou shalt take part in the punishment. The Storm is violent, full of Horror and De∣struction: Endeavour to prevent it, that your Coun∣trey may be a Countrey of Peace, a Fortunate Island, and a Garden of Eden: Which is the hearty desire of Your most obedient Servant, Saint Jean. Postscript.] You, who are Watchmen of Israel, this is the time to Watch and to Pray, this is the time to cry aloud and spare not: Sound the Trumpet in Sion; Awaken the sleeping People: Be instant in season, and out of seasor, and speak boldly to Jerusa∣lem, that she repent, that so Peace may be unto her, and not sudden Destruction; for the Thunder has al∣ready begun.
Archbishop USHER's PREDICTION. THe Year before he died, being asked, Whether he did believe that Great Persecution of the Church of God in England, Scotland and Ireland, (of which he had spoken with great confidence many years before in time of great Peace) to be past, or yet to come? He said, That it was yet to come, and that he did as confidently expect it, as ever he had done; adding, That this sad Persecution would fall upon all the Protestant Churches of Europe. And when it was answered, It might be hoped that it might have been past in these Nations, by reason of the Devastation and Bloodshed which had been in thé late Civil War: He replied with a very serious and stern Look, Fool not your self with such Hopes; for I tell you, All you have yet seen, hath been but the Beginning of Sorrows, to what is yet to come upon the Protestant Churches of Christ: Who will e're long fall under a Sharper Persecution than ever yet has been upon them. And therefore look you be not found in the Outward Court, but a Worshipper in the Temple before the Altar. For Christ will measure all those who profess His Name, and call themselves His People; and the Outward Worshippers he will leave out to be trodden down by the Gentiles. The Outward Court is the Formal Christian, whose Religion lies in performing the Out-side Duties of Christianity, without having an Inward Life, and Power of Faith and Love Uniting them to Christ. And these God will leave to be trodden down and swept away by the Gentiles. But the Worshippers within the Temple and before the Altar, are those who do indeed worship God in Spirit and in Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and he is honoured and adored in the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts; and they sacrifice their Lusts and vile Affections, yea, and their own Wills to him. And these God will hide in the Hollow of his Hand, and under the Shadow of his Wings. And this shall be one great Difference between this last and all the other preceding Persecutions: For in the former, the most eminent and spiritual Ministers and Christians did generally suffer most, and were most violently fallen upon; but in this last Persecution, these shall be preserved by God as a Seed to partake of that Glory, which shall immediately follow and come upon the Church, as soon as this Storm shall be over: For as it shall be the Sharpest, so it shall be the Shortest Per∣secution of them all; and shall only take away the gross Hypocrites and Formal Profissors; but the true Spiritual Believers shall be preserved till the Calamity be overpassed. To this I think  Prtinent  Excellent Passage of his to the same Person, concerning San understand what Sanctification and the New Creature are. It is no less than for a Man to be brought to an intire Resignation of his Will to the Will of God; and to live in the offering up of his Soul continually in the flames of Love, as a whole Burnt-Offering to Christ. And how little are many of those, who profess Christianity, experimentally acquainted with this Work on their Souls! Some Circumstances of the Persecution aforesaid are mentioned in the Printed Paper of his Pre∣dictions, to which I refer the Reader. But one there is not mentioned there, or ever by him expresly, that I have heard of, viz. the Time. Of which yet it may be observed, that he seems in divers Discourses to have intimated it so, as it must be now very near, by telling some Persons, viz. such as were ancient, that they should not live to see it, and others that they might, that is by course of years, and among others Judge Hale, who, had he been now living, had been upwards of Eighty one. Besides, if the same was signified by the Thunder under-ground mentioned by Mr. St. Jean, that seems to agree well with the Manner mentioned by the Archbishop, of a sudden unexpected Massacre. LONDON, Printed for J. Harris in the Poultrey, 1691.
