P1858 E54_2 R23213 99871935 155232
A PETITION to the Kings Majesty. ALSO A Glorious Victory, Certified in a briefe Relation of the totall Routing of Prince RVPERT. And the taking of all his Ordnance, Armes and Ammunition, bagge and baggage. LONDON, Printed for F. L. Iuly the 6th 1644.
An humble Petition to the King, desiring His Majestie to take into consideration the great charge that is laid upon Him, and the sad, and bleed∣ing Condition of His People. GRatious and most renowned Soveraigne, when God said of Governours, I have said yee are Gods, in few words hee comprehended many notable things putting not onely subjects there∣by in mind how honourably they are to con∣ceive of their superiours, but Magistrates be∣sides, how religiously they should behave themselves in their places. For God vouchsafing them his owne name, will have them no doubt in some sort to answer unto his Divine nature. Not that they can be in this world Spirits as hee is, Eternal as he is, Almightie, Incomprehensible as he is: For ill fareth it with that King (said the Macedmians very well) which would be counted a God rather than a King, as the tragicall end of Alexander the Great, the horrible death of Calgula, the con∣fusion of Herod, and others doe witnesse. But the are thy Gods when they doe their duties rightly according unto his word, for Magistrates must beare in minde continualy as many things besides, so especially these foure heads. 1. First, that their calling is good, and that they are in such
place, wherein they may and must both benefit their Cou∣trie, and profit the Church. For their Authoritie is from God. 2. Secondly, both how the come into such excellencie a∣bove other men, and how they continue in their state of dig∣nitie, how as Princes to rule. By the Grace of God, &c. and the Scriptures doe witnesse. By me Kings Raigne, and Princes decree Iustice, by me Princes rule, and the Nobles, and all the Iudges of the Earth. 3. Thirdly over whom they have government. For they rule men▪ not beasts: Free men, not bond-slaves: And there∣fore must behave themselves wisely, as over reasonable crea∣tures, and Kingly to do them good, not as Tyrants to spoyle them. Fourthly, to what end they bare Authority, that there Subjects may leade a quiet, and peaceable life, in all godlinesse, and honestie; A life quiet from Forreigne enemies abroad; peace∣able from civill discord at home, from Idolatry in Religion, honest from impuritie in conversation. So that all their con∣sultations and doings are to be directed, either to all these ends, or to one of them, that is, to quietnesse, Peace, Godlinesse, or honestie. They must procure quitnesse from Forreigne Enemies, there∣fore have they both men and munition, therefore bee Subse∣dies given, that the enemy when he shall offer to invade, may be resisted. And that Warre is good, let the braine-sicke Ma∣lignant Cavaleers imagine what they will without book, which is taken in defence of Reigion, the Realme, and good peo∣ple. For there is a time of Warre, and a time of Peace. Not∣withstanding this by the way is to be had in continuall remem∣brance, that when the wayes of a man doe please the Lord, hee will make all his enemies at peace with him. And till then, neither Force of War, nor policie of wit shall prevaile.
Peace at home must be sought for, which is then done, not only when wisely it is fore seene that no Traitors, like vipers, burst out from tht bowells of the Common-weale, to the distruction thereof by their comming forth, but also when justice is ex∣tended rightly into all persons, For which cause a Common weale is not unfitly compared unto musicke, and good Maje∣strates unto good Musitians, for as good musique consisteth not of one, but of divers sound proportionably answer∣ing together, so doth a Common weale of sundry kinds of men, keeping themselves within the limmits of their owne callings, and as there is nothing more delightfull to the eare then good musique, and contrariwise nothing more ungratefull then much noyse, and no concord, so is there nothing more ac∣ceptable before God, or profitable for man, then good Orders duly observed, nothing more pretious then when the last will be the best, and they which should be alow are lifted at last, which Iustice is exercised, in seeing that no man do use what con∣tracts, Bargains, and dealing he left for profit, nor any man ever meanes for preferment. Religion must be advanced, the care whereof is committed unto Ma∣iestrates of God himselfe for thus we read. When the King shall sit upon the Throne of his Kingdome, then shall he write him this Law, repeated in a booke, by the Priests of the Levites, And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the daies of his life, that he may learn to feare the Lord his God, and to keepe all the words of this Law, and these ordinances to doe them, that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turne not from the Commandement, to the right hand or to the left, but that he may prolong his dayes in his Kingdome he and his Sonns. Whereby it is apparent as what damnable opi∣nions they are, which think either with Atreous, that Princes must regard profit, not Religion or with Machivill, that Chri∣stianity causeth too much humility in Governours, as though that either they were too good to obey the Commandements
of God, or God would enjoyne them any thing which were not good, either for themselves or their people. But besides it is to be noted carefully, if he according to the doctrine of Paul which neglects the care of bringing up ones fmely religeously in the feare of God, hath denyed the faith and is woser the an Infidell, that they are in a most damnable estate which prohibit many House-holds promises and people to be instructed therein. Furthermore, as it is the part of good prents not only to no∣rish the bodyes of their Children with meats, but especially to nurture their minds with good learning, so it is the duty of good Princes (which are the parents of their people) not so much to provide for the safety of their bodyes, as for the salva∣tion of the soules, of their children ther Subject. Finally, if they will bee counted rightly, as they are certainly entiled defender of the faith &c. then must the purity of Gods word by them be maintained against all impiety, Idollatry and superstition. They must see that their subiects lead an honest life, wheeby as well upprightnesse among men in their Contracts is commen∣ded, as gravery without lightnes in bhaviours comprehended, and both are brought to passe ither by Law, example, or Punish∣ment. By law things seemely are commanded, unhonest forbid∣den, and those whom Councell of the wise with genlensse can not restrayne the law often times by threatning can keepe under By example, for as the Prince is, such are the people, and such Superiours, such Subjects, by punishment, they whom neither the terrour of the law can draw from wickednes, nr the good examples of their governors allure to wll doing are kept in awe. Fifthly and lastly, of all, Majestrates must beare in minde that one day assuredly, how soone it is uncertaine, they shall ren∣der an accut unto the King of all Kings, of their bhaviour in
their places, either to their everlasting comfort if they have done well, or to their endlesse torments with the Reprobates in Hell, if they have been wicked, where their paines by so▪ much shall be greater then other mens, by how much their charge was greater, and their callings for honour higher then others, for mighty men shall mightily be tormented. We do not instruct your Majesty in these points, only de∣sire, and humbly pray, that your sacred Majesty may be such a one as may have honour in this life, and eternall glory in the life to come. And therefore do humbly begge of your gratious Majesty, that you wold be pleased to call to minde your owne honour, your posterity, your Parliament, and your people, and by prayer and Imitation of your Prodecessors settle the Kingdome in Peace by your Parliament, so shall you have peace and honour here, and Eternall glory in the life to come. A Breefe relation of the routing of Prince Rupert. RVpert hearing of the rasing of the siege at York, marched up with a numeous Army towards our Forts, and ased
them, our men were drawne up in a Batalia, Rupert fell upon the reare of the Earle of Manchesters forces neere Todcaster, charged upon them, and they being so great a strength, the Earle of Manchesters new levied Forces began to give backe, the Enemy pursued our men, fell on againe and gained two peeces of Ordnance there, Rupert fell upon Sir Thomas Fairfaxes horse, and there was a very hott fight, many slayne on both sides: our forces retreated, but ralleing our men againe, and Generall Leshly comming on with his foote, they fell on very furiously, many were killed on both sides, and then the enemy beginning to retreat our men followed pursuing, and totally Routed Rupert, tooke all his Ordnance and Amunition, bagg and baggadge, Rupert himselfe being fled as is supposed into Yorke. 5 Iuly 1644. (Of raising the seige at Yorke this is the event— —and now Malignant tell me what you thinke) This is Printed according to Order.
