p279 e546_27 99863194 115380
THE PAPER Called the AGREEMENT of the PEOPLE taken into CONSIDERATION, AND The Lawfulness of Subscription to it Examined, and Resolved in the Negative, by the Ministers of Christ in the PROVINCE of LANCASTER. Published by them especially for the satis∣faction of the Conscience, and guiding of the practise of our entirely honored and beloved, the People of our several Chur∣ches, committed to our Charge; and for the general good of this Church & Nation. LONDON, Printed for LUKE FAWNE, and are to be sold at his shop at the signe of the Parrot in Pauls Church-yard. 1649.
The paper called the Agreement of the People taken into Consideration, and the lawfulness of Subscription to it ex∣amined, and resolved in the negative, by the Ministers of Christ in the Pro∣vince of LANCASTER. THis Agreement being drawn up in the name of the People of England, and by the Title of the Book being tendered to the Consideration of the People, as also by a Declaration, bearing the name of his Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, and his general Councel of Officers, annexed to it, it is said to be tender∣ed to the People of England; and the said Declaration desiring that all good people of England Will cordially embrace it, and by Subscription declare their Concurrence, and accord thereto, when it shall be tendered to them, as is directed therein: And it being of universal Concernment, taking in, and desposing of all publique Affairs, not onely of the Civil State, but of Religion: We the Ministers of Christ in the Province of Lancaster, who have constantly and cordially adhered to the Cause of King and Parliament, both in the first and second War, and have opposed, according to our places and Callings, the late Scottish Engage∣ment, (by which many of us have been Sufferers,) and (having
been called thereunto by the Authority of Parliament) have not only taken, but press'd upon our people both the Vow and Pro∣testation to 5 May, 1641. and the Solemn League and Covenant, in the latter of which we have bound our selves, Art. 6. in the Cause therein Covenanted, all the days of our lives zealously and constantly to continue against all Opposition, and to promote the same, according to our power, against all Lets and Impedi∣ments whatsoever; and what we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, to reveal, and make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed. And Art. 4. That we shall also, with all faithfulness, endeavor the discovery of all such as have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hin∣dering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst the People, contrary to this League and Covenant; do hold our selves bound (our common interest, and relations, our special vocations, and our aforesaid Engage∣ments being considered) not only deliberately to weigh, and re∣solve, with our selves and one another, what to do in reference to this Agreement, but publiquely to make known our apprehensi∣ons concerning it, for the resolution of those that may be in doubt about it, and tt those that are for it may have our Rea∣sons why we dissent from it; and we humbly and dearly entreat our highly honored and beloved Country-men and Brethren of this Kingdom, into whose hand this our paper may come; as well the Composers and Publishers of the Agreement, as those to whom it is directed and intended, to be offered for their Sub∣scription, more especially the Inhabitants of this County, unto whom we stand in a more intimate relation, both as living among, and having the spiritual Charge respectively of them, candidly to take and interpret, and conscientiously to perpend this our ma∣turely conceived, and setled Judgment. This Draught, called the Agreement of the People, being a Platform of State-Government, calculated for this Nation, and so, more immediately of a Political or Civil Consideration; Our undertaking is not to survey, or give our Verdict on every thing it holds forth divisively, or by distinct Sections, no yee shall we examine any thing in it Politically, or by the rule of State-Mis, or the Laws of the Realm, we remit that work to the learned
State-men and Lawyers of the LandAshursts Rea∣sons, &c. and Mr Prynnes Speech.: But we shall  it as Christians and Ministers, enquiring and determining accord∣ing to our Talent how it may stand or disagree with the dictates of Conscience regulated by the Word of God: And in doing this, our method will be. 1. To give an account of our Con∣ceptions upon the whole plot or frame taken together. 2. To speak distinctly and particularly to the Ninth Section, which con∣cerneth Religion; whereupon we shall be the rather particular, because it is both more proper to our profession, and more press∣ing to our souls. For the first; The project of this Agreement is to place a power in the People, to alter when they will the Government of the Kingdom, to abrogate the present, and to erect a new form of Policy, and to be Lords paramount, or transcendental Mode∣rators over those to whom the Government is committed, assu∣ming to deliver them their Authority, to give them Laws, to disanul the Laws they make, to consine their Legislative power, and to oppose them by force of Arms when they see good; and to move them now to exert the said power. This may appear by the whole tenor of the Agreement, and namely in that it repre∣sents the People ordering the present Parliament to dissolvePag. 8 par∣tic. 1., appointing new Representatives of a new proportion and Consti∣tution, (both in regard of places and persons electing,) and of the manner, times, and other circumstances of ElectionPag 8 par∣tic. 2. &c., which are to have the supream trust in order to the preservation and go∣vernment of the whole, and their power is to extend without the consent or concurrence of any other person or persons, to the erect∣ing and abolishing of Courts of Justice, and publique Offices, and to the enacting, altering, repealing, and declaring of Laws, and the highest and final Judgment, concerning all natural or civil thingsPa. 24. part. 8, limiting the said Representatives from having power in many thingsPa. 24. par∣tic. 8. &c., directing and restraining them in matter of ReligionPa. 26. par. 9, and repealing all Laws. Ordinances, and Statutes, contrary to the Liberty in Religion which they pro∣videPa. 27 part 4, reserving in themselves, or any of them, power to resist them by force of Arms in some casesP. 27. part. 10; And that such a funda∣mental change was in the Intentions of the Compilers, is evident by the Declaration following it, which saith, it contains the best and most hopeful Foundations for the Peace and future well-Government
Government of this NationPage 30., and in it they disclaim to mid∣dle in any thing, save the Fundamental setling of that power (to wit, the Law-giving, or Judicial power over the Kingdom) in the most equal and hopeful way for common Right, Freedom, and Safety, as in this AgreementPage 32.. This Agreement then perswades the people to cast off, or de∣pose the present Government, to turn themselves into an Anarchy, or jumbled multitude, to become a people without distinction or order, to run themselves into that confusion which the Jews were brought unto by the Babylonian Captivity, to be as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things that have no ruler over themHabak. 1.14., and so fit for nothing but to be angled by them that desire to fish in troubled waters, for so it follows in the Text, they take up all of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drags,Verse 15. as though we were a colony, or company of men, swarmed or broken out from some other Nation, and newly landed in this Island, free and ready to elect and set up a frame of a Common-wealth, such as we should like best. Unto all this we say; 1. We are constituted Kingdom, a setled State, and under a lawful Government, which is very ancient, fully understood both by Magistrates and People, and deeply rooted in mens affections, both by long habituated exercise, and the well-approved benefices of it. 2. The Government we are under is good, wholesom, equita∣ble for the Constitution of it, fitly ballanced and proportioned, be∣ing reduced to the golden-mean, lying between Monarchical Ty∣ranny, and Popular Anarchy, it hath had the general sufferage to be one of the moderatest and best tempered Governments in Europe. 3. The form of Government which we have are bound to own and continue under, not only by the single tye of the duty of Subjects, but by sacred obligation of Oaths, Vows and Cove∣nants, into which we have been called be called by lawful authority, pre∣scribing or propounding them to us; as namely, 1. The Oath of Allegiance, in which the Subject solemnly sweareth in these words, I shall bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him, and them, will defend to the ut∣termost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts what∣soever
which shall be made against his or their persons, their Crown or Dignity, 2. The Oath of the Kings Supremacy, where∣in are these words, I do promise, that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true, allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Ju∣risdictions, Priviledges, Preeminencies and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and Successors, or united to the imperial Crown of this Realm. 3. The Vow and and Protestation of 5 May, 1641. in which who so entreth into it, bindeth himself thus, I do in the presence of Almighty God, pro∣mise, vow and protest to maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power and estate, according to the duty of my Allegiance, his Majesties, Royal Person, Honor and Estate, as al∣so the Power and Priviledges, of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, &c. 4. And lastly, The Solemn League and Covenant, wherein we with hands lifted up to the most high God to swear thus, We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and constancy, in our several Vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually, to preserve the Rights, and Priviled∣ges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdom, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesties Person and Authority, in the Preservation and defence of the true Religion, and Li∣berties of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesties just power or greatness. And it deserves to be remembred, that the Parliament, at their entring into the Vow and Protestation, did it upon and apprehension, that our Government was in danger of undermining, and laid down their sense thereof as one special ground of making the same,In the Pre∣amble, and finding also that there have been, & having just cause to suspect that there still are, even during the sitting in Parli∣ament, endea∣vors to subvert the fundamen∣tal Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Go∣vernment by most pernicious and wicked councels, practi∣ses, plots and conspiracies &c. and both entered and led the people into it expresly for the pre∣vention of such a design, adding to the tye of civil duty, the religi∣ous bond of this Vow and Protestation, for the firmer obliging of our allegiance to the Government: And in the instructions for the taking of the Solemn League and Covenant throughout the Kingdom, Art. 10. there is an Exhortation ordered to be made to all sorts of persons to take it, as that which they judg not only lawful, but (all things considered) exceeding expedient, and ne∣cessary for all that wish well to Religion, the King and Kingdom to joyn in.
From these three Considerations, as Premises, we infer: First, There's no place, need or occasion for such an attempt  is the abolishing of the old, and rearing a new model of Govern∣ment. 1. Say, that some invested with the Government have been faulty, that's no ground for changing the Government, if it be, we may run through all forms of policy, and stay in none, but still be changing, for men will still be found failing; our Government being lawful and good, our course is (as to this case) to pray that our Magistrates may be good, as we are required by the Apostle1 Tim. 2 1.2, for unless it please God to give us just and godly Magistrates, the best Constitution will nothing avail us, and if that were ob∣tained, that which we have would serve our turn. 2. Say, that such deep wounds have been given lately to our Government in the persons of those in which it was inherent, as that the influence of it into the body politique may be for a time suspended, yet we cannot think that the Kingdom it self is thereby beheaded of its Government, if that Maxime we have often heard of [The King never dyes] be true, and that Act for the continu∣ance of the Parliament, till it dissolve it self, be still a Law, we can∣not but conceive we have a Government actually invested, and however it is, who can deny but still there is an obligation and right in us to the Government? And as it is a far easier way to restore the former Government to its natural course, then to re∣move it, and settle another; so we beleeve, if we of this Nation shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will raise it up again. We observe (if we understand the Remonstrance of his Excellen∣cy &c. of Novemb. 20. and the Declaration of Novemb. 30. and the humble Answer of January 3. and the Petition before this Agreement,) that the late proceedings against those in the seat of Authority were asserted, and put on as necessary, in order to the matter of this Agreement, and if so, the said matter cannot be ne∣cessary by vertue of those proceedings; desperate and successive things cannot really and innocently make each other necessary. And indeed until the composers of this Agreement prove the fun∣damental change of Goverment in it simply necessary, (which hitherto they have not (that we know of) assayed to do) the pre∣tence of necessity for the aforesaid proceedings, so far as it was built upon their tendency to this end, stands unsupported, which
we the rather point at, for that in the humble Answer aforesaid we find acknowledged; That the late proceedings against the Parliament Members was a course in it self-irregular, and not justifiable, but both by honest intentions for publique good, and an extraordinary necessity for the same end leading thereunto. Now if the changes in this Agreement be that end, and publique good, and they prove not at all necessary, (no not lawful, as we hope to manifest) the extraordinary necessity pretended thence for these proceedings vanisheth into nothing. All that is particu∣larly said for the needfulness of any thing in this Agreement, that we have met with, is layd down, pag. 8. Since therefore our former oppressions, and not yet ended troubles, have been occasi∣oned, either by want of frequent National Meetings in Coun∣cel, or by the undue on unequal Constitution thereof, or by ren∣dering those Meetings ineffectual, We are fully agreed, &c. But the superstructure that follows upon this reason (to wit the change of Government) is too large fot this Foundation, the provisions do far out-reach the grievances, which might easily (yea and we think only) be remedied, the Government standing as it doth, es∣pecially the two of those three evils which are (to our thoughts) important, the dis-continuance and ineffectualness of Parliaments, and for the former already provision hath been, made since this Parliament, and no doubt what remains necessary to be done against any of those evils, the Parliament would care∣fully provide for, as appertaining to self preservation. Secondly, Such an attempt would be very unsafe and full of danger, were there any occasion or appearance of need for such an undertaking, yea, it would be a very rash and impolitick course, and prudence would forbid it; the experience of all ages may in∣struct us how perillous a thing it is to go about to innovate or make an alteration in Government: and how much better it is for a people to bear with many inconveniences in a setled State, then to run upon the mischiefs that usually and almost inevitably attend such a change. When the ten Tribes revolted from under Rehoboams. Government, for the burthensomness of his fathers reign, and because his was threatened to be more heavy; they got no case nor other advantage by that revolt, but (together with the loss of their Religion and their God) they involved them∣selves in sea of miseries, never enjoyed any good Government,
but through many changes, and at last by revolting, from under Shalmaneser King of Assyria they brought themselves to utter ruine. 3dly, What ever power of taking away and new forming Go∣vernment is conceived to rest in the People, yet it is all one as to us our Oaths, Vows, Protestation, and Covenant considered, by which we have fast bound our hands from the use of such a Freedom (were there any such orginally residing in us,) these Oaths and Covenants which we have taken are to us far more restringent and strongly engaging to keep to our present Government, then any secular respects can be to put on a change, in as much as the satis∣fying of those conduceth to the good or peace of the Soul & Con∣science; the prosecution of these reflecteth only upon a temporary Commodity. If the People of this Land, that are within any of these religious bonds, shall attempt either wholy to take away the King, the House of Lords, and the ancient Knights, Citizens, and Bur∣gesses of the House of Commons, or any of them, or diminish any thing that is matter of power, honor, or priviledg from any of them, then when they swore or protested, inherent in them, or put any power in themselves, which they cannot have but by some substraction from the Rights either of King or Parliament, how can they be clear from the great wickedness of perjury, or Vow-violation? So that these Vows, Oaths, and Covenants being upon us (as we beleeve all are upon many, and some at lest upon most of the people of this Kingdom) if this Agreement shall indeed be carryed on, and rendered to us, each of us (that are within any of them) may answer to the offer of it in the words of Jephthah, Judg. 11.35. I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back. Let but the nature of an Oath be weighed, In swearing we call God for a record upon our souls, and appeal to him to be a witness and judg of our truth and reallity in the Oath, by manifesting himself either in mercy, or judgment, ac∣cording as we either with sincere or treacherous intentions under∣take, and according as we either firmly keep or perfidiously break the Oath: and dare any of us be such God-contemners, and self-destroyers, as wittingly, or purposely, to violate our Oaths? If any unrighteousness or sin had born the subject of these Vows, Oaths, and Covenants, we might be allowed, yea bound to re∣pentance, and revocation of them that were such, but no such
thing hath been or can be once alledged against any of them: We wonder that the Framers of this Agreement are in it so liberal in providing for the liberty of Conscience (as they term it) in matter of Religion, and yet are so silent in the resolution of Conscience in this point of Religion, which is publique enough for them to take notice of, and may (we beleeve) concern their, as well as our consciences. Say there were some inconveniences (though we finde none in the substantials of our Government) yet we, having devoted our selves thus unto it, cannot alter any thing exprest in these Engagements, without impiety, to be abhorred. A righte∣ous man sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not, Psa. 15.4. The League which Joshua made with the Gibeonites, and the Princes of the Congregation sware to, though it proved to be to the publique loss and prejudice, they might not break, and they answered the Congregation that murmured against them for it, thus, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, now therefore we may not touch them: We will even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the Oath which we sware unto them, Josh. 9, 15, &c. And when Saul, four hundred years after this, in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah, had slain the Gibeonites, there was a famine in the days of David three years (Saul being dead) for that his bloody fact; and seven of Sauls sons were hanged up before the Lord, ere God was entreat∣ed for the Land, 2 Sam. 21. God hath heard our VowsPsa. 61.5., and though men do not insist on, or would discharge us of them, yet the Lord our God will surely require them of usDeut. 23.21.: A false Oath is one of the special things that he hatethZech. 8.17.. He hath said, he will come near to men in judgment, and will be a swift witness against false swearersMal. 3.5. Zedekiah the King of Judah, being made by Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon to swear fealty to him, though he was a forreign and heathenish Prince, and though the subjection was disadvantageous to him, and tend∣ed to make the Kingdom base, that it might not lift up it self; yet Zedekiah breaking this Oath, and rebelling against Nebu∣chadnezzar, the Lord sent his Prophet with these tydings; Shall he prosper? Shall he escape that doth such things? Or shall he break the Covenant and be delivered? Nay, upon this his breach of Oath, the Lord himself swears thus, As I live, saith the Lord God, surely in the place where the King dwelleth that made
him King, whose Oath he despised, and whose Covenant he brake▪ even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die; neither shall Pharoah with his mighty Army, and great company, make for him: Seeing he despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant, when lo he had given his hand, and hath done all these things, he shall not escape: Therefore thus saith the Lord God, As I live, sunely mine Oath that he hath despised, and my Covenant that he hath broken, even it will I recompouce upon his own headEzek. 17.12.. And again, when Zedekiah, the Princes, and people of Jerusa∣lem, had made a Covenant before the Lord in his house, to pro∣claim Liberty, and let their Hebrew servants go out free, after their seven years service, according to the Law and Covenant of the Lord, and had done accordingly; but afterwards, upon the re∣treat of the King of Babylons Army from them, they had cau∣sed their servants, whom they had set at liberty, to return, and brought them again into subjection, the Prophet thus denounceth against them from the Lord, Therefore, thus saith the Lord, ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbor; behold I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the Lord, to the sword, to the pesti∣lence, and to the famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth: and I will give the men that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed the words of the Covenant which they had made before me; I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and their dead bodies shall be for meat to the fowls of the heavens, and to the beasts of the earthJerem. 34.17 &c.. Now in this our case (which with the inversion of the terms may be paralel'd to theirs) if we, having covenanted subjection to the Authority set over us, when we were in fears and dangers, shall, when our fears are over, cast off that subjection, and pro∣claim to our selves liberty from it, and presume to abrogate the Government we have covenanted to preserve, we provoke the Lord to pass the same sentence upon us. They that hold forth this Agreement to us, say, in Title, it is an Agreement for a secure and present Peace, upon Grounds of common Right, Freedom and Safety. But by this Scripture, we know not how otherwise to stile it, then an Agreement for sure and (it may probably be) present trouble and misery: and if it
go on to be a National Compact indeed, we doing the same things with Zedekiah and his people, if we have ears to hear, we may hear the Lord pronouncing the same things upon us which he did upon them; Behold I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the Lord, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine. This is the Freedom, and not that which the Agreement speaks of, which we shall purchase by it: And we earnestly with that we may not put the Lord to it, as those rebellious Jews did, when he said of them,Jerem. 44.28 Jer. 44.28. And all the remnant of Judah shall know, whose word shall stand, mine or theirs. And as for common Right, which is another thing the Title of the Book holds forth, we may gather what Right we may expect by it, should it be establish'd, by our Covenant-breaking; if we look into ano∣ther Prophet, to wit, Hosea, cap. 10.4. They have spoken words,Hosea 10.4. swearing falsly in making a Covenant; thus judgment springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the field. When we look into the tendency of this Agreement, and withal observe the posture in which it is published, before it a Petition to the honorable the Commons of England, and behinde it a Declaration to the Peo∣ple of England, in both which it is with plausible terms and Rhetorical insinuations flourished over and set forth; we remem∣ber and make bold to put in mind all persons, named or concerned in it, of that flying roul in Zechariahs Vision, the length whereof is twenty cubits, and the bredth thereof ten cubits, and the mean∣ing of it is thus given by the Angel, This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth; for every one that steal∣eth shall be cut off as on this side, according to it, and every one that sweareth shall be cut off as on that side, according to it. I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of hostes, and it shall enter into the house of the theef, and into the house of him that sweareth falsly by my name; and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones there∣ofZech. 5.2, 3, 4. And let the spreading of this roul, and the pronouncing of this curse, warn and deter us all, that those very hands which were lift up to the most high God, in our swearing to preserve the Government we are under, be not lift up against, or made instruments to pull it down, lest we involve our selves thereby in the large, lasting, and consuming curse of the roul which the Lord of hostes undertakes to bring forth, and execute
upon every one where ever, upon the face of the whole earth, that doth such a thing; so that if we fall under this guilt, though we should make a Covenant with Death, and an Agreement with Hell, it shall not stand; but when the overflowing scourge passeth through, we shall be troden down by itIsa. 28.15, 18. And here, having so much insisted on the strongly obliging force of our Oaths and Covenants taken, we cannot refrain our selves from expressing a little, what great heaviness and continual sorrow we have in our hearts for the little care that's taken by the people generally of these their Oaths and Covenants, the com∣mon prevaricating and departing of many from the several en∣deavors engaged to, in them, upon any temptation, either of ad∣vantage offered, or danger and trouble threatened, and the re∣missness, backwardness, and indifferency of spirit in all (we ex∣cuse not our selves in this) in relation to the duties of them. But especially we know not how to hide or hold in the sorrow and shame that, even unto horror, hath filled our hearts and faces, up∣on occasion of the late proceedings, both those against the se∣cluded and imprisoned Members of Parliament, and those against the person of the King deceased; we not knowing how to clear them from manifest disloyalty and breach of Covenant, and when we would comfort our selves with this, that our souls have not come into the secrets of, or been united in any society with those actions, but ever abhorred them; our hearts are yet faint with∣in us, when we consider, how, upon these proceedings, our Christian and Protestant profession, the Way, and common Cause we have stood for, the endeavored Reformation, and the Nati∣onal Covenant, we with others have entered into, are reproached: Oh tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistins rejoyce, Sam. 1.20. lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. But having delivered our sense in this first part of the whole frame, and general drift of the book, we proceed to that which we proposed for our second part; the examination of the nineth Section of this Agreement, which concerneth Religion; we have seen its contrivements in humane or civil matters, let us now see how it would despose in the matters of God; and truly in this respect we may say to the promoters of it, as the Prophet Isaiah spake to Ahaz. the King, Hear ye now, is it a small thing for you
to weary men, but will ye weary any God alsoIsai. 7.13.? In speaking to this Section we shall 1. dissect it, sentence by sentence, deno∣ting, as we go, the flaws or faults we observe in it; 2. Lay down some of our Reasons against what we take to be the main import or project of it, to wit, the dissettlement and free intermixture of Religion. This Section of Religion is divided into four heads, whereof we shall examine particularly the three first. It is intended,Agreem. 1. that Christian Religion be held forth and re∣commended as the publike Profession in this Nation. 1. How reservedly, sparingly, fearfully doth this Agreement own Religion? as if it were jealous of engaging men to it, it dare not injoyn, no nor resolve firmly on it, only it adventures to intend it; a word that enacts, or puts not anything in being, imports nothing but a waver∣ing irresolvedness and mutability. 2. How doubtfully doth it hold forth Religion? Here's no restriction to true Christian Religion, although there are so many, & so extreamly differing ways of Re∣ligion which assume the title of Christian; yea instead of such a ne∣cessary restriction here's a plain implication, (in that only Popery and Prelacy are excepted from being thus held forth,) That any Religion (Popery and Prelacy excluded) may be the publique Pro∣fession. 3. How pretendedly and meerly in shew doth it hold forth the profession of Christian Religion? for in the three following Heads it leaves practise free, and what gross hypocrisie is this? If a man should propound to himself, and declare to others that he would profess Christian Religion, but he would leave himself a freedom to practise any way, live as his list, were not this in him the most deliberate, wilful and perfect hypocrisie that can be ima∣gined? And is it not so in a Nation? yet this is the Agreements Profession. 4. Is not this holding forth of Christian Religion as the publique Profession being compared with the rest of this Section, a self-contradiction? for if none shal be compelled to the publique pro∣fession, but may cast it off if they will, as in the second Head; and if men may both profess and practise differently from that which (it's said) shall be publiquely held forth, as in the third Head; if this li∣berty be generally made use of, what becomes of the publique pro∣fession? how is it held forth? and by whom? And suppose it not grown to that, yet this Agreement neither tells us who it intends shall hold it forth, nor by what acts or means it shall be held forth;
but on the contrary, denies the Representatives to have the high∣est and final Judgment concerning things Spiritual or Evangeti∣cal;Pag. 14. part. 8 and consequently it cannot be done by them and for a Church Representative, or National Synod, or any other way of holding forth a publique Profession, here is not the least sillable, but con∣trarywise provisions that make it morally impossible to be done. Agreem. Which we desire may by the grace of God he reform∣ed to the greatest purity, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, according to the Word of God. 1. Here are none nominated, en∣couraged, or authorized to take this work in hand, and we appre∣hend the Representatives, being not to have the judgment of things Spiritual of Evangelical, are dis-enabled to do, or set others a∣bout it. 2. But in the three following Heads there are full pro∣mises, that men may (if they will) live unreformed, yea lay aside the very face and profession of Religion, or deform the Church of God in Doctrine, Worship or Discipline, without controul. 3. We have Covenanted a Reformation in all these; but is this hollow de∣sire, with long actual grants of the contrary following it, all the keeping and performing of our Covenant that is intended? It is no marvel those words are left out [according to the example of the best reformed Churches,] for such a Reformation is this, is without example or pattern in any Church or age. 4. It is Re∣formation according to the Word of God, That the Magistrate suppress the preaching of false doctrines, and exercise of false Re∣ligion, and that he command men to serve the Lord, according to his own institution, and bring men to the means of their Salvation, which the following particulars deny him power to do. Agreem. The instructing of the people whereunto in a publique way, (so it be not cumpulsive,) as also the maintaining of able Teachers for that end, and for the confutation or discovery of He∣resie, Error, and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine, is allow∣ed to be provided for by our Representatives. 1. Here is men∣tion of able Teachers for the instructing of the people in Christian Religion, but not a word of a Church or Ministry for this, or for the building up of those that are instructed, or for the offering up of the publique Worship, the administration of the Sacraments and Discipline: Must we have none of these things provided for? Must they be laid aside, until that faint desire, without hands or endeavors, work out a Reformation? Or must these be dispensed
by any body? Here then is a Christian Religion without Church, Ministry, Sacraments or Discipline. 2. Here is confutation and discovery of Heresie, &c spoken of, but no Church Censures, or Authority placed in any to purge them out of the Church. 3. Here is compulsive instruction prohibited; the meaning of which we take to be, that none shall be compelled to repair to the publique meetings for instruction, or to behave themselves orderly therein; so that neither Magistrate, parent or master shall bring those under them to the means of their salvation, but give them the reins to run on in ignorance, and all damnable ways. This one clause, if followed, is a lesson that may more instruct men to irreligion and informedness, and more unteach men the Christian Religion, then all the able Teachers, here allowed to be provided for by the Representatives, can prevail to instruct them to it. 4. Here is not so much care taken to promote the Religion, which is intend∣ed publiquely to be held forth, as there is of giving advantage to other ways differing from it in the following Heads; for here the instruction of people unto the publique Religion, and providing Teachers for that end, is put off, and referred to the Representa∣tives; but the liberty of diserting it, and both professing, and pra∣ctising contrary to it, is presently granted and enacted; and the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, contrary to that liberty, are re∣pealed. The maintenance of which Teachers may be out of a publique Treasury, and we desire not by Tythes. For this, we being in hand with matter of Religion, and this being but of a temporal concernment, and that our own, we shall not insist on it: We ex∣pect to suffer in such things, and think it but suitable when our Re∣ligion it self is thus dealt with, as in this Agreement; only seeing that in this very page it saith, No Representative shall in any mise level mens estates, destroy property, &c. We mind it, to see that it agree with it self. Provided, That Popery and Prelacy he not hold forth as the publique way on profession in this Nation. 1. They are so much the more beholding to this Agreement, the ways that are not thus held forth being better provided for, as we shall see presently. 2. Then, any or all other ways of Religion, called Christian, are, or may, be held forth as the publique way or profession, besides Popery and Prelacy, here then is a profession of Religion of a wide
latitude, and of strange party-coloured, and jarring composure, more like to the mixture of the cup in the hand of the great Whore of Babylon, or to the many headed and homed beast she sits on, Revel. 17. then to pure and uniform Religion of the chaste Spouse of Christ. 3. Why are these two only excepted, is it because these are the worst of all? doubtless there are other doctrines and ways that are held forth among us, or may be intro∣duced as bad as the worst points of Popery, & ten thousand times worse then Prelacy, such as these of the Antiscripturists, Antitri∣nitarians, Arrians, Pelagians, &c. 4. Why are they only exclu∣ded from being the publique profession? If they may be allowed to be professed and practised, why may they not be comprehended under the notion of the publique profession, as well, at least, as some other differing ways? It they be too dangerous or noxious for that notion, why are they not wholly exterminated? they may hurt as well, if they be permitted, as private profession. That to the publique Profession so held forth none be compelled by penalties,2 Head. or otherwise, but only may be endeavored to be won by sound doctrine, and the example of a good Conversation. 1. To the profession of Christian Religion none among us have been or are desired to be compelled, but it hath been, and still is judged, a necessary course to cause men that profess the Christian Religion to carry towards it answerably, to bring men to the means of the knowledg of it, and to restrain men from publique scandalizing of it. 2. Compulsion by Penalties, or otherwise here forbidden, may include the Ecclesiastical Censures of the Church, the exercise of the power of parents over their children, and of masters over their servants, in reference to duties of Reli∣gion, and the rather, because it is said, they only may be endeavored to be won by sound doctrine, &c. which words are exclusive of all other ways. 3. Here then (if this should stand) men might become Atheists, Recusants, Sabbath-breakers, Blasphemers, or what they will, and no man say to them, what dost thou? The former Court connivance of Popery, the prelatical indulgence of prophaneness, the Kings book for sports on the Lords Day so much cryed out upon since this Parliament, were but small Gnats to the swallowing down of this; a horrible thing to be enacted in a King∣dom so generally christianized as this is. 4. Them may no Court or Magistrate constrain men to take an oath (such as is used among
us) because in so doing he professeth Christian Religion. 5. How should men be won to Christian Religion by sound doctrine, and good Conversation, when no provision is made to bring, or keep doctrine to be sound, and conversation to be religious. That such as profess faith in God by Jesus Christ (however differing in judgment from she Doctrine,3 Head. Worship, or Discipline, publiquely held forth as aforesaid,) shall not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the profession of their faith, and exercise of Religion, according to their conscience. 1. Thus all the damna∣ble Heresies, Doctrines of Devils, Idolatrous, Superstitious, and a∣bominable Religions that ever have been broached, or praclised, or can be devised (if the persons owning them will but profess faith in God by Jesus Christ) are set a liberty in this Kingdom; nay not only granted a Toleration, but enfranchisement, yea pro∣tection and patronage, and that in gross, without considering or knowing what is so allowed, and taken into Tutelage. 2. Although here is a distinction used betwixt the Doctrine, Worship and Di∣scipline publiquely held forth, and other ways differing from them, yet the deserters of, and contrary professors and practisers to the publique profession have as much favor granted them (as to secure practise) as they have that embrace it, nay more. 1. None are forbidden to compel by penalties, or otherwise, to any profession of Faith, or exercise of Religion, that is differing from the publique, how gross soever it be in it self, or opposite to it, only men may not be compelled to the publique. 2. None are prohibited to re∣strain any from the publique Religion, only men may not restrain from the Heterodox, or differing ways, though never so corrupt. 3. No protection is granted to those of the publique profession; men may thrust themselves into the publique Assemblies, violate the Ordinances of them, and no remedy for it; men may profess the publique Religion at their perils, but the differing ways must be protected. 3. It were much more to the honor of the Name and Faith or God, if this liberty must be afforded, that men might have it without professing Faith in God by Jesus Christ, for the worst the world will verbally profess thus much to obtain such a liberty if they have need of it, and by their professing thus, when as both their real prefession, and their practise denyeth, opposeth and reproacheth the Faith in God by Jesus Christ, the Name of God and of Christ and the true Faith are but the more blasphemed and vilified.
Agreem. In any place (exept such as shall be set and apart for the publique worship, where we provide not for them unless they have leave.) 1. As you provide not for them, so you prohibit them not the place of the publique Worship, but rather by adding that reservation, unless they have leave, you make them capable of it, only they must carry favor with them that can give leave, and then ask and have. 2. If they (to wit, the dissenters from the publique, and advancers of another different profession of Religi∣on) may have leave, and upon it enjoy the places of publique Wor∣ship, then may they by encreasing their number come to justle out the publique profession, and then that which in the first head was propounded to be held forth and recommended, ceaseth to be the publique profession, and instead of being held forth, is put forth a∣doors. 3. Were this a real exeption, and might not be remitted by leave, yet it is little or no abatement of the liberty, or preven∣tion of the growth of a way to e denyed the publique, if it may have free passage in any other place, yea if it find followers enough (as, if it be bad enough, it is likely to do) it may become as pub∣lique as that which hath that name, it being the concourse of peo∣ple, and not the place which makes any action of society pub∣lique. Agreem. So as they abuse not this liberty to the civil injury of others, or to actual disturbance of the publique peace on their parts. Civil injury then of men, and breach of outward wordly peace, must by all means be prevented, and rather Religion con∣fined then it incurred, such miscarriages may nullifie this liberty, but spiritual, yea divine injury, the disturbance of the Churches, and consciences peace and wealth must be let pass, yea protected. Agreem. Nevertheless it is not intended to be hereby provi∣ded, that this liberty shall necessarily extend to Popery or Prela∣cy. This clause (as the former) would make a countenance of being an exception, but indeed is none; for as it doth not say, that these two shall be excluded from this liberty, so it leaves it Arbi∣trary, that it may extend to them, and consequently leaves no au∣thority in any to restrain them from it; if any in the place of Ma∣gistracy should go about to abridg them of this liberty, they might soon plead, where is your authority? The Agreement pro∣hibits to us, but never any Law forbade a thing in these terms, it shall not
necessarily be. The same, though it be not exprest, must needs be granted of all other ways, to which this liberty is intended; it is not necessary it should extend to this or that, because it is not ne∣cessary that this or that should be. And because the exceptions that we have noted by the way, upon looking into them, appear to us to be of no reallity at all, but may be inserted as colours and shadows to blind the eyes of men easie of belief, and to make them think those more generally distasted and exploded ways Popery and Prelacy are quite cashier'd from having freedom, and that others are much confined by exclusion from the places set apart for the publique profession. We shall yet further give notice to the Reader, that these pretend∣ed exceptions (as to that purpose) are but void and frivolous terms, meer nothing, and that notwithstanding them, Popery and Pre∣lacy stand as free to be practised as any other different ways, and those other different ways are as capable (if they can but get head or favor) of the publique places, yea of the stile of being held forth as the publique profession in the Nation, as any one that may seem at this day to have the property thereof. For I. The second and third particulars of this Section are pag. 27. and 28. declared to be fundamental to our Common Right, Liberty and Safety, and there being nothing positive in them to exclude either Popery or Prelacy from liberty and protection therein provided, or any dif∣ferent ways from the publique places, (as hath been noted) they stand inviolably by this Agreement entitled thereunto, and in case any Representative should take in hand to restrain them, they may lawfully by force of arms make resistance against the Repre∣sentative, pag. 27. part. 10 of this Agreement; yea this being a fundamental, all they that joyn in and subscribe the Agreement, bind themselves to maintain them in it, pag. 28. 2. Suppose there were something in these seeming exceptions, yet it vanisheth into nothing; for if the Papists, Prelatists, or any other, do exceed them, none can take cognizance of it, or offer to reduce them into the limits of these exceptions, for all Representatives are forbid∣den the highest and final judgment in Spiritual or Evangelical things, and of so, then all other Judicatories and Magistrates must needs be denyed subortinate judgment or cognizance of such things, under which all the aberrations in this matter are com∣prehended, yea, and by this means any other Religion that cannot
be shrowded under a Profession of Faith in God by Jesus Christ, as Judaism, Turcism, Paganism, may yet settle it self, and enjoy freedom amongst us by this Agreement, if it err only in Spiritu∣al and Evangelical things, in as much as there is none that hath power of judgment over it to suppress it. We have but a word or two more way of observation on this Section of Religion. We cannot but take notice, that the holding forth and recom∣mending of Christian Religion, as the publique profession in this Nation, is laid down, not as fundamental to our Common Right, Liberty and Safety, but only as useful and good for the publique, pag. 28. whereas the second and third particulars (wherein Liberty from the profession of that Christian Religion, and for a different profession and practise from it is provided for) are laid down as fundamental to our Common Right, Freedom and Safety, so that by this Agreement, Chrisrtian Religion, as to the Foundation of a Kingdom, is a stone set at naught by these builders, though it de∣serve to be the head of the corner;Acts 4.11. whilst Liberty to desert that Re∣ligion, and positively to profess and practise in opposition to it, Liberty of Irreligion, Idolatry, Superstition, Blasphemy, Sabbath∣breaking, Seduction, Schism, is of the Foundation, sure the edifice must needs be a Babel, or confusion, a principal part of the Foundation whereof is such a Liberty as this; it must needs be a rotten building, where Liberty to fundamental Erroe is of the Foundation. Once more, it is said, as you see noted, that this Liberty is fun∣damental to our Common Right, Freedom and Safery; but let us ask what equity there is in a liberty to iniquity? In a liberty to dishonor and injure, the Name, Truth and Ordinances of God, to infect and destroy the Church of Christ, and the souls of men? What freedom is it wander and run a whoring from God, to be led captive by ignorance, error and unrighteousness? And what safety is there to open the fold for grievous wolves to en∣ter in, and devour the flock, to give way to the poysonous and eat∣ing gangrene of damnable heresie, to spread without any corrasive? And was it noted of Israel. Judg. 5.8. They chose new gods, then was War in the gates? In the last we come to lay down Arguments or Reasons, some of many (that might be insisted on) against the relaxation,
or setting free of men to Atheism, and the full liberty and pro∣tection granted to false Doctrines and Religions by this Agree∣ment, in this Section. 1. If the Scriptures may be our rule and judg in this matter (and to those that admit of their binding authority and decision we only address our selves) the sinfulness of such a Toleration, and maintenance of erroneous and irreligious ways, wil clearly appear; 1. By testimonies our of the Old Testament, wherein there is more found for our direction, because (as we apprehend it) the Governors of Israel, to whom the Oracles of God were then committed, had in this case received the knowledg and worship of the true God. 1. By the Commandments which the Lord gave for the sup∣pression of Idolatry, and the punishing of Idolaters, Blaspemers, and Sabbath-breakers, Deut. 7.5.12.2, 3.13.1, 2. to the end. 17.2, 3, 4, 5. Jud. 2.2. Exod. 22.20.31.14. Lev. 24.13, 14, 15, 16. Exod. 32. 26, 27. Num. 15.35. 2. By the approved & binding examples of the people of God, and of godly Magistrates abolishing and destroying the monuments and means of Idolatry, and executing punishments upon Idol-Priests and Worshippers, blasphemers of the living God and profaners of the Sabbath, and commanding and causing those under their authority to abandon superstition, and to embrace the true ser∣vice of God. Gen. 18.19.35.2, 3, 4. Exod. 32.28.1 King. 18.40. 2 King. 10, 11, 24.2 Chron. 14.2, 3, 4, 5.15.8, 12, 13, 16.19.4. 23.17.29.5, to the end. 30.5, 6, 12.31.1, 2, &c. 34.3, to 9. & vers. 32, 33.35.2, 3, &c. Ezra 10.5, 7, 8. Neh. 13.9, 11, 17, 19. Yea Gentile Princes, being convinced of their duty to the true God, have straily enjoyned his honor and service, and mulcted the contrary, Ezra 6.3, to 13.7.13, to 27. Dan. 3.29. 3. By condemning and reproving the Toleration of corrupt ways of Religion, 1 King. 18.21.2 Chron. 20.33. Hos. 7.8. 4. By predictions and precepts (apperataining to the times of the Gospel) holding forth the duty of those that are in civil pow∣er to promote Religion, and to punish the corrupters thereof by that their power, Isa. 49.29. Zech. 13.3. And whereas some except against the validity of those precepts, presidents, &c. as proper to the Paedagogy of the Law and the Na∣tion of Israel, and not binding to us now under the Gospel,
we say to that, 1. Some of those commands and practices were antecedent to the Law given by Moses, as that of Abraham, commanding his children,Gen. 18.19. and his houshold after him, to keep the way of the Lord:Gen. 35.2. and that of Jacob, requiring not only his hous∣hold, but all that were with him (amongst whom it is supposed were the captive Shechemites taken, in the Chapter preceding,Divines Annot. in loc. by the sons of Iacob, who indeed were likeliest to harbor Idols) to put away the strange gods that were among them: And it is very remarkable, that before any Law was given by Moses for the punishing of Blasphemers and Sabbath-breakers, yet the people of Israel apprehended, and put in ward, both the Blasphe∣mer, Levit. 24.12. and the Sabbath-breaker, Numb. 15.34. un∣til the minde of the Lord might be shewed them, having so much in them by the light of nature, and the rules of the moral Law they were acquainted with, that such were to be punished. 2. We have no other Institution of Magistracy under the Gospel then that which was before, nor find we in the new Testament any abrogation or alteration of what was before time cómitted to the Magistrate, but civil authority continues Gods Ordinance by ver∣tue of that appointment from the beginning; neither is any thing detracted from his commission that was at first in it. 3. No Reason can be assigned, why those evils in Religon should be then punished, and not now; they are no less sins now, then they were then; they are as dishonorable, and hateful to God, and as baneful to the souls of men, now, as they were then. The Reasons given for their punishment then (as that they are very ensnaring if allowed to be among the servants of God, Iud. 2.3. Exod. 34.12, 13. that they tended to turn men away from the Lord their God, and to thrust them out of his way, and that to punish them is to put the evil away from the people, and to pro∣cure that all Israel may hear and fear, and do no more such wick∣edness, Deut. 13.5, 11.) they are moral, and still obtain strength: Error and false Religion have not lost their ensnaring nature, nor are men now more wise and stedfast in the truth then they have been. 4. What is now fundamental to common right, liberty, and safety, was so in those former days, and we may not think that the Lord would have given such strict and standing Laws to his people, in matters of Religion, if liberty therein had been in∣deed fundamental to common right, freedom and safety, as this Agreement pretendeth.
2. By authorities out of the New Testament. 1. The description of the Magistrates power and duty extend∣eth to the procurement of good, and avengement of evil indefi∣nitely without any restriction; and there being no limitation of this good, and evil, in this or any other text, we must needs hold to that approved rule of interpreting Scripture, which is not to distinguish, or limit the sence, when the holy Ghost doth not. 2. The duty of Christians, in relation to their Rulers, is, to pray for them, (to wit, for their Coversion,1 Tim. 2.1, 2 as appears by v. 3, 4) that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: A Christian Magistrate then as such (and consequently by the power of his Magistracy) is to assist, and promote, not only honesty and justice towards man, but godliness and piety to∣wards God. 3. Parents and Masters of Families, whose power is of the same nature (that is, civil and external) with that of the Magi∣strate,2 Joh. v. 10. they are enjoyned to exclude and expel out of their houses false Teachers, and then by Analogy, or proportion, the Magi∣strates are to prosecute such, and exterminate them out of their state. No Reason can be yeelded why the less extensive and infe∣rior power should be thus tyed, and impowered, to oppose He∣reticks, and not the larger and superior of the Magistrate: only the Apostle might forbear to mention it of the Magistrates, they being at that time generally unchristian. 4. The Holy Ghost foretelleth, that those ten Kings which do first give their power and strength unto the beast, and do make war with the Lamb, being overcome by him,Rev. 17.12, 13, 14, 16 shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire; that is, shall destroy the Roman Antichrist, or Rome Antichristian; and that not only as the beast, having civil dominion, but as the great Whore, (that is) as a corrupter of Religion, by lyes and idolatry;Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and a seducer of the Kings and inhabiters of the earth to her false Religion: But how shall they lawfully do this, if Kings and States have no sword, power, or duty to command, enforce, and punish, in the cause of Religion. 3. Having thus (we hope) sufficiently confirmed the unwar∣rantableness of such a manumission, and protection of irreligion,
false doctrine, and perverse ways, by Scripture authority, we shall for a close tender to consideration: 1. How can those Caveats, given us by our blessed Saviour, and his Apostles,Matth. 7.15. To beware of false Prophets; To take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees,Cap. 16 6 and of the Sadduces; To mark them which cause divisions,Rom. 16.17. and offences, contrary to the doctrine received,Gal. 1.9. and to avoyd them: If any man preach any o∣ther Gospel,Phil. 2.2. then that we have received, to Anathematize him: To beware of dogs,1 John. 5.21. evil workers, and of the concision: To keep our selves from Idols: and many others How can the observa∣tion, and the practice of these, and a subscription, and grant of such a liberty, consist together? 2. How can we do this, and yet be true to our Covenant, wherein we stand bounden sincerely, really and constantly to en∣deavor, in our several places and callings,Artic. 1, & 2. the Reformation of Religion, in the Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, in doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government: To bring the Churches of God, in the three Kingdoms, to the neerest Conjunction and Ʋniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church-Government, and Catechising; That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresie, Schism, Profaness, and whatso∣even shall be found to be contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness? 3. In doing this thing shall we not fail, desert, and give up that Cause for which defensive Arms were taken up by the Parliament and Kingdom; for the maintenance of which so many lives have been adventured, so much blood hath been spilt, such miseries have been waded through in the late Wars, yea, so many prayers put up, and Fasts publique and private observed, one main (if not the first and principal) part of which Cause was the Vindication and Defence of Religion?See Declarat. of both King∣doms, 1643. And shall we thus improve and requite all the wonderful successes and deliverances wherewith the Lord of hostes hath owned, and pleaded this Cause for us, and answer∣ed our desires therein? 4. What advantage would this liberty give to our, and religions enemies, to open their mouthes in reproaches, & blasphemy against our way; who have formerly objected against us, That our de∣signe was to promote private fancies, to introduce a multiformity
of Religion, and to subvert Magistracy; and whom we have charged with a cup filled up to the brim of Apostacy, Atheism,Decla. of both Kingdoms. p. 4. Idolatry, Blasphemies; and Profaness? 5. Shall we not asperse all the petal Laws of the Land, and all the judicial proceedings that have been upon them since the Reforma∣tion against Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and Papists, or any other, justly suffering in matter of Religion, as acts of highest injustice, being against the Fundamentals of common Right, Freedom, and Safety? Lastly, Will not this Liberty, reduced into practice, be in dan∣ger, not only to deface, defile, rend, and crumble to nothing our Churches, but to fill the Kingdom full of Factions and Tumults, and tend to the overthrow of the Magistrates power in civil things, and that men having once got head, and immunity in the things of God, will proceed to introduce a lawlesness and impu∣nity in humane Interests; the Commandments of both Tables be∣ing so united and enwreathed in one, that they stand and full to∣gether,Iames 2.10. and the violation of one hath an influence upon all; and it being so easie for men willing to err, to entitle any civil extra∣vagancy, not only to Conscience, but to Faith and Religion? We have thus, in the uprightness of our hearts, delivered our Judgment concerning this Agreement, and Subscription to it, not affecting Division, or Faction, but vehemently desiring and seeking a religious Peace, and right agreement of the people; not intending any disrespective reflexion upon the persons of any, but heartily desiring the true honor and happiness of all; and endea∣voring, according to our places, to prevent the great evils that we pre-apprehend will ensue, if this Agreement should be carried on. As for us, we shall not (we trust) sin against the Lord,1 Sam. 12 23. in ceasing to pray for you our dear Flocks, and the rest of the Chur∣ches of Christ in these Kingdoms of England and Ireland, that he would direct your course in this case of so weighty and funda∣mental an importance: and we have herein endeavored to shew you the good and the right way: And having layd before you those Grounds upon which we profess our disagreement and dis∣sent to the Book called the Agreement of the People: We testifie the same by underwriting our names. Richard Heyrick Warden of Christs
Colledg in Manchester. Richard Hollinworth Fellow of the said Colledg. William Walker Minister there. Alexander Horrocks Minister in the Dean parish. John Tilsley Pastor at Dean. William Alt Ministers of the Go∣spel at Bury. Toby Forness. Ministers of the Go∣spel at Bury. Robert Bathe Pastor of the Church at Rachdale. James Hyet Pastor at Croston. William Ward Min. of the Gospel at Walton. Thomas Johnson Pastor of Halsal. Edward Woolmer Min. of Flixton. Thomas Cranage Pastor of Brindle. James Wood Pastor at Asshton in Makerfield. Edward Fleetwood Pastor at Kirkam. John Angier Pastor of Denton. Thomas Pyke Pastor of Radcliff.
John Harrison Pastor of the Church at Asshton-underline. Jonathan Scholefield Min. at Heywood Thomas Holland Pastor of Ringley. Robert Constantine Pastor of Oldham. William Meek Pastor of Salford. James Walton Min. of Blakely. David Durie Preacher at Gorton. John Walker Preacher of the Word. Samuel Joanes Min. at Hool. Henry Welsh Min. of Gods Word at Chorley. Thomas Crompton Min. at Astley. Peter Bradshaw Min. at Cockey. Isaac Ambrose pastor of Preston. James Bradshaw pastor of the Church at Wigan. John Fogge pastor of Liverpool. Richard Maudsley pastor at Ellens. Robert Yates pastor at Warrington. VVilliam Dun Min. of Ormeskirk. Thomas Norman pastor at Newton.
Paul Latham pastor of Standish. VVilliam Leigh pastor at Newchurch VVill: Garner preacher of the Gospel Thomas VVhitehead pastor at Halton Robert Shaw Min. at Cockeram. Edward Gee pastor at Eccleston. VVill: Brownsword pastor at Douglas. Christopher Edmundson pastor at Gar∣stang. Peter Atkinson Min. at Ellel. Richard VValker Min. at VVarton. VVilliam Smith Min. at Overkolles. Robert Seddon min. of the Gospel at Alker. Robert Cunningham preacher at Ha∣milton. John Fisher pastor at Bispham. John Jaques pastor of Bolton. John Syll pastor of Gressingham. John Harper Rich. Goodwin Ministers of the Gospel at Bolton in the Moors. March 6. 1648. Imprimatur JOHN DOWNAME. FINIS.
additions of grace and glory into Gods Children,Rev. 2.10. and therefore the chief marks of Gods favour: As in our gracious King Charles,Dan. 12.10. who was also taken away from the evill to come, in Gods mercy unto him; which thou even thou, unto the shame and confusion of thy face (although thou hast harned it) shalt see in the ap∣proaching day of Englands calamity, which in a great part is procured and hastned by thy infernall counsels; thou needst not to have given that Scripture such a violent stretch so to streine it as to make it reach from Assyria unto England, or to travaile so farre for a reason why His Majesty should not have a royall inter∣ment with His Mauncesters; the causes were nearer thee, Let me assigne them: First, it had been a Condemnation of your selves to have al∣lowed him solemne and Kingly Funeralls, unto whom you gave so unjust and cruell a death, that were to build up what you were resolved to destroy. Next, you could not but know, that the neighbourhood of his sacred earthly remaines must needs refricate the scarce skinn'd sorrowes of London; when they should have such a standing and still present Monument of their former happinesses, in His Maje∣sties peaceable Government; and of their new misery in your Tyranny, which would serve also (this being the place of the greatest confluence) to recrude the griefe of the whole King∣dome, and probably beget such compunction and reluctancy in both city and Kingdome, as would testifie it selfe, by their attempt to cast you downe headlong from your new and wickedly acquired Dominion. Another reason was, lest the nearnesse of his Body whom you murthered, might too frequently offer unto you the horror of your Guilt, and redouble unto you those inward cheques and lashings of your Consciences (which you cannot be without) and so impede and trouble your Counsels. The Devill at the Oracle of Apollo of Daphne could not give his Answers unto Julian the Apostate,Theod. l. 3. c. 9. who sent to consult him about his undertakings against the Persians, so long as the body of the Martyr Babylas lay by him, so it is to be presumed that the same Spirit (which the Apostle saith,Eph. 2.2. powerfully worketh in the Children of Disobedience) might be hindred in his cooperation
and influence upon those unto whom he hath consigned the chief exercise of his power in our English world, if King Charles his sacred reliques were lodged so nigh unto them as Westminster, and therefore Windsor was neare enough. But from the view of His Majesties undeniable matchlesse Virtues, let us passe unto that of His Sufferings: Sinfull envie never failes to give a malitious attendance upon virtue, which by how much the more it is illustrious, with so much the greater rancour doth she dog and persecute it, and therefore many are the troubles of the righteous; and no (meer) man had ever more, then righteous King Charles: behold and see if any sorrows and sufferings were like unto His. See one of the most potent Monarchs of Europe, loved at home, and feated abroad, most injuriously and strictly Imprisoned, debarred from the most deare society of the most virtuous and best Wife, from the converse and sight of his most sweet and hopefull Children, from the attendance of his most faithfull Servants, from Gods house, from Gods publique worship & all Gods Servants, fore'd to cohabite with Beasts, brutish, savage, and wicked Men, & these to be made the Instruments of their cruelty unto him, who were his sworne Subjects and Servants, upon whom all civill and di∣vine obligations of duty and affection unto His Majesty rested, and that upon pretensions of Religion and Liberty, of which He was the truest and most undoubted Defender; to lie under the weight & wounds of so many scandals, reproaches, wants, and miseries; besides the most grievous sense of the sufferings of his Kingdoms and best Subjects, to be daily tortured with so many iterated, unreasonable Propositions, and insolent Demands, to be racked out of his undoubted Royal Rights, to make so many Conces∣sions & such great Condescentions in his propensness unto peace, which notwithstanding his Enemies never meant; to be tormen∣ted (if it wre possible) unto perjury, sacriledge, and Acheisme; and to have no other Conditions propounded for the Enjoy∣ment of his Crownes and Kingdomes, then that which the De∣vill made unto our Saviour, All these will I give thee if thou wilt fall downe and worship me; to offer his owne (that which never was theirs) to deny God, which God gave him to acknow∣ledge and worship him: These must needs be sorrowes and suf∣ferings
as beyond expression, so above our conception; most terrible tests, and trials of all his virtues; certainly no man had ever more, and more strict examinations of Gods graces in him, all which he fully answered with a learned and invincible piecy; for in all these who ever heard him murmure, repine, or charge God foolishly? who ever heard him accuse, raile at, or threaten his most confirmed Foes? with Job,Iob 16.20. his eyes still powred out tears unto God, whose justice in their greatest injustice he acknowledged, and although he vindicated his owne Innocency, (having where∣with to justifie himselfe before man) from theirs; yet not before God, he cleared the equity of his judgement upon him, for acting against his Conscience in the Earle of Straffords death. But it was the great and crying guilt of these Nations sinnes (Englands principally) which made this righteous man fall into the pits of his Adversaries, to ripen Gods judgement upon this Nation, by that great addition of guilt [the shedding of his inno∣cent bloud] who had so many characters of Gods supreme power and spirituall graces upon him, as must needs make this Crime committed against God, and draw his speedy and unavoidable vengeance upon them for it. God usually punisheth one sinne by suffering Sinners to fall into others, and those customary sinnes accompanied with sens∣lessnesse and impenitency, which fills up the measure of sin brim∣full for judgment to take it off: so that this pious Prince fell in the very conruption of Christianity, which is of farre more maligne aspect, and hath a more malitious influence of impiety upon the actions of men then Atheisme it selfe, for then men professe that they know God, jet in their works they deny him; using the name of God and Religion, as Conjurers int heir Incantations to perpe∣trate those things are most contrary unto God, and destructive unto Religion; for as the Devill never doth more hurt then when he appeares in the likenesse of an Angel of light; so are men never so mischievous, as when they drive on wicked designes un∣der the shew of Godlinesse. Englands former sins which caused this Gods just dereliction, & the abandoning them up unto greater, were their exceeding lu∣xury, in turning the grace of God (temporal favours) into wantonnes, the long continuance of their peace, the increase of their Trade,
riches, and plenty, begot in them a generall insolency and pride, so that when they Waxed fat, like Jesurun, they kicked against God, in the Authority and regard due unto his principall Offi∣cers, the Prince, and the Priest: Hence the people of England (in their generality) became self-willed, heady, high-minded, and in∣corrigible, they slandered the footsteps of Gods Anointed, smote him-with the tongue, contended with Gods Priests; and usurped that sa∣cred Jurisdiction which God had delegated unto them, as those Conspirators did (Ye take too much upon you ye Sonnes of Levi, since all the people of the Lord are holy) under pretence of then Am∣bition of the Clergy; and being like Elihu's now bottels, ready to burst, with that liquor or flatuous and superficiall knowledge instilled into them by the giddy preachments, and undigested, swelling, and tedious prayers of their Lecturers, (who reduced all Religion unto lip-worship, and canting Scriptures.) Hence came it to passe that contemning the old paths, the truth of the reformation in the Protestant Religion they contended unto bloud to corrupt by their phanatick Alterations, the pure Doctrine & E∣vangelical discipline established in the Church of England, to effect which with the more ease, they adventure upon sacriledge, to carry on that, they must pull down Episcopacy, (the fence of the Church) and here the King, as a nursing Father interposing, they tender Him unable by encroaching upon his Prerogatives, quarrelling him, seize upon his Strengths, Arme, fight against him, Imprison, and then Murther Him; which last Act of Rebellion, though the greatest part of the first Engagers may be thought never to have intended, yet they may see the first violation of their Obedience due unto His Majesty punished, by a guilt (thus farre) of his In∣nocent, bloud, that that power which they raised, spilt it; So dangerous it is to vary from a Christian Principle, or to doe evill that good may come of it, God onely having power to direct, li∣mit, and determine any evill action: so that looke over the pe∣digree of Englands sinnes through the severall descents thereof, and you will find it thus, peace begot wealth, that plenty, that pride, that vanity, that curiosity, that contention, that hate of the Clergy, that sacriledge, that the downfall of Bishops, that the con∣tempt of the KING, that Warre, that Imprisonment, and that the murther of the King, a murther, the most horrid murther that ever
the Sun saw, for Subjects to take away their KING's life; with∣out the prescription of a single example, or a law; nay, even a∣gainst all lawes divine and humance, to Trie him after the forme of a Judiciary proceeding, this is to entitle God unto the grea∣test sinne; to establish iniquity by a Law, and to make God such as themselves: Thus the Jewes dealt with our Saviour,Ioh. 19.7. We have a Law, and by that Law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God, although there was no such Law; but a new-made Law, a Junto-law, Straffords law, Canterburies law, the KING's law (consequent Lawes, Lawes without names or cognizance) made because He was KING. Neither doth their Power any more prove the equity of this fact (the great scandall of the Christian name, and height of Anabaptistical fury) then the De∣vils power (which is from God) doth justifie his malice (which is from himself.) They have now indeed made King Charles a Glorious King, prov'd him glorious in his Personall virtues, glorious in his di∣vine Grace, but most Glorious in the Christian Constancy of his Glorious sufferings for Gods Cause, the true Protestant Religion, and the Lawes and Liberties of the three Kingdomes, thus hath God extorted a truth from them; for this spake they not of themselves, but (God forceing their testimony) they prophecyed. As we have seen His Majesties sufferings, and their causes our sins, so let us reflect upon their punishment; as the Springs from which our sorrowes should arise.l'it. Const. l. 4. c. 29. The exceeding avarice and hy∣pocrisie (two noted Court sinnes with which the greatest Chri∣stian Prince Constantine was abused) of the State-Grandees, the deep pits wherein they laid the fatall snares into which pious King CHARLES fell, will be visibly punished, for God will not be mocked. The pride, vanity, sacriledge, rebellion, and the cruell murther of His Majesty will have particular judgements levell'd against these sinnes; every mans sinne even of those who have fought for His Majesty who have yet fought against him by their sinnes hath given force unto this great stroked and wound given unto these Kingdomes in His Majesties death; and therefore ought every man to proportion his sorrow unto his sinnes. As King Josiah from Judah, so the strong Barricadoe King Charles is taken away betwixt Gods judgements, and this Kingdome, the
great and wide Inlet of all misery is made by his death, could our sorrows answer them, like a Torrent, it would over flow all the banks of reason, and grow too big to be carried away by the chanels of our senses: behold every spring of Jeremiah and Ju∣dahs sorrow open, to send forth these flowing streames of af∣fliction upon us, and also arise from the same head; The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was taken in their pice, of whom we said, Ʋnder his shadow we shall live among the Heathen. Those heavie judgements which the Prophet Jeremiah foresaw impending, and after came to passe by King Josiahs death, are in agreat part by King Charles his death,Lam. 1.10. & 2.7. already come upon us. Gods house his beautifull house is laid maste, the Heathen have entred into the Sanctuary, they have made a noise in the house of the Lord as in the day of a solemus Feast: So that they who in the beginning pretended God, Religion, the Church, [their Cause] have dealt with us as that Faction among the Jewes who called themselves The Zealous in the Warre with Titus did under pretense of defending Religion,Joseph. Bell. Jud.l. 2. c. 12. and the Law, they possessed themselves of the Temple, yet were themselves the first who put fire with their owne hands into the holy places. How hath the avarice and carnall interests of the Teachers of these times corrupted the purity of our Religion,Lam. 2.14. as Judahs, so Englands onely Prophets have seen vaine and foolish things for her, and they have not discovered her iniquity,4.13. to turne away her capti∣vity, but have ene for her false burthens and causes of banishment; they have shed the bloud of the just (K. Charles) in the midst of her.1.5. Englands greatest Adversaries are chief,5.8. and her Enemies prosper; Servants doe beare rule over us, and there is none to deliver us out of their hand.4.5. They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets,5.12. they that were brought up in ear let embrace dunghils. Princes are hanged by their hands, and the faces of the Elders are not honoured. Warre, de∣solation, and famine, with their sad effects, foretold in these La∣mentations, appeare in our Horrison already like Elijahs little Cloud, which will shortly overspread our whole English firma∣ment; and all these calamities have and will fall upon us,5.16. because the Crowne is fulne from our Head;1.9. the Brittish Josiah K. Charles is taken from us, and we have no Comforter; and how great and
just Causes of our sorrowes are all these Calamities: But let this sorrow have the full advantage in its fall, (to adde motion unto all the turning wheels of our afflicting griefs) the fall from our great happinesse in His Majesties Government: Let London, let England, let Scotland, let Ireland, let every of them Remember (as Jerusalem did) in the daies of her afflictions and her miseries,1.7. all the pleasant things that she had in the daies of old. All the pleasant things they had in the blessed daies of King Charles his blessed Reigne, the glory and truth of her Religion, the just execution of her Lawes, her peace, her riches, her plenty, her liberty at home, and her protection and honour abroad,2.15. England was the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the while earth. The Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have believed that the Ad∣versary and Enemy should have entred into the Gates of (our) Jeru∣salem, London, that Churches should be turned into stables, Gods Houses made Coures of Guands, the Royall Palaces made Garri∣sons, the Tythes (the portion of Gods Ministers) made the Soldiers salary, that the Law should be turned into wormwood, our Religion and, Liberty measured out unto us by the Pikus length, the Decisions of the Sword become the Principles of Faith, and that (:which is the Cause of all this) mechanique Per∣sons, Trades men (who will certainly marre, never can mend so great concernments, they never before handled, or were acquain-with) the sole Moderators of Publique affaires, and the chiefe Princes and Potentates of our Kingdome. But now the glory is departed from (our) Israel,1.1. the Arke of God is taken, and how is England become a Widow? made a prey unto cruell people, and skilfull to destroy, who daily force and prosti∣tute her unto their wicked purposes: for these things let Eng∣land (and every true-hearted English-man) say, I I weep,1.16. mine eye, mine eye runneth downe with water, because the Comforter (King CHARLES) that should relieve my soule, is farre from me. The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, &c. The life of our Religion, of our Lawes, of our Liberties, is taken from us; the Image of Gods power in supreme Authority, Indemnity, & Inviolability, is taken from us, our Physition, our nursing Father, our Comforter, our Protectour, is taken from us, and for our sins was taken in their pits, so that now we want the Wings of his protection
among these Heathen among whom we live; we are now made very Slaves unto the worst of Heathen, a People without God, without Faith, without Law, without Rule, without Reason, without Humanity, without all these, and whose unrully will one∣ly, is unto them all these. These calamities are all fallen upon us, because The breath of our Nostrils, &c. pious King Charles is taken from us like Elias in a fiery Charriot,Vit. Const. l. 4. c. 73. (or as Conctantine the Great after his death was impressed on a Coyne pluck'd up by a divine hand) into Heaven, that his eyes might not see, nor his righteous soule be afflicted with all that evill which is to come upon us, to consume us; woe unto us for we have sinned. These are but the contracted heads of those miseries which we shall all read over, in the vast volumes of our approaching woes; and justly bespeaks such sorrows as might transforme us into Niobes, make our heads ri∣vers of sorrowes, and our eyes fountaines for continuall teares. The Lond in mercy looke upon us, and wipe away these teares from our eyes, and their Causes, our sinnes from our soules; and since the bloud of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church, in mercy unto his Church restore the seed of his Martyr King Charles the first unto the Government of these Kingdomes, that Religion, Peace, and Liberty, may be restored unto us: I conclude these ours,Lam. 5.21, 22. at the Prophet doth his Lamentation, Turne thou unto us, ô Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our daies as of old, if thou hast not utterly rejected us: heare our prayers O Lord for thy Sonnes sake, unto whom with the Holy Ghost be ascribed, &c. FINIS.
