R2068 E402_27 99862324 160444
An Exact and full RELATION Of the great VICTORY OBTAINED. Against the Rebels at Dungons-Hill in IRELAND, August 8. 1647. By the Forces under the Command of Colonel Michael Jones. With a Letter from the said Colonel, to the right Honorable, The Committee at Derby-house. Together with a perfect LIST of all that were slain, and taken Prisoners. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Relation be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Ho∣norable House of Commons. Aug. 19. 1647.
To the Right Honorable, The Com∣mittee at Derby-House. Right Honorable, I Have herewithal given your Lordships an accompt of passages in our late advan∣cing against the Rebels; the observations therein given, drawn up by others, have been perused and approved for true by such as were upon the place & action: It is much from my dispositiō to take notice, much less thus to pub∣lish matters of this kinde, wherein I am so con∣cerned; But at this time I have been thereunto enforced, in the over-forwardness of some who have taken upon them to give out Relations of this Service, not onely short, but far from truth, and of much disadvantage to the Pub∣lique. This Victory had been well leading to a perfect Conquest of this Kingdom, were we thereunto enabled by supplies of Men, Moneys, and other Provisions necessary for the Service. In the very noise of what is now done, I might (by Gods assistance) have ad∣vanced far into the enemies chiefest strengths, and well nigh at once shut up what of this work were to be done in this Province, had I
been furnished with Carriages, Provisions and Pay for the Soldiers, for want of which I have been enforced to march home, whereby time and means may be given to the Enemy for re∣cruiting, to our further disadvantage: for we had not provisions of Victuals in the field for one day, and Money there was not here for one weeks Pay. That of greatest value seized on, was the Train of Artillery, and particular∣ly Sixty four Oxen, worth 16.l. the yoke: These were the Soldiers due, who possessed themselves of them; yet I have gathered them in from several hands for the publike service, promising recompence out of the publike Treasure, which I desire may there be thought upon, and satisfaction therein given: Our loss was not in men (not twenty being found mis∣sing) but in horse, many whereof were kill'd, and rendred unserviceable; the Riders are cast off from present service, if not again mounted, which I humbly desire may be there thought of, for the speedy and vigorous prosecution of the War, which is to be done principally by Horse and Dragooners, the Foot not being able to march in winter. I am Your Lordships most humble Servant, MICHAEL JONES. Dublin, 12 Aug. 1647.
A DIARY and Relation of passages in and about Dub∣lin, from the first of August, 1647. until the tenth of the same. AVGVST I. FOr relieving of Trim (a considerable garison of ours, 20. miles distant from Dublin, besieg'd by Col. Preston, the Rebels General of Leynster with his whole strength, Col. Michael Iones Com∣mander in chief of the Leynster Forces, marched from Dublin, Aug 1. 1647. with about 3800. foot, and two Regiments of horse, two Demiculver∣ings, one Saker and four Sakaruts. That night the Army quartered at a village called Swords, six miles from Dublin, being something out of the rode to Trim, but leading towards the Rendez∣vous appointed for meeting with the Droghedah and Dundalk Forces, joyned with a party of horse and Foot expected out of the North of Ireland. AVGVST II. Monday the 2. they marched to Ballirouthery, six miles from Swords. AVGVST III. Tuesday the 3. They marched over the Hills of Hollywood, a mountainous country, to a place cal∣led the Naal, and that night to Garishtown, where Col. Iones received Intelligence of the advancing of the expected supplies.
AVGVST IV. Wednesday the 4. The Army marched to the Hill of Skreen, where they met with Sir Henry Titch∣born, with the Droghedah Forces, Col: Moor, with those of Dundalk, Newry and Carlingford, and Col: Conway with a party of the Northern old British, all making up about 700. Horse and 1200. Foot, and two pieces of Ordnance: Thither came from Trim, Major Cadogan and Captain Arthur Graham, informing that the Enemy had that morning burnt his camp about Trim, and retired to the old lurking place called Portleister, a great and secure fastness, about five miles westward from Trim. The same day our Army marched to the Hill of Tarra, where they were drawn up and mistered 1500 Horse, & about 5000. Foot. That night they quarterd at the foot of the Hill of Tarra, at a place cald Dodestown; here Col. Iones cald a counsel of war. AVGVST V. Thursday the 5. The Army marched to a place called Skurlockstown, within one mile of Trim, where they quartered that night. AVGVST VI. Friday the 6. They marched through Trim, to a place called Trimbleston, wherein the Enemy had a garison; this place Col: Iones surrounded in view of the Enemy, then encamping at Portleister two
miles off, thereby to draw him forth, if possibly it might be, to engage himself to fight. AVGVST VII. Saturday the 7. A party of fifty horse of ours was commanded out for discovering of the Ene∣my, and observing his motion; about ten a clock that day the Enemy was observed to move, and rising from Portleister to cross the countrey, and march towards Maynouth, a place within ten miles of Dublin; this confirmed the intelligence former∣ly given us, of the Rebels intending to come be∣twixt us and home, and marching to Dublin for surprising of that place in absence of our forces engaged at the siege of Trimbleston. Whereupon Col: Iones resolved to rise with the Army and to follow the Enemy, and had scarcely spoken the word for Drums to beat, but (by especial provi∣dence) at the same instant did the Castle beat a Parley, offring to surrender, if permitted to march away with Bag and Baggage, and Colors flying; which with advice of a Councel of War, was as∣sented unto, We receiving the place, and placing therein a garison. That night our Army marched back through Trim, and quartered at Skurlockstown aforesaid therein, in four hours marching, as far as before they had done in a whole day: That
night a convoy, with some provisions, came from Droghedah to the Army: That night a commanded party of 500. Horse was sent out from our Army, with Orders to follow the Enemy, & beat up his quarters if enquartered, otherwise to follow him to Dublin if marching forward, the body of our Army being to follow after with all possible ex∣pedition: This commanded party found the ene∣my quartered behinde a very great Bog, so as no approach could be made to him; whereof Col: Iones being certified, he the next morning advanced towards the Enemy with the whole Army. AVGVST VIII. The Army marched through the strong fastnes of Dennigan belonging unto Westy, wherein was a garison of the Enemies that shot at our men in their passing by, the village we fired, but the Ca∣stle held out: That day about ten a clock our ar∣my came to a place cald Lynchesknock, within one mile whereof the Enemy was drawn up on Dun∣gon hill, a place to him of all advantages, being an high ground, whereunto adjoyned a Wood and a Bog (their usual refuge in distress) The Enemy also stood possessed of great ditches, within which he was as in so many strong works intrenched; hereunto may be added the advantages of wind and Sun.
The Enemy had lately before mustered 7300 Foot, and 1047 Horse; which number of Horse ap∣peareth by a Muster-Roll after found in these words: viz. Mustered the 5 of August 1647. The Lo. Generals Troop besides Officers 52 Colonell Fitz Gerald 49 The Major Generall 50 Lieutenant Col. Finglas 45 Major Butler 50 Captain Fitz Gerald 42 Colonell Cullin 34 Sir James Dyllon 36 Captain Davies 47 Major Dungan 44 Cap. John Fitz Patrick 35 Colonell Preston 35 Captain Aylmer 36 Cap. Plunket 28 Cap. Harpoole 38 Earl of Fingall 41 Lord of Primbleston 36 Earl of Westmeath 41 Cap. James Barnwell 35 Cap. John Butler 39 Sir Walter Butler 40 Cap. Grase 47 Cap. Edward Butler 34 Cap. Walsh 44 Cap. Bagnall 45 Cap. Nugent 44 This List of 26 Troops amounteth to 1047 Horse: whereunto is to be added the Lord Costologh's party of about 300 Horse, and two of the Nugents with two Troops more, which came to the Enemy the night be∣fore the Battell. Under the hill our Army was drawn up; the Ene∣mies
Canon playd hot at us, but with little losse o∣ther then two men, and one horse. About 12 of the clock the Armies joyned the Bat∣tell, continuing about two hours: our two Wings of Horse with some Foot having broken both Wings of the Enemy, our main Body advanced, and broke theirs: whereupon about 3000 of the Rebels beta∣king themselves to the Bog, they there drew up into a Body: But Colonell Jones commanding the Bog to be surrounded with Horse and Foot, our Foot followed into the Bog, where they put to the sword all not admitted to quarter; such of the Rebels as lest the Bog fell into the power of our Horse. Of the slain there were upon the place reckoned 5470, besides those after gleaned up, which were very many: of the enemies Foot there could not e∣scape above 500, they being as they were inviron∣ed. Amongst those slain were 400 of Kilketto's men; there were also put to the sword without mercy all formerly of our party, now found amongst the Re∣bels, and all English, though never of our party. The number of the Prisoners (as appeareth in the annexed Schedule) is, of Colonels five, whereof is the Lieutenant Generall of Leinster, and the Earle of Westmeath; four Lieutenant Colonels, six Ser∣geant Majors, thirty two Captains, twenty three Lieu∣tenants,
twenty seven Ensignes, two Cornets, twen-two Sergeants, two Quartermasters, two Gunners, the Clerk of the Stores, thirteen Troopers, and 228 common Souldiers; Preston their Generall hardly e∣scaped with the Horse: he left his Carriages and Ca∣non, being four Dem-Culverings, each carrying 12 pound bullet, and sixty four fair Oxen attending the Train, which are to us of very great use, we being till now in that kind very short provided: there was also taken Prestons Cabinet of Papers, much valued in discoveries therein made. All their Colours wee have, which Colonell Jones could not be perswa∣ded to be brought into Dublin with triumph, as sa∣vouring (said he) of ostentation, and attributing un∣to man the glory of this great work due to the Lord alone. Of ours were some wounded, but not twenty slain; of note we lost onely two Coronets, and one Captain Gibbs, who being over-heated in the Ser∣vice, dyed in drinking ditch-water. Herein to give every hand in this glorious Action the honour due, were more then many more lines could suffice unto; in the generall, never did men carry themselves with more resolution and gallantry then did ours both Officers and Souldiers, deserving much more encouragement then hitherto they have
found, most of them having scarce meat to eat, or clothes to put on. All done, Colonell Jones commanded through∣out the Army thanksgiving to be given to the Lord of Hosts, who did that day wonderfully for his people; appointing Tuesday the seventeenth of Au∣gust for a day of publick Thanksgiving in all the Churches of Dublin. On the place where the Battell was fought did the Army that night quarter. August 9. Munday August the ninth, Colonell Jones called a Councell of War, and commanded Colonell Fen∣wick Governour of Trim to place Garisons in Den∣nigan and Kilbrue. That day the Army marched to Maynouth, a strong Castle belonging to the Earl of Kildare, which was summoned, and surrendred by the Rebels, and by us garrisoned. After this Victory the Enemy quit and burnt di∣vers of their Garrisons, viz. the Naas, Piggings∣town, Harristowne, Collanstown, Castle-Warding, and Moyglare, and much more had been gained of them, had there been pay and provision for the Ar∣mie, whereby the Victory had been prosecuted. But
in the want of both they were inforced to take homewards unexpectedly. August 10. Tuesday the tenth, Colonel Jones dismissed the Northern Forces that had joyned with him, engaging himself for their satisfaction assoon as Treasure should come over. He also dismissed to their several Garisons the For∣ces of Droghedah, Dundalk, Newry and Carlingford, commanding Sir Henry Titchburne in his return to summon the Nobber, and other places neer Droghe∣dah possessed by the Rebels; promising, if occasion required, and that provision could be made for the Army, to advance with his Strength to their assist∣ance. That day the rest of the Army marched to Dublin, where wanting what might content our hungry and wearied Souldiers, by the providence of God, as our Army was ready to enter the Citie, they were met with news of 1500 l. brought by Captain Rich into the Harbour, borrowed by Alderman Walley, therein much meriting of the Publike. This small sum, though otherwise very inconsiderable, was yet some∣thing in the present distresse, and is to be valued as an earnest of the Lords care of his people, to whom he
will in his good time appear in a full deliverance. There was little considerable pillage gained from the Enemy in this Victory: That of best value was the Artillery and Oxen, which at last Colonel Jones purchased for the publike use from those hands whereinto they fell, unto whom he standeth engaged for satisfaction. As for pillage of greater value, lit∣tle was found, howsoever some have been pleased to speak of it largely and ridiculously: and if any thing had been in that kinde gained more then ordinary, it could not be imagined it should be of publick advantage, coming in (and that of due) into private hands. This was the most signall Victory with greatest losse to the Rebels that ever was gained in Ireland since the first Conquest thereof by the English; For which the Lord make us truly thankfull. Matt. Rowe. A List of the Prisoners taken at the Battel of Dungan Hill, Aug. 8. 1647. Colonels. The Earl of Westmeath Lieutenant General Byrue Colonel Warren Colonel Browne Colonel Butler 5. Lieutenant Colonels. Lieutenant Colonel Synnott Lieutenant Colonel Fitz-Gerald Lieutenant Colonel Gavanagh Lieutenant Colonel Cruise 4.
Sergeant Majors. Major Taaffe Major Laler Major Cusacke Major Gaffegan Major Synnot Major Byrne 6. Captains. Michael Byrne Arthur Cavanagh Danby Toole Martin Wolverstowne Edward Tirrel Christopher Nugent Edward Nugent Baltazer Nugent. James Dempsy William Tirrel Roger Darcey James Fitz-Gerald Thomas Geoghegan Charles Conner Henry Warren Patrick Notterveile Teige Connor Thomas Plunket Lawrence Fitz-Patrick Thomas Gawly Richard Nash Dominick Shortaile John Comerford William Furlonge Arthur Dillon Lawrence Tuite Robert Preston Captain of Horse Randel mac Alexander Captain Geoghegon Captain mac Donnel Captain Taaffe Captain Rochfad 32. Lieutenants. Nicholas Tirrel James Casey Garrot Floyd Edm. Bermingham Thomas Darcey Christopher Geoghegan Walter Mooney Donnogh Dempsy Leonard Shortayle Christopher Darcy Michael Gaynor Rosse Geoghegan Thomas Quyn Henry Dotton Henry Neale Bryan Ravanagh Tirlagh Toole Robert Byrne Walter Fitz-Harris John Rech Theobald Toole Rosse Dempsie James Barry alias Gerrald 23. Ensignes. James Fitz-Symons James Tyrrel Teige Kelly Francis Foxe James mac ô Kyre Christopher Nugent Lawrence Dempsy Philip Cusacke George Warren Andrew Geoghegan
Oliver Lynacke James Warren John Butler James Fitz-Harris Victor Whyte Jeffry Fitz Symons Owen ô Heveran Edward Fitz-Gerald Robert Fitz-Gerald Lawrence mac Donnel Phelim Notane Patrick Kahore Anthony ô Bryan Donnel Cowran Tirlagh mac Nully Enos mac Alexander Nicholas Quayhell 27. Cornets. Richard Talbot James Fitz-Gerald. 2. Quartermasters. James Walsh Richard Jones 2. Gunners. Michael Walsh Philip Stafford 2. Clerk of the Store. John Hadger 1. Sergeants. Donogh Mynom John ô Meaghan Moyle Murry Ravanagh Peirce Synnot Teige Gaffney James Purcel Patrick Rowland Calure Ravanagh Morogh Ravanagh Garrot Toole Neill ô Royrke Neale ô Dolane John Darcey Patrick Farrily Thomas Congan Richard Murphey Garrot Tirrel Mamis ô Leadan. William ô Moran Owen mac Caffery John mac Scallin Dudley Byrne 22. Troopers. 13. Common Souldiers. 228. FINIS.
