s1828 45097939 171514
PROCLAMATION For Apprehending Captains Gavine Hamilton, Kenneth Mackenʒie & Kenneth Urquhart. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith: To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greet∣ing. Forasmuch as it is informed, that Captain Gavine Hamilton, Son to Gavine Hamilton of Hill, Captain Kenneth Mackenʒie, & Captain Kenneth Ʋrquhart, were principal Instigators, Actors or Ring-leaders of the Tumult that hapned within our City of Edinburgh, on the Twentieth of June last, which proceeded to the unheard-of Outrages of burning and breaking up of Tolboth-doors, setting free the Prisoners specially Hugh Paterson and James Watson, accused before our Privy Council for scandalous and seditious Pamphlets, with other Criminals, and the deforcing of the Magistrats and Town-Guards, with the effusion of Blood. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have Ordained and hereby Ordain, that all Our Liedges be Certified by open Proclama∣tion, of the saids persons their accession to the said insolent Tumult and Rabble; and in respect of their absenting and absconding from Justice, do farder require all Magistrats and Officers of Our Forces and others, to use their outmost endeavours, to apprehend the fore∣saids persons, and all Our other good Subjects to be assisting to them therein, that they may be brought to condign Punishment: As also, that all Our good Subjects give notice to the next Magistrats, Justices of Peace, Officers of Our Forces and Constables, where they have seen the saids persons, or any of them, since the said Twentieth day of June last to the effect they may be apprehended and brought to due Tryal. Likeas, We with Advice foresaid, do hereby Promise and Assure the Sum of Twelve Hundred Pounds Scots Money, to any person or persons who shall apprehend any or each of the persons above-named, and deliver him to any of Our Officers Civil or Military, to be by them secured to the end foresaid; And We with Advice foresaid, Discharge any of Our Subjects, to Shelter, Harbour, or any ways Assist or Supply the saids persons, or any of them, upon their highest peril. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the several Head-Burghs of the haill Shires and Stewarties within this Our antient Kingdom, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Pre∣sents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Twenty Fifth day of July, and of Our Reign the Twelfth year 1700. Per actum Dominorum secreti Consilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. sti. Consilii. God save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dous. 1700.
