S2310A 38875852 152361
The SECOND PART Of the Nevv Ballad Of the Late and Terrible Fight on St. James's day One Thousand 666. To the Tune of the First part Written and Printed at London. A Second part, I here indite Of the English and Dutch Bloody Fight With a Thump, Thump, Thump, Thump, Thump▪ Thump, Thump, upon Thump. This only tells what was done since, The Renowned Duke and Famous Prince, Made the Seven Headed Beast to wince With a Thump, &c. As you the first so sing this too To the French Tune call'd Monsieur Ragou, With a Thump, &c. Or else because that this discourses Of Beauforts and 'De Ruyters Forces Call the Tune The Dancing Hobby Horses, With a Thump, &c. Sing not High English in Low Dutch Though now our Foes are truly such With a Thump, &c. This must be Sung not said at all And they that Sing must Rise and Fall The first part did th The Duke of ork and King now saies The Sea-men too deserve some Bayes With a Thump, &c. For though the Officers bear the Bell The private Sea-men Rung the Dutch Knel With a Thump, &c. The Bores fought well with Brandy Drunk, But in two houres their Courage sunk And then like beaten Stock-Fish stunk. With a Thump, &c. Goliah like, look'd Houndsfoot and Skellum, But Monk and's Fryers with Slings and Stones fell'um With a Thump, &c. Ruyter swears that Trump came not to's Aid Trump swears Ruyter ran like Coward afraid, We had done both their works had they staid. With a Thump, &c. While Trump and Ruyter sneake in th' Welling The brave English land at Ʋly and Schelling, With a Thump, &c. A thousand Houses with eight score Ships, We Fired like so many Chips, And made the States to bite their Lips, With a Thump, &c. This was a most prodigious Rap, To loose five Millions at a Clap With a Thump, &c. We beg but one boon more kinde Fates Their India Fleet and then proud States Wee'l make you shit as small as Rats, With a Thump, &c. Old Rome neere did ought worth a doyt Compar'd with Holmes's brave exploit, With a Thump, &c. The Tale of Ten years War for Hellen Homer had never thought worth telling, Had he but heard of Ʋly and Schelling With a Thump, &c. Twelve East-land Ships did likewise fall-in To the hands of stout Sir Thomas Allen With a Thump, &c. And we now spite of Adelar And Beaufort too have Pitch and Tarr And Ropes enough to end the Warr Without a Thump, &c. Our Victory hath but one Flaw The Unhappy loss of the Breda Without any Thump, &c. On the Dutch Coast she ran aground And without men was strangely found They merit Hanging if not Drown'd With a Thump, &c. With a Thump, &c. Alas, alas, poor baffl'd Hans. The Dane can't ayd thee, nor dares France Though thou hast had Thump, upon Thump, Thump, Thump, upon Thump. The Monsieurs, Fleet a Mangy Crew is Monks brave Boys that eat Beef and Brewis Cry a F—for Denmark and King Lewis With a Thump, &c. Bow then to Charles distressed States After so many broken Pates, With a Thump, Thump still upon Thump, &c. Beg Peace or next your Banks shall Rue, And we will give the Divel his Due, He shall take Monsieur, the Sea drown you Then are ye both Thumpt and Mumpt and Mumpt, &c. Now to conclude I will take care As Ballads use to end with Prayer, With a Thump, &c. For Ballads made of the old Fashion Should still conclude with Supplication For King and Queen, and the whole Nation With a Thump, &c. God Bless the Swede, he's not our Foe, And Spains King too though France say no, They both wish the Dutch well Thumpt, Thumpt, &c Heaven send our Fleet Auspicious Gales Our King and Queen a Prince of Wales And then let who will bite their Nayles When we all our foes have Thumpt, and Mumpt, &c.. Printed in the Year, 1666.
