S2317 E710_7 R207186 99866256 166655
The Second Part of the TRAGEDY OF Amboyna: OR, A TRUE RELATION OF A Most Bloody, Treacherous, and Cruel Design of the Dutch in the New-Netherlands in America. For the total Ruining and Murthering of the English Colonies in New-England. Being extracted out of several Letters very late∣ly written from New-England to several Gentle∣men and Merchants in London. London, Printed for Thomas Matthews, at the sign of the Cock in St Pauls Church-yard. 1653.
A true Relation of a most bloody, trea∣cherous and cruel Design of the Dutch in the New-Netherlands in America. THe Colonies of New-England con∣sisting of several Governments, as that of Connecticot, of Newhaven, Road Island, Plymouth, Massachusets, the Province of Main, and Pemmaquid, &c. part of them distinct Jurisdictions, and part confederate and associate, have the Dutch setled to the Southwest of them, at the Manatha's or New-Netherlands, and the French to the North∣east, alongst the Grand River of Canada; be∣tween which Nations there hath been ever (till now of late) a friendly correspondence, and a mutual assistance against the common Enemy, the barbarous Indians. About six years since the Dutch being re∣duced to a great exigence and strait by the In∣dians,
implored the English ayd and assist∣ance, which immediately was sent them, un∣der the command of Captain Underhill, a Gentleman of spirit, experience, and conduct, who prizing Christian Blood beyond Indian Wealth and Treasure (being proffered a hogs∣head of their Wampampege to withdraw the English Forces) fell on these Heathens, in vin∣dication of the Dutch, and in one night cut off fourteen hundred of them, and so gallant∣ly, with the hazard and some loss of English Blood (through the assistance of the Omnipo∣tent) resetled the Hollander in peace and safety. But Ingratitude overclouding these Hero∣ick Actions, and Amboyna's treacherous Cru∣elty extending it self from the East to the West Indiaes, running in its proper channel of Dutch blood, quickly sought their Neighbors, their Friends, their Noble Defenders, the Eng∣lish, Destruction; and by their unworthy in∣equality of retribution, have chronicled them∣selves, Ungrateful, Perfidious, Bloody, and Cruel. For about March last 1653. with gifts and large promises they instigated and hired four
of the Heathen Sagamores (the Grand Princes of those Territories, of the Mohawks, Nara∣ganses, Pequets, Massachusets, and Pigwock∣ets, some of them most fierce, barbarous, and bloody people, fit instruments for so horrid a design,  on a Sabbath day, when all families were at Meeting, unexpectedly to fall on the English, and to burn and slay what possibly they could: and for the better perfecting of this Diabolical Plot, they supplyed the Indi∣ans with Arms and Ammunition, which were dispersed in all their habitations, they having a Ship sent them on purpose from Holland, the Fountain of Treacheries, with all necessary tools for the acting of a second Amboyna Tragedy. But the Omnipotent God (who hath ever been a most merciful Protector of the Eng∣lish in those parts, as in the Pequet War, &c.) did through his infinite goodness most time∣ly before the bloody day of acting, cause an Indian, that should have been an Executioner, to be a revealing Deliverer of our Nation, who informed the Magistrates of Boston of the Dutch and Indians bloody intentions; whereupon they requested several Merchants
of that Town with all expedition to march forth towards the Indian habitations, to see what they could discover. At whose desire Mr Gardner, Mr Hutchinson, Mr Houper, and Mr Seavern rid forth, and the first Wigwambs or Indian houses they came to searching, they found them full of Arms and Ammunition, (which have been ever prohibited the Indians by the English,) all their Muskets were char∣ged with powder and ball, which they brought with them to Boston: the Country was immediately put in a posture of defence, and two Gentlemen sent from Boston, viz. Captain John Leveret, and Mr Davis, to the New Nether-lands with some Indians that confessed, that they were hired by the Dutch for to be Instruments in this unheard of and unparallel Inhumanity. These Gentlemen returning, sufficiently as∣sured the Governors and Magistrates of the Dutch guiltiness of this Treachery; where∣upon the Country was raising Forces to march against them; Captain Hathorn, beating his Drums in Salem for Volunteers, had one hun∣dred and fifty stout men that proffered their service: Most of the English in the South∣west
parts are enforced to forsake their habi∣tations. Some Letters affirm, that the French are consederate with the Dutch and Indians, so that the English are invironed with their enemies. But that out of the hands of all their Enemies the Lord may deliver them, Let all good Christians implore a blessing from the Almighty, that is most powerful to save, that he may crown their Enterprizes with success∣ful Victories. Amen. The Ship that came from New-England arrived at Dorthmouth after six weeks voy∣age, loaden with Tarr, belonging to William Philips of Boston, being the first Ship that came thence since the bloody Tragedy should have been acted. If any desire to be better informed of what here is inserted, let them repair to any Mer∣chant that holds Correspondence with New-England, whose Letters can evidence the certainty hereof. FINIS
