S2783 E986_22 R203739 99863576 115784
SEVERAL New Cheats Brought to Publique View; Or, The Good Old Cause Turn'd to a NEW CHEAT. London, Printed in the Yeer, 1659.
Several NEW CHEATES Brought to PVBLIKE VIEW, OR, The Good Old Cause Turned to a NEW CHEAT. I. THe devillish pollicy of the deceased, with his private pimps, sate forging mischief at the anvil▪ while the divel blowed the bellows of dissention a∣mongst his subjects, till we were almost ruined under the load, and durst not groan, although▪ tied by the oppression of blood-thirsty Tyrants.
II. Under the pretence of Religion and liberty, there lyes lurking the spawn of that old Toad, who hath poisoned the free born people of these three Nations with damnable heresies, and so infringed the rights of many noble persons, that we can call nothing our own but what their damnable charity please to be∣stow upon us. III. Our pulpets are now become stages, to cry up our new Gospel-mungers, who Ape▪ like, would imitate any thing that springs from a new fashioned heretick, and thank God twice a year for the prosperity of that old Tyrant, who drencht the ground with the blood of those▪ whose shoos he was not worthy to unloose; therefore may we thank God that he and his Imps are purged from amongst us. IV. Religion had almost broke its neck down White-hall steps, and the good Common-wealths men of these three Nations sorely oppressed with Taxes, to main∣tain him and his privy▪ Councel, whom I may com∣pare to my Lord Marquess Fool, alwayes imployed though never doing good.
V. How hath this Nation been opprest with unnecessa∣ry taxes by our rebellious traytors who commanded their Plate, Jewels, Bodkins, Whistles, Ear-rings, and fifty two subsidies at a time, free loan, lent money, weekly rates, monthly Sessments, and dedicated to our Idol Parliament, whose Counsels were adored as Demi-gods; thus our rebellion against God, disloy∣alty to our King, and idolatry committed with the trayterous Army, hath brough this Babylonish cap∣tivity, and tyrannical yoke of bondage upon us, exer∣cised by those who are our inferiors. VI. And to argue that their consequent slavery is cer∣tain, I say, what Nation ever endured such tyrannical bondage upon such slight occasions? Nay, how are Jorneymen-Coblers advanced to places of dignity and honor, and our Court of State now to be sold to raise a Dowry for the old VVitch, and to maintain a Venice publike Stew at the Common-wealths charge, that so our weak Brethren may make use of holy Si∣sters? VII. Hath it not been their practice for several years, to advance themselves on other mens ruines, and instead
of being served by the Milk of the gospel, we have been choaked with the poyson of asps, and robb'd of our ancient customs, all our freedoms infringed, and our Priviledges violated; and is not the old Proverb verified? Dulcis odor Lucri ex requalibet. O London! where's thy happy dayes! Although thy streets with Gold Are pav'd; yet where's thy Franchises That have been long inroll'd? Whose tyrannie is now made known: Or, who have thee deprav'd, And have thy Freedoms all ore▪ thrown, And thee have quite inslav'd? VVhat! can th' Parliament have the face Their Brethren to abuse,
And take from them both Sword and Mace, And a new Mayor to choose. Yes, yes, they're Saints, and cannot err In any thing they do, For their great Father Lucifer Doth give them leave thereto. FINIS.
