S3956 42475183 151340
SLANDERS and LYES Being cast upon the Children of Light, given forth to Print from one HENRY WALKER, which R: IBITSON hath Printed, That they Deny the Resurrection, and Hea∣ven, and Hell, which are Lyes published to the Nation: which Lyes R: WOOD hath also Printed. Therefore for the truths sake, and them that feare God, is this Paper given forth, that the Lyes returne from whence they came, and them that are given over to believe Lyes may receive them. But the honest hearted regard them not, knowing the time is coming, as the Scripture saith, The wicked shall fret them∣selves, &c. WHEREAS Henry Walker gave in Lyes to the Printer, that two QUAKERS which came to White-hall, said, That there is no such place as Heaven and Hell: Thou Walker hast ministred forth thy Lyes; for hell Thou shalt find, which the wicked must be turned into, and all Lyars; and Heaven is Gods Throne, and Scriptures in the Old and New Testament is a Declaration from the Spirit; and od is the Word, and Christ Jesus is the Light that lighteth every man that comes in∣ the world; and Thou who hast made a scoffe at this, Thy folly is made manifest, and y selfe declared to be a false Witnesse, and brought Thy selfe upon Record; for John d, that, Christ was the true light that enlightneth every man that comes into the world; whose Doctrine Thou stumbles; and Thou shalt find a Resurrection to Condemna∣ for Thy body to goe in, when that the Just shall witnesse a raising to life: and eward shall be according to Thy work, for many Lyes hast Thou uttered forth in papers against the Children of the Light, and published to the Nation: But all that God doth not Thee nor them regard. That in Thy Conscience shall us remember day of Thy calamity, that we to Thy soule are friends, though now to the world thy work to speak evill upon the Children of light, and render them odious to the . And R: Wood in Thy paper is many unsavoury speeches against the Children of ; who art seeking to justifie lyes, shewing thy self to be one of the world, wch loveth owne, whose custome is to utter lyes, whose Torment is beginning, and whose ill and savour ascends, because the Sun is risen: And Thou declarest Walkers lyes he hath given forth against the Children of light, in Thy Book which is called Weekly Post, and hast uttered forth Thy slanders and lyes against the Children of . And those words Printed in thy Book, called, A Declaration of the Children of ht, shall stand and witnesse against thy lyes, and a Hell Thou shall witnesse who said, said, there is no such place as Hell. R: Wood. And secondly, Thou sayest they say, is no such place as Heaven, which are lyes; for the wicked shall be turned into , and all that forget God; and Heaven is Gods Throne. Againe, thou sayest, they There is no Resurrection of the Body; Resurrection to condemnation thou shalt tnesse, which we witnesse, who doe witnesse a Resurrection to life, according to the iptures: And R: Wood thou sayest the Judges sate at White-hall, which is another thy lyes: The Scriptures the Old and New Testament the Children of light do owne, d the Scriptures saith, God is the Word, which we witnesse according to Scripture, ich maketh such lying fellowes as Thee to rage: And R: Wood when thou hast utte∣ forth thy lyes, thou sayest, Pure Rogues to rost. O Tyranny! here upon Record all the Nation thou art, what spirit thou art of, and whose Servant thou art. And ou sets in thy Book, John Boulton, Simon Dring, William Rayman, Richard Davis, hose Names thou art not worthy to mention, such as be men fearing God, and their tnesse stands against the deceits and lyes, The light in thy Conscience shall witnesse it, We are justified by faith in Christ, which faith works by love. From them whom the world calls QƲAKERS scornfully; but Moses who quaked and trembled, said, To him Reproaches was great Riches.
