S5204 E1816_2 99863508 115712
A CAVEAT AGAINST SEDUCERS: As it was Preached BY RICHARD STANDFAST, Mr. of Arts, and Rector of Christ-Church in Bristol, Whereunto are annexed The Blind Mans Meditations. By the same Author. Ther's none so blind as he that will not see. LONDON, Printed for H. Mortlock at the Phoe∣nix in St. Pauls Church-yard, neer the little North-door. 1660.
TO THE Courteous Reader. Courteous Reader, THe continual declining of my Sun, and decay of my sight, as it threat∣ens mee with blindness, so it warns mee to provide for my night approaching: this moved mee to consider with my self how I might lay up somewhat in store for the time to come, which might bee for my support and comfort in so sad a condition. Hereupon I composed some few copies of verses, which when I had imparted to some of my friends for their approbation, they much importuned mee to make them publique, for the benefit of o∣thers in the like condition. I was at last pre∣vailed withall. But being loath to suffer so in∣considerable a peece, as I judge the verses to bee, to pass alone, I was willing to prefix some sermon or other, which might bee for more publique advantage, and being doubtful what to fasten upon, the perswasion of friends hath drawn this from mee which here follows, which I consented to the more willingly, because there is some correspondence and agreement
between the one and the other: for as the one tends to the comforting of the blinde; so the other tends to the curing of such as through ignorance and errour have been led out of the way. This brief account, Courteous Reader, I thought good to give thee of the Printing of both; that which I now desire of thee is to read the Sermon diligently, to accept the Uerses candidly, and to judge of both charitably. If thou finde any benefit by either, bless God, and pray for him, who is Thine in the Lord Jesus, RICHARD STANDFAST.
A CAVEAT AGAINST SEDUCERS. MATTH. 24.4. Take heed that no man deceive you. THese are the words of our Blessed Saviour to his Disciples, warning them to beware of being led aside by the cunning craf∣tiness of such as lye in wait to de∣ceive. And if Christ thought it fit, to give such a Caution to his own Dis∣ciples, you need not think much, if wee call upon you, in the same words, to take heed that no man deceive you. The Caution, I confess, points directly
to the matter proposed, in the former verse, scil. the time and the sign, of the coming of Christ, and of the end of the world; Concerning which Christ bids them to take heed, that no man deceive them; howbeit the words are not so to be restrained to the matter here in hand, but that they call for the like care upon all like occasions. And indeed, it is a duty that lies upon all Christians, to take heed what they hear, and to beware of deceivers. And this is a truth most plain and evident by those frequent Ca∣veats, which wee meet withall in the Book of God. As for instance, Beware of false Prophets, Mat 7.15 Mat. 7.15. Beware of the Scribes, Mark 12.38 Mark. 12.38. Beware lest a∣ny man spoyl you through Philosophy, Col. 2.8. Col. 2.8 Beware lest you bee drawn away with the errour of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3.17 2 Pet. 3.17. and so likewise, 2 Thes. 2.3 2 Thes. 2.3. Take heed that no man deceive you by any means, which words are very full, and very emphatical; for sometimes wee may be deceived with the man, sometimes with the means. Sometimes with the man; If hee bee one, of whom wee have so good an opinion, both for his parts, and for his piety, that wee judge him too
wise, to bee deceived himself, and too honest, to deceive others, the authori∣ty of such a man may easily betray us into an errour. Magnos errores magnorum virerum authoritate transmittimus, Wee never err more securely, than when we follow a guide, whom, wee presume, wee may safely trust. Thus the conceit of St. Peters worth raised him so high in the repute of the people, that his ex∣ample did, as it were, compel them to follow him, as appears by Gal. 2.13. Gal. 2.13. Thus sometimes the man may deceive us. Sometimes also the means may de∣ceive us, which means are various, as will appear more fully in the following part of this discourse. But the Apostle would not, that any man should deceive us by any means; 'tis not the man, but the matter that must be regarded, nor should wee suffer any means to with∣draw us from the truth. Many more like Caveats wee may finde in St. Pauls Epistles, from the frequency of which wee may very well collect, either some more than ordinary proneness in us to bee mis-led; or some more than ordinary danger in falling a∣way from our own stedfastness. And by
all it will appear how much it concerns every one of us, to take heed that no man deceive us. And if wee look well into the matter, wee shall finde a great deal of reason to make us all very careful in this behalf. The first Reason may be taken from our own proneness to errour. Green fruits, and such like trash are more de∣sireable, and more delightful to depra∣ved appetites, than wholesome food; and such depraved appetites have wee all had, ever since our first Parents ta∣sted of the forbidden fruit, their eating set our teeth on edge; and our natural corruption hath a stronger bias in it to∣wards perverse opinions, than it hath towards sound doctrine, partly because it is very much a stranger to truth, and partly because it is very much desirous of novelty. 1. Our natural corruption is very much a stranger to truth; our Blessed Saviour saith, I am come in my Fathers Name, and yee receive mee not, if ano∣ther shall come in his own Name, him yee will receive, Joh. 5.43. Joh. 5.43. From whence by the way wee may observe, That Se∣ducers need not boast of the multitude
of their Proselytes, as if that success of theirs were a sufficient witness of their walking in the truth; nor need the mes∣sengers of the truth bee discouraged at their cold entertainment in the world, as if that were enough to prove, that they were not sent of God; for Christs own Disciples may fish all night, and catch nothing, when the nets of false Apostles may bee ready to break through the multitude of fishes; and Christ himself may not have so welcome a reception, as a false Prophet; for so hee saith himself in the place alledged, which though it may seem strange at the first, yet upon a serious survey, the won∣der will vanish. For Christ, coming in his Fathers Name, brings nothing but truth with him, and therefore no won∣der if hee be neglected, but they that come in their own names, bring false∣hood, and lies, and therefore like to be the better welcome; for truth hath no such party within us, as errour hath; er∣rour is neerer of kin to our corruption, than truth is, and therefore like to finde a more chearful entertainment. There is no tinder in our nature to catch one spark of truth, but there is oyl enough
in it to feed the wild-fire of errour, and quickly to heighten it into a flame. Are not Heresies listed among the works of the flesh? Gal. 5.19, 20. No marvel then if our corrupt nature be more prone to receive falshood than truth, and be∣cause it is so prone, wee have the more reason to take heed to our selves, lest wee be deceived. 2. Besides this, Est natura hominum novitatis avida; in meats wee love va∣rieties; in cloaths wee are for new fashions; and in Religion too wee are apt to be taken with new modes and waies, though the old be better: but as scratching, to them that are trou∣bled with the itch, though it may be pleasing for the present, yet it will smart afterwards; so they, whose itching ears, Athenian-like, are delighted with no∣velties, will finde it bitterness in the latter end; for 'tis the way to grow weary of sound and wholesome do∣ctrine, and that fits them to be an easie prey for false Prophets. And there∣fore, seeing our natural distemper gives heretical tenents such advantage against us, wee had need to look about us with the greater care, lest wee be deceived.
A second Reason may be drawn from the Apostacy of other men, whom wee share with both in constitution and de∣serts. Our Saviour saith in the verse after my Text, Mat. 24.5. That many shall come in his Name, and shall deceive many; and St. Peter having made mention of false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. in the very next verse saith, That many shall follow their pernicious waies; and experience can testifie the truth of these predictions, for many have been led aside, and there∣fore beware lest you also fall from your own stedfastness, so adviseth St. Peter, 2 Epist. 3.17. 2 Pet. 3.17 If others have been sedu∣ced, 'tis possible, that wee may also, if wee be not the more careful. For First, Wee are all of the same depraved nature, that other men are. That wee are not all Planets, 'tis no thanks to our own particular constitu∣tions, but to that good hand of provi∣dence, which hath fastened us among the fixed Stars; That any Stars have e∣scaped the power of the Dragons tayl, 'tis no thanks to any proper influence of their own, but it must be ascribed to him, Rev. 1, 16 who in his own right hand hath held them from falling; That wee are
not all Hereticks and Sectaries, 'tis no thanks to our nature, for wee are all cast in the same corrupt mold, that other men are, and therefore other mens wracks should be our warnings, and serve to make us the more wary to a∣void danger. 2. As wee are all of equal corruption by nature, so wee are all of answerable deserts by our practice. Some men, through the just hand of God, have been given up to strong delusions, and if God should do the like by any of us, which of us could charge him with any injustice? 'tis through Gods mercy, and not through our merit, if any of us have been hitherto preserved from the snare of the Fowler, and therefore wee had need to walk the more humbly with God for the time to come, lest through our security, or pride, or wantonness, wee provoke him to leave us to our selves, and to turn us over for a prey to those that watch for our hal∣ting. A third Reason for our care may be drawn from the cunning, and the sub∣tilty of Seducers. They are very subtil and crafty in their waies, and therefore
we had need to be the more watchful, lest we be deceived by them. Hee that hath any thing to do with crafty com∣panions, had need to have his eyes in his head, and to look about him, lest hee be cheated out of what hee hath, and like fishes taken in an evil net, hee be betrayed into their traps, and become a Captive to their will and pleasure. What are Seducers, but a company of cheaters? and though they be not all alike cunning, yet there are none of them without some jugling tricks for the advancing of their party, and therefore wee may well take heed that no man deceive us. Seducers are very subtil persons, e∣specially they that are heads of a party, and file-leaders of a faction; and this may easily be collected from several passages of holy writ, wherein the actions of such persons are set down in such significant metaphors, as may fit∣ly proclaim their craftiness to all men. In Ephes. 4.14. Eph. 4.14 we finde mention of the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lye in wait to deceive. The words in the Greek are, ,
in which there are three several words made use of, every one of which reacheth full home to the matter in hand, which is, the subtilty of Sedu∣cers. The first word is , which comes from , a dye, and implies such a sleight of hand, as is in cunning game∣sters, who know how to shuffle in false dies, when they please, and how to cog the dies, and to throw what cast they please, for their own advantage. The next word is , which notes a cunning craftiness, like to that of a ser∣pent, yea, like to that of the Old Ser∣pent, when hee first deceived our first Parents; for it is the same word which we have, 2 Cor. 11.3 2 Cor. 11.3. and is set there to signifie the subtilty, whereby the Serpent deceived Eve. There is yet a third word, which is as much as either of the former, if not more, and that is, , which as I conceive, may be rendered, after the rate of those, who are artificially trained up in the trade of deceiving. The same word is used, Eph. 6.11 in Eph. 6.11. and there rendred, Wiles, by which wee may see, that such men are to be looked upon as cunning
Engineers for Stratagems of war, as men, that know how to lye in ambush, and to carry on designs so covertly, and out of sight, that there may be no suspition of their falshood, and if you please, I will lay before you some of the secrets of this their art, that so you may both see, what reason we have to beware of them, and also learn the better how to shun and avoid them. The envious man is said to low tares; now there is a method in sewing, and that is, first, To make choice of a fit soil, secondly, To plow up the ground, and to prepare it for the seed, thirdly, To throw in the seed, when the ground is so prepared, fourthly, To harrow it in, when it is thus sown, and to sense and wate it, that it may be fruitful; and the like method is observed by decei∣vers, in the sowing of their tares. First, They make choice of a fit soil, and that's usually the weaker sex, who, being for the most part, of the weakest judgements, are therefore the most like to be wrought upon, and being of the strongest affections, are like to prove most active instruments, and (by reason of their sex) the most prevailing Ora∣tours,
for the propagating of what they are set upon among others also. Secondly, The next work is to pre∣pare the ground for the receiving of the seed, and this they do by calling into question received truths; for when once there is a doubting, and an anxiety bred in the mind, then the mind becomes the fitter to be wrought upon by them, and to receive any stamp and impression, which they desire to fasten upon it. Thirdly, When the ground is thus prepared, then they begin to sow their tares; when received truths are once brought into suspition, then they begin to broach their falshood. Fourthly, and lastly, They har∣row and water what they have so sown, with large promises, and specious preten∣ces, and other like artificial helps, which they have alwaies ready, and whereby they gain both reception and success. And in this very method did the Serpent deal with our first Parents; for he begins with the woman, then he questions a received truth, Hath God said yee shall not eat? Gen. 3.1, 2, 4. Gen. 3.1. And after this hee utters his own falshood, yee shall not surely dye, vers. 4. and that
this might be the more easily entertain∣ed, hee tells them a fair story of how hugely it would conduce to their ho∣nour and advancement, and withall spightfully insinuates, that Almighty God did, as it were, envy them so great an happiness. This was the method of that grand Impostor of old, and his A∣gents have ever since written after the same Copy, and trod in the same steps, especially in their pretences of love, and promises of Advantage. And here comes in another peece of the cunning of Seducers, which is hinted at in a word, that is used by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.14. 2 Epist. 2.14. We read it beguiling, but the word is , which signifies beguiling with a bait, under which me∣taphor, Seducers are compared to cun∣ning Fishers and Fowlers, who know how to bait their hooks, and snares so, as may best serve, either to allure the de∣sired prey, or to conceal the intended danger: Of like subtilty are Seducers, both in their baits and blinds, both to allure and conceal, the one of which they do by fair promises, the other by specious pretences, of each of which a word briefly.
First, They are cunning to allure by their baits, which baits are their fair promises of ease or honour, or other like advantage, with which they season their errours, to make them pleasing to our palats, and as savoury meat to our corruptions. Thus when Jeroboam set up his Idolatrous Calves, hee baited his design with the ease of the people; hee knew, 1 King. 12.28. that if they went up to Jerusa∣lem, to worship the true God in the old good way which hee had appointed, it would not be long before they would return again to their old allegiance to their lawful Soveraign, and therefore hee tells them, that they shall have an easier, and a cheaper Religion nearer home; It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, 1 King. 12.28. 1 King. 12.28. Thus Anti∣nomians, and other Sectaries beguile men into their errours, with promises of an easier and smoother way to Heaven, than hath been discovered by other men; and 'tis to be doubted, that the Papists have beguiled many by the same means, who in hopes to finde among them an easier way for the pardon of some sins, than the truth will afford them, have thereupon embraced their
superstitions. Promises of ease will do much, especially when seconded with profit or honour. Who so dull as not to be in danger to be wrought upon by such allurements? The Golden Cup which is in the hand of the woman, mentioned Rev. 17.4. hath, Rev. 17.4. without controversie, invited many to drink of her abominations; but where-ever you see these baits, beware the hook; you shall be as gods, is a strong temptation, and 'twas that by which our first Parents were brought into as bad, or worse a condition, than the beasts that perish; and in like manner the promise of a glo∣rious Liberty may be made an Engine, whereby to bring men into an intole∣rable bondage, and the hopes of a glori∣ous Reformation, may betray them into an abominable confusion. Secondly, Thus you have seen their hooks baited; see also their nets covered, and that's usually done with some spe∣cious pretences, of which they have no small variety. Sometimes they pretend to more Piety than ordinary, and this they dis∣cover by their long prayers, and fre∣quent fastings; but see how the best
things may be abused, for under this veil, some men have carried on most devilish designs, and hellish actions. Thus the Pharisees devoured Widdows houses, and for a colour made long prayers, Mat. 23.14 Mat. 23.14. Thus fasting was a mantle for murder, 1 King. 21.9. in the case of Na∣both, and thus Religion it self may be made a cloak for cruelty and wickedness, yea for treason and rebellion. Sometimes they pretend a great zeal for the glory of God, and yet under∣hand they drive on nothing more, than their own interest. 2 King. 10.16. Thus did Jehu, his pretence was zeal for the Lord, when hee cut off the house of Ahab, and the worshippers of Baal, and yet his grand design was the securing of himself in the injoying of the Kingdome, and there∣fore, though hee had an express com∣mand for what hee did, and not a bare fancied revelation; the Lord threatens to avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehn, Hos. 1.4. Hos. 1.4. for siniter ends were the only compas by which his actions were steered, and whatever his pretences were, his heart was not up∣right before God. Sometimes they pretend to a greater
measure of purity, and to an higher pitch of perfection, than ordinary. So can the Prince of Darkness transform himself into an Angel of Light; and the Wolf disguise himself in sheeps-cloathing. Under this pretence the Donatists of old sought to justifie their separations from the publick Assemblies of the People of God, and many also of latter times have set on foot several schismatical and heretical opinions, to the rending of the seamless Coat of Christ, and to the wo∣ful wounding and dividing of the Church of God. Sometimes they pretend to more than ordinary humility, abasing them∣selves even to the ground, to advance a party, creeping into houses, 2 Tim. 3.6. 2 Tim. 3.6. not only stealing in slily to prevent being discovered, but in a shew of hu∣mility, ready to crawl as it were upon their bellies to gain entertainment, but such crawlers and creepers are seldome without venome; and if these snakes be harboured till they grow warm, you may quickly perceive their proper tem∣per. And thus you have some of their pretences also, but you have not all their cunning yet; for besides all this that
hath been said upon this Subject, they can rack the Scriptures to the length and breadth of their false opinions, . 2 Pet. 3.16. and tor∣ment them to make them speak, more than ever they intended, for the main∣taining of their lies, which Scriptures, if let down again, and left to themselves, and to their own proper sense and meaning, will prove too narrow, and too short to serve their turn, and to cover their falshood. Besides this, they have also unwritten traditions, and feigned miracles, and cunning devised fables; they can also pretend to dreams and revelations, and for a need can forge Authors for their own advantage; nor are they without their clouted shooes, and patched garments, the better to beguile us with a shew of Antiquity, as the Gi∣beenites did the people of Israel, Josh. 9.5. and all these they can set off, , with good words, and fair speeches, Rom. 16.18. and , with flattering words, 1 Thes. 2.5. 1 Thes. 2.5 2 Pet. 2.3. yea , 2 Pet. 2.3. with artificial words, composed, as it were, on purpose, and set as in a frame, for the better uttering of their false wares, and counterfeit commodities.
Some of these St. Paul mentions, 2 Thes. 2.2. Where hee saith, 2 Thes. 2.2 that hee would not have them troubled, either by word or by spirit, or by letter, as from him; by word, there's tradition; by spirit, there's revelation; by letter, as from mee, there's forgery; and tradition, revela∣tion and forgery are usual arts, whereby hereticks do deceive. By some of these devises formerly mentioned, the Papists seek to support their purgatory and prayers for the dead, invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, and other things of like na∣ture; nor have the Anabaptists, and Qua∣kers been without their pretended Re∣velations, and new Lights, whereby to maintain their old errours, and vertigi∣nous imaginations. And lastly, when all other means fail, Some Seducers have been ready to rake hell, by black arts, and to call in to their aid the Prince of Darkness, that so by lying wonders, they may gain the more credit to their damnable do∣ctrines. Most of all these cunning devices that I have mentioned, were easie to be seen in the carriage of Simon Magus,
and those Hereticks, that were his fol∣lowers, for they pretended to a greater depth of knowledge, and understand∣ing in the hidden mysteries of those Scriptures, which were then extant, than other men had, and therefore they were called Gnosticks, then they suited their doctrines, to mans natural corrup∣tion, and to the basest of fleshly lusts, complying with the Heathen in their abomi∣nable Idolatries, and alluring with much wantonness, those that had escaped from them, that live in errour, promising also ease to the flesh, and freedome from worldly troubles, by teaching it law∣ful to deny Christ in times of persecu∣tion; and at last like Jannes and Jam∣bres, who withstood Moses, they coun∣terfeited the miracles of the greatest Apostles, the more to disparage the truth of the Gospel, and to bring their notorious lies into credit, & reputation. Thus did they. And whether the worst of these Arts have not sometimes been made use of by some of the Jesuites, and their emissaries (amongst whom I think it will be no injury to reckon some of the Quakers also) is not a lit∣tle to be doubted. Sure I am, that they,
whom we read Seducers, 2 Tim. 3.13. 2 Tim. 3.13. are in the Greek called , i. e. Sorce∣rers, by which word we understand men that have some skill in witchcraft, or at least know how to blinde the eyes, and to delude the fancies of their behol∣ders, that they shall think (like men in a dream) that their hands are full of gold, when 'tis nothing but leaves; and that they have before them plentiful Tables, when there is nothing to be fed on, but appearance and delusion; and so do Seducers deceive the eyes of their followers with false lights, which serve only to lead men out of the way, and to betray them into the ditch. Seeing then, that Seducers are such subtil Ser∣pents, such cunning gamesters, such crafty companions, such skilful fowlers, such Masters of Art in the Mysterie of couzenage, we had need to take a great deal of heed that no man deceive us. I have been somewhat large upon this point, but, I hope, not tedious, be∣cause 'tis no more than the nature of the Subject doth require; but I will be the briefer in the Reasons follow∣ing.
A fourth Reason may be taken from the dangerousness of Seducers; for as they are cunning, so they are pernicious persons; for what are they but theeves and robbers? and the theef comes not, but to steal, Joh. 10.10 and to kill, and to destroy, John 10.10. St. Paul saith, See that no man spoil you, Col. 2.8. Col. 2.8. the word is , lest any man carry you away, as a prey, as a prisoner, as a captive, to make prize of their estates, 2 Tim. 3.6. and slaves of their persons, 2 Tim. 3.6. (where the word is, , from , which signifies a spear, and , taken, so Pasor, q.d. led captive, like prisoners ta∣ken by conquest in the battel, or lest you be carried away, as the Sheep by the theef, to be destroyed and devou∣red. Seducers are no better than theeves, sheep-stealers, yea men-stealers, they steal the sheep from the shepherd, yea one man from another, yea a man from himself, and their coming is to rob us of the truth, and of our peace (False doctrine is a great troubler of mens minds, Gal. 1.7. but truth brings rest, Jer. 6.16.) Jer. 6.16. and of our comfort, and at last of our very souls, and heaven, and happiness also, and when these be gone,
what will be left us but beggary and e∣verlasting misery? and therefore being such dangerous persons, we have the more reason to take heed, that no man deceive us. The last Reason may be taken from the difficulty of getting off again, if once we be intangled. If once we be got into the snare, it will not be an easie thing to recover our liberty, and this difficulty ariseth partly from the cunning of Sedu∣cers, and partly from the nature of er∣rour. Seducers are as cunning to keep pos∣session, as to gain admission, and to this end they frighten their followers with the woful dangers of Apostacy from the truth (for so they call the revolting from their errours) and by this device they so boare their ears, that they are in dan∣ger to be their servants for ever. Besides this, Mat. 16.6. errour is of a spreading nature, the corrupt doctrine of the Pharisees is called leaver, Mat. 16.6. be∣cause it is of a sour and enlarging nature. Hereupon St. Paul saith, Shun prophane and vain bablings, for they will increase to more ungodliness, and their word will eat as doth a canker, 2 Tim. 2.16, 17. 2 Tim. 2.16, 17. The
like Caution we have, Heb. 12.15. Heb. 12.15. Look to it, that no root of bitterness spring up, 2 Tim. 3.13. and thereby many be defiled; evil men & Seducers wax worse and worse, 2 Tim. 3.13. So hard a matter it is, if once we be caught, to recover again out of the snare of the Devil. So that if we put all this together, we may plainly perceive, that we have a great deal of reason, to be watchful o∣ver our selves, and to take heed that no man deceive us. What remains now, but that I press you earnestly to this your duty: If e∣ver there were age wherein this Subject were in season, this is it. Erasmus in writing the life of St. Je∣rome, hath a notable passage concerning those times, wherein that Father lived, his words are these, Nullum fuit unquam saeculum seditiosius, neque consusius: & sic omnia contaminarant haereticorum errores, ac dissidia, ut magnae cujusdam artis fue∣rit orthodoxum esse, i.e. There was never any age fuller of confusion and sedition, and the errours and dissentions of Here∣ticks had so polluted all things, that it was a kinde of Art for a man to be Or∣thodox; which passage looks as if it were
calculated for our meridian; 'tis the ve∣ry picture of the times wherein we have lately lived, wherein there have been spread abroad such variety of er∣rours, that it could be no less than an Art to be Orthodox. Almighty God fed us once with the staves of a good Shepherd, beauty and bands, in beauty there was unity, in bands order; but our beauty hath been defaced, and our bands broken; our u∣nity divided, and our order dissolved; many shepherds have been smitten, and the flocks scattered; the gaps were left open and the Foxes let loose, and the Sheep had got libertatem erroris, and were at liberty to stray and perish, as it were cum privilegio. It cannot therefore but be a word in season to call upon men to look about them. Blessed be the God of Truth, for the hopes which hee hath given us, of see∣ing better times, but the day is so new∣ly broke, and there is so much of the old leaven gone abroad, and our own Station is so slippery, and errour is so in∣fectious, that I hope it will prove an ac∣ceptable service, to warn every one of you, as Christ warned his own Dis∣ciples,
to take heed that no man deceive you. And for your better furtherance in this so needful a work, I cannot, in the general, commend unto your thoughts, any better direction than this, namely, To be in the fear of the Lord all the day long; even natural fear is the great Guardian of the body; how warily doth hee walk, that is afraid of falling? how careful is that man about his mony, that fears robbing? how diligent is hee, that is afraid of danger? how circum∣spect is hee, that is afraid of sickness? So is spiritual fear the great Guardian of the soul; Prov. 16.6 For by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil; and the same fear will preserve us also from departing from God, Jer. 32.40. Jer. 32.40. If therefore you would not be led away , 2 Pet. 3.17. with the errour of lawless men; be not high minded but fear; Happy is the man that feareth al∣way, Pro. 28.14 but hee that hardeneth his heart, shall fall into mischief, Prov. 28.14. For particular helps against the dan∣ger of being seduced, let mee commend unto you these few following.
Helps against Seduction. First, Labour to know the Truth. A blind man may easily be led out of the way. And to this end let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, that you may be able to discern between things that differ; for his word is Truth, Joh. 17.17. Joh. 17.17 This will be a lamp to our feet, and a light to our paths; but ignorance of the Scrip∣tures, is the way to errour, Mat. 22.29. This was the Rule of old, to the Law, and to the Testimonies, Isa. 8.20. Isa. 8.20. and it is in force still; and it is well for us that we have a written word for a Rule to walk by, for otherwise what certainty could we have of any of those things that do belong to our peace? 'tis by the Scriptures that we come to know the voice of Christ from the voice of a stranger, and to be preserved from the path of the destroyer. This is the prin∣cipal Antidote, which St. Paul prescribes against the like danger, as may appear by comparing Act. 20. v. 29.30. Acts 20.29, 30. with vers. 32. for having warned them of grievous Wolves, which should enter among them after his departure, for a remedy against them, hee commends
them to God, and to the word of his grace, &c. And the like may be observed from 2 Tim. 3. if wee compare the four last verses with the rest of the chap∣ter. Secondly, Labour to be rooted, and settled, and stablished in the Truth. Be not children in understanding, nor yet in inconstancy; mutatur in horas, is the cha∣racter of a childe in the phrase of the Poet; children are never long in one mind, but be not you such children; a tottering wall may easily be blown down; a childish inconstancy is in danger to be tossed to and fro, like a wave of the Sea: a weather-cock disposition is easily carried about, with every wind of doctrine, Ephes. 4.14. unstable souls may quickly be insnared, and therefore hold fast the profession of the Faith with∣out wavering; 2 Pet. 2.14. wavering is the way to wander from the Truth. Thirdly, Be contented with the Truth, without itching after novelties, lest ye be drawn away from sound doctrine; hee that is weary of being led by God, is in danger to be led away with errour. Re∣member them, that were weary of Manna, and lusted for flesh,
Num. 11.33. Num. 11.33. it had been better for them to have been contented with Gods al∣lowance, than to have longed for such varieties, they had sweet meats indeed, but they had soure sauce with it; for while the meat was in their mouths, the heavy wrath of God fell upon them; and they that did feed to the fullest, did never thrive with it; Psal. 106.15. for God sent leanness into their Soul. Psal. 106.15. Fourthly, Be lovers of the truth, men are not easily won to let go what they love, but if once our love to the truth grow cold, we may easily be wrought upon to exchange it for fables: yea it is just with God, that such men as do not embrace the love of the truth, 2 Thes. 2.10, 11. that they may be saved, should be given up to believe lies, 2 Thess. 2.10, 11. Fiftly, Be ye doers of the truth, and be∣ware of living in any known way of wickedness with liking and allowance. There are some men that are more in danger to be seduced, than other men are; some are , unlearned souls. 2 Pet. 3.16. 2 Pet. 3.16 these may easily be wrought upon to call good evil and evil good; 'tis an easie matter for ignorant men to be deceived. Some are  men that are not well
under-set, not well propt up; not rooted and stablished in the faith, 2 Pet. 2.14. which they have been taught, and such unstable souls may easily be beguiled; some are , plain hearted, well meaning men, people that have no harm in them, and there∣fore are not apt to suspect any in others, and therefore are the more in danger to be over-reached. Rom. 16.18. Rom. 16.18. but none in more danger to be seduced than wic∣ked men, 2 Tim. 3.13. wicked men and seducers are coupled by St. Paul, and well they may, for disorder in the affections, is the way to corrupt the understanding: Er∣rour in practice will in time draw on er∣rour in judgement, and when once a good conscience is put away, 1 Tim. 1.19. faith will quickly suffer Shipwrack. 1 Tim. 1.19. He that lives in any known sin, which he is re∣solved not to part withall, that man is swept and garnished for the entertaining of any erroneous doctrine, which shall tend to strengthen his hands, and to com∣fort his heart in his way of wickedness. Facile credimus, quod volumus. We are very apt to believe what we would have to be true, and are loath to doubt of such things, as are agreeable to our de∣sires.
6. Beware of calling into question ap∣parent truths, and of disputing express commands, for after this manner the Serpent beguiled Eve; and by this means the man of God, that was sent to Bethel, was betrayed to believe a lye. 1 King. 13. No Commission Per. Ol. 1 King 13. should ever sway us against express orders under Hand and Seal: nor should the pretended voice of an Angel prevail with us a∣gainst the express voice of God, lest it prove bitterness in the latter end; for by the one, we may be deceived, by the other we cannot. 7. Beware of their society, who with ju∣dicious, and understanding men, have the repute of Seducers. Peter in the high-priests hall, may quickly be brought to deny his master: They that defire the health of their bodies, are carefull to shun all places of infection: and so should we be too, if our desire be the health of our souls. Tis dangerous for the unlearned to be hearers of such men, or to read their books, or to hold discourse with them, though it be with an intent not to be led by them. Dinah had no intent to be defiled, when her curiosity sent her forth to see the daugh∣ters
of the land; but 'tis not good to be gadding, or to wall in tempting waies. God hath made no promise to preserve us from evil, when we lead our selves into temptation. Eightly, Trust no mans doctrine upon his own bare word, nor upon his bond neither, unless he bring the word of God for his secu∣rity. Believe not the matter, for the mans sake, but the man for the matters sake: if we pin our faith upon another mans sleeve, we knovv not whether it may be carryed; 'tis not good to be too cre∣dulous, lest sometimes we be couze∣ned: 1 Thes. 5.21. Try all things, and hold fast what is good, Is the precept of St. Paul. How curious are men in receiving of mony? a man will tell mony after his own father, and if any peece be suspici∣ous, we turn it, and wind it, and ring it, and rub it, and smel to it, and shew it to the by-standers, and it may be carry it to the Gold-smith, to try and touch it, nor care we whose Image and Superscription it bears, if once we discover the coyn to be counterfeit. And have we not much more reason to be curious about those things that do belong to the good of our souls? Follow therefore in this case, the
advice of St. John, 1 Epist. 4.1. Many false Prophets are gone forth, saith he, 1 Joh. 4.1. (and so may we) believe not therefore every one, that pretends to the Spirit, but try what Spirit they are of. And for our better di∣rection in their discovery, These fol∣lowing rules may be very useful. First, Rules for the tryal of false Prophets. Rule 1. They that come not in by the door are theeves and robbers, John 10.1. It is spoken there of false Christs, but it holds true also, of false Prophets, and by this door I understand a lawful calling, nor may any man take upon him to be a messenger of God unless he be fairly cal∣led to it; and if any man pretend to a mission, and can produce no commission for what he doth, he is but a deceiver. I do not deny, but that a man may be truely a Prophet, and yet he may be a false Prophet, he may be truely a Prophet, in regard of the lawfulness of his calling, and yet he may be a false Prophet, in re∣gard of the ill discharging of his duty, and therefore I do not say, that a lawful calling is enough to argue the truth of a mans doctrine; but this I say, that the want of a lawful calling is enough to prove the falshood of the person. Who sent thee? or who made thee a minister?
is a needful question; for if any man come in his own name, it is to be doub∣ted, that he comes upon his own errand. The Lord complains of some that spake lies in his Name, Jer. 14.14. and he never sent them. If they speak lies, we may be sure that he never sent them, or at least not on that errand; and if he sent them not, what can we expect, but lies from them? If God send any upon his errands, it is either by the ordinary way of imposition of those reverend hands, in which Christ hath intrusted that power for the good of his Church; or else tis by the way extraordinary: Now whomsoever he sends this way, he doth not onely vouch∣safe unto them some special revelation, for the perswading of themselves, but also he indues them with power suffici∣ent for the performing of such works as are above the reach of men, or devils, and for the doing of such things, as may carry authority with them, to convince others also, that they are sent of God. These are Gods waies, and who-ever they be that pretend to be sent of God, & yet cannot make it out by one of these waies, we may safely conclude that God
never sent them, unless it be to prove the sincerity of our love, as it is said of the false Prophet, Deut. 13.3. or else for a punishment to a barren, and wanton Na∣tion; and if like Jezabel, Rev. 2.20. they call themselves Prophets upon their own account, we may call them Sedu∣cers. Secondly, They that can indure no su∣periority in the Church, are suspicious per∣sons. The ground of this, I have from St. Jude, for he complains of some dan∣gerous men, that were in his daies, and amongst other their ill qualities, which hee there reckons up, hee saith, That they did despise dominions, and speak e∣vil of dignities, vers. 8. And hee de∣nounceth a woe against them for being cruel, like Cain, and covetous, like Ba∣laam, and seditious, like Corah, vers. 11. It should seem by St. Jude, that they were factious disturbers of that comely order, which God had settled in his Church; for though by dominions, v. 8. we may understand the Civil Power, yet reason wills, that by dignities, we un∣derstand the Ecclesiastical Order; how else could they be said to perish in the gain-saying of Corah? for if there had
not been some dignities and eminencies in the Church of the Christians, even in those most Primitive times, as well as there were of old in the Church of the Jews, it can never sink into my head, how it is possible for any man to perish in the gainsaying of Corab, now in the times of the Gospel; for this was the heart∣root of Corahs sin, hee sought to equal the Levite with the Priest, and so became souly guilty of that fault, of taking too much upon him, of which hee falsly ac∣cused others; as doth most plainly ap∣pear by Numb. 16.7, 9, 10. This was the cause of their gathering together against the Lord, vers. 11. Corah being but a Levite, would needs be a Priest (as if in these our daies, hee that were but a Presbyter, should take upon him to be a Bishop, this was the main of the matter. Indeed, hee did oppose Moses, as well as Aaron, but Moses came in only by the by, for the grand design lay wholly against Aaron. I do not think but that Corah could have been contented to have let Moses alone, if Moses would have been contented to have left Aaron alone; but if Moses be like to take Aarons part, Mo∣ses must look to share in Aarons portion;
for rather than Corah will not oppose the Priest, hee will oppose the Prince too; and rather than not prevail against Aaron, hee will strike at Moses also; So that Moses was brought in, more for Aarons sake than his own. And as for Dathan and Abiram, they were meerly drawn in. And 'tis most pro∣bable, that Corah stirred them up a∣gainst Moses, chiefly for this end, that hee might the better ingage them for himself against Aaron: for the main plot was against him, and the whole design was (in all likelihood) contrived by Corah, 'twas hee that was the head of the party, all they did but march under his colours; nor is it called the matter of Dathan, but the matter of Corah, Numb. 16.19. See also Numb. 16.5, 11. and Numb. 26.9. and 27.3. Where, by the way, observe the joynt Interest between Moses and Aaron. The design against Aaron reacheth to Moses too, and the opposing of Moses takes in Aaron also. Thus, no Aaron, no Moses; and if Moses be like to fall, Aaron is not like to stand. The King and the Priest go down together, Lam. 2.6.
But now see the issue of this matter of Corah. While Corah sought to re∣move the bounds between the Priest and the Levite, there were others, that were as busie with the same tools to pull down the pale, between the Levite and the People, and by laying all in common to bring all to confusion. If the Levite will own no Priest, the People will own no Levite; or thus; If the Levites will all be Priests, the People will be ready to think, that they may all as well be Le∣vites, and that all the Congregation are holy, as well as they, even every man of them. In so much that now God himself was fain to interpose in the behalf of that Tribe, which hee had set apart for him∣self, and by miracle to maintain his own election. The miracle was wrought in the Rod of Aaron, with lower, second, and third stories, for though it had of it self neither root, nor sap, yet by the mighty power of God, that Rod only, among all the rest of the Rods, budded buds, and bloomed blossomes, and brought forth ripe Almonds, Numb. 17.8. By which miracle, as God did testifie his chusing and owning of that Tribe, a∣bove all the other Tribes, for his own
more immediate service: So by the manner thereof, hee gave them at once, both an Emblem of Order, and also a Pledge for Succession; of Order, for blos∣somes are in a degree above buds, and Almonds above blossomes, and of Suc∣cession too; for buds were ready to grow up into blossomes, and blossomes to knit and ripen into Almonds, when the old Almonds were dropt off. And therefore well worthy was this Rod, to be laid up in store, and to be kept for a token, being an Emblem of Order, and a Pledge for Succession, as well as a testimo∣ny of the choice of God. And as the Censors of Corah were made bread plates for a co∣vering for the Altar, for a memorial unto the children of Israel, that no stranger, which was not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer incense before the Lord, that hee be not as Corah, and as his company, Numb. 16.40. For a to∣ken a∣gainst the Rebels. Numb. 17.10. So might that Rod al∣so serve for a memorial, that no stran∣ger, which was not of the Tribe of Le∣vi, presume to meddle with the things of the Tabernacle, lest hee be like that mutinous Congregation. By all which, if it be duly weighed, you may easily judge, if I have not reason to say, That
they who can indure no Superiority in the Church, are suspicious persons. Thirdly, Revilers and opposers of those Ministers, and that Ministry of the Gos∣pel, which hath been settled in the Church by the Holy Ghost in all ages downward, e∣ven from the Apostles daies, are to be looked upon as Impostors and Seducers. It is no marvel, if deceivers cry out a∣gainst those that are the duly ordained Ministers of the Gospel, for these are the rubs that lye in their way, and that strike off their Chariot wheels, and cause them to drive on their designs but heavily: And till they can prevail with their simple Auditors to lay these aside, they will not be able to do any feats amongst them. Are not the Mi∣nisters compared to Shepherds, and to Salt? and why so, unless it be to shew what use they are of, even in this be∣half, scil. to secure us from wolves, and to preserve us from putrefaction? And experience makes it good; for when once the Sheep grow weary of the Shepherd, as useless, or burdensome, they quickly become a prey to Wolves, and Foxes; and if once wee can be perswa∣ded to throw this Salt into a corner,
those flyes will quickly be buzzing a∣bout our ears, to fill our brains with worms, and our minds with rottenness. Observe that passage of the Apostle, Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. that you may the better take heed how you sleight the Ministers of the Gospel, all the daies of your life. God gave some Apostles, &c. and some Pastors and Teachers. Mark, not all teachers, for who then should be hearers? but some Pastors and Teachers. And why hath hee given the Church Pastors and Teachers, but amongst o∣ther ends, for this also, that we should not be tossed to and fro, and carried about, &c? vers. 14. If then God gave Mi∣nisters to prevent Seducers, we may well account them no better than Se∣ducers, that shall revile or oppose them. Fourthly, Beware of those, who de∣cline the word of God revealed in the Scriptures, and set up any other Rule to walk by, in the worship of God, and way of salvation. 'Tis his word that is the Truth, and therefore to decline this, and instead thereof to set up Traditions, new Lights, or pretended Revelations, is the mark of a deceiver. There be ma∣ny
in these latter daies, that have boast∣ed much of the Spirit, and pretended to Revelations no less than Angelical; but let them boast and pretend what they will, Si à verbo discrepant, non sunt Evan∣gelica Revelationes, sed Diabolicae illusio∣nes, if they agree not with the written Word of God, they are no Evangelical Revelations, but they are diabolical de∣lusions. 'Tis the way of Christs A∣postles, that we must walk in, we must hear them, i.e. beleeve, regard, obey, and follow them, and they that do not thus hear them, are not of God, and by this we may know the Spirit of Truth, and the spirit of errour, 1 Joh. 4.6. Fifthly, They that are for divisions and offences contrary to the Doctrine, which we have learned from the blessed Apostles, are to be marked and avoided; for they serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, Rom. 16.17. If it be but strange doctrine (with which heretofore we have had no ac∣quaintance) which is brought unto us, Heb. 13.9. let it stand at the door, and examine it thorowly, before it be let in, and unless it have a good certificate, give it no en∣tertainment, but if it cross the unity of
the Spirit, and the bond of Peace, away with it; for unnecessary strife and need∣less divisions, have no agreement with the Spirit of God. To this purpose give mee leave to acquaint you with a passage of a modern Divine, much to be taken notice of, his words are these. In a Church, where the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ only is soundly and truly taught, and received; if any the most sanctified man in shew, shall teach any thing, which may tend to make a division, or faction, See Mr. Par. in his Loctures on Rom. 16, 17. and to disturb the peace of the Church; suspect, and be jealous thereof: for either it is false, or if true, yet better be buried as low as the center of the earth, than to be broached to break the Peace and unity of the Church. Thus hee. Sixthly, Beware of those that promise liberty beyond the bounds of the Gospel. The Gospel indeed is a perfect doctrine of perfect liberty, shewing us the ready way how to be freed from the terrour and rigour of the Law, from the service of sin, and slavery of Satan, and from the curse of God, and the wrath to come. But if any man shall stretch this
liberty to a freedome from Parents, and Masters, and Magistrates, and Ministers, to a freedome from the Ordinances of God, to a freedome from the Moral Law, as the Rule of our Obedience, to a freedome from penitential sorrows, and from praying unto God for the par∣don of our sins; this is beyond the li∣berty of the Gospel. This is not liber∣ty, but looseness, this is liberty turned into a cloak of maliciousness, and they that thus promise liberty, are themselves the Servants of corruption. See 1 Tim. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. Seventhly, By their fruits you may know them, Mat. 7.16. Mat. 7.16. not by their leaves, but by their fruit, for the leaves may bee fair, when the fruit is faulty; Not by their cloa∣thing, but by their carriage; for that may be sheepish, when this is ravenous and devouring: not by their street-doors, but by their secret chambers; for the one may be swept and clean, when the o∣ther are foul and nasty. There is filthi∣ness of the Spirit, as well as of the flesh, and though they put away fornication and drunkenness, yet if they retain pride, and hatred, and malice, and
wrath, and seditions, and heresies, are they not carnal? Men may pretend to much light and perfection, and acquain∣tance with God, but if they say, They have no sin, they are a company of lyers, 1 Joh. 1.8. & 10. And they that walk in hatred, let them pretend what they will, they walk in darkness, 1 Joh. 2.9. & 11. And therefore look narrowly into their conversations. A conversation truly pure, and truly peaceable, patient and meek, full of self-denial, and mercy, and charity, is a conversation suitable to the Gospel, but they that walk contra∣ry to these, are disorderly walkers. Wal∣kers indeed, some of them are, for they go to and fro, and compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes, who if they come not within compass of the Statute against Vagrants and Wanderers (whom a whip and a pass should convey to the place from whence they came) yet they should be carefully avoided by all those that wish well to their own peace, and the good of their brethren. Or lastly, If this be not the true meaning of that place, Mat. 7.16. then by their fruits, we must understand the
fruit which grows upon their doctrine; ob∣serve what fruit their doctrine brings forth, for by that you shall know them. The scope of their doctrine will help to discover what they are. If it tend to the denying of all ungodliness, and world∣ly lusts, and to living godly, righteously, and soberly in this present world, 'tis well; but if it tend to the strengthening of the hands of evil daers, this is according to the false Prophets of old, Jer. 23.14. If it tend to peace, and love, and mercy, and meekness, 'tis well; but if it tend to hatred, variance, envy and malice, it cometh of evil; If it tend to build men up in their most holy Faith; if it tend to a growth in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; if it tend to the growing up in all things into him, which is the head, i.e. into a greater communion with, and conformity to the Lord Jesus, 'tis well; but if it tend not to these things, 'tis but hay and stubble at the most, or else 'tis a wind of doctrine, empty and light stuff at the best, having more of noise and sound, than of soundness and solidity. But if this wind prove blustering and
tempestuous, raising up storms of sedi∣tion and rebellion, and kindling, the coals of needless contentions all the day long, though it carry with it never so great a shew of zeal and holiness, yet can it not proceed from the Spirit of that God, who is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. But 'tis a blast ra∣ther, raised by him, who is the Prince of the power of the Air, whose subtilty is such, that hee knows how to make ad∣dition by substraction, and how to mul∣tiply by division; and whose malice is such, that hee will do whatsoever he can for the defacing of a beautiful Church, and the ruining of a flourishing Nation. And his Agents may they be counted, that are such Authors of confusion, and by such fruits you may know them. Thus have I shewed you what reason you have to beware of Seducers, I have also shewed you how to be preserved from them, and by what marks they may be known from other men. I will now conclude all with the words of St. Peter; 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. Seeing yee know these things be∣fore, beware lest yee also, being led away with the errour of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. But grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ; to whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen.
THE BLIND MANS MEDITATIONS. LONDON, Printed for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Pauls Church-yard, near the Little North-door, 1660.
THE Blind Mans MEDITATIONS On PSAL. 139.12. THe dark and light, O God, are like to thee: So are the day and night alike to mee, Yet how unlike, O Lord, am I to thee! The dark and light, are both alike to thee, Because to thee the very dark is light; The day and night, are both alike to mee, Because to mee the very day is night. The dark's no dark to thee, The day's no day to mee, O how unlike to thee! Thou all things seest, unseen of any, I nothing see, though seen by many, There's nothing hid from thee, There's nothing seen by mee, O how unlike to thee!
Thou 'rt purity it self, I all defil'd, Alwise, Almighty thou, I twice a childe, I a blind worm, thou the most glorious God, Thou the most holy, I a sinful clod, Thou dwell'st in light, and that light shadows thee Darkness doth compass, yet not cover mee, O how unlike to thee! Happy were I, if I were like to thee In things wherein there may a likeness be; And yet for this thy Precept is express, 'Tis thy command, I should resemble thee, Thus what's my duty, is my happiness, So gracious is thy goodness toward mee, Thy Precept therefore should my prayer be, Lord make mee like to thee. Father of lights, from darkness set mee free, O shine upon mee with thy heavenly grace, Renew that Image, which was lost in mee, Make mee so pure, that I may see thy face, Then shall I happy be, Because then like to thee.
THE BLIND MANS Meditation On ECCLES. 11.7. TRuly the light is sweet, saith Solomon, And 'tis a pleasant thing to see the Sun. And well hee might Thus praise the light, Which is so pure, so fair, so bright, And gives such lustre to all lovely features. And was, in time, and worth the first of crea∣tures. In the Creation God with light began, Not for himself, but for the use of man; For by the same Wee view this frame, And learn to praise Gods glorious Name For all his works, which, if they be not seen, Would seem to us as if they had not been. Whatever wonders Art, and cost, bring forth, Without the light they would bee nothing worth.
Both books and blanks, Pictures and planks, The dark bestows in equal ranks, And, if the light her rayes did not disperse, There were no beauty in the Universe. What's done, and how, 'tis light discovery brings, Light is the great distinguisher of things. All colours, faces, Dressings, laces, Look alike in all dark places. And without light, the world would, in con∣clusion, Seem but a very Chaos of confusion. And with the light, the sight may well compare In use, and loss, they do so joyntly share. No light, no sight, No sight, no light, Where either fails, 'tis all but night. Here (one alone is none) holds true of either, For both are useless, if not both together. If light and sight, be then so full of gladness, Needs must the loss of both abound with sad∣ness. Then woe is mee That cannot see,
My light and sight ecclipsed be, And I may say, my worldly joyes are past, For now my Sun is set, I have seen my last. Yet why should I so much dejected be? Why should the loss of sight so trouble mee? For this I finde, There's none so blind, As hee that hath a darkned mind. If God reveal to mee his loving-kindness, I'le not account my loss of eye-sight, blindness. Though I be blind, yet may I in some measure See the Laws wonders, & the Gospels treasure. How to beleeve, And how to live, Gods Word doth full directions give, With which if once my mind inlightned bee, I'le never more complain, I cannot see. There are the things that do concern our peace, Wherwith thēselves the blessed Angels please; Thence springs that light, That brings delight, And can redeem my soul from night, And is to endlesse light preparatory. The light of Grace, leads to the light of Glory.
And that's the Inheritance of the Saints in light, Of which the Blind, may yet obtain the fight. Above the skyes, Jobs hopes did rise, Though death should quite consume his eies. With whose resolves, Lord let mee rest in peace In hopes to see with better eyes than these. Sith then there be so many sweeter lights, Compar'd to which these present daies are nights, Lord shew thou mee The way to thee, Fill mee with hopes, thy face to see, And I'le not say, though blind, my joyes are gone, But rather thus, my joyes are yet to come.
THE BLIND MANS LOSSE. LOsers, they say may speak, then blame not mee, If I bewail mine own unhappiness; For I'm a loser in an high degree, Higher, indeed, than I can well express, And yet I know not how to hold my peace; Speaking may give a grieved mind some ease. My windows lately had a stately prospect Of hills and vales, of towns, and woods, and fields, Of forts, and ships, and every pleasing object, which either skyes, or earth, or ocean yeelds, But now 'tis lost, and that which adds to grieve mee, 'Tis not the Art of man that can relieve mee. I had a skilful guide, that did direct mee, I had a watchful guard, that did attend mee,
I had a faithful Scout, that did respect me, And upon all occasions much befriend mee, All which are lost, and I that loss bomoan, My sight, my guide, my guard, my scout, is gone. O what an alteration blindness brings! Through want of fight, things be not what they be, Windows and eyes to mee be no such things, The day's no day, the Sun's no Sun to mee, Blindness hath turn'd my windows into walls, My noon to night, mine eyes to useless balls. I have lost the use of all my books and papers, Which were so helpful to mee heretofore. I have lost the light, and now through cloudy vapours 'Tis grown so dark, that I can work no more. All these I lost; when once I lost my sight, And now 'tis time, to bid the world good night. But stay (my soul) though great thy losses are, Thy Blessed Saviour doth not yet forsake thee, Make him thine own, and then thou needst not care, His joyful prefence will a gainer make thee.
That's true indeed, to him I'le therefore flye, Whose fulness can my, losses all supply. Be thou my strength (O God) and I stand surely; Be thou my light, and I shall finde my way; Be thou my shield, and I shall walk securely; Be thou my guide, and I shall never stray; Be thou my strength, my light, my shield, my guide, And I shall neither stray, nor fall, nor slide. Be thou my fortress, foes shall foil mee never; Be thou my portion, I shall ne'r be poor; Be thou my life, and I shall live for ever; Be thou my God, and I defire no more; Shine thou on mee, and I shall need no Sun, Nor fear, whilst thou art mine, to be undone.
THE BLIND MANS Advantage. THe dark doth not a dungeon make, Nor night the want of brightness; A knowing and contented mind Can turn that dark to lightness; May I from ignorance be free, And see Gods loving-kindness, With Angels bright, That live in light, I'le not complain of blindness. The foolish are compar'd with beasts, Though differing in their feature, Who knowledge wants, though hee have his sight, Is but a brutish creature, Where eyes are lost, there inward light With knowledge can requite them.
Minds truly wise Have Angels eyes, 'Tis happy to be like them. 'Tis sad, I know; to lose the sight, And much to be lamented, Yet therein finde I gain enough To make the blind contented; For when mine eyes could look abroad, They sometimes bred mee danger, And I was then, Like many men, At home too much a stranger. But now I'me free from all those snares, Way-layd for eyes that wander, Whose looks have often prov'd to lust No better than a pandar; From all whose most alluring baits My blindness doth exempt mee, What Eve beguil'd, Or David foil'd, Hath now no power to tempt mee. And now mine eyes are inward bent With earnest inquisition, To search, and try, and know my self, And what's mine own condition;
Thus are they rather turn'd than lost, For that, which was mee homward, Hath now no looks For other books, But all my sight is homeward. Homeward, indeed, my blindness calls, My certain change foretelling; For sith my windows be shut up, I must look to remove my dwelling; There is an house, not made with hands, The joyes of whose fruition My Faith gives mee Good hopes to see; For the end of Faith is vision. And thither to be remov'd from hence I may well count a kindness, For though I here have lost my fight, Yet there I shall lose my blindness. Thus hee, that out of dark brought light, To blessings turns our crosses, Where his love takes, His goodness makes Us gainers by our losses.
AN Address to Blindness; Wherein are contained several grounds or chearful Patience for those that bee in that condition. WElcome Blindness, for his sake, From whom thou didst commission take To seize upon my watchful spyes, And by degrees to cloud mine eyes: Because thine orders were from God, I'le not repine, but kiss my Rod. No little Birds to earth decline Without a Providence Divine; I may as well conclude from thence, No Blindness, but by providence; All rising thoughts I therefore shun, And only say, Gods will bee done. From him the Holy Lord of Might, There's nothing can proceed but right;
Or light on mee, but what is just, For what am I, but sinful dust? The Provocation then being from mee, Submissive Patience will become mee. Besides, God would be understood, In all hee sends, to seek our good, His bitter Pills intend our health, And outward losses inward wealth, His very chiding comes from kindness, And therefore once more welcome Blindness. With aged Eli thou didst dwell, And Father Isaac knew thee well, With Jacob too thou didst abide, And other holy men beside, Wy then should I deny submission, When Saints have been in my condition? Thy first appearance calls thee foe, But better known, thou art not so; At least there's more of friend in thee, Than at the first there seems to be: For though the body may defie thee, The soul may prove a gainer by thee. Thy clouds ecclipse all earthly beauties, And yet obstruct not holy duties;
For I can hear, discourse, and pray, Though thou hast took my sight away, Thou rather furtherest such transactions, In helping to prevent distractions. Thy mantle muffles up the sight, And yet obscures no inward light, Nay, thou giv'st leisure, and occasions For many heavenly Meditations, And canst with Faith and Hope agree, Why then should I fall out with thee? 'T wixt Faith and thee hath ever been Consent; for that's of things not seen; A Christians walking suits thee right, For that's by Faith, and not by sight; And, for a Saint, the best ingredients Are hood-winkt faith, and blind obedience. When once God speaks, man should be mute, Beleeve, obey, and not dispute, For of his word the truth and right Hath no dependence on our sight; Thou canst not therefore, I confess, Either hinder Faith or Holiness. Nor canst thou bar mee from his love, Whom no mans face could ever move;
Or mee from loving him again, That doth invisible remain; And I, though blind, may have a being, Where blindness shall be turn'd to seeing. In Heaven, I know, there dwells no night, But glorious and eternal light, For which thou makst mee pant and pray, And pressest mee to sigh, and say, O come the time, when I shall never Be blind at all, but see for ever. Thou also teachest mee to know The emptiness of things below; For now by thee I plainly finde, That all this world is all but wind, And from the Scepter to the Hod, There's nothing worthy love but God. In Summe, seeing that from God thou art, For good; and not without desert: No foe to Faith, or Hope, or Love, Put rather friend to things above, Contented I may well remain, Till Heaven restore my sight again.
THE COMPLAINT, AND THE SUIT OF A SINNER. Ah mee! VVHat a wretch should I be, Should I suffer what I see that my sins do require! There be none of them so small, Which for vengeance do not call, And for bitterness, and gall, Loss of body, soul, and all In the pit of woe and thrall. 'Tis no less than endless fire, That in justice is their hire.
Sin, Sin, With my life did begin, And I have liv'd therein All my daies heretofore; Sins of heart head, hand and tongue, Through my life all along, Like a thread have they run Binding mee to be undone; Many and great are they grown, And if Justice scan the score, I must perish evermore. Poor I, Whither now shall I fly To be set at liberty From this depth of miscry? 'Tis not Sea, 'tis not shoar, 'Tis not all the Indian o're, 'Tis not Rome, with all her store, That hath salve to cure my sore, Onely One can mee restore. To that Altar I will fly, There I'le live, there I'le dye. Save, Save, Mercy, Lord, do I crave, Other Refuge none I have, But thy mercy to implore,
O look upon mee through that side, Which the spear made so wide, Look on mee through him that died, And for sin was crucified, Grant his wounds my sins may hide, And his blood cross my score And I ask but one thing more. Grace, Grace, In my heart do thou place, That I may run the race, Which thy Laws do require; Give mee, Lord, I humbly sue, Grace to know, grace to do, Grace that may mee so renew, And confirm, and perfect too, That, when death shall claim his due, Grace in Glory may expire, This is all my desire.
AN EPITAPH. LIfe leads to Death, so Nature saith; Death is the way to Life, So Faith. Thus let us think of both. Say I, Hee that desires to live, must dye.
A Meditation UPON THIS EPITAPH, LIfe is the way to Death, The common course of Nature saith, Death is the way to Life, This is a truth maintain'd by Faith. Even Nature then May minde us men To look for an alteration; But against that day 'Tis Faith must lay Sure grounds of consolation. Hee that would live, must dye, So Faith and Nature both do teach, In words they both comply, And yet in sense they make a breach;
Who love this breath, Must look for death, Thus Nature doth explain it; Faith thus: who love That life above, Must dye before obtain it. But 'tis by both confest All Adams race are born to dye, The worst, and eke the best, The rich, the poor, the low, the high, Against deaths dart The wisest heart Could never yet finde shield, The stout must stoop, The daring droop, And all be forc'd to yeeld. And yet there's hope in Death For such as do in Christ beleeve, For when they lose this breath They truly do begin to live; Their worst is past, For even the last Omega, well to dye, The Alpha is To joy and bliss In Heavens eternity.
To thee I therefore cry, Who dost both grace and glory give, Teach mee, Lord, how to dye That so I may be taught to live. While I dwell in clay I humbly pray For an heavenly conversation; And when I must Return to dust Lord shew mee thy salvation. FINIS.
