T2191 R226755 43077700 151812
THE TRYAL OF JOHN FOSTER, for Stealing a Mag pye. The Tryal of John Foster a private Centinel, at Justice-hall in the Old-Bayly in London, on Thurs∣day the Fifth Day of June, Anno Dom. 1693. And in the Fifth Year of Their Majesties Reign, &c. For Felony, in Stealing a certain Live Bird called or known by the Name of a Mag∣pye, and a Cage, at the Parish of New Brandford in the County of Middlesex. THE Court being set, and Proclamation made for si∣lence, as is usual, the Court proceeded as followeth; Clerk of the Crown. Keeper of Newgate, bring the Bo∣dy of John Foster to the Bar, (which was done). John Foster hold up thy Hand, (which he did) thou standest Indict∣ed, for Felony by the Name of John Foster of the Parish of Han∣well in the County of Middlesex, Labourer, as in the Indictment is set forth, &c. What sayest thou John Foster? Art thou Guil∣ty of this Felony whereof thou standest Indicted, or Not Guilty? Foster. Not Guilty, my Lord. Clerk of the Crown. Culprit, How will you be Try'd? Foster. By God and my Countrey. Clerk of the Crown. God send you a good Deliverance. After which the Prisoner was taken from the Bar, and with∣in a little time after that, he was set to the Bar again by Order of Court, &c. Clerk of the Crown. Cryer make Proclamation. Cryer. O yes, if any one can inform Their Majesties the King and Queen's Justices, Their Serjeant, Their Attorney, before this Inquest be taken, between our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen, and the Prisoner at the Bar, of any Felonies, Treasons, or Misprision of Treason, let them come forth and they shall be heard. God save King William and Queen Mary. Court. Amen. Clerk of the Crown. You the Prisoner at the Bar, these Men that you shall hear call'd, and personally do appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen, and you, upon Trial of your Life and Death; if you will chal∣lenge them, or any of them, your time is to speak to them as they come to the Book to be Sworn, and before they be Sworn. The Prisoner made no Exceptions, and the Jurors Sworn to Try the Issue are these Gentlemen whose Names follow, who were called over, and appeared every one at the first Call. JURORS. Matthias Cupper. Crisp Grange. John Hynde. Robert Hynde. Paul Winkle. William Webb. Henry Cripps. Charles Longland. John Holding. Robert Longland. Francis Barry. Emanuel Davis. Clerk of the Crown. Cryer count these. Cryer. One, two, three, &c. Twelve good Men and true, stand together and hear your Evidence. Clerk of the Crown. John Foster hold up thy Hand, (which he did); Gentlemen of the Jury, and you that are Sworn, look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his Cause; he stands In∣dicted by the Name of John Foster of the Parish of Hanwell in the County of Middlesex, Labourer, for that he the 14th. day of May, in the Fifth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Ldy the King and Queen, with Force and Arms, at the Pa∣ aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, one Bird called a Mag∣e value Two-pence, and one Bird-Cage value Four-pence,  Goods and Chattels of one Robert Connisbey Gent. then and tere being found Feloniously, he did steal, take, and bear a∣way, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queen, Their Crown and Dignity, &c. To this In∣dictment he hath pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Tryal he hath put himself upon God and his Countrey, which Countrey you are; your Business is to enquire whether he be Guilty or Not Guilty; if you find him Guilty, you are to enquire of his Goods and Chattels, and whether he fled for it; if you find him Not Guilty, nor that he did fly for it, say so, and no more, and hear your Evidence. Cryer. Call Robert Connisbey and Richard Searing, who appear∣ed in Court and were Sworn, and Mr. Connisbey stood up. Court. Come Sir, what have you to say against the Prisoner at the Bar about a Mag-pye that you lost? Mr. Connisbey. My Lord, I lost a Mag pye and a Cage the 14th. of May last, it was taken from my Door off the Hook that it hung upon; b truly, my Lord, I can't say the Prisoner at the Bar stole it from me. Court. What made you bring him here then? It is a very small inconsiderable Business to put a Man into Newgate for. Mr. Connisbey My Lord, it was none of my doings, it was the Justice of Peace his fault that committed him, I was un∣willing he should go to Prison; I am sorry it happened so, my Lord. Court. What is the Justice of Peace his Name? Mr. Connisbey. His Name is Hawley, my Lord. Court. Pray where does he Live? Mr. Connisbey. At New Brandford. Court. He was but a foolish man for his pains to commit a poor Fellow to Goal for such a silly trifling business as this is; he had better have sent him to his Captain, and let him run the Gantlet, &c. Have you any other Witness, Sir? Mr. Connisbey. I have no more, but the Constable that took the Prisoner. Court. Took him, d'ye call it, why surely you had no great difficulty about the taking of him, he was not in such fear as to run away for a Mag-pye; however we will hear the Constable. Clerk of the Crown. Stand up, Mr. Constable, (which he did). Court. Is the Constable Sworn. Mr. Constable. Yes, my Lord, I am Sworn. Court. Come Mr. Constable, what say you to the matter? Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar. Mr. Constable. Yes, my Lord, this Gentleman brought me a Warrant from Mr. Justice Hawley against the Prisoner at the Bar, and I serv'd it upon him at his Quarters at Old Brandford, where I found the Cage and a Mag-pye, and I took them and the Prisoner, and carried them before Mr. Justice Hawley, and his Worship was pleased to commit the Fellow to Prison. Court. Poor Fellow! Friend, how long hast thou been in Prison? Foster. Almost three Weeks, my Lord, and I have endured a great deal of hardship, and many a hungry Belly I am sure, God help me; I am very poor, my Lord. Court. Hark you, Mr. Connisbey, pray what did the worthy Justice of Peace bid you do with the Mag-pye after he had com∣mitted the Prisoner? Mr. Connisbey. My Lord, he order'd me to keep the Mag-pye and the Cage safe till the Bishop of London's Bayliff came for it, it being a Waife, he said it was forfeited to the Lord of the Mannor; at which the Court laughed heartily.
Court. Pray Mr. Connisbey what was your Mag-pye worth, and your Cage; was it a Wyer-Cage? Mr. Connisbey. Worth, my Lord, I do not know well what it was worth, about a Groat or Sixpence, as the Indictment sets forth; the Cage was a Twiggen Cage. Court. Fie, fie! a silly business, a wise Justice indeed! he de∣serves to be committed himself, till he learns more wit; have you done for the King and Queen Mr. Connisby? Mr. Connisby. I have no more to say, my Lord, I would not have come here to say this, if I could have helped it Court. Come Mr. Foster, you have heard what hath been sworn against you; now make your Defence. Mr. Foster. My Lord, Indeed my Lord, I did not steal the Mag-pye; there was a man overtook me (a Stranger to me) in the way between the Two Brandfords, and desired me to carry the Bird and the Cage for him, which I did; and when we came to Old Brandford, he desired me to keep it, till he call'd for it; he went away, my Lord, but never came any more; so, my Lord, I was loath to kill the Bird, and I did not know whose it was, if I had, I would have restor'd it to the Owner. Court. A good Defence. Look you, Gentlemen of the Jury, The Prisoner at the Bar, John Foster, stands indicted of Felony for stealing a Mag-pye and a Cage, of the value of 6 d. which is a very inconsiderable value. And you have heard the Evidence for the King, who told you that the Mag-pye was lost, and that it was found upon the Prisoner; but Mr. Connisbey does not take upon him to swear that the Prisoner stole it from him; and the Prisoner he denies it, and tells you, That truly he did not take it away, but that he had it of a Stranger that he accidentally met withal upon the Road between the Two Brandfords, therefore I don't see any colour of Evidence against the Prisoner: And I must needs say it was a very simple weak thing done of the Justice of Peace to com∣mit the poor Fellow for such a Trifle; I shall leave it to you to consider of the Evidence, and if you find him guilty, you are to say so; but if you think in your Conscience that he did not steal the Mag-pye, then you are to acquit the Prisoner. You had best go over to each other, and consider; you need not give your selves the trouble to go out of the Court about such a small indifferent matter as this. Then the Jury having considered of their Verdict, and be∣ing return'd to their Seats; the Court spake as followeth. Clerk of the Crown. Gentlemen of the Jury, are you agreed of a Verdict? Jury. Yes. Clerk of the Crown. Keeper, set John Foster to the Bar (which was done). Clerk of the Crown. John Foster hold up thy hand (which he did); Gentlemen of the Jury, look upon the Prisoner; how say you, is he guilty of the Felony whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty? Fore-man. Not guilty. Court. Keeper, bring the Prisoner about into the middle of the Court (which was done) Court. Look you, Foster, because you are a poor man, the Court has considered of your Condition, and acquitted you of the Fees; get you home about your business, but have a care how you meet with a Mag-pye again. Foster. Indeed, my Lord, I will; Pray God bless King Wil∣liam and Queen Mary, and all the Honourable Bench. God be with you, my Lord. ADVERTISEMENTS. Letters of Love and Gallantry. And several other Subjects. All written by Ladies. Vol. I. Printed for S. Briscoe, over-against Will's Coffee house in Russel-street, Covent-Garden. Geogrphy Rectified: Or, A Description of the World in all its Kingdoms, Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bayes, Capes, Ports; Their Ancient and Present Names, Inhabitants, Scituations, Histories, Customs, Govern∣ments, &c. As also their Commodities, Coins, Weights and Measures, compared with those at London. Illustrated with Seventy eight Maps. The Third Edition, Enlarged. To which is added a Compleat Geographical Index to the whole: Al∣phabetically digested The whole Work performed according to the more Accurate Observations and Discoveries of Modern Authors. By Robert Morden. Conformity of the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France with that of the Primitive Christians. Written by M. La Rocque, Minister of Quevilly near Rouen. With his Learned Commentaries on each Article. Render'd into English by Jos. Walker. Sermons preach'd on Several Occasions. By John Conant, D. D. The Righteous Man's Hope at Death: Consider'd and Improv'd for the Comfort of Dying Christians, and the Support of Surviving Relations. To which is added Death-Bed Reflections, &c. proper for a Righteous Man in his Last Sickness. By Samuel Doolittle. The Mourner's Directory, guiding him in the Middle Way be∣twixt the Two Extreams, Defect, Excess of Sorrow for his Dead. To which is added, The Mourner's Soliloquy. By Thomas Doo∣little, M. A. There is in the Press, and will be suddenly published, a Ser∣mon, Entituled, The Necessity of an Early Victory over Satan. By T. Cruso. These Six Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Leggs in the Poultrey. An Answer to the Late King James's Last Declaration, dated at St. Germains, April the 17th. S. N. 1693. Memoirs concerning the Campagne of Three Kings, William, Lewis, and James, in the Year 1692. With Reflections upon the Great Endeavours of Lewis the 14th to effect his Designs, of Jame the the IId. to Remount the Throne. And the proper Methods for the Allies to take to hinder both. Reflections upon the Late Horrid Conspiracy contrived by the French Court, to murther His Majesty in Flanders: And for which Monsieur Granvall, one of the Assassinates, was Executed. Liturgia Tigurina: Or, The Book of Common Prayers and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, usually practised, and solemnly performed in all the Churches and Chappels of the City and Canton of Zu∣rick in Switzerland, and in some other Adjacent Countries; as by their Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws they are Appointed; and as by the Supream Power of the Right Honourable the Se∣nate of Zurick they are Authorised, Established, and Command∣ed. With the Orders of that Church. Faithfully translated out of the Helvetian into the English Tongue, by John Conrad Werndly, formerly Minister of the French and Dutch Congregation of San∣toff in the Isle of Axholme in the County of Lincoln: And now Minister of Wraisbury cum Langley in the County of Bucks. Travels into divers parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's Order to discover a new Way by Land into China; containing many curious Remarks in Natural Philoso∣phy, Geography, Hydrography, and History. Together with a Description of Great Tartary, and of the different People who inhabit there. Done out of French. To which is added, A Sup∣plement extracted from Hakluyt and Purchas; giving an account of several Journeys over Land from Russia, Persia, and the Mo∣guls Countrey to China, together with the Roads and distances of the places. An Account of the late Terrible Earthquake in Sicily; with most of its Particulars. Done from the Italian Copy printed at Rome▪ The Life of Lewis of Bourbon, late Prince of Conde. Di∣gested into Annals, with many curions Remarks on the Trans∣actions of Europe for these last 60 Years. Done out of French. These Seven Printed for Richard Baldwin. These are to give notice to all Persons for the benefit of the Publick, That W. Elmy, Professor of Physick, and Operator, of known Integrity, and above 25 Years Practice, liveth at the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone-Court, at the lower end of Bartholomew-Lane, by the Royal-Exchange. VVho most safely and expeditiously cures Deafness, and Noise in the Ears, in any, of what Age soever, (if curable) and at first sight by inspection resolves the Patient, if so or not, as most eminent Persons of Quality in this City can testifie. I have Remedies ready prepared for the preservation of the Hearing in those who through some great defects in the Sounding Membrane, and other Impediments in the Auditory Passages are not perfectly curable, which Remedies pre∣serves them from ever growing worse, and improves their Hearing to Old Age. That you may not mistake and go to a false Pretender, my House is at the Blue-Ball, as aforesaid, you may see it as you come in∣to the Court. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. 1693.
