W1142 E1610_4 99869144 170676
THE SAINTS Delight. To which is annexed a TREATISE of MEDITATION. By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the City of LONDON. Valida est ut mors dilectio Dei, sicur mors vio∣lenter separat animas à corpore, ita dilectio Dei violenter segregat hominem à mundano amore, Isidor. I will delight my self in thy statutes. Ps. 119.16. Imprimatur, EDM. CALAMY. LONDON, Printed by T. R. & E.M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Corn-hill, near the Royal Exchange. 1657.
To his loving Friends, the Aldermen, the Esquires, and the rest of the Inhabitants of the Parish of Stephens Walbrook in the City of London. Honoured, and Beloved, MY hearts desire for you is, that you may be saved. It hath been a long time in my thoughts after the many sig∣nal demonstrations of your love
to me, to shew my gratefulnesse in a way of retaliation; Such as I have, give I you Gratius venit quod facili quam quod plena manu datur Seneca. I do here Dedicate this Manual to you, as a standing Testimonial of that real respect, and zea∣lous affection which I bear to∣wards you. The subject of it you will finde to be a Christians delight Nec sine delectu nec intellectu Costerus in Psal. 1. and meditation in Gods Law. I have purposely for your sakes laid down sever∣al heads, or particulars for your meditations to dilate and runne upon, as the attributes, the promises, the love of Christ, &c. If he who by often looking on a Ring with a deaths head, at last grew sober, who knows
but by often meditating on these things your hearts may be brought into a more serious and heavenly frame? Meditation is a holy kinde of usury, it is put∣ting out Sermons to use, which brings in no small profit at the yeares end. Meditation is a duty which carries meat in the mouth of it; My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatnesse, while I meditate on thee, Psalme 63.4, 5. There is little written (so farre as I know) upon this subject. Most Discourses of this nature di∣gresse into ejaculations. I have with the help of God cut out my way thorough the rock, not
finding any path that others had gone in before me; so that I have not offered that to you which cost me nothing; for the stile of it, it is plaine; but truth, when it is in the plainest dresse, is most comely. The star shines brightest in its native lustre. Divinity hath so much intrinsecal beauty, that it needs no art of wit or fan∣cy to set it off. Who goes to em∣broyder a pearl? or paint over gold? this would but imbase and eclipse it; It is a signe of a wanton Christian to look most at the fringing and garnishing of a Truth. I wish it be not the sin of many in this City, they like the dressing, but loath the food. The
blew flowers which grow among the corn, make a fine shew, and are pleasing to the eye, yet are prejudicial to the Harvest. Rhe∣torical flourishes may please the fancies of men, but I much que∣stion whether they will not lessen Christs spiritual barvest at the end of the world. When men preach rather words than mat∣ter; they catch peoples ears, not their soules; they do but court, not convert. If the patients wound bleeds, nay rankles, it is better for him to have a deep in∣cision made in the flesh, than to binde it about with silk, or dress it with aromatick oyntments. True it is, Ministers ought to
cloath the truths they preach in decent expressions to preserve them from contempt; (though they must come in plainnesse of speech, not in rudenesse of speech.) But, let them take heed, lest with their affected new∣coynd phrases, (unsutable to that gravity the Apostle speaks of Tit. 2.7) they adulterate and corrupt the simplicity of the Word, like some kind of sauces and compounds which take away the natural taste, and savour of the meat. As for you (my friends) I hope the Lord hath given, (at least some of you) a spiritual pallate to rel∣lish and thirst after, , the sincere milk of the Word,
1 Pet. 2.2. A savoury heart is for wholsome doctrine: How glad should I be (dear friends) if I might either by preaching, or writing become savingly instru∣mental for your good, and before I die, might help to make up an happy match between Christ and you 2 Cor. 11.2.: I blesse God that I see some of you walking in the truth; 2 John 4. when so many in the world are marching apace towards hell. But O that I might see an en∣crease of holinesse among you, that more converts might be brought in, and as so many jewels make the Crown of Christ shine the brighter; do not hearken to the Syrene songs of the world;
the sins you commit in hast, you will repent at leasure; sugred poisons go down pleasantly, but afterwards they wring and tor∣ment the bowels. Let me earnest∣ly beseech you to put a bill of di∣vorce into the hand of your sins; let not Error gangrene, lust burn, malice boyle, pride swell, intem∣perance overflow, covetousnesse root in any of your souls. Purge out the old leaven; and as e∣ver you expect to go to the new Jerusalem, when you die, become new creatures while you live; Rest not in baptismal priviled∣ges: all are not Israel which are of Israel Rom. 9.6; what is a man the better to have Christs Name
upon him, and Satans image? What is he advantaged to have the Oracles of God, and want the Spirit of God? Think not that an empty profession will save; millions will be sent to hell in Christs livery Mat. 7.22, Matth. 8.12. Oh labour to know the grace of God in truth Col. 1.6. The Lord hath been at much cost and char∣ges with you to bring you near to himself; let not God be a looser by you. Pindar saith, it was an opi∣nion of the people in ancient times, that Jupiter rain'd down gold upon the City of Rhodes: Give me leave to apply it to you, God hath rain'd down golden showers upon you. What mercies hath he enrich'd you with? what
talents hath he entrusted you with? your estate is a talent, your health (in these sickly times espe∣cially) is a talent, your Sanctua∣ry-blessings are talents, every motion of the Spirit, every opportunity for heaven is a ta∣lent, and nothing more sure than that you will be called to an ac∣count shortly Marth. 25 19, 20; now if you have let your talents lie rusting, and done no good with them, the hi∣ding your talents will not hide your sin, expect an heavy doome. Think not these things imperti∣nencies. Be not so evil, as to be too good to be advised. I confesse my felf with Ignatius, the least of all that labour in Gods vine∣yard,
but though I am with you in weaknesse, yet as the Apostle saith, in much trembling 1 Cor. 2.3. I tremble to think how sad it will be, if any of you shall perish in these dayes of the Gospel, though you have been plac'd under a trumpet, lesse shrill and powerful. It shall be my prayer for you all, that you may be fruit-bearing trees, that when the great Vine∣dresser shall remove you hence by death, he may transplant you in∣to the coelestial Paradise. Be pleased to accept of these few notes which (some years since) you did seeme to hear with much affection: I shall only desire two things of you, that you would
thoroughly peruse them, and then copy them out in your daily pra∣ctise. Get up into your Tower of Meditation, and look often with Moses upon him, who is in∣visible Heb. 11.27. But I will not hold you any longer; I remember Saint Paul in the close of his Epistle, craves the Thessalonians pray∣ers 1 Thes. 5.25, and so shall I end my Epistle begging a contribution of your prayers for me, that the Lord would give me the strength of heaven to do the work of hea∣ven . Ignat. Epist.; that he would help me to take heed to my self and my doctrine, that he would make me, not only faithful, but suc∣cesseful in my Ministry among
you: that so, when the chiefe Shepheard shall appear, I may receive a Crown of glory which fadeth not away 1 Pet. 5.4.: I shall not further enlarge, unlesse in my affections towards you. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shep∣herd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting Co∣venant, make you perfect in e∣very good work, to do his wil, working in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.20, 21. which shall be the earnest prayer of him who is, Your friend, and servant for Jesus sake THOMAS WATSON.
THE EPISTLE To the Reader. Christian Reader, THere are some exerci∣ses of Religion which stand only in a forme of godlinesse, when men draw neer with their mouth and honour God with their lips, and bestow a little bodily exercise and attendance upon him, when in the mean time their hearts are farre from him, running after o∣ther
objects, Isaiah 29.13. Ezek. 33.31. Other duties there are which are more spiritual, and wherein the life and power of godlinesse doth con∣sist. Among these, that of hea∣venly Meditation is one, when, (as the Apostle saith of the blessed Angels, 1 Pet. 1.12.) the heart desires to look into the mysteries of salvation. Ever since the fall of Adam, sin∣ful men have had the disposition of Adam, to flie away, and to hide from the presence of the Lord. Natural men are without God in the world, he is not in all their thoughts, they could be well enough content to have him cease from be∣fore them, Esay 30.11. He is every where else to be found, onely shut out of the hearts of wicked men. The heart never willingly fixeth on God, till he be the Treasure of it; for where a mans treasure is, there will his heart be also. It canot ea∣sily
Meditate, but where it doth de∣light, Psalme 119.97. Love is the weight of the soul, it readily moves to the object which it loves. Mary will not away from the empty Se∣pulchre, where a little before her Lord had lien. Every good man is of Davids minde, Psalme 16.8. to set the Lord alwayes before him, that he may be in his feare all the day long. There is nothing of a more un∣stable and roving temper than the minde of man. Some have prescri∣bed the study of Mathematicks to fix the volatile agilitie thereof; but certainly the more serious, the more setled the soul is. Nothing therefore will so ballace and compose it, as true holinesse, which doth of all other things make it the most serious, the most willing to acquaint it self with God, that it may be at peace, Job 22.21. He is the Rest of the soul. Inquietum est cor nostrum donec re∣quiescat
in te. The more it knows of him, the more desirous it is to stay with him that it may know more. The more it tasteth of his favour, the more it longeth after his glory, as Moses did, Exod. 33.17, 18. What the Philosopher saith of all knowledge, is indeed true onely of the knowledge of God and Christ, that it is quies intellectus. And therefore our Saviour cal∣leth it eternal life, John 17.3. In which alone the soul doth Rest. Now one excellent meanes of fixing the heart on God, is medi∣tation, whereby a man calls to∣gether All that is within him to blesse his name, Psalme 103.1. Meditation is the wing of the soul which carrieth the affections there∣of to things above; by this, as Moses, it goeth up to the top of Pisgah to take a view of the promi∣sed land. It is as Clemens Alex∣andrinus
saith of prayer, , a conversing with God; as Chrysostome saith of faith, so may we of Meditation, , It makes God, and Christ, and precepts, and promises ours, by giving us a fuller possession of them. Hereby we hold fast the things which we have learned, we awaken our faith, inflame our love, strengthen our hope, revive our de∣sires, encrease our joys in God; we furnish our hearts, and fill our mouthes with materials of prayer, we loosen our affections from the world, we praeacquaint our selves with those glories which we yet but hope for, and get some knowledg of that love of Christ which passeth know∣ledge. Meditation is the palate of the soul wherby we taste the goodnesse of God; the eye of the soule whereby we view the beauties of holinesse; that  and , whereby our spiritual senses are exercised,
Acts 24.16. Heb. 5.14. it is the key to the wine-sellar, to the banquetting house, to the garden of spices, which letteth us in unto him whom our soul loveth; it is the arme whereby we embrace the promises at a distance, and bring Christ and our souls toge∣ther. Though some learned men of for∣mer times have written some few things upon this subject, yet of our age, and in our language, I do not remember any who have purposely handled it, but our Christian Seneca, the learned and Reverend Bishop Hall, which being one small tract in the midst of a voluminous work, may haply not be in every mans hand to peruse. The necessity, excellency, and usefulnesse of this Christian duty, the Reverend Authour of this book hath elegantly described, which is therefore worthy the perusal of such as desire to acquaint and furnish themselves with so excellent a part
of Christian skill, whereby Time may be redeemed and improved unto the prepossession of Eternity. The Lord so fill us with the love of him, and with all the the fulnesse of God; that we may be able continually to say, My heart is fixed O Lord, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise From my Study at Lawr. Jury, Nov. 7. 1657. Thine in the Lord Edw. Reynolds.
THE SAINTS SPIRITUAL DELIGHT. PSAL. 1.2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord. CHAP. I. Shewing that negative goodnesse is but a broken title to heaven. AS the Book of the Can∣ticles is called the song of songs by an Hebra∣isme, it being the most excellent; so this Psalme may not unfitly be en∣tituled,
the Psalme of Psalmes, for it containes in it the very pyth and quintescence of Christianity. What Hierom saith of St. Pauls Epistles Breves esse pariter, ac longas. Hierom., the same may I of this Psalme; 'tis short for the composure, but full of length and strength for the mat∣ter Psalmus hic reliquis anteponi∣tur, estenim quasi pro∣mium in univer sam sacram Scripturam Moller.. This Psalme carries blessed∣nesse in the frontispiece; it begins where we all hope to end: It may well be call'd a Christians guide, for it discovers the quicksands where the wicked sink down in perdition, verse 1. and the firme ground on which the Saints tread to glory, ver. 2. The text is an epitome, and breviary of Religi∣on. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he meditate day and night. Every word hath its Emphasis; I begin with the first word But . This But is full of spiritual wine, we will broach it, and taste a little, then proceed.
But] This is a tearme of oppo∣sition. The godly man is descri∣bed, 1. By way of negation, in three particulars. 1. Verse 1. He walketh not in the councel of the ungodly. He is none of the Councel; he neither gives bad councel, nor takes it. 2. He standeth not in the way of sinners. He will not stand among those who shall not be able to stand in the judge∣ment, verse 5.3. He sitteth not in the seat of the scornful. Let it be a chaire of state, he will not sit in it, he knows it will prove very uneasie at last. The word sitting im∣plies, 1. An habit in sinne Moles imposita se∣pulchroipsa est vis dura consuetudi∣nis qua premitur anima, nec resurgere nec respirare possit. Aug. in Mat. hom. 45. Adeo sunt pertinaces, suisque perfricta fronte peccatis addicti, ut jam nihil cos pudeat, sed omnem religio∣nem habeant proludibrio. Moller. Psal. 50.20. Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother.
2. Sitting implies familiarity with sinners. Psal. 26.4. I have not sate with vaine persons; that is, I do not haunt their company. The godly man shakes off all intimacy with the wicked . Menander.. He may traffique with them, not associate; he may be civil to them, as neighbours, but not twist into a cord of friendship: Diamonds and stones may lie toge∣ther, but they will not sodor and ceament. II. The godly man is described by way of position, or rather oppo∣sition, But his delight is in the Law of the Lord. From this word But] observe, That negative goodnesse is not suf∣ficient to entitle us to heaven. To be no scorner, is good, but it is not e∣nough. There are some in the world whose religion runs all upon negatives; they are not drunkards, they are not swearers Qui fla∣gitium nou committit non est vir bonus, sed tantum non malus. natal. com., and for this they do blesse themselves. See
how that Pharisee vapours, Luke 18.11. God I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, un∣just, adulterers, &c. Alas, the not being scandalous will no more make a good Christian than a cipher will make a summe. The godly man goes further, He sits not in the seat of the scorner, but his delight is in the Law of the Lord. We are bid, not on∣ly to cease from evil, but to do good, Psalme 34.14. 'Twill be a poore plea at last, Lord I kept my selfe from being spotted with grosse sin. I did no hurt, but quid boni inest? What good is there in thee? It is not enough for the servant of the vineyard that he doth no hurt there, he doth not break the trees, or destroy the hedges; if he doth not work in the vine-yard, he loseth his pay; 'tis not enough for us to say at the last day we have done no hurt, we have liv'd in no grosse sin, but what good have we done in
the vine-yard? where is the grace we have gotten? if we cannot shew this, we shall lose our pay, and miss of salvation. Use. Do not content your selves with the Negative part of Religion; Virtutis est magis houesta agere quàm non turpia. many build their hopes for hea∣ven upon this crack'd foundation, they are given to no vice, none can charge them with any foule miscarriages, and these are their letters of credence to shew; to such persons I say three things. 1. You may not be outwardly bad, and yet not inwardly good. You may be as far from grace as from vice; though none can say, black is your eye, yet, our soul may be dyed black. Though your hands be not working iniquity, your heads may be plotting it. Though you do not hang out your bush, yet you may secretly vent your commodity: a tree may be full of vermine, yet the fair leaves may cover them that they
are not seen; so the faire leaves of civility may hide you from the eye of man, but God sees the vermine of pride, unbelief, covetousnesse in your heart: Ye are they (saith Christ) that justifie your selves before men, but God knows your hearts, Luke 16.15. a man may not be morally evil, yet not spiritually good. He may be free from grosse enormity, yet full of secret enmity against God; like the snake, which though it be of a fine colour, yet hath its sting. 2. If you are onely negatively good, God makes no reckoning of you; you are as so many ciphers in Gods Arithmitick, and he writes down no ciphers in the book of life: Take a piece of brasse, though it be not so bad mettal as lead or i∣ron, yet not being so good as silver, there is little reckoning made of it, 'twill not passe for currant coine; though thou art not profane, yet
not being of the right mettal, wanting the stamp of holinesse up∣on thee, thou wilt never passe cur∣rant, God slights thee, thou art but a brasse Christian. 3. A man may as well go to hell for not doing good, as for doing evil; he that beares not good fruit is as well fuel for hell, as he that bears bad, Matth. 3.10. Every tree which beareth not good fruit, is hewen down and cast into the fire. One may as well die with not eating food, as with poison; a ground may as well be spoil'd for want of good seed, as with having tares sown in it; They that were not active in works of charity, were sad∣ly sentenc'd: Depart from me ye cursed, &c. for I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat, Matth. 25.41, 42. It is not said ye took away my meat from me, but ye gave me no meat. Why were the foolish Virgins shut out? They had done
no hurt, they had not broken their lamps, I, but they took no oyle in their lamps, Matth. 25.3. Their wanting oyle was the indightment; there∣fore let not any man build his hope for heaven upon negatives. This is building upon the sand; the sand is bad to build on; it will not ceament Arena est terra steri∣lis, minuta, & grana ejus non cohaerent., being ex materia fria∣bili; but suppose a man should fi∣nish an house upon it, what is the issue? the flood comes, viz. persecu∣tion, and the force of this flood will drive away the sand and make the house fall; and the winde blows, the breath of the Lord as a mighty winde will blow such a sandy build∣ing into hell; Be afraid then to rest in the privative part of Religion, launch forth further, be eminently holy. So I come to the next words, but his delight is in the Law of the Lord . Theodoret in loc., and in his Law doth he medi∣tate day and night.
CHAP. II. What is meant by the Law of God, what by delight in the Law, and the proposition resulting. THe words give us a two∣fold description of a godly man. First, He delights in Gods Law. Secondly, he meditates in Gods Law. I begin with the first. His delight is in the Law of the Lord: The great God hath graffed the affection of delight in every creature; it hath by the instinct of nature something to delight it self in Ovis frondem, cervus fon∣tem, Canis leporem, Pylades sectatur Orestem.. Now the true Saint, not by instinction, but divine inspiration makes the Law of God his delight. This is the badge of a Christian, ejus oblectatio in lege Jehovae, his delight is in the Law of
the Lord. A man may work in his trade, and not delight in it; either in regard of the difficulty of the work, or the smalnesse of the in∣come; but a godly man serves God with delight; 'Tis his meat and drink to do his will. For the Explication of the words, it will be enquired, 1. What is meant by the Law of the Lord. This word Law may be taken either more strictly, or more largely. 1. More strictly, for the Decalogue or ten Command∣ments. 2. More largely. 1. For the whole written Word of God Musculus Diodat. Tota de∣ctrina a Deo patefacta & Ecclesiae tradita. Mollerus.. 2. For those truths which are deducted from the Word, and do concenter in it. 3. For the whole businesse of Religion which is the counterpane of Gods Law, and agrees with it as the transcript with the original. The word is a setting forth, and Religion is a shewing forth of Gods Law. I shall take this word in its full lati∣tude and extent.
2. What is meant by delight in Gods Law. The Hebrew and Septua∣gint both render it, his will is in the Law of the Lord Plus valet consouantia voluntatum quàm vo∣cum. Bern. Serm. sup. salve. Regina.; and that which is voluntary is delightful; a graci∣ous heart serves God from a princi∣ple of ingenuity; he makes Gods Law not only his task, but his re∣creation; upon this Scripture∣stock I shall graffe this Proposi∣tion. Doct. That a child of God, though he cannot serve the Lord perfectly, yet he serves him willingly; His will is in the Law of the Lord; he is not a prest souldier, but a volun∣teer Quia Deus cor quaerit, cor intus in∣spicit, testis est, judex, approbator, adjutor, co∣ronator, sufficit ut offeras vo∣luntatem. Aug. in Ps.; by the beating of this pulse we may judge whether there be spi∣ritual life in us, or no. David professeth Gods Law was his delight, Psalme 119.77. he had his crown to delight in, he had his musick to chear him, but the love he had to Gods Law did drown all other de∣lights; as the joy of harvest and
vintage exceeds the joy of gleaning. I delight in the Law of God (saith Saint Paul) in the inner man, Rom. 7.22. the Greek word is, I take pleasure ; The Law of God is my recreation, and it was an heart-de∣light,* 'twas , in the inner man 2 Cor. 5.12.; a wicked man may have joy, , in the face*, 2 Cor. 5.12. like honey-dew, that wets the leaf; but the wine of Gods Spirit chears the heart; Paul delighted in the Law, in the inner man. CHAP. III. Whence the Saints spiritual delight springeth. THe Saints delight in the Law of God proceeds, 1. From soundnesse of judgement. The minde apprehends
a beauty in Gods Law, now the judgement as the primum mobile draws the affections, like so many orbes after it; The Law of God is perfect Lex Dei integra. Hierom. Pagnin. Absoluta & consum∣mata cui nihil desit Fabrit. in Psalm., Psalme 19.7. it needs not be eeked out with traditions: The Hebrew word for perfect  seemes to allude to a perfect, entire body that wants none of the mem∣bers or lineaments; Gods Law must needs be perfect, for it is able to make us wise to salvation, 2 Tim. 3.15. The Septuagint renders it, The Law of the Lord is pure, . Septuagint like beauty that hath no staine, or wine that is clarified and refined. The soul that looks into this Law, see∣ing so much lustre and perfection, cannot but delight in it; The middle lamp of the Sanctuary being light∣ed from the fire of the Altar, gave light to all the other Lamps: So the judgement being lighted from the Word, it sets on fire the lamps of the affections.
2. This holy delight ariseth from the predominancy of grace. When grace comes with authority, and Majesty upon the heart, it fils it with delight; naturally we have no delight in God, Job 21.14. Therefore they say unto God depart from us, for we de∣sire not the knowledge of they wayes; nay, there is not only a dislike, but antipathy; sinners are called  haters of God, Rom. 1.30. Rom. 1.30 but when grace comes into the heart; O what a chang is there! Grace preponderates; it files off the rebellion of the will, it makes a man of another spirit Josh. 14.24. It turnes the lion-like fiercenesse into a dove-like sweetnesse, it changeth hatred into delight; Grace puts a new by as in∣to the will, it works a spontaneity and cheerfulnesse in Gods service. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power, Psalme 110.3. 3. This holy delight in Religion
is from the sweetness of the end. Well may we with cheerfulnesse let down the net of our endeavour when we have so excellent a draught. Hea∣ven at the end of duty causeth delight in the way of duty. CHAP. IV. Shewing a characteristical differ∣ence between a childe of God and an hypocrite. IT shews us a discriminating dif∣ference between a childe of God and an hypocrite, the one serves God cum animi prolubio, from a principle of delight, the other doth not. The Law of thy mouth is better un∣to me than thousands of gold & silver, Psalm 119.72. With what delight doth a covetous man tell over his thousands? I, but Gods Law was better to David than thousands;
a child of God looks upon the ser∣vice of God, not only as his duty, but his priviledge. A gracious heart loves every thing that hath the stamp of God upon it. The Word is his delight. Thy Words were found, and I did eat them, and thy Word was unto me the joy and rejoycing of my heart, Jerem. 15.16. The Sab∣bath is his delight, Isaiah 58.13. If thou turne away thy foot from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight. Prayer is his delight, Isa. 56.7. I will make them joyful in my house of prayer. Hearing is his delight, Esay 60.8. Who are these that flie as Doves to to the windows? The gracious soul flies as a Dove to an Ordinance, up∣on the wings of delight; The Sa∣crament is his delight: On this day the Lord makes a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the Lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined, Esay 25.6. A Sa∣crament-day
is a soul-festival day; here Christ takes the soul into his banqueting-house, and displays the banner of love over it, Cant. 2.4. Here are dulcissima fercula (as Au∣stin saith) heavenly delicacies set be∣fore us. Christ gives us his body and blood In vul∣neribus Christi dormio se∣curus & requiesco intrepidus. Aug.. This is Angels food, this is the heavenly Nectar, here is a cup perfum'd with the di∣vine nature Sanguis Christi sa∣lus Christi∣ani. Salvian.; here is wine spiced with the love of God. The Jews at their feasts, poured oyntment up∣on their guests, and kissed them; Here Christ poures the oyle of glad∣ness into the heart, and kisses us with the kisses of his lips Cant. 1.2. This is the Kings Bath where we wash and are cleansed of our leprosie: The withered soul, after the receiving this blessed Eucharist, hath been like a watered garden, Esay 58.11. or like those Egyptian fields, after the overflowing of Nilus, fruitful and flourishing; and do you wonder that
a childe of God delights in holy things? He must needs be a volun∣teer in Religion. But it is not thus with an hypo∣crite, though he may facere bonum, yet not velle, he may be forced to do that which is good, but not to will that which is good; he doth not serve God with delight. Job 27.10. Will he delight himselfe in the Almighty? That he hath none of this complacency and delight, appears thus, because he serves God grudgingly Vir'us nolentium nulla est.; he brings his sacrifice with a wicked minde, Prov. 21.27. Such an one was Cain: It was long before he brought his offering Gen. 4.3, it was not the first fruits, and when he did bring it, it was grudgingly; 'twas not a free-will-offering, Deut. 16.10. 'Tis probable 'twas the custome of his fathers fami∣ly to sacrifice; and perhaps con∣science might check him for for∣bearing so long, at last the offer∣ing
is brought, but how? as a task rather than a duty; as a mulct or fine rather than a sacrifice. Cain brought his offering, but not himself. What Seneca saith of a gift, I may say of a sacrifice Multum interest in ter materi am benefi cii & be∣neficium, itaque nec aurum, nec argentum beneficium est, sed ipsa tribuentis voluntas. Sen. de be∣nef.; 'Tis not gold and silver makes a gift, but a willing minde; if this be wanting, the gold is only parted with, not given: So, 'tis not prayer and hearing makes a sa∣crifice, but it is a willing minde. Cains was not an offering, but a tax, not worship, but pennance. CHAP. V. Two Cases of conscience resolved. BUt here are two Cases to be put. 1. Whether a regenerate person may not serve God with wearinesse?
Answ. Yes, but 1. this delight in God is not wholly extinct. This lassi∣tude and wearinesse in a childe of God may arise, From the in being of corruption, Rom. 7.24. 'Tis not from the grace that is in him, but the sinne; (as Pe∣ters sinking on the water was not from his faith, but his fear;) yet I say still a regenerate persons will is for God, Rom. 7.15. Paul found sometimes an indisposition to good, Rom. 7.23. yet at the same time he professeth a complacency in God, ver. 22. I delight in the, Law of God in the inner man; one may delight in musick, or any recreation, yet through wearinesse of body be for the present dull'd, and indisposed; a Christian may love Gods Law though sometimes the clog of the flesh weighing him down, he findes his former vigour and agility re∣mitted. 2. I answer, that this faintnesse
and wearinesse in a regenerate person is not habitual; 'tis not his constant temper; when the water ebbes a while it is low-water, but there is soon a spring-tyde againe: it is sometimes low-water in a Christi∣ans soul, he findes an indisposition and irksomness to that which is good, but within a while there is a spring∣tyde of affection, and the soule is carried full saile in holy duties; 'Tis with a Christian as with a man that is distempered; when he is sick he doth not take that delight in his food as formerly, nay, sometimes the very sight of it offends, but when he is well he falls to his meat again with delight and appetite; so, when the soule is distempered through sadnesse and melancholy, it findes not that delight in Word, and Prayer erly, but when it re∣turnes to its healthful temper again, now it hath the same delectability and cheerfulnesse in Gods service as before.
3. I answer. That this wearinesse in a regenerate person is involuntary; he is troubled at it; he doth not hug his disease, but mournes under it. He is weary of his wearinesse. When he findes a heavinesse in duty, he goes heavily under that heavinesse; he prays, weeps, wrastles, useth all means to regain that alacrity in Gods service as he was wont to have. David, when his chariot-wheels were pull'd off, and he did drive on hea∣vily in Religion, how oft doth he pray for quickning grace? Psalme 119.25, 37, 40, 88. When the Saints have found their hearts faint∣ing, their affections flagging, and a strange kinde of lethargy seasing on them, they never leave till they have recovered themselves and ar∣rived at that freedome and delight in God as they were once sencible of. 2. The second Case is, whether an hypocrite may not serve God
with delight? I answer, he may; Herod heard John Baptist gladly, Mat. 6.20. and those that fasted for strife and debate, did delight to know Gods wayes, Esay 58.2. An hypocrite may, out of some flashy hopes of heaven, shew a delight in goodnesse; but yet it is not such a delight as is found in the regenerate; The hypo∣crites de∣light car∣nal. for his delight is carnal. A man may be carnal while he is doing spi∣ritual things; 'Tis not the holinesse and strictnesse in religion that the hypocrite delights in, but something else; he delights in prayer, but 'tis rather the shewing of gifts he looks at than the exercising of grace. * He delights in hearing, but 'tis not the spirituality of the Word he delights in; Cor. 2.14 . not the favour of knowledge * but the lustre. When he goes to the Word preached, it is, that he may rather feast his phancy, than better his heart; as if a man should go to an Apothecaries shop for a pill, on∣ly
to see the gilding of it, not for the operative vertue. The hypocrite goes to the Word to see what gild∣ing is in a Sermon; and what may delight the intellect. Hypocrites come to the Word as one comes into a garden to pluck some fine flower to smell to, not as a child comes to the breast for nutriment. This is rather curiosity than piety. Such were those, Ezek. 33.32. thou art to them as a very lovely song, of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument. The Prophet being eloquent, and having a plea∣sing delivery, they were much taken with it, and it was as sweet to them as a fit of musick, but it was not the spirituality of the matter they so well liked, as the tunablenesse of the voice It was a sharp, yet season∣able, reproof of Chrysostom to his auditory. This is that (saith he) which is like to undo your souls, you hear your Ministers as so many min∣strels
to please the eare, not to pierce the conscience Chrysost.. You see an hypocrites delight in Reli∣gion is carnal; 'tis not the be∣ing nourished up in the words of faith 1 Tim. 4.6. which he mindes, but the eloquence of speech, the rarenesse of noti∣on, the quicknesse of phancy, the smoothnesse of stile; he strives on∣ly to pluck from the tree of know∣ledge. Alas (poor man) thou mayst have the star-light of knowledge, and yet it may be night in thy soul. CHAP. VI. Trial of a Christians delight in God. LEt this put us upon a holy scrutiny and trial, whether we have this delight in Religion? 'Tis life or death as we answer this.
Quest. How may this spiritual delight be known? Answ. 1. He that delights in Gods Law, is often thinking of it; what a man delights in, his thoughts are still running upon; he that delights in money, his minde is taken up with it; therefore the covetous man is said , to mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. Thus if there be a delight in the things of God the minde will be still musing upon them Sicut illis acci∣dere solet, qui cogita∣touibus vel seriis vel adlubescen∣tibus absti∣nere non possunt. Musculus. O what a rare treasure is the Word of God! it is the field where the pearl of price is hid; how precious are the pro∣mises, they are the conduit that hold the water of life, they are like those two Olive branches, Zach. 4. which through the two golden pipes did emp∣ty the golden oyle out of themselves, Zach 4.12. These seal up pardon, adoption, glory, O Lord by these things men live, Isa. 38.16. Where there is a delight in the Law of God, the minde is wholly busied about it.
2. If we delight in religion, there is nothing can keep us from it, but we will be conversant in Word, Prayer, Sacraments. He that loves gold will trade for it Extremos currit mer∣cator ad Indos. Horace.. The Mer∣chant will compasse sea and land to make money his proselyte. Men will not be kept from their faires. If there be a delight in holy things, we will not be detained from an Ordi∣nance, for there we are traffiquing for salvation. If a man were hun∣gry, he would not stay from the market for the aking of his finger. The Ordinances are a Gospel∣market, and those that hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, will not for every slight occasion stay away. I was glad when they said, come let us go up to the house of the Lord, Psalm 122.1. Thou that art glad when the Devil helps thee with an excuse to absent thy self from the house of the Lord, art farre from this holy de∣light.
3. Those that delight in Religion are often speaking of it; Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another, Mal. 3.16. Where there is gratia infusa, it will be effusa. The words of a wise mans mouth are gracious, Eccles. 12.10. David delighting in Gods testimonies, would speak of them before Kings, Psalme 119.46. The Spouse delighting in her beloved, could not conceal her love, but breaks forth into most pa∣thetical, and no lesse elegant ex∣pressions: My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thou∣sand The stan∣dard bearer, his head is as the most fine gold, &c. The disciples whose hearts were upon Christ, make him the whole subject of their discourse as they were going to Emaus; Luke 24.19. The primitive Christians who were fired with love to God, did speak so much of heaven, and the Kingdom prepared, that the Em∣perour suspected they meant to take
his Kingdome from him; The words are (as one saith) the looking glasse of the minde Verba sunt specu∣lum mentis Bern., they shew what is in the heart. Where there is spiritual delight, like new wine, it will have vent; Grace is poured into thy lips, Psalme 45.2. a man that is of the earth speaketh of the earth ., John 3.31. He can hardly speak three words, but two of them are about earth. His mouth, like the fish in the Gospel, is full of gold, Mat. 17.27. So where there is a delight in God, our tongues will be as the pen of a ready Writer Psal. 45.. This is a Scrip∣ture touch-stone to try mens hearts by. Alas, it shews how little they delight in God, because they are possessed with a dumb devil; they speak not the language of Cana∣an. 4. He that delights in God will give him the best in every service. Him whom we love best, shall have of the best. The Spouse delight∣ing
in Christ, will give him of her pleasant fruits, Cant. 7.13. and if she hath a cup of spiced wine, and full of the juyce of the pomgranate, he must drink of it, Cant. 8.2. He that delights in God, gives him the strength of his affections, the cream of his duties Mat. 22.37; If he hath any thing better than other, God shall have it; Hypocrites care not what they put God off with; They offer that to the Lord which costs them no∣thing 2 Sam. 24.24; A prayer that costs them no wrastling, no pouring out of the soul 1 Sam. 1.15; they put no cost in their services. Cain brought of the fruit of the ground, Gen. 4.3. 'Tis obser∣vable, the holy Ghost doth not men∣tion any thing that might commend, or set off Cains sacrifice. When he comes to speak of Abels, he sets an Emphasis upon it, Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof Abel ob∣tulit non exigua sed pinguia. Ambrose., verse 4. but when he speaks of Cain, he only saith, he
brought of the fruit of the ground. Some sorry thing; perhaps pull'd out of a ditch; God who is best, will be serv'd with the best. Domi∣tian would not have his Statue carv'd in wood or iron, but in gold. God will have the best of our best things, golden services. He who delights in God, gives him the fat of the offering Lev. 3.3.; the purest of his love, the hottest of his zeale; and when he hath done all, he grieves he can do no more, he blusheth to see such an infinite disproporti∣on between Deity and Du∣tie. 5. He that delights in God doth not much delight in any thing else. The world appears in an ecclipse Utitur mundo, fru∣itur Deo. Aug.; Paul delighted in the Law of God, in the inner man, and how was he cruci∣fied to to the world? Gal. 6.14. 'Tis not absolutely unlawful to delight in the things of the world, Deut. 26.11. Thou shalt rejoyce in every good
thing which the Lord thy God hath given thee. None may better take the comfort of these things than be∣leevers; for they have the best right to them, they hold all in Capite There is nothing ours but as we see out title in Christ. Greenham; and they have the dew of a blessing distill'd. Take two talents, said Naaman to Gehazi, 2 King. 5.23. so saith God to a beleever, take two ta∣lents, take thy outward comforts, and take my love with them; but the children of God, though they are thankful for outward mercies, (which is the yearly rent they sit at) yet they are not much taken with these things 1 Cor. 7.31.; they use them only as a conveniency for their passage Omnia quibus ute∣ris in hac vita debent esse tanquā stabulum viatori non tanquam domus ha∣bitatori. Aug.; they know they need them as a staffe to walk with, but when they shall sit down in the Kingdome of heaven, and rest them∣selves, they shall have no use of this Jacobs staffe. Beleevers do not much passe for these things which are still passing 1 Joh. 2.17. Their de∣light
is chiefly in God and his Law; and is it thus? have we this low opinion of all undermoon comforts? is the price fallen? The Astrono∣mer saith, if it were possible for a man to be lifted up as high as the Moone, the earth would seem to him but as a little point. If we could be lifted to heaven in our affections, all earthly delights would seem as nothing; when the woman of Sa∣maria had met with Christ Invenit non aquam, sed salutem Ambrose., down goes the pitcher John 4., she leaves that behinde Theophil. in Joh. 4; he who delights in God, as having tasted the sweetnesse in him, doth not much minde the pitcher, he leaves the world be∣hinde. 6. True delight is constant. Hy∣pocrites have their pangs of desire and flashes of joy, which are soone over. The Jews did rejoyce in Johns light for a season , John 5.35. Unsound hearts may delight in the Law of the Lord for a season; but,
they will quickly change their note, What a wearinesse is it to serve the Lord! The Chrysolyte (which is of a golden colour) in the morning is very bright to look on, but towards noone it grows dull, and hath lost its splendor; such are the glistring shews of Hypocrites. True delight, like the fire of the Al∣tar, never goes out; affliction can∣not extirpate it, Psalme 119.143. Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me, yet thy Commandments are my delights. CHAP. VII. A suasive to this holy delight in Re∣ligion. LEt me perswade Christians to labour for this holy delight; Exhort. Comment upon the Text. Let your delight be in the Law
of the Lord Plurimum refert, utrū ex volun∣tate agas an necessitate, Ambrose sup. beat. immacul.; And that I may the better enforce the Exhortation, I shall lay before you several weighty considerations. 1. There is, that in the Law of God which may cause delight; as will appeare in two things. Considerat. There is in it, Verum. 1. Truth. 2. Goodnesse. 1. Truth, the Law of God is a series of truth, Psalm 119.160. Thy word is true from the beginning Quid acrius desi∣derat ani∣ma quam veritatem. Austin. tom. 26. in John 4.. The two Testaments are the two lips by which the God of Truth hath spoken to us. Here is a firm basis for faith. 2. Goodnesse, Nehem. 9.13. Thou gavest them true Laws, good Statutes. Bonum. Here is Truth and Goodnesse; the one adequate to the understanding, the other to the will. Now this goodnesse and excellency of the Law of God shines forth in nine particulars. 1. This blessed Law of God is a
letter Est quae∣dam Epi∣stola omni∣potentis Dei ad creaturam. Greg. sent to us from heaven, in∣dighted by the Holy Ghost, and sealed with the blood of Christ Fertur de Carolo Borromaeo quod Scri∣pturam solebat assidue vol∣vere, & populo expare, idque tanto studio, devotione, & reverentia, ut ultimis vitae suae annis, velut ipsissimas Deo ad homines literas, non nisi capite, & flexis Genibus venerabundus lectitaret. Julius Nigr. Tract. ascetico. c. 3. n. 9.; See some passages in the letter, Isa. 62.5. As the bridegroom rejoyceth over the bride, so shall thy God re∣joyce over thee; and Hosea 2.19. I will betroth thee unto me  for ever in righteousnesse and in lo∣ving kindnesse, and in mercies. Is it not delightful reading over this love∣letter? 2. The Law of God is a light that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Pet. 1.19 it is our pole-star to guide us to heaven; 'twas Davids candle and lanthorn to walk with, Ps. 119.105 now, light is sweet, Eccles. 11.7. 'tis sad to want this light; those heathen who have not the know∣ledge
of Gods Law, must needs stum∣ble to hell in the dark. Hierom brings in Tully with his Oratory, and Aristotle with his Syllogismes, crying out in hell; they that leave the light of the Word, following the light within them, (as some speak) prefer the shining of the glo-worm before the Sun. 3. The Law of God is a spiritual glasse to dresse our souls by. Da∣vid oft looked himselfe in this glasse, and got much wisdome, Psal. 119.104. through thy precepts I get understanding. This glasse both shews us our spots, and takes them a∣way; it may be compar'd to the La∣vor which was made of the womens looking-glasses, Exod. 38.8. it was both a glasse and a Lavor; a glasse to look in, and a Lavor to wash in; so the Law of God is a glasse to shew us our faces, and a Lavor to wash away our spots. 4. This Law of God contains in it
our evidences for heaven; would we know whether we are heires of the promise, whether our names are written in heaven; we must find it in this Law-book, 2 Thes. 2.13. He hath chosen us to salvation through sanctification, 1 John 2.14. We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren, and is it not comfortable reading over our evidences? 5. The Law of God is a place of ammunition, out of which we must fetch our spiritual artillery to fight against Satan. Sanctus Paulus in omnire & tentatione Scriptura se armabat. Hierom. in ejus epi∣taph. It may be compar'd to the Tower of David, builded for an armory, whereon there bang a thousand bucklers; all shields of mighty men, Cant. 4.4. It is called the sword of the Spirit, Ephes. 6.16. 'Tis observable, when the devil tempted our Saviour, he runnes to Scripture for armour, 'tis written Mat. 4.4; three times Christ wounds the Serpent with this sword, Mat. 4.
ver. 4, 7, 10. Is it not good having our armour about us when the ene∣my is in the field? 6. The Law of God is our spiri∣tual physick-book, or book of re∣ceits. Basil compares the Word of God to an Apothecaries shop which hath its Basil epist prima ad Gregor. Nazian.; when there is any disease growing in the soul, here is a recipe to take; if we find our selvs dead in duty, here is a recipe, Ps. 119 50. Thy Word hath quickned me; If our hearts be hard, here is a recipe; Is not my Word as fire, Jer. 23.29. This is able to melt the rock into tender∣nesse. If we grow proud, here is a recipe, 1 Pet. 5.5. God resists the proud; if there be any fresh guilt contracted, here we have a sovereign medicine to take, John 17.17. San∣ctifie them through thy Truth. The Law of God is like a Physick-gar∣den, where we may walk and gather any herb to expel the poisor of sin. 7. The Law of God is a divine
treasury to enrich us; here are the riches of knowledge, and the riches of assurance to be found, Col. 2.2. in this Law of God are scattered ma∣ny truths as precious diamonds to a∣dorn the hidden man of the heart. David took the Law of God as his heritage, Psalme 119.111. in this blessed Mine is hid the true pearle In uno salvatore omnes flo∣rent gem∣mae ad salu∣tem.; Here we digge till we finde heaven. 8. The Law of God is our cor∣dial in fainting times; and it is a strong cordial, Heb. 6.18. That we might have a strong consolation .. They are strong consolations in∣deed that can sweeten affliction, that can turn water into wine, that can stand against the firy trial. This is my comfort in affliction, for thy Word hath quickned me, Psal. 119.50. The comforts of the world are weak consolations; A man hath com∣fort in health, but let sicknesse come, where is his comfort then? He hath comfort in an estate, but let pover∣ty
come, where is his comfort then? these are weak consolations, they can∣not beare up against trouble; but the comforts of the Word are strong Consolations; they can sweeten the waters of Marah. Let sickness come, the comforts of the Word can alay and stupifie it. The inha∣bitant of the land shall not say I am sick, Isa. 33.24. Let death come, a Christian can out-brave it: O death where is thy sting, 1 Cor. 15.55. and is it not comfortable to have such a julip lying by, as can expel the venome of death. 9. The Law of God is Manna cujuslibet saporis . Theophil. in Mat.; an heavenly Man∣na that suits it self to every Chri∣stians pallat. What doth the soul desire? is it quickning, strengthning? he may finde all in this Manna. But I refer the Reader to the learned O∣rigen, who hath written fully to this Si tu verbum Dei tota fide, & devo∣tione suceperis fiet tibi ipsum verbum quaecunque desideras; si tribularis consolatur te dicens; cor contritum, & humiliatum Deus non despicies; si laetaris, pro spe futura cumulat tibi gaudium, dicent, laetamini in domino, & exultate justi. Si iracundus es, mitigat te, dicens desine ab ira, & derelinque furorem. Si in doloribus es, sanat te, dicens, dominus sanat omnes languores tuos; si in paupertate, erigit te, dicens, domi∣nus allevat de terra inopem. Sic ergo Manna Dei reddit in ore tuo saporem quemcunque volueris, &c. Origen hom, 7. in Exod. And this is the first weighty consideration to make us delight in the Law of the Lord, there is that in it may render it delightful. I will shut up this with that divine saying of Austin. Tanta est Christianarum litcrarum profun∣ditas, ut in cis quotidie proficerem si cas solas ab incunte pueri∣tià usque ad decrepitam senectutem maximo otio summo studio, meliore ingenio conarcr addiscere. Aug. Epist. 3. ad vo∣lusianum..
2. Delight in Religion crowns all our services Delectatio perficit o∣perationem Thom. 1. ae quest. 4. art. 2.. Therefore David counsels his son Solomon, not only to serve God, but to serve him with a willing minde, 1 Chron. 28.9. Illud Deo  quod ex viva cordic radice pro∣ficiscitur. Calvin. Delight in duty is better than duty it self; as it is worse for a man to delight in sinne, than to commit it, because there is more of the will in the sinne Gravius est peceatū diligere quā perpe∣trare. Hier.: so delight in duty is to be preferred before duty; O how love I thy Law; Psalme 119.97. it
is not how much we do, but how much we love; hypocrites may obey Gods Law, but the Saints love his Law; This carries away the gar∣land Juvenal. Satyr. 12.. 3. Delight in spiritual things evi∣denceth grace; 'Tis a signe we have received the Spirit of adoption. An ingenuous childe delights to obey his father; he that is born of God is enobled by grace, and acts from a principle of ingenuity; grace alters the byas of the heart, and makes it of unwilling, willing. The Spirit of grace is call'd a free Spirit, Psal. 51. not only because it works freely, but because it makes the heart free and cheerful in obedience; a gracious heart doth not act by pure constraint, but free consent. 4. Delight in Religion will make the businesse of Religion more facil to us. Delectatio conservat operantem in opere suo A quinas Arist Eth. lib. 10. Delight makes every thing easie; there's nothing hard to a wil∣ling minde; Trahit sua quemque vo∣luptas;
— delight turnes Religion into recreation; 'tis like fire to the sacrifice, like oyle to the wheeles, like winde to the sailes, it carries us full saile in duty; he that delights in Gods way, will never complaine of the ruggednesse of the way; a childe that is going to his fathers house, doth not complain of bad way. A Christian is going to heaven in the way of duty; every prayer, e∣very Sacrament, he is a step nearer his Fathers house; sure he is so full of joy he is going home, that he will not complain of bad way. Get then this holy delight. Beloved, we have not many miles to go, death will shorten our way, let delight sweeten it. 5. All the duties in Religion are for our good. We shall have the benefit; If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thy self, Prov. 9.12. God hath twisted his glory and our good together. I gave them my statutes,
which if a man do, he shall even live in them, Ezek. 20.11. There is no∣thing the Lord requires, but it tends to self-preservation. God bids us read his Word, and why? this Word is his Will and Testament wherein he makes over a fair estate to be set∣tled upon us, Col. 1.12. 1 Joh. 2.25. And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life; he bids us pray, and this duty carries meat in the mouth of it, 1 John 5.14. This is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us. Ask what you will, he will signe your petitions; if you had a friend that should say, come to me when you will, I will furnish you with money, would you not delight to visit that friend? God will give to more than half the king∣dom, and shall we not delight in pray∣er? God bids us beleeve, and there is  a honey-comb to be found in this precept? Beleeve & you shal be sa∣ved.
Salvation is the crown that is set upon the head of faith. Well may the Apostle say, his Commandments are not grievous, O then! if Religion be so beneficial, if there be such gold to be digg'd out of this mine, it may make us delight in the wayes of God. What wil tempt, if not self-interest? 6. How did Christ delight in the work of our redemption? Lo I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God, Ps. 40.7, 8. 'Tis by Expositors agreed that it is spoken mystically of Christ Ecce ve∣nio videl. Ego Messias ad sum pro∣missus sal∣vator, qui tanquam vadis se sistit ad sol∣vendum dobitum, me tibi of∣fero tau quam sacri∣ficium  Mollerus.; when he came into the world to sacrifice his life for us, it was a free will-offering. I have a baptisme to be baptised with, Luke 12.50. Christ was to be (as it were) baptiz'd in his own blood, and how did he thirst for that time? How am I straitned till it be accomplished? Did Christ so delight in the work of our redemption, and shall not we delight in his service? Did he suf∣fer willingly, and do we pray un∣willingly?
Did he so cheerfully lay down his life for us, and shall nor we give up our lives to him? Certainly if any thing could make Christ repent of shedding his blood, it would be this, to see Christians come off so hardly in duty, bringing it rather as a pennance, then a sacrifice. 7. Delight in Gods service makes us resemble the Angels in heaven. They serve God with chearfulnesse as soon as God speaks the Word, they are ambitious to obey. How are they ravish'd with delight while they are praising God; in heaven we shall be as the Angels; spiritual delight would make us like them here; to serve God by constraint, is to be like the devil, all the devils in hell obey God, but it is against their will, they yeeld a passive obe∣dience . Theophil.; but service which comes off with delight is angelical: This is that we pray for, that Gods will may be done on earth as it is in hea∣ven;
is it not done with delight there? 8. This delight in Gods Law will not breed surfeit. Carnal objects do oft cause a loathing and nau∣seating; we soone grow weary of our delights Rerum juvenilium velox transmuta∣tio. Thom. Aqu. Eth.; hence it is we change from one sense to another; from colours to musick, from musick to smell, &c. Too much pleasure is a paine; but spiritual objects do not cloy, or tyre the soul; the more we study in the Law of God, still the more delight we finde. And in this regard David might say, the Words of Gods mouth were sweeter to his taste than honey, Psal. 119.103. be∣cause one may soon surfeit upon ho∣ney, but he can never surfeit with the Word of God. He that hath once with Jeremy, found the Word and ate it, Jer. 15.16. will not be cloyd with it Augent spirituales delitiae de∣siderium in mente dum satiant. Greg. hom.; There's that savou∣rinesse in the Word that a Christian cries out, Lord evermore give me
this bread Joh. 6.34. There is that sweetnesse in communion with God that the soul saith with Saint Bernard, O si duraret. — O that it might be al∣ways thus; O that what I now feel, I might ever feel. He that delights in God doth not complaine he hath too much of God, but rather too lit∣tle; he opens and spreads the sailes of his soul to take in more of those heavenly gales, he longs for that time when he shall be ever delight∣ing himself in the sweet and blessed vision of God. 9. Without this holy delight we weary our selves, and we weary God too, Isa. 7.13. Will ye weary my God also? our delighting in God would make him delight in us; but when we begin to say what a weari∣nesse is it to serve the Lord, Mal. 1.13? God is as weary as we are; he is even sick of such services. When duties are a burden to us, they are a burden to God, and what should he
do with them? when a man is wea∣ry of a burden, he will cast it off. Let all this quicken delight in Gods service. CHAP. VIII. Shewing how a Christian may arive at this delight in Gods Law. FOr the attaining this blessed delight in the Law of God, three things are requi∣site. 1. Set an high estimate upon the Word; what the judgement prizeth, the affections embrace; he that va∣lues gold, will delight in it; we are apt (through a principle of Athe∣isme) to entertaine slight thoughts of Religion, therefore our affecti∣ons are so slight. David prized Gods Statutes at a high rate; more to be desired are they than gold, yea
than much fine gold, Psal. 19.10. and hence grew that enflamed love to them; I will delight my selfe in thy Statutes, Psal. 119.16. 2. Pray for a spiritual heart; an earthly heart will not delight in spi∣ritual mysteries; the earth puts out the fire. Earthlinesse destroys holy delight, get a spiritual pallate that you may rellish the sweetnesse of the Word. He that tastes the sweetness of honey, will delight in it. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gra∣cious, 1 Pet. 2.3. 'Tis not enough to hear a Sermon, but you must taste a Sermon; 'tis not enough to read a promise, but you must taste a pro∣mise; when you have gotten this spiritual pallate, then Gods Word will be to you the joy and rejoycing of your heart Jer. 15.16. 3. If you would delight in the Law of God, purge out the delight of sinne; sinne will poyson this spiritu∣al delight: If you would have Gods
Law sweet, let not wickednesse be sweet in your mouth, Job 20.12. When sinne is your burden, Christ will be your delight. CHAP. IX. Holy delight should cause thank∣fulnesse. WHat cause have they to be thankful who can find this spiritual delight in God? Thankful∣nesse. How did Da∣vid blesse God that he gave the peo∣ple hearts to offer so chearfully to the building of the Temple? Who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort, 2 Chron. 29.14? Their willingnesse was more than their of∣fering; so should a Christian say, Lord, when there are so many prest souldiers; who am I, that I should of∣fer
so willingly. Who am I that I should have thy free Spirit, & should serve thee rather out of choice, than constraint; 'tis a great blessing to have this , this promp∣titude and alacrity in Gods service; Delight doth animate and spirit duty; now we act to purpose in Religion. Christians are never drawn so powerfully and sweetly, as when the chaine of delight is fasten∣ed to their heart . Chrysost.. Without this all is lost; our praying and hearing is like water spilt upon the ground. It loseth both its beauty and reward; then blesse God (Christian) who hath oyl'd the wheeles of thy soule with delight, and now thou canst run and not be weary. For thy comfort, be assur'd thou shalt not want any thing thy heart can desire, Psal. 37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.
A CHRISTIAN On the Mount: OR, A TEATISE concerning MEDITATION. Wherein the necessity, useful∣nesse, excellency of Meditation is at large discussed. By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the City of LONDON. Meditate upon these things, 1 Tim. 4.15. I thought on my wayes, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies, Psal. 119.59. Amans Deum sublimia petit sumptis alis, & relicta terra in coelum volat. Philo. lib. de victimis. LONDON, Printed by T. R. & E. M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Corn-hill, near the Royal Exchauge. 1657.
PSAL. 1.2. And in his Law doth he medi∣tate day and night. HAving led you through the chamber of de∣light, I will now bring you into the withdrawing room of Meditation. In his Law doth he meditate day and night.
CHAP. I. The opening of the words, and the pro∣position asserted. GRace breeds delight in God, and delight breeds Medita∣tion. A duty wherein con∣sists the essentials of Religi∣on, and which nourisheth the very life blood of it; and that the Psal∣mist may shew how much the godly man is habituated and inured to this blessed work of Meditation, he sub∣joynes, in his Law doth he meditate day and night ; not but that there may be sometimes intermission; God allows time for our calling, he grants some relaxation, but when it is said, the godly man meditates day and night, the meaning is, frequent∣ly; he is much conversant in the du∣ty. 'Tis a command of God to
pray without ceasing ., 1 These. 5.17. The meaning is, not that we should be alwayes praying (as the Euchites held) but that we should every day set some time apart for prayer; so Drusius and others interpret it. We read in the old Law it was called the continual sacrifice Juge sa∣crificium. Num. 28.24; not that the people of Israel did nothing else but sacrifice, but because they had their stated houres every morning and evening they offered, therefore it was called the continual sacrifice; thus the godly man is said to meditate day and night, that is, he is often at this work, he is no stranger to medi∣tation. The Proposition that results out of the Text, is this, That a good Christian is a meditating Christian, Psalme 119.15. I will meditate in thy precepts, 1 Tim. 4.15. Medi∣tate upon these things. Meditation is the chewing upon the truths we have heard; The beasts in the old
Law that did not chew the cud were uncleane; the Christian that doth not by meditation chew the cud, is to be accounted unclean. Meditation is like the watering of the seed, it makes the fruits of grace flourish. For the illustration of the point, there are several things to be discus∣sed. 1. I shall shew you what medita∣tion is. 2. That meditation is a duty. 3. The difference between medi∣tation and memory. 4. The difference between medi∣tation and study. 5. The subject of meditati∣on. 6. The necessitie of meditati∣on.
CHAP. II. Shewing the nature of Medita∣tion. IF it be enquired what meditati∣on is, I answer, What me∣ditation is. meditation is the souls retiring of it selfe, that by a serious and solemne think∣ing upon God, the heart may be raised up to heavenly affections. This description hath three bran∣ches. 1. Meditation is the souls reti∣ring of it self; a Christian, when he goes to meditate, must lock up him∣selfe from the world. The world spoiles meditation; Christ went apart into the Mount to pray, Mat. 14.23. So, go apart when you are to medi∣tate. Isaac went out to meditate in the field, Gen. 24.63. he sequestred and retired himself that he might
take a walk with God by meditati∣on. Zacheus had a minde to see Christ, and he got out of the crowd, He ran before, and climbed up into a sycamore-tree to see him, Luke 19.3, 4. So when we would see God, we must get out of the crowd of world∣ly businesse, we must climb up in∣to the tree by retirednesse of medi∣tation, and there we shall have the best prospect of heaven. The worlds musick will either play us a∣sleep, or distract us in our meditati∣ons. When a more is gotten into the eye, it hinders the sight; when worldly thoughts, as motes, are got∣ten into the minde (which is the eye of the soul) it cannot look up so stedfastly to heaven by contempla∣tion. Therefore, as when Abra∣ham went to sacrifice, he left his servant and the Asse at the bottom of the hill, Gen. 22.5. So when a Christian is going up the hill of meditation, he should leave all secu∣lar
cares at the bottome of the hill; that he may be alone, and take a turne in heaven. If the wings of the bird are full of lime, she can∣not i: Meditation is the wing of the soul, when a Christian is be∣limed with earth, he cannot she to God upon this wing. Saint Bernard when he came to the Church-door, used to say, stay here all my worldly thoughts, that I may converse with God in the Temple; so say to thy self, I am going now to meditate, O all ye vaine thoughts stay behind, come not neare. When thou art going up the mount of meditation, take heed the world doth not follow thee, and throw thee down from the top of this pinacle. This is the first thing, the souls retiring of it selfe; lock and bolt the doore against the world. 2. The second thing in meditati∣on, is, a serious and solemn thinking upon God. The Hebrew word to
meditate , signifies with intense∣nesse, to recollect and gather to∣gether the thoughts: Meditati∣on is not a cursory work, to have a few transient thoughts of Religi∣on. Canis ad Nilum; like the dogs of Nilus, that lap and away; but there must be in meditation a fixing the heart upon the object, a steeping the thoughts; carnal Christians are like quick-silver, which cannot be made to fix; their thoughts are roving up & down, and will not fix; like the bird that hops from one bough to ano∣ther, and stays no where. David was a man fit to meditate, O God my heart is fixed, Ps. 108.1 Psalme 108.1. In meditation there must be a staying of the thoughts upon the object; a man that rides post through a Town or Village, he mindes nothing; but an Artist or Limner that is looking on a curious piece, views the whole draught and pourtraiture of it, he ob∣serves the symmetry and proportion,
he mindes every shadow and colour. A carnal slitting Christian is like the traveller, his thoughts ride post, he mindes nothing of God; a wise Christian is like the Artist, he views with feriousnesse, and ponders the things of Religion, Luke 2.19. But Mary kept all these things, and pondered dici∣tur de ai quo secum dissertante. Grotius in loc. them in her heart. The third thing in meditation is the raising of the heart to holy affe∣ctions. A Christian enters into meditation, as a man enters in∣to the Bath, that he may be healed. Meditation heales the soule of its deadnesse and earth∣linesse; but more of this af∣ter.
CHAP. III. Proving Meditation to be a duty. MEditation is a duty lying upon every Christian, and there is no dispu∣ting our duty. Meditation is a Duty, Meditati∣on a duty. 1. Imposed. 2. Opposed. 1. Meditation is a duty imposed; It is not arbitrary; there is a jus di∣vinum in it. The same God who hath bid us beleeve, hath bid us me∣ditate, Josh. 1.8. This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shalt meditate therein day and night. These words, though spoken to the person of Joshuah, yet they concerne every one; as the promise made to Joshuah concerned all beleevers, Joshuah 1.5. com∣par'd
with Heb. 13.5. So this pre∣cept made to the person of Joshuah, thou shalt meditate in this book of the Law, takes in all Christians; it is the part of an hypocrite to enlarge the promise, and to streighten the precept. Thou shalt meditate in this book of the Law; the word Thou, is indefinite, and reacheth every Chri∣stian; As Gods Word doth direct, so his will must enforce obedience. 2 Meditation is a duty opposed. We may conclude it is a good duty, because it is against the stream of cor∣rupt nature; as he said, you may know that Religion is right which Nero persecutes; so you may know that is a good duty which the heart opposeth. We shall finde naturally a strange a∣versenesse from meditation. We are swift to heare, but slow to meditate. To think of the world, if it were all day long, is delightful, but as for ho∣ly meditation, how doth the heart wrangle and quarrel with this duty!
It is doing of pennance; now truly, there needs no other reason to prove a duty to be good, than the reluctan∣cy of a carnal heart. To instance in the duty of self-denial. Let a man deny himself, Mat. 16.24. self∣denial is as necessary as heaven, but what disputes are raised in the heart against it? What to deny my reason, and become a fool, that I may be wise; nay, not only to deny my reason, but my righteousnesse? What, to cast it over-board, and swim to heaven upon the plank of Christs merits? this is such a duty that the heart doth naturally oppose and enter its dissent against. This is an argu∣ment to prove the duty of self-denial good; just so it is with this duty of meditation; the secret antipathy the heart hath against it, shews it to be good; and this is reason enough to enforce meditation.
CHAP. IV. Shewing how meditation differs from memory. THe memory (a glorious fa∣culty) which Aristotle calls the souls scribe, sits and pens all things that are done. Whatso∣ever we read, or hear, the memory doth register; therefore God doth all his works of wonder that they may be had in remembrance. There seemes to be some Analogy and Resemblance between Meditation and Memory. But I conceive there is a double difference. 1. The meditation of a thing hath more sweetnesse in it than the bare remembrance. The memory is the chest or cupboard to lock up a truth, meditation is the pallate to feed on it; the memory is like the Ark in which the Manna was laid up, meditation is like Is∣raels
eating of Manna. When Da∣vid began to meditate on God, it was sweet to him as marrow, Psal. 63.5, 6. There's as much difference between a truth remembred, and a truth meditated on, as between a cordial in a glasse, and a cordial drunk down. 2. The remembrance of a truth without the serious Meditation of it will but create matter of sorrow an∣other day. What comfort can it be to a man when he comes to die, to think he remembred many ex∣cellent notions about Christ, but never had the grace so to meditate on them, as to be transformed in∣to them: A Sermon remembred, but not ruminated, will only serve to encrease our condemna∣tion.
CHAP. V. Shewing how Meditation differs from Study. THe Students life looks like meditation, but doth vary from it. Meditation and study differ three ways. 1. They differ in their nature. Study is a work of the braine, meditation of the heart; study sets the inven∣tion on work, meditation sets the affection on work. 2. They differ in their designe. The designe of study is notion, the designe of mediation is piety: The design of study is the finding out of a truth; the designe of meditation is the spiritual improvement of a truth; the one searcheth for the vein of gold, the other digs out the gold.
3. They differ in the issue and result. Study leaves a man never a whit the better; it is like a Win∣ter Sun that hath little warmth and influence: Meditation leaves one in a more holy frame. It melts the heart when it is frozen, and makes it drop into teares of love. CHAP. VI. Showing the subject of Medi∣tation. THe fourth particular to be discussed is the subject-mat∣ter of Meditation; The sub∣ject of Me∣ditation. What a Christian should meditate upon. I am now gotten into a large field, but I shall only glance at things; I shall but do as the disciples, pluck some ears of corn as I passe a∣long.
Some may say, alas I am so bar∣ren I know not what to meditate upon; to help Christians therefore in this blessed work, I shall shew you some choice select matter for meditation. There are fifteen things in the Law of God which we should principally meditate upon. SECT. I. MEditate on Gods attributes. The attributes of God are the several beames by which the divine nature shines forth to us; and there are six special attributes which we should fix our meditations up∣on. 1. Meditate upon Gods omnis∣ciency. His eye is continually up∣on us; he hath a window o∣pens into the conscience; Our thoughts are unvail'd before him.
He can tell the Words we speak in our bed-chamber, Rev. 5.6. 2 Kings 6.12. He is described with seven eyes to shew his omnisciency Egyptii olim in sce∣ptro Regio Oculum designarunt. Thou numberest my steps, Job 14.16. The Hebrew word signifies to take an exact ac∣count. God is said to number our steps, when he makes a curious and critical observation of our actions; God sets down every passage of our lives, and keeps as it were a day∣book of all we do, and enters it down into the book. Medi∣tate much on this omniscien∣cie. The meditation of Gods omnis∣cience would have these effects. 1. It would be as a curben-bit to check and restraine us from sinne. Will the thief steal when the Judge looks on? 2. The meditation of Gods om∣nisciency would be a good means to make the heart sincere Marcelli∣us Titul. 7 dist. sexta.. God hath set a grate at every mans breast, doth
not he see all my wayes? Job 31.4. If I harbour proud, malicious thoughts, if I look at my own inte∣rest more than Christs, if I juggle in my repentance, the God of hea∣ven takes notice. The meditation of this omnisciency would make a Christian sincere, both in his actions and aimes. One cannot be an Hypocrite, but he must be a foole. 2. Meditate on the holinesse of God. Meditate on the ho∣liness of God. Mirabilis Sanctitate. Holinesse is the embroyder∣ed robe God wears; it is the glory of the God head, Exod. 15.11. Glo∣rious in holiness: 'Tis the most o∣rient pearle of the crown of heaven. God is the exemplar and pattern of holinesse. It is primarily and origi∣nally in God as light in the Sunne; you may as well separate weight from lead, or heat from fire, as holi∣nesse from the divine nature; Gods holinesse is that whereby his heart riseth against any sinne, as being
most diametrically opposite to his essence. Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold iniqui∣ty. Meditate much on this attri∣bute. The meditation of Gods holi∣nesse would have this effect, it would be a means to transforme us into the similitude and likenesse of God; God never loves us till we are like him Amor fundatur similitu∣dine.. There is a story in Pe∣ter Martyr of a deform'd man, who set curious faire pictures before his wife, that seeing them, she might have faire children, and so she had. Jacobs cattel looking on the rods which were pilled, and had white strakes in them, conceived like the rods, Gen. 30.38, 39. So while by meditation we are looking upon the beames of holinesse which are gloriously transparent in God, we shall grow like him, and be holy as he is holy. Holinesse is a beautiful thing, Psal. 110. It puts a kinde
of angelical brightnesse upon us; 'tis the only coyne will pass currant in heaven, by the frequent medita∣tion of this attribute, we are changed into Gods image. 3. Meditate on the wisdome of God He is called the only wise God, 1 Tim. 1.17. His wisdome shines forth in the works of providence; he fits at the helme guiding all things regularly and harmoniously; he brings light out of darkness; he can strike a streight stroke by a crooked stick; he can make use of the injustice of men to do that which is just: He is infinitely wise, he breaks us by afflictions, and upon these broken pieces of the ship, brings us safe to shore; Meditate on the wisdome of God. The meditation of Gods wisdom, would sweetly calme our hearts. 1. When we see things go crosse in the publick, the wise God holds the rains
of government in his hand; and let who will rule God over-rules; he knows how to turne all to good; his work will be beautiful in its sea∣son. 2. When things go ill with us in our own particular, the meditation of Gods wisdome would rock our hearts quiet. The wise God hath set me in this condition, and whe∣ther health or sicknesse, wisdome will order it for the best. God will make a treakle of poyson, all things shall be physical and medicinable to me; either the Lord will expel some sinne, or exercise some grace. The meditation of this would silence murmuring. 4 Meditate on the power of God. This power is visible in the creation. He hangs the earth upon nothing, Job 26.7. What cannot that God do that can create; nothing can stand before a creating power; Creatio fit irrifisti∣biliter. He needs no prae-existent matter to work upon; He needs no instruments to
work with, he can work without tooles; He it is before whom the Angels vaile their faces, and the Kings of the earth cast their crowns. He it is that removes the earth out of her place, Job 9.6. An earthquake makes the earth tremble upon her pillars, but God can shake it out of its place. God can with a word un∣pin the wheeles, and break the axle∣tree of the creation. He can sus∣pend natural agents, stop the Lions mouth, cause the Sunne to stand still, make the fire not burn; Xerxes the Persian Monarch threw fetters into the sea, as if he would have chain'd up the unruly waters; but when God commands, the windes and sea obey him Mat. 8.27.. If he speak the word, an army of stars appeare, Judges 5.20. If he stamp with his foot, an Hoast of Angels are present∣ly in a Battalia, if he lift up an en∣signe, and doth but hisse, his very enemies shall be up in armes to re∣venge
his quarrel Isa. 5.56.. Who would provoke this God! It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the li∣ving God Laneos habet pedes sed ferrcas manus., Heb. 10.31. as a Lion he tears in pieces the adversaries, Psalme 50.22. Oh meditate on this power of God. The meditation of Gods power would be a great stay to faith. A Christians faith may anchor safely upon the rock of Gods power. It was Sampsons riddle, out of the strong came forth sweetness Judg. 14.14; While we are meditating on the power of God, out of this strong comes forth sweet∣nesse. Is the Church of God low? he can create Jerusalem a praise Is. 65.18: Is thy corruption strong? God can break the head of this Levia∣than: Is the heart hard, is there a stone gotten there? God can dis∣solve it. The Almighty makes my heart soft Job 23.16; Faith triumphs in the power of God: out of this strong comes forth sweetnesse; Abrabam
meditating on Gods power, did not stagger through unbelief, Rom. 4.20. He knew God could make a dead womb fruitful, and dry breasts give suck. 5. Meditate upon the mercy of God; Meditate on the mercy of God. mercy is an innate dispositi∣on in God to do good; as the Sun hath an innate property to shine, Psalme 86.5. Thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and plentious in mercy to all them that call upon thee. Gods mercy is so sweet, that it makes all his other attributes sweet. Holi∣nesse without mercy, and Justice without mercy were dreadful. Geogra∣phers write that the City of Syracuse in Sicily is so curiously scituated, that the Sunne is never out of sight; though the children of God are un∣der some clouds of affliction, yet the Sun of mercy is never quite out of fight. Gods justice reacheth to the clouds, his mercy reacheth above the clouds. How slow is God to
anger. He was longer in destroy∣ing Jericho, than in making the world; He made the world in six dayes, but he was seven dayes in de∣molishing the walls of Jericho. How many warning-pieces did God shoot against Jerusalem, before he shot off his murdering-piece? Justice goes a foot-pace, Gen. 18.21. mer∣cy hath wings Psal. 57.1; the sword of justice oft lies a long time in the scabbard, and rusts, till sinne doth draw it out and whet it against a Nation; Gods justice is like the widows oyle, which ran a while, and ceased, 1 Kings 4.6. Gods mercy is like Aarons oyle, which rested not on his head, but ran down to the skirts of his garment, Psalme 133.2. So the golden oyle of Gods mercy doth not rest upon the head of a good parent, but is poured on his chil∣dren, and so runnes down, to the third and fourth generation, even the borders of a religious seed. Of∣ten
meditate upon the mercy of God. The meditation of mercy would be a powerful loadstone to draw sin∣ners to God by repentance Rom. 2.4. It would be as a cork to the net to keep the heart from sinking in de∣spaire; behold a City of refuge to flie to; God is the Father of mer∣cies, 2 Cor. 1.3. mercy doth as na∣turally issue from him, as the childe from the parent. God delights in mercy, Micah 7.18. Chrysostome saith, 'tis delightful to the mother to have her breasts drawn; and how delightful is it to God to have the breasts of mercy drawn; mercy finds out the worst sinner, mercy comes not only with salvation in its hand, but with healing under its wings. The meditation of Gods mercy would melt a sinner into tears; One reading a pardon sent him from the King, fell a weeping, and burst out into these words, A pardon hath done
that which death could not do, it hath made my heart relent. 6. Meditate upon the truth of God; Meditate on the truth of God. mercy makes the promise, and truth performes it. Psal. 89.33. I will not suffer my faithfulness to faile. God can as well deny himself, as his Word. He is abun∣dant in truth, Exod. 34.6. What is that? if God hath made a pro∣mise of mercy to his people, he will be so far from coming short of his Word, that he will be better than his Word. God often doth more than he hath said, never lesse; he oft shoots beyond the mark of the pro∣mise he hath set, never short of it. He is abundant in truth. God may sometimes delay a promise, he will not deny it. The promise may lie a long time as seed hid under ground, but it is all the while a ri∣pening. The promise of Israels deliverance lay four hundred and thirty yeares hid under-ground; but
when the time was come, the pro∣mise did not go a day beyond its reckoning. Exod. 12.41. Exo. 12.41 The strength of Israel will not lie, 1 Sam. 15.29. Meditate on the truth of God. The meditation of Gods truth would, 1. Be a pillar of support for faith. The world hangs upon Gods power, and faith hangs upon his truth. 2. The Meditation of Gods truth would make us ambi∣tious to imitate him. We should be true in our words, true in our dealings. Pythagoras being askt Quidnam homines diis similes faciat? cum vera lo∣quuntur., what did make men like God, an∣swered, When they speake truth. SECT. 2. Meditate on the promises.THe second subject of medita∣tation, is, Meditate upon the promises of God. Habenu∣bera vere vino meli∣ora & fra∣grantia un∣guentis o∣ptimis. Ber. The promises
are flowers growing in the paradise of Scripture, meditation, like the Bee sucks out the sweetness of them. The promises are of no use or com∣fort to us, till they are meditated upon. For as the Roses hang∣ing in the garden, may give a fra∣grant redolency, yet their sweet wa∣ter is distilled only by the fire; so the promises are sweet in reading o∣ver, but the water of these Roses, the spirits and quintescence of the promises are distill'd into the soule onely by meditation. The Incense, when it is pounded and beaten, smells sweetest. Meditating on a promise, like the beating of the In∣cense, makes it most odoriferous and pleasant; The promises may be compar'd to a golden Mine, which then only enricheth, when the gold is digged out; by holy meditation we digge out that spiritual gold which lies hid in the Mine of the promise, and so we come to be en∣riched.
Cardan saith, there's no precious stone, but hath some hid∣den vertue in it. They are call'd precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. When they are applied by meditation, then their vertue appears, and they be∣come precious indeed. There are three sorts of promises which we should chiefly meditate upon. 1. Promises of remission; I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not re∣member thy sinnes, Isa. 43.25. Where∣as the poore sinner may say, alas, I am deep in arrears with God, I feare I have not fill'd his bottle with my teares, but I have filled his book with my debts; Well, but meditate on this promise, I am he that blotteth out, &c. The word there in the original to blot out , is a Metaphor alludes to a Merchant, who when his debtor hath paid him, he blots out the debt, and gives him an acquittance. So saith God,
I will blot out your sinne, I will crosse the debt-book. Ah, but may the poore soul say, it may be a great while first, I may be a long time under the convulsi∣ons of conscience; I may even pine away, and my life draw nigh to the grave Psal. 88.9; No, in the Hebrew it is in the participle of the present . I am blotting out thy trans∣gressions. I have taken my penne, and am crossing out thy score. Oh but may the sinner say, there's no reason God should do this for me? Well, but acts of grace do not go by reason, I will blot out thy sinnes for my name sake. Ah, but saith the sinner, will not the Lord call my sins again to remembrance? no, he pro∣miseth an Act of Oblivion, I will not upbraid thee with thy sinnes, or sue thee with a bond that is can∣cell'd, I will remember thy sinnes no more. Here is a sweet promise to meditate upon; 'tis an Hive full
of the honey of the Gospel. 2. Meditate upon promises of Sanctification. The earth is not so apt to be over-grown with weeds and thornes, as the heart is to be o∣ver-grown with lusts; now, God hath made many promises of healing, Hos. 14.4. and purging, Jerem. 33.8. Esay 4.3. promises of sending his Spirit . Theophy act.; which for its sanctifying nature, is compar'd sometimes to water which cleanseth the vessel; sometimes to winde, which is the fan to winnow and purifie the aire; sometimes to fire, which doth refine the mettals. Meditate often on that promise, Isa. 1.18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow Scarlet is so deep a die, that all the art of man cannot take it out; but behold here a promise, God will lay the soul a whitening; he will make of a scarlet sinner, a milk-white
Saint. By vertue of this refining and consecrating work a Christian is made partaker of the divine na∣ture; 2 Pet. 1.4. he hath an idoneity and fit∣nesse to have communion with God for ever; Meditate much on this promise. 3. Meditate upon promises of re∣muneration: The Haven of rest, Heb. 4.9. The beatifical sight of God, Matth. 5.8. The glorious Mansions, John 14.2. The medi∣tation of these promises will be as bezar-stone to keep us from fainting under our sinnes and sorrows. SECT. 3. THe third subject of meditati∣on is, Meditate on the love of Christ. meditate upon the love of Christ Rev. 1.5. Christ is as full of love, as he is of merit. What was it but love, that he should save us, and not
not the Angels? Among the rarities of the Load-stone, this is not the least, that leaving the gold and pearl, it should draw iron to it, which is a baser kinde of mettal; so that Christ should leave the Angels, those more noble spirits, the gold and pearl, and draw mankinde to him, how doth this proclaime his love! Love was the wing on which he did flie into the Virgins womb.  1. How trans∣cendent is Christs love to the Saints! The Apostle calls it a love that pas∣seth knowledge ., Ephes. 3.19. 'Tis such a love as God the Father bears to Christ; the same for quality, though not equality, Joh. 15.9. As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: A beleevers heart is the garden where Christ hath planted this sweet flower of his love. 'Tis the channel through which the gol∣den stream of his affection runnes. 2. How distinguishing is Christ love, 1 Corinth. 1.26. Not many wise,
not many noble are called. In the old Law God passed by the Lion and the Eagle, and took the Dove for sacrifice; that God should passe by so many of birth and parts, and that the lot of free-grace should fall upon thee; , O the depth of divine love! 3. How invinsible is the love of Christ! It is strong as death, Cant. 8 6. Death might take away his life, not his love Absorbeat igitur mentem meam ab omnibus quae sub caelo sunt ignita & melliflua vis tui amo∣ris ut totus tibi inhae∣ream solaque suavitatis tuae dulcedine pascar & inchrier.: and as death, so neither sinne could whol∣ly quench that divine flame of love, the Church had her , her in∣firmities, her sleepy fits, Cant. 5.2. but though black'd and sullied, yet still a Dove, Christ could see the faith, & wink at the failing: He who drew Alexander while there was a scarre upon his face, drew him with his finger upon the scar: Christ puts the finger of mercy upon the scars of the Saints;
he will not throw away his pearls for every speck of durt. And wch makes this love of Christ the more stupen∣dious; There was nothing in us to ex∣cite or draw forth his love Non di∣lexit dig∣nos, sed di∣ligendo ef∣ficit dignos Aug.: He did not love us, because we were wor∣thy, but by loving us, made us wor∣thy; 4 How immutable is Christs love? Having loved his own, he loved them to the end Joh. 13.1. The Saints are like letters of gold engra∣ven upon Christs heart, which can∣not be raced out. Meditate much upon the love of Christ. The serious meditation of the love of Christ,  1. Would make us love him again. Can one go up∣on bot coales, and his feet not be burnt? Prov. 6.28. who can tread by meditation upon these hot coals of Christs love, and his heart not burne in love to him? 2. The Meditation of Christs love would set our eyes abroach with tears for our Gospel-unkindnesses.
O that we should sinne against so sweet a Saviour? had we none to abuse but our friend? had we no∣thing to kick against, but bowels of love? did not Christ suffer enough upon the Crosse, but must we needs make him suffer more? do we give him more gall and vinegar to drink? O, if any thing can dissolve the heart in mourning, it is disingenuity, and unkindness offered to Christ. When Peter thought of Christs love to him, Christ could deny Peter nothing, yet that he should deny Christ, this made his eyes to water, Peter went out and wept bitterly Mat. 26.75. 3. The meditation of Christs love would make us love our enemies. Jesus Christ shewed love to his ene∣mies. We read of the fire licking up the water, 1 King. 18.38. 'Tis usual for water to quench the fire, but for fire to dry up and consume the water, which was not capable of burning, this was miraculous! such
a miracle did Christ shew, his love did burne where there was no fit matter to work upon, nothing but sin and enmity, he loved his enemies, the fire of his love did consume and lick up the water of their sins. He prayed for his enemies, Father far∣give them; he shed tears for them that shed his blood. Those that gave him gall and vinegar to drink, them he gave his blood to drink. O amor his plagis membra cruentat amor.— The meditation of this love would melt our hearts in love to our ene∣mies. Austin saith Christ made a Pulpit of the Crosse, and the great lesson he taught Christians was, to love their enemies. 4. The meditation of Christs love would be a means to support us in case of his absence. Sometimes he is pleased to withdraw himselfe, Cant. 5.6. yet when we consider how entire and immutable his love is Joh. 13.; it wil make us wait with patience till he
sweetly manifests himself to us. He is love, 1 John 4.16. and he can∣not forsake his people over-long. He may take his leave, not his last farewel Mic. 7.19. The Sunne may be gone a while from our climate, but it re∣turnes in the spring: The medita∣tion of Christs love may make us waite for the returne of this Sunne of righteousnesse. Heb. 10.37. For yet a little while and he that shall come will come. He is Truth, therefore he shall come, he is love, therefore he will come. SECT. 4. THe fourth subject of me∣ditation is, Meditate on sinne. meditate upon sinne. 1. Reatus. Meditate upon the guilt of sin. We were in Adam, tanquam in radi∣ce, as in a common head, or root, and he sinning, we become guilty,
Rom. 5.12.  in whom all have sinned; by his treason our blood is tainted, and this guilt bringeth shame with it as its twin Conscia purpureus venit in o∣ra rubor. Ovid., Rom. 6.21. 2. Meditate upon the filth of sin; Macula. not only is the guilt of Adams sinne imputed, but the poison of his nature is disseminated to us. Our Virgin nature is defiled, the heart is spotted 1 Kings 8.38.; how then can the actions be pure? If the water be foule in the well, it cannot be cleane in the bucket. Isa. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing. We are like a Patient under the Physicians hand that hath no sound part in him, his head bruised, his liver swell'd, his lungs perish'd, his blood enflam'd, his feet gangreen'd. Thus is it with us before grace comes, in the mind darknesse in the memo∣ry slipperinesse; in the heart hard∣nesse; in the will stubbornesse, from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head there is no soundnesse, but wounds
and bruises, and putrifying sores, Isa. 1.6. A sinner befilthied with sinne, is no better than a devil in mans shape . Macar. hom. 11.; and which is sadly to be laid to heart, the adherency of this sinne. Sinne is naturalized to us, the Apostle calls it , an encompassing sinne, Heb. 12.1. a sin that will not easily be cast off. A man may as well shake off the skin of his body, as the sinne of his soul; it sticks fast as the ivy to the wall. There's no shaking off this viper till death. Oh often meditate on this contagion of sinne. How strong is that poison, a drop whereof is able to poison a whole sea? how vene∣mous and malignant was that apple, a taste whereof poisoned all man∣kinde? Meditate sadly on this. The meditation of sinne would make the plumes of pride fall, if our know∣ledge makes us proud, we have sin enough to make us humble. The best Saint alive who is taken out of
the grave of sin, yet hath the smell of the grave-cloathes still upon him. 3. Meditate upon the curse of sinne. Maledictio Gal. 3.10. Cursed be every one that continues not in all things written in the book of the Law. This curse is like a blast upon fruit, which keeps it from thriving; sinne is not only a defiling thing, but a damning. It is not only a spot in the face, but a stab at the heart. Sin betrays us into the Devils hands, who like Dra∣co, writes all his Laws in blood. Sin bindes us over to the wrath of God, and then what are all our earthly enjoyments, but like Damaris his banquet, with a sword hanging over the head; sinne brings forth the rowle written with curses against a sin∣ner, Zach. 5. and it is a flying rowle, v. 5. it comes swiftly, if mercy doth not stop it. Ye are cursed with a curse, Mal. 3.9. Thus it is till the entail of this curse be cut off by
Christ. Oh meditate upon this curse due to sin. The meditation of this curse would make us afraid, 1. Of retain∣ing sinne. When Micah had sto∣len his mothers money, and heard her curse him, he durst not keep it a∣ny longer, but restores it, Judges 17.2. he was afraid of his mothers curse; what then is Gods curse?  2. The meditation of this curse would make us afraid of entertain∣ing sinne. We would not willingly entertaine one into our house who had the plague. Sinne brings a curse along with it, which is the plague of God that cleaves to a sin∣ner; sinne is like the water of jea∣losie which made the belly to swell, and the thigh to rot, Numb. 5.22. The meditation of this would make us fly from sinne; while we sit un∣der the shadow of this bramble, fire will come out of the bramble eternally to devoure us Judg. 5.19.
SECT. 5. THe fifth subject of meditation is, Meditate on the va∣nity of the creature. meditate upon the vanity of the creature. When you have sifted out the finest flower that the creature doth afford, you will finde something either to dissatisfie, or nauseate. The best wine hath its froth, the sweetest Rose its prickles, and the purest comforts their dregs; the creature cannot be said to be full, unlesse of vanity; as a bladder may be fill'd with wind, Job 20.22. In the fulnesse of his sufficiency he shall be in streights; They who think to finde happinesse here, are like Apollo who embraced the law∣rel-tree instead of Daphne. Medi∣tate on this vanity. The world is like a looking-glasse which repre∣sents that face which is not in it.
The meditation of this vanity, 1. Would be like the digging about the roots of a tree, to loosen it from the earth, it would much loosen our hearts from the world, and be an excellent preservative against a sur∣feit. Let a Christian think thus with himself, why am I so serious about vanity Ridetura Tertulli∣no Achilles dum discit stolam fun∣dere, comam struere, cu∣tem fingere speculum consulere collum de∣mulcere, aurem Fo ratu effae∣minare; quid for∣ma? quid tota mundi compages?? if the whole earth were chang'd into a globe of gold, it could not fill my heart. 2. The meditation of the crea∣tures vanity would make us look after more sollid comforts; The favour of God, the blood of Christ, the influences of the Spirit. When I see the life which I fetch from the cistern is vain, I will go the more to the Spring head; in Christ there is an inexhaustible treasury: When a man finds the bough begin to break, he lets go the bough, and catcheth hold on the main tree; so when we finde the creature to be but a rotten
bough, then by faith we shall catch hold on Christ the tree of life, Revel. 2.7. The creature is but a reed, God is the rock of ages. SECT. 6. THe sixth subject of meditati∣on is, Meditate on the ex∣cellency of grace. meditate upon the ex∣cellency of grace. Grace is,  1. Pre∣cious in it self, 2 Pet. 1.1. precious faith. Grace is precious,  1. In its original, it comes from above, Jam. 3.17. 2.  In its nature Ardentes sui amores excitaret si simulachrū ejus ad o∣culos pene∣traret. Plat.; it is the seed of God, 1 John 3.9. Grace is the spiritual enamel and embroide∣ry of the soul; It is the very signi∣ture and engraving of the holy-Ghost: Grace doth not lose its colour: It is such a commodity, that the long∣er we keep it, the better it is, it changeth into glory. 2. As grace is precious in it self, so it makes us precious to God Summa apud Deum nobilitas clarum esse virtutibus. Hierom. Epist. ad Celantiam, as a rich diamond
adornes them that weare it, Esay 43.4. Since thou wert precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable. The Saints who are invested with grace, are Gods jewels, Mal. 3.17. though sullied with reproach, though besmear'd with blood, yet, jewels; all the world besides is but lumber. These are the jewels, and heaven is the golden cabinet where they shall be lockt up safe: A gra∣cious man is the glory of the age he lives in; like Melancthon, who was called the phaenix of Germany Bucauus praefat. loc. com.. So illustrious in Gods eye is a soul be∣spangled with grace, that he doth not think the world worthy of him, Heb. 11.38. Of whom the world was not worthy Therefore God calls for his people home so fast, be∣cause they are too good to live in the world, Prov. 12.26 The righteous is more excellent than his mighbour. Grace is the best blessing . Zenoph.; It hath a meliority and transcendency above
all things else, there are two things sparkle much in our eyes, but grace infinitely out shines both. 1.  Gold. The Sunne doth not shine so bright in our eyes as gold; 'tis the mir∣ror of beauty, money answers all things, Eccles. 10.19. but grace weighs heavier than gold Nullae majores di∣vitiae quam fides, quae caecos illu∣minat ae∣gros curat martyres coronat, in haereditate aeterna cum Sanctis angelis col∣locat. Aug. de verb. dom.; gold draws the heart from God. Grace draws the heart to God. Gold doth but doth enrich the mortal part, grace the angelical. Gold perishes, 1 Pet. 1.7. grace perseveres. The Rose the fuller it is blown, the sooner it sheds, an emblem of all things be∣sides grace. Petitur hac caelum via, Nunquam stygias fertur ad umbras Inclyta virtus — — sed cum summas. Exiget horas consumpta dies, itur ad superos gloria pandet. Sen. Trag. 2. Guifts. These are natures pride.
Guifts and parts, like Rachel, are faire to look upon, but grace excels. I had rather be holy than elo∣quent . Cyrill.. An heart full of grace is better than an head full of notions. Gifts commend no man to God. 'Tis not the paring of the apple we esteem (though of a vermillion color) but the fruit. We judge not the better of an horse for his trappings Non faciunt equum meliorem aurei fraeni. Sen. l. 5. Epist. 41. and or∣naments unlesse he have good mettel. What are the most glo∣rious parts, if there be not the met∣tel of grace in the heart? Gifts may be bestowed upon one for the good of others, (as the nurses breasts are given her for the childe) but grace is bestowed for a mans own e∣ternal advantage. God may send away reprobates with gifts, as A∣braham did the sons of the concubines, Gen. 25.6. but he entails the inheri∣tance
only upon grace. O often me∣ditate upon the excellency of grace. The musing on the beauty of grace would,  1. Make us fall in love with it. He that meditates on the worth of a diamond, grows in love with it. Damascen calls the graces of the Spirit the very characters and impressions of the divine nature . Damascen.. Grace is that flower of delight which like the vine in the parable, Judges 9.13. chears the heart of God and man. 2. The meditation of the excel∣lency of grace would make us ear∣nest in the pursuit after it. We dig for gold in the Mine, we sweat for it in the furnace; did we medi∣tate on the worth of grace, we would dig in the Mine of Ordinan∣ces for it; what sweating and wrast∣ling in prayer? We would put on a modest boldnesse, and not take a denial. What wilt thou give me
(saith Abraham) seeing I go child∣lesse, Gen. 15.2. so would the soul say, Lord, what wilt thou give me seing I go gracelesse? who will give me to drink of the water of the well of life? 3. The meditation of the excel∣lency of grace would make us en∣deavour to be instrumental to con∣vey grace to others. Is grace so transcendantly precious, and have I a child wants grace, Oh that I might be a meanes to convey this treasure into his soul. I have read of a rich Florentine Cosm. Medices., who being to die, called all his sons together, and used these words to them, It much rejoy∣ceth me now upon my death-bed, quod vos divites relinquam. That I shall leave you all wealthy; But a parents ambition should be rather to convey sanctity, that he may say, O my children, it rejoyceth me that I shall leave you gracious; it comforts me that before I die, I
shall see Jesus Christ live in you. SECT. 7. THe seventh subject of medita∣tion, is, Meditate upon thy spiritual estate. enter into a serious me∣ditation of the state of your soules; while you are meditating of other things, do not forget your selves. The great work lies at home. It was Solomons advice, know the state of thy flock, Prov. 27.23. much more know the state of thy soul Cum sub∣latum è conspectu lumen est (inquit Se∣neca) moris mei jam conscius, totum diem mecum serutor, ni∣bil transco. Tacitus annal. l. 13; for want of this meditation men are like tra∣vellers, skill'd in other countreys, but ignorant of their own; so they know other things, but know not how it goes with their souls, whe∣ther they are in a good state or bad; there are few who by holy Medita∣tion enter within themselves▪ There are two reasons why so few medi∣tate upon the state of their souls.
1. Self-guiltinesse. Men are loth to look into their hearts by medi∣tation, lest they should finde that which would trouble them. The cup is in their sack. Most are here∣in like trades-men, who being rea∣dy to sink in their estates are loth to look into their books of account, lest they should finde their estate low; but hadst thou not better en∣ter into thy heart by meditation, than God should in a sad man∣ner enter into judgement with thee? 2. Presumption; men hope all is well; men will not take their land upon trust, but will have it survey∣ed; yet they will take their spi∣ritual estate upon trust, without any surveying. They are confident their case is good Prov. 14.16; 'Tis a thing not to be disputed on, and this confidence is but conceit. The foolish Virgins, though they had no oyle in their lamps, yet how confident were they?
They came knocking; 'twas a perem∣ptory knock, they doubted not of admittance; so, many are not sure of their salvation, but secure; they presume all is well, never seriously meditating whether they have oyle or no. Oh, Christian, meditate a∣bout thy soul. See how the case stands between God and thee; do as Merchants, cast up thy estate, that thou mayest see what thou art worth; see if thou art rich towards God, Luke 12.21. Meditate about three things 1.  About thy debts, see if thy debts be paid or no, that is, thy sinnes pardoned; see if there be no arrearagies, no sinne in thy soul unrepented of. 2.  Meditate a∣bout thy Will; see if thy Will be made yet: Hast thou resigned up all the interest in thy self? Hast thou gi∣ven up thy love to God? Hast thou given up thy will? This is to make thy Will. Meditate about the Will; make thy spiritual Will in the
time of health; if thou puttest off the making of thy Will till death, it may be invalid; perhaps God will not accept of thy soule then.  3. Meditate about thy evidences. These evidences are the graces of the Spirit; see whether thou hast any evidences. What desires hast thou after Christ? what faith? see whe∣ther there be no flaw in thy eviden∣ces; are thy desires true? dost thou as well desire heavenly principles, as heavenly priviledges? Oh medi∣tate seriously upon your eviden∣ces. To sift our hearts thus by medi∣tation, is very necessary: if we finde our estate is not sound, the mistake is discovered, and the danger pre∣vented; if it be sound, we shall have the comfort of it. What gladnesse was it to Hezekiah, when he could say, Remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight, Isa. 38.3. so, what unspeakable comfort will it be, when a Christian upon a serious meditation, and review of his spiritual condition, can say, I have something to shew for heaven, I know I am passed from death to life 1 John 3.14; and as an holy man once said, I am Christs, and the devil hath nothing to do with me Bucer.. SECT. 8. THe eighth subject of medi∣tation, is, Meditate on the paucity of them that shall be sa∣ved. meditate upon the paucity of them that shall be saved; but few are chosen, Matth. 20.16. a∣mong the millions in Rome, but few Senatours; and among the swarmes of people in the world, but few beleevers. One said, all the names of the good Emperours might be en∣graven in a little Ring Flavus Vopiscus.; there are
not many names in the book of life. We read of foure sorts of ground in the Parable, and but one good ground, Matth. 13. How few in the world know Christ? how few that believe in him? quis cre∣didit? Who hath beleeved our report Is. 53.1? how few that strike saile to Christs Scepter, Luke 19.14? The Heathen Idolaters and Mahometans possesse almost all Asia, Africa, America; in many parts of the world the devil is worshipped; as among the Parthians and Pilapians; Satan takes up most climates, and hearts. How many for∣malists are there in the world? 2 Tim. 3.5. , having a forme of godlinesse; like wool that receives a slight tincture, not a deep die, whose Religion is a paint, (which a storm of persecution will wash off) not an engraving. These look like Christs Doves, but are the Ser∣pents brood . Ignatius.. They hate Gods image, like the Panthar, that hates the pi∣cture of a man.
Oh often meditate on the paucity of them that shall be saved. The meditation of this, would,  1. Keep us from marching along with the multitude. Thou shalt not follow a multitude, Exod. 23.2. The multi∣tude usually goes wrong; most men walk, , after the course of the world Non qua eundum, sed qua itur. Sen., Ephes. 2.2. That is, the lusts of their hearts, and the fashions of the times. They march after the Prince of the aire. The meditation of this would make us turne out of the common roade. 2. The meditation of the few∣nesse of them that shall be saved would make us walk tremblingly; few that finde the way, and when they have found it, few that walk in the way. The thoughts of this would work holy fear, Heb. 4.1. not a despairing fear, but a jealous and cautious fear. This feare the eminent Saints of God have had.
Austin saith of himselfe, he knock∣ed at heaven-gate with a trem∣bling hand. This fear is joyned with hope, Psalme 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that feare him, in those that hope in his mercy; A childe of God fears, because the gate is streight, but hopes, because the gate is o∣pen. 3. The meditation of the pau∣city of them that shall be saved, would be a whet-stone to industry. It would put us upon working out our salvation; If there are so few that shall be crown'd, it would make us the swifter in the race. This meditation would be an allarme to sleepy Christians.
SECT. 9. THe ninth subject of meditati∣on, is, Meditate upon final apostasie. meditate upon final A∣postasie. Think what a sad thing it is to begin in Religion to build, and not be able to finish Luke 14 30; Joash was good while his uncle Jehoiada lived, but after he died, Joash grew wicked, and all his Religion was buried in his uncles grave. We live in the fall of the leaf, how many are fal∣len to damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. Meditate seriously on that Scrip∣ture, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. It is impos∣sible for those who were once enlight∣ned, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall a∣way, to renue them again unto re∣pentance.
A man may be enlight∣ned, and that from a double lamp, the Word and Spirit, but these beams, though they are irradiating, yet not penetrating. 'Tis possible he may have , a taste of the heavenly gift; he may taste, but not con∣coct Potest summis la∣bris deli∣bare. Estius; as one saith, a Cook may taste the meat he dresseth, but not be nourished by it M. Per∣kins.. This taste may not only illuminare, but reficere Thom. Aquin.; it may carry some sweetnesse in it, there may be a kinde of delight in spiritual things: Thus farre a man may go, and yet penitus recidere, fall away finally. Now this will be very sad (it being such a God-affronting, and Christ-reproaching sinne;) Know therefore it is an evil and bitter thing that thou hast forsaken the Lord, Jerem. 2.19. Meditate upon final relapses. The meditation of this would make us earnest in prayer to God.  1. For soundnesse of heart, make
my heart sound in thy statutes, Psal. Ps. 119.80 119.80. Lord, let me not be an Al∣chimy Christian, work a thorough work of grace upon me; Though I am not washed perfectly, let me be wash'd throughly, Psalme 51.2. That which begins in hypocrisie, ends in apostasie. 2. The medita∣tion of hypocrites final falling away would make us earnest in prayer for perseverance. Hold up my goings in thy paths that my footsteps stip not, Psalme 17.5. Lord, hold me up, that I may hold out. Thou hast set the crown at the end of the race, let me run the race, that I may wear the crown; it was Beza's prayer, Domine quod coepi∣sti perfice ne in portu naufragi∣um accidat. Beza. and let it be ours. Lord perfect what thou hast begun in me, that I may not suffer shipwrack when I am al∣most at Haven.
SECT. 10. THe tenth subject of me∣ditation, is, meditate of death Vera Phi∣losophia est mortis con∣templatio. Plato in dial. de sap.. We say we must all die, but who is he that meditates seri∣ously upon it? Meditate,  1. Of the certainty of death, statutum est; 'Tis appointed for all once to die, Heb. 9.27. There's a statute out.  2. Meditate upon the proximity of death, it is near to us; Et mors a∣tra caput fuscis circumvolat alis. — We are almost setting our feet up∣on the dark entry of death. The Poets painted time with wings; it not only rides Post, but flies, and carries us upon its wings. The race is short between the cradle and the grave: the sentence of death is al∣ready passed, Gen. 3.19. To dust thou shalt returne; so that our life is but
a short reprieval from death which is granted to a condemned man; Mine age is , as nothing, Psal. 39.5. nay, if it were possible to take something out of nothing, our life is lesse than nothing, reckon'd with e∣ternity.  3. Meditate upon the uncer∣tainty of the time. We have no Lease, but may be turned out the next houre; there are so many ca∣sualties, that it is a wonder if life be not cut off by untimely death Quis scit an adjici∣ant hodier∣nae crastina vitae tem∣pora, dii superi! Horat.. How soon may God seale us a lease of ejectment? Our grave may be digging before night. To day we lie upon a pillow of downe, to mor∣row we may be laid upon a pillow of dust. To day the Sermon-bell goes, to morrow our passing-bell may go.  4. Think seriously, that to die is to be but once done, and af∣ter death, there's nothing to be done. If thou diest in thy impenitency, there's no repenting in the grave. If thou leavest thy work at death
half done, there is no finishing it in the grave, Eccles. 9.10. There's no work nor devise, nor wisdome in the grave whether thou goest. If a ga∣rison surrender at the first sum∣mons, there is mercy, but if it stay til the red flag be hung out, and the garison is storm'd, there's no mer∣cy then. Now 'tis a day of grace, and God holds forth the white flag of mercy to the penitent, if we stay till God hold forth the red flag, and storme us by death, now there's no mercy. There is nothing to be done for our souls after death. Oh meditate of death. 'Tis reported of Zeleucus, that the first piece of houshold-stuff he brought into Baby∣lon, was a tomb-stone: think often of your Tomb-stone. The medita∣tion of death would work these ad∣mirable effects. 1. The meditation of death would pull down the plumes of pride; Cum sis humi limus cur non humilimus? thou art but pulvis animatus; shall
dust and ashes be proud? Thou hast a grassy body, Is. 40.6. Agnoscat homose esse mortalem, & franget elationem. Aug. and shalt shortly be mowen down; I have said ye are gods, Ps. 82 but lest they should grow proud, he adds a corrective, ye shal die like men, v. 7. ye are dying gods. 2. The meditation of death would be a means to give a deaths wound to sinne, nihil sic revocat a peccato, &c. No stronger antidote against sinne, saith Austin, than the frequent meditation of death; am I now sinning, and to morrow may be dy∣ing? What if death should take me doing the devils work, would it not send me to him to receive double pay? carry the thoughts of death as a table-book alwayes about thee, and when sinne tempts, pull out this table-book, and read in it, and you shall see sinne will vanish. We should look upon sin in two glasses, the glasse of Christs blood, and the glasse of death. 3. The meditation of death would
be a bridle for intemperancy; shall I pamper that body which must lie down in the house of rottennesse? Our Saviour at a feast breaks forth into mention of his burial, Mat. 26.12 Matth. 26.12. feeding upon the thoughts of death would be an excellent pre∣servative against a surfeit. 4. The meditation of death would make us husband time bet∣ter, and croud up much work in a a little room. Many meet in Ta∣verns to drive away time; the A∣postle bids us redeeme it; Eph. 5.15. Redeem∣ing the time. Our lives should be like jewels, though little in bulk, yet great in worth. Some die young, yet with gray haires upon them; we must be like grasse of the field, useful, not like grasse of the house-top, Psalme 129.6. which withers before it be grown up. To live, and not be serviceable, is not vita, but tempus Seneca.. 5. The meditation of death
would make us lay in provision a∣gainst such a time. It would spur us on in the pursuit after holinesse. Death is the great plunderer, it will shortly plunder us of all our outward comforts; our feathers of beauty, and honour must be laid in the dust, but death cannot plunder us of our graces. The Common∣Wealth of Venice in their armoury have this inscription, happy is he that in time of peace thinks of warre Id etiam depictuon aurcis lite∣ris in porta aquaria ci∣vitatis. Embrin∣censis.; he that often meditates of death, will make preparation against its coming. SECT. 11. MEditate upon the day of judg∣ment. Meditate on the day of judge∣ment. God hath appointed a day in which he will judge the world, Acts 17.31. Meditate, 1.  Upon the solemnity of this trial. The
trumpet shall sound to summon all the world before the Judge Si talis sit horror venientis, qualis erit judicantis? Aug., 1 Thes. 4.16. and Jesus Christ shall come in the glory of his Father, with all his holy Angels, Mat. 25.31.  2. Me∣ditate upon the universality of this trial. We must all appeare before the judgement-seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10. Kings and Nobles, all must come to the barre, there's no exemption. I have read of a wicked King, who on his death-bed fell a weeping, his brother ask'd him why he wept? to think (saith he) that I, who have judged others, am now going to be judg'd my self. 3. Meditate of the impartiality of the tryal: Christ will do justice; He will judge the world in righteousnesse, Acts 17.31. There are no bribes taken in this Court; no relations take place here. The Thebanes did picture their Judg∣es blinde, and without hands; blind, that they might not respect persons; Reusner. without hands, that they might take
no bribes. Christs Scepter is a Scepter of righteousnesse, Heb. 1.8. 'tis not nearnesse of blood availes; nor will he be bribed with a teare.  4. Me∣ditate upon the exactnesse of the tri∣al; it will be very critical; He will thoroughly purge his floor ., Mat. 3.12. not a grace, or a sinne, but Christs fan will discover it; He will judge the heart as well as the fact.  5. Me∣ditate upon the issue and conse∣quence of this trial. There will be a discrimination made. He will se∣parate the good from the bad, Mat. 25.32. The wheat and chaffe may both grow together, but they shall not lie together. Meditate often upon this Court of judicature, from whence is no ap∣peal. Feathers swim upon the wa∣ter, but gold sinks into it; light fea∣thery Christians flote in vanity, they minde not the day of judge∣ment, but serious spirits sink deep in∣to the meditation of it. Most men
put farre away from them the evil day, Amos 6.3. they report of the Italians, that in a great thunder they use to ring their bells, and shoot off their Cannons, that the sound of their Bells, and the roaring of their Cannons may drown the noise of the thunder; so the devil delights men with the musick of the world; that the noise of this should drown the noise of the day of judgment, and make them forget the sound of the last trump. Most men are guilty, therefore they do not love to heare of the Assises. When Paul preach'd of judgement, Faelix trembled, Acts 24.25. he had a bad conscience; Josephus tells us of Faelix, that he was a wicked man: The woman that lived with him (Drusilla by name) he had entised away from her husband, and when he heard of judgement, he fell a trembling. Oh I beseech you meditate upon this last and solemne day; while others
are thinking how they may get rich∣es, let us bethink our selves how we may abide the day of Christs co∣ming. The meditation of the day of judgement,  1. Would make us to scanne all our actions; Christ will come with his fanne and his sieve: Will this action of mine bide the test at that great day? 2. The meditation of the last day would make us labour to ap∣prove our hearts to God, the great Judge and Umpire of the world. 'Tis no matter what men think of us, but what is our Judges opinion of us? to him we must stand or fall. The meditation of the day of judge∣ment would make us endeavour to be like Moses, who was , faire to God, as the Original hath it Act 7.20. The Galaxia, or milky way (as the Astronomers call it) is a bright cir∣cle in the heavens containing many
starres, but they are so small that they have no name, nor are they taken cognizance of by the Astrolo∣gers. Give me leave to apply it, pos∣sibly others may take no notice of us, we are so small as to have no name in the world, yet if we are true stars, and can approve our hearts to God, we shall hold up our heads with boldnesse, when we come to stand before our Judge. 3. The meditation of the day of judgment would make us labour af∣ter an interest in Christ; There's no standing before Christ, but by being in Christ! if Christ be thine, then all is well; no matter what is charg'd, if all be discharg'd, Rom. 8 33, 34. There's no way in the world to stand in the day of judge∣ment, but by making a party; make Christ thy friend, and then thy Judge will be thy 1 Joh. 2.1. Advocate. 4. The meditation of the day of judgement would make Christians
lesse censorious, they would not repobrate others so fast; who art thou that judgest another? doest thou take Christs Scepter into thy hand? darest thou sit in judgement upon thy brother? perhaps when the critical day comes, he may be found gold, and thou chaffe. 'Tis true, we may judge mens way, but not their persons, Rom. 14.10. but why doest thou judge thy brother? we shall all stand before the judgement seat of Christ. 5. The meditation of the day of judgement would yeeld much com∣fort to a Christian, and that in two cases. 1. In case of weaknesse of grace; a poor Christian when he sees his grace so defective, is ready to be dis∣couraged, but at the day of judge∣ment if Christ finde but a dramme of sincerity, it shall be accepted; if thine be true gold, though it may be light, Christ will put his merits
into the scales, and make it passe currant. If thou hast no sinne of allowance; Thou shalt have grains of allowance. I may allude to that, Amos 9.9. yet shall not the least graine fall to the earth; He that hath but a graine of grace, not the least grain shall fall to hell. 2. In case of censures and slanders. The Saints go here through strange reports, , 2 Cor. 6.8. There's no walking in the world now a dayes, let us tread ne∣ver so warily without catching some spects of dirt; John Baptists head in a charger is a common dish in this age, 'tis ordinary to bring in a Saint beheaded of his good name; but at the day of judgement, Christ will unload his people of all their calumnies, and reproaches, he will at that day wash his Spouse so white, that she shall not only be guiltlesse, but spotlesse, her black spots of re∣proach shall be taken away, Ephes.
5.27. he will present his Church glo∣rious, sine macula & ruga, not ha∣ving spot or wrinkle. SECT. 12. THe twelfth subject of Medita∣tion. Meditate of hell. 1. Meditate on hell. 1. Poena damni. Me∣ditate upon the paine of losse, Mat. 25.10. and the door was shut. To have Christs face vail'd over, and a perpetual eclipse, and mid-night in the soul, to be cast out of Gods presence, in whose presence is fulnesse of joy, this doth accent and imbit∣ter the condition of the damned; 'tis like mingling gall with worm∣wood. 2. Meditate upon the paine of sence; 2. Poena sensus. the Photinians hold there is no hell, but they speak in a dream, Psalme 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell. And here meditate
of two things. 1. The place of hell. 2. The company. 1. Meditate of the place of hell. 'Tis call'd a place of torment, Luke 16.28. There are two things espe∣cially in hell to torment. 1. 1. Ignis Urens, Fire, Revel. 20.15. 'Tis called a lake of burning fire, Austin, Peter Lombard, Gregory the Great, say, this fire of hell is a material fire, though they say it is infinitely hotter than any culinary fire; that is but paint∣ed fire to this. I wish none of us may know what kinde of fire it is, but I rather think, the fire of hell is partly material, and partly spiritual; the material fire is to work upon the body, the spiritual to torture the soul. This is the wrath of God, which is both fire and bellows, who knows the power of thy anger, Psalme 90.11. But it may be objected, if there be any material fire in hell, it will
consume the bodies there? I answer, it shall burn without consuming In rebus sacris mi∣rari non ri∣mari sapi∣entis est. Gerhard de. coena dom., as Moses bush did, Ex. 3.2. The power of God silenceth all disputes. If God by his infinite power could make the fire of the three children not to consume, cannot he make the fire of hell burne and not consume? Au∣stin in his book, de civitate Dei, Aug. lib. 21 tells us of a strange salt in Sicily, which if it be put in the fire swims; That God which can make salt, contrary to its nature, swim in the fire, can make the bodies of the damn'd not consume in the fire. 2. The worm, Mark 9.44. 2. Vermis Rodens. Where the worme never dies, Homer in his Odisses faines, that Titius his liver was gnawn by two vultures in hell. This never-dying worme Christ speaks of, is the gnawing of a guil∣ty conscience. Comment. 1 Cor. 11 Melancthon calls it Erynnis conscientiae .; an hellish fu∣ry, Siculi non invenere tyranni tor∣mentum majus,—they that will
not hear conscience preaching, shall feel conscience gnawing Ge adag Comment.; and so great is the extremity of these two, the fire which burnes, and the worme which bites, that there will follow gnashing of teeth, . Mat 8.12. the damn'd will gnash their teeth for horrour and anguish. That must needs be sad chear (as Latimer saith) where weeping is serv'd in for the first course, and gnashing of teeth for the second Latimer Serm. ad cler. Ejus adesse intollera∣bile ejus abesse im possibile. Aug.: to endure this will be intollerable, to avoid it will be im∣possible. 2. Meditate of the company in hell, the devil and his Angels, Matth. 25.41. Job complaines he was a companion to owles, chap. 30.29. What will it be to be a com∣panion to devils? Consider, 1. Their gastly deformity, they make hell look blacker. 2. Their deadly antipathy; they are fired with rage against man-kind; first they become tempters, then tormentors.
Meditate much on hell. Let us go into hell by contemplation, that we may not go into hell by condem∣nation. How restlesse is the con∣dition of the damned; The ancients faine of Endymion, that he got leave of Jupiter always to sleep Impetras∣se a Jove ut perpetuo dormiret. Natal. Com.. What would the damned in hell give for such a Licence? in their paines is neither intermission, nor mitigati∣on. The serious meditation of hell, would make us,  1. Feare sinne as hell. Sinne is hells fuel; sinne like Sampsons foxes Judges 15.5., carries devouring fire in the taile of it. 2. The meditation of hell would cause rejoycing in a childe of God. The Saints feare of hell is like the two Maries feare, Matth. 28.8. They depared from the Sepulchre with fear and great joy. A beleever may fear to think of the place of tor∣ment, but rejoyce to think he shall not come into this place. When a
man stands upon a high rock, he trembles to look down into the sea, yet he rejoyceth that he is not there strugling with the waves. A child of God, when he thinks of hell, he rejoyceth with trembling. A Prison is not made for the Kings sons to be put in. A great Naturalist observes that nothing will so soon quench fire as salt and blood; sure I am, the salt brinish tears of repentance, and the blood of Christ will quench the fire of hell to a beleever. Christ him∣self hath felt the paines of hell for you. The Lamb of God being roast∣ed in the fire of Gods wrath, by this burnt-offering the Lord is now appeas'd towards his people. Oh how may the godly rejoyce. . There's no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Rom. 8.1. When the Son of God was in the furnace, Dan. 3.25. the fire did the three chil∣dren no hurt; so Christ being for a time in the fiery furnace of Gods
wrath, that fire can do a beleever no hurt. The Saints have the gar∣ment of Christs righteousnesse upon them, and the fire of hell can never singe this garment. SECT. 13. THe thirteenth subject of medi∣tation, is, Meditate on heaven. Meditate on hea∣ven: From the Mount of medita∣tion, as from Mount Nebo, we may take a view and prospect of the Land of promise. Christ hath ta∣ken possession of heaven in the name of all beleevers, Heb. 6.20. Whi∣ther the forerunner is for us entred, even Jesus. Heaven must needs be a glorious City, which hath God both for its builder and inhabitant. Heaven is the extract & quintessence of all blessednesse. There the Saints shall have their wish. Austin wish∣ed
that he might have seene three things before he died, Rome in its Glory, Paul in the Pulpit, and Christ in the Flesh. But the Saints shall see a better sight; they shall see, not Rome, but Heaven in its glory; they shall see Paul, not in the Pulpit, but on the Throne, and shall sit with him; they shall see Christs flesh, not vail'd over with infirmities and disgraces, but in its spiritual embroy∣dery; not a crucified, but a glorifi∣ed body. They shall behold the King in his beauty, Isa. 33.17. What a glorious place will this be! In heaven God will be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Beauty to the eye, musick to the eares; joy to the heart, and this he will be to the poorest Saint, as well as the richest. O Christian, who art now at thy hard labour, perhaps following the plough, thou shalt sit on the Throne of glory Rev. 3.21. Quintus Curtius writes of one who was dig∣ging
in his garden, and on a sudden made King, and a purple garment richly embroydered with gold, put upon him; so shall it be done to the poorest beleever, he shall be taken from his labouring work, and set at the right hand of God, Injectaci vestis pur∣pura auro∣que distin∣cta. Curtius having the Crown of righteousnesse upon his head. Mat. 25.33. Statuet oves ad dextram. O in effabile gaudium in beat is glo∣rificatis qui ad dextram Christi si∣stent; astituri ipsi ut subditi screnissi∣mo suo principi, ut filii benignissimo suo patri, ut regale sacerdotium gra∣tiosissimo suo pontifici; mater solomo∣nis fuit ad dextram regis in Throno posita, 1 King. 2.19. O vero quam caduca haec, etsi regia majestas! in novissimo autem die vere magnifica & gloriosa erit constitutio ad dextram so∣lomonis coelestis desiderium cordis ple∣nissime illis dabit, apponet capiti eo∣rum diadema auri Ps. 21.3.. Solom. Classius Exeg. 4. Meditate often on this Jerusalem above.
The meditation of heaven, would,  1. Excite and quicken obedience. It would put spurs to our sluggish hearts, and make us abound in the work of God, knowing that our labour is not in vaine in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. The weight of glory would not hinder us in our race, but cause us to runne the faster: this weight would adde wings to duty. 2. The meditation of heaven would make us strive after heart∣purity, because, onely the pure in heart shall see God, Matth. 5.8. 'tis only a cleare eye can look upon a bright transparent object. 3. The meditation of Heaven would be a pillar of support under our sufferings, heaven will make a∣mends for all. One houres being in heaven will make us forget all our sorrows; the Sunne dries up the wa∣ter; one beame of Gods glo∣rious face will dry up all our tears.
SECT. 14. THe fourteenth subject of me∣ditation, is, Meditate on eternity Meditate up∣on eternity; Some of the An∣cients have compared it to an in∣tellectual sphere, whose centre is e∣very where, and circumference no where. Eternity to the godly is a day which hath no Sun-setting, and to the wicked, a night which hath no Sun-rising. Eternity is a gulf which may swallow up all our thoughts: Meditate on that Scripture, Matth. 25.46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righ∣teous into life eternal. 1. Meditate upon eternal punish∣ment; the bitter cup the damned drink of shall never passe away from
them. The sinner and the furnace shall never be parted. Gods vial of wrath will be alwayes dropping up∣on a wicked man. When you have reckon'd up so many myriads and millions of years, nay, ages, as have passed the bounds of all Arithmi∣tick, Eternity is not yet begun. This word EVER breaks the heart; Horaque erit tantis ultima nul∣la malis. Cogita centum millia annorum, cogita decies centena millia annorum, cogita mille milliones annorum, im∣mo seculorum, nondum inchoasti aeter∣num, Cornel. de Lap. Think of this all you that forget God. If the tree fall hell-ward, so it lies to all e∣ternity, Paenae gehennales torquent non extorquent, puniunt non finiunt cor∣pora. Prosper. Prosper. Now is the time of Gods long-suffering, 2 Pet. 3.9 af∣ter death will be the time of the sinners long-suffering, when he shall suffer the vengeance of Eternall fire, Jude 7.
Si Deus diceret damnatis implea∣tur terra arena minutissima, it a ut to∣tus orbis hisce arenae granulis sit reple∣ta à terra usque ad coelum Empyraeum; & mille simo quo{que} anno angelus ve∣niat dematque ex hoc arenae umulo u∣num granulum, eumque post tot mil∣lenarios annorum quot sunt granula ea exhauserit, liberabo vos a gehenna, O quam exultarent damnati at vero, post omnes hos millenarios restant a∣lii, & alii millenarii, in infinitum, in aeternum. & ultra, Drexel. 2. Meditate upon life eternal Eternitas Est. inter∣minabilis vitae tota simul & perfect possessio. Bius l. 5 de Consol. Philosoph. prosa 6.. The soul that is once landed at the heavenly shore is past all stormes. The glorified soul shall be for ever bathing it self in the rivers of plea∣sure, Psalme 16. ult. This is that which makes heaven to be heaven, We shall be ever with the Lord. 1 Thes. 4.17. Austin saith; Lord I am con∣tent to suffer any paines and torments in this world, if I might see thy face one day; but alas, were it onely for
a day, and then to be ejected heaven, it would rather be an aggravation of misery; but this word ever with the Lord, is very accumulative and makes up the garland of glory; A state of eternity is a state of security . Theodoret., O vi∣ta vitalis, vita sempi∣terna, & sempiterne bea∣ta, ubi gaudium sine me∣rore, requies sine labore, sanitas sine languore, opes sine amissione, perpetuitas sine corrup∣tione. Aug. Manuali cap. 7. de gaud. The meditation of eternity would,  1. Make us very serious in what we do. Zeuxes being ask'd, why he was so long about a picture, an∣swered aeternitati pingo, I paint for eternity. The thoughts of an irrever∣sible condition after this life, would make us pray and heare as for eter∣nity. Vive Deo vive aeternita∣ti.—
2. The meditation of eternity, would make us over-look pre∣sent things, as flitting and fa∣ding. What is the world to him that hath eternitie in his eye Eterni inhianti fastidio sunt transi∣tria Bern. Epist. 3.? 'Tis but minutissima pars puncti Simonides, which (as the Mathematicians say) is just nothing. He that thinks of eternitie will despise the pleasures of sinne for a sea∣son Heb. 11.25.. 3. The meditation of eternity would be a meanes to keep us from envying the wickeds prospe∣rity: Here they ruffle it in their ilks, but what is this to eternity? as long as there is such a thing as eternity, God hath time enough to reckon with all his ene∣mies.
SECT. 15. THe last subject of meditation is, Meditate on your experien∣ces. meditate upon your expe∣riences. Look over your receites;  1. Hath not God provided liber∣ally for you, and vouchsafed you those mercies which he hath denied to others who are better than you? Here is an experience, Gen. 48.15. The God who hath fed me all my days. Thou never feedest, but mercy carves for thee; thou never goest to bed, but mercy draws the curtaines, and sets a guard of Angels a∣bout thee. Whatever thou hast is out of the Exchequer of free grace. Here's an experience to medi∣tate upon. 2. Hath not God prevented many dangers, hath he not kept watch and ward about you? 1. What tempo∣ral
dangers hath God screen'd off? Thy neighbours house on fire Paries cum prxi∣mus ardet. Virg., and it hath not kindled in thy dwellings. Another infected, thou art free; Behold the golden feathers of pro∣tection covering thee. 2. What spi∣ritual dangers hath God prevented? when others have been poyson'd with errour, thou hast been preserved. God hath sounded a retreat to thee; thou hast heard a voice behinde thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it Isa. 30 21; When thou hast listed thy self, and taken pay on the devils side, that God should pluck thee as a brand out of the fire, that he should turne thy heart, and now thou espousest Christs quarrel against sinne. Behold pre∣venting grace! here's an experience to meditate upon. 3. Hath not God spared you a long time? Whence is it that others are struck dead in the act of sinne, as Ananias and Saphira *, and you are preserv'd as a monument of pati∣ence?
Here is an experience; God hath done more for you than for the Angels; he never waited for their repentance, but he hath waited for you year after yeare, Isa. 30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious. He hath not only knockt at your heart in the Mi∣nistry of the Word, but he hath waited at the doore: How long hath his Spirit striven with you? like an importunate suitor, that af∣ter many denials, yet will not give over the suit. My thinks I see ju∣stice with a sword in its hand ready to strike, and mercy steps in for the sinner, Lord have patience with him a while longer: My thinks I hear the Angels say to God as the King of Israel once said to the Prophet Eli∣sha, 2 Kings 6.22. Shall I smite them? shall I smite them? So my thinks I heare the Angels say, shall we take off the head of such a drunk∣ard, swearer, blasphemer? and mer∣cy
seems to answer as the Vinedres∣ser; Luk. 13.8. let him alone this year. See if he will repent. Is not here an experience worth meditating upon? Mercy turns Justice into a rain-bow; the rain-bowe is a bowe indeed, but hath no arrow in it; that justice hath been like the rainbowe without an arrow, that it hath not shot thee to death, Here is a receit of pati∣ence to read over and meditate upon. 4. Hath not God often come in with assisting grace? when he hath bid thee mortifie such a lust, and thou hast said as Iehoshaphat, 2 Chr. 20 12. I have no might against this great army. Then God hath come in with auxiliary forces, his grace hath been sufficient. When God hath bid thee pray for such a mercy, and thou hast found thy self very unfit; thy heart was at first dead and flat, all on a sudden thou art carried above thy own strength; thy tears drop, thy love
flames; God hath come in with as∣sisting grace. If the heart burn in prayer God hath struck fire. The Spirit hath been tuning thy soul, and now thou makest sweet melody in prayer. Here is an experience to me∣ditate upon. 5. Hath not God vanquished Sa∣tan for you Satan nihil non molitur contra Sanctos, scutum fi∣dei aggre∣ditur, his tentatio∣num arie tibus sic porest co∣pium obsi dere & in tantas du∣bitationes prapitareout deum expauescat, ei irascatur & aliquando blasphemet. Nque tura, neque Caesar unquam tanto impe∣tu pessunt civitatem aliquam oppugnare, quam Satan aliquan∣do conscientias piorum, Luthr in Ps. 118.? When the Devill hath tempted to infidelity, to self-murder, when he would make you beleeve either, that your graces were but a fiction, or Gods pro∣mise but a counterfeit bond, now that you have not been foil'd by the Tempter, it is God who hath kept the garrison of your heart, else his fiery darts would have entred. Here's an experience to meditate up∣on.
6. Have you not had many signal deliverances? When you have been even at the gates of death, God hath miraculously recovered you, and renued your strength as the Eagle; may not you write that writing which Hezekiah did, Isa. 38 6. The writing of Hezekiah King of Judah, when he had been sick and was recovered of his sicknesse; you thought the Sunne of your life was quite setting, but God made this Sunne returne back many degrees. Here's an experience for meditati∣on to feed upon. When you have been imprisoned, your foot taken in the snare, and the Lord hath broken the snare, nay, hath made those to break it who were the instruments of laying it. Behold an experience; Oh let us often revolve in minde our experiences. If a man had physick receits by him, he would be often looking over his receits. You that have rare receits of mercy by you,
be often by meditation looking o∣ver your receits. The meditation of our experi∣ences would, 1. Raise us to thank∣fulnesse. Considering that God hath set an hedge of providence about us, he hath strewed our way with roses; this would make us take the Harp and Vial, and praise the Lord; and not on∣ly praise, but record . Plato., 1 Chr. 16.4. The meditating Christian keeps a Re∣gister or Chronicle of Gods mer∣cies, that the memory of them doth not decay. God would have the Manna kept in the Ark many hun∣dred years, that the remembrance of that miracle might be preserved; a meditating soul takes care that the spiritual Manna of an experience be kept safe. 2. The meditation of our expe∣riences would engage our hearts to God in obedience. Mercy would be a needle to sowe us to him. We would cry out as Bernard Duas ba∣beo minu∣tias domine &c. Bern., I have,
Lord, two mites, a soule and a body, and I give them both to thee. 3. The Meditation of our experi∣ences would serve to convince us that God is no hard master; we might bring in our experiences as a sufficient confutation of that slander. When we have been falling, hath not God taken us by the hand? When I said my foot slippeth, thy goodnesse, O Lord, held me up, Psalme 94.18. How often hath God held our head and heart when we have been fainting . Euri∣pides.? and is he a hard Master? is there any master besides God who will wait upon his servants? Christians summon in your experiences. What vailes have you had Ps. 19.11? What in∣ward serenity and peace, which neither the world can give, nor death take away? a Christians own experiences may plead for God a∣gainst such as desire rather to cen∣sure his ways, than to try them, and
to cavil at them than to walk in them. 4. The meditation of our experi∣ences would make us communica∣tive to others. We would be telling our children and acquaintance what God hath done for our souls Psal. 44.1; at such a time we were brought low, and God raised us; at such a time in deser∣tion, and God brought a promise to remembrance which dropt in com∣fort. The meditation of Gods gra∣cious dealing with us would make us transmit and propagate our experi∣ence to others, that the mercies of God shewn to us may bear a plenti∣ful crop of praise when we are dead and gone.
CHAP. VII. Shewing the necessity of Medita∣tion. It is not enough to carry the book of Gods lawabout us, but we must Meditate in it. The ne∣cessity of Meditation wil appear in three particulars.  1. The end why God hath given us his word written and preached, is not onely to know it but that we should Meditate in it. The word is a letter of the great God written to us, now we must not runne it over in hast but medi∣tate upon Gods wisdom in in∣diting, and his love in sending it to us. Why doth the Physi∣cian give his patient a receit? is it that he should onely read it o∣ver
and know the receit, or that he should apply it? The end why God communicates his Gospel receits to us is, that we should apply them by fruitful meditati∣tion: would God (think we) e∣ver have been at the pains of writing his lawwith his own fin∣ger only that we should have the Theory and notion of it? is it not that we should Meditate in it? would he ever have been at the cost to send abroad his mini∣sters into the world, to furnish them with gifts, Eph. 4. and must they for the work of Christ be nigh unto death Phil. 2.30. that Christians should onely have an empty knowledge of the truths pub∣lished? is it only speculation or me∣ditation that God aims at? 2. The necessity of meditati∣on appears in this, because with∣out it we can never be good Christians; a Christian without
meditation is like a soldier with∣out arms or a workman without tools. 1. Without Meditation the truths of God will not stay with us, the heart is hard and the memory slipery, and without meditation all is lost; meditation imprints and fastens a truth in the mind, it is like the Selvedge which keeps the cloath from ra∣velling. Serious Meditation is like the engraving of letters in gold or marble which endure. without this allour preaching to you is but like writing in sand, like pouring water into a sieve, like throwing a bur upon chry∣stal which glides off and doth not stay. Reading and hearing without Meditation is like weak Physick which will not work; want of Meditation hath made so many sermons in this age to have a miscarrying womb and dry brests.
2. Without Meditation the truths which we know will ne∣ver affect our hearts, Deut. 6.6. These words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart. How can the word be in the heart unless it be wrought in by Meditation? as an hammer drives a nail to the head, so Me∣ditation drives a truth to the heart. It is not the taking in of food but the stomacks con∣cocting it, which makes it turn to blood and spirits, so it is not the taking in of a truth at the ear but the Meditating of it (which is the concoction of it in the mind) makes it nourish. With∣out Meditation the word preached may encrease notion not affection. There is as much difference between the know∣ledge of a truth, and the medi∣tation of a truth, as there is be∣tween the light of a Torch and
the light of the Sun: set up a Lamp or Torch in the garden, and it hath no influence. The Sun hath a sweet influence, it makes the plants to grow, and the herbs to flourish: So know∣ledge is but like a Torch lighted in the understanding, which hath little or no influence, it makes not a man the better; but Meditation is like the shine∣ing of the Sun, it operates upon the affections, it warmes the heart, and makes it more holy. Meditation fetcheth life in a Truth. There are many truths ly, as it were, in the heart dead, which when we Meditate upon, they begin to have life and heat in them. Meditation of a Truth is like rubbing a man in a swoon, it fetcheth life. Tis meditation makes a Chri∣stian. 3. Without Meditation we
make our selves guilty of slight∣ing God and his word. If a man lets a thing lie by, and never mindes it, it is a sign he slights it: Gods Word is the book of life, not to medi∣tate in it, is to undervalue it. If a King puts forth an Edict or Proclamation, and the Sub∣jects never minde it, it is a slighting the Kings Authority. God puts forth his Law as a Royal Edict, if we do not Me∣ditate in it, it is a slighting his authority, and what doth this amount to lesse then a Con∣tempt done to the Divine Ma∣jesty.
CHAP. VIII. Shewing the reason why there are so few Good Christians. USE 1. IT gives us a true account why there are so few good Chri∣stians in the world, namely, Inform. be∣cause there are so few Medita∣ting Christians: we have many that have aures bibulas, they are swift to hear, but slow to medi∣tate. This duty is grown almost out of fashion, people are so much in the Shop, that they are seldom on the Mount with God. Where is the Meditating Christi∣an? Diogenes, in a full Market, was seeking up and down, and being ask'd what he sought for,
saith, hominem quaero. I seek for a man, that was to say, a wise man, a Philosopher; among the croud of Professors, I might search for a Christian, videl. A Meditating Christian. Where is he that Meditates on sin, hell, eternity, the recompense of re∣ward, That takes a prospect of heaven every day? where is the Meditating Christian? Tis to be bewail'd in our times that so many who go under the name of Professors, have banished good discourse from their Ta∣bles, and Meditation from their Closets. Surely, The hand of Joab is in this. The Devil is an Enemy to Meditation, he cares not how much people read and hear, nor how little they Meditate; He knowes that Meditation is a means to compose the heart and bring it into a gracious frame:
Now the Devil is against that, Satan is content that you should be hearing and praying Christi∣ans, so that ye be not Meditating Christians, he can stand your small shot, provided you do not put in this bullet. CHAP. IX. A Reproof to such as do not medi∣tate in Gods Law. Use 2. IT serves to reprove those who Meditate indeed, but not in the Law of God: Reproof They turn all their Meditations the wrong way; like a man that lets forth the water of his Mill which should grind his corn into the highway, whereit doth no good: So there are many who let out
their Meditations upon other fruitless things, which are no waies beneficial to their souls. 1. The Farmer Meditates on his acres of land not upon his soul: his Meditation is how he may improve a barren piece of ground, not how he may im∣prove a barren minde: he will not let his ground lie fallow, but he lets his heart lye fallow: There is no spiritual culture, not one seed of grace sown there. 2. The Physitian meditates upon his receits, but seldom on those receits which the Gospel prescribes for his salvation, Faith and Repentance. Com∣monly the Devil is Physitian to the Physitian, having given him such stupifying physick that for the most part he dies of a Lethargy. 3. The Lawyer meditates up∣on the common Law, but as for
Gods law he seldom Meditates in it either day or night: the lawyer while he is Meditating on his clients evidences often forgets his own; most of this Robe have their spiritual evi∣dences to seek, when they should have them to show. The trades-man is for the most part Meditating upon his wares and drugs: his study is how he may encrease his estate and make the ten talents an hundred. He is cumbred about many things; he doth not Meditate in the book of Gods law but in his account-book day and night. At the long run you will see these were fruitless Meditations, you will find that you are but golden beggars and have gotten but the fooles pur∣chase when you dye, Luke. 12.20. 5. There is another sort that Meditate onely upon mischief, who devise iniquity, Mic. 2.1. they
Meditate how to defame; and to defraud; James 8.5. they make the Epha small and the shekel great. The Epha was a measure used in buying, the shekel a weight used in selling, they know how to collude & sophisticate Christians who should support too often supplant one another; and how many Meditate revenge? tis sweet to them as dropping honey (as Homer speaks) Their hearts shall meditate terrour, Isaiah 33.18. the sinner is a fellon to himself and God will make him a terrour to himself. Jer. 20.4. CHAP. X. An holy perswasive to Meditation. USE. 3. I Am in the next place to ex∣hort Christians to this so ne∣cessary
duty of Meditation. If ever there were a duty I would press upon you with more earnestness & zeal, it should be this, because so much of the vitals and spirits of Religion lies in it. The plant may as well bear fruit without watering, the meat may as well nourish without digesting, as we can fructifie in holinesse without Meditation. God pro∣vides the meat, Ministers can but cook and dresse it for you, Meditation must make the con∣coction; for want of this you may cry out as the Prophet, Isa. 24.16. My leanness, my leanness, wo unto me. Oh let me perswade such as fear God, seriously to set upon this duty. If you have for∣merly neglected it, bewail your neglect, and now begin to make conscience of it: Lock up your selves with God (at least once a day) by holy Me∣ditation
Ascend this Hill, and when you are gotten to the top of it, you shall see a fair pro∣spect, Christ and heaven before you. Let me put you in minde of that sweet saying of Bernard, O sancta anima, fuge publi cum, fuge domesticos, an nescis te verecun∣dum habere sponsum, & qui nequa∣quam suam velit tibi indulgere praesentiam, praesentibus caeteris: Ber: serm. 40. in Can. O Saint knowest thou not that thy husband Christ is bashfull and will not be familiar in com∣pany? retire thy self by medita∣tion into the closet, or the field and there thou shalt have Christs embraces. Cant. 7.11, 12. Come my Beloved, let us go forth, into the field, there will I give thee my loves, O that I might invite Christians to this rare du∣ty. Why is it, that you do not Meditate in Gods Law? Let me expostulate the case with you: what is the Reason? My thinks I hear some say, we are indeed convinced of the necessity of the duty, but alas there are ma∣ny things that hinder. There are
two great objections lye in the way, I shall remove them, and then hope the better to per∣swade to this duty. CHAP. XI. The answering of Objections. Object. 1. I Have so much business in the world, that I have no time to Meditate. Answ. The World indeed is a great enemy to Meditation. 'Tis easie to lose ones purse in a croud, and in a croud of world∣ly employments, 'tis easy to lose all the thoughts of God. So long as the heart is an Exchange, I do not expect it should be a Temple; but to answer the ob∣jection. Hast thou so much bu∣siness that thou hast no time for
Meditation? as if Religion were but by the bye, a thing fit only for idle hours: What? no time to Meditate! What is the busi∣ness of thy life but Meditation? God never sent us into the world to get riches (I speak not against labour in a calling) but I say this is not the end of our coming hither. The errand God sent us into the world a∣bout is salvation, and that we may attain the end we must use the means, viz. Holy Meditation, Now hast thou no time to Medi∣tate? just as if a husband-man should say truly he hath so much business that he hath no time to plough or sow; why, what is his occupation but plow∣ing and sowing? what a madness is it to hear Christians say they have no time to Meditate? What is the business of their lives but Meditation? Oh take heed lest by
growing rich, you grow worth nothing at last. Take heed that God doth not sue out the Statute of Bankerupt against you, and you be disgraced be∣fore men and Angels: no time for Meditation? you shall ob∣serve that others in for∣mer ages have had as much busi∣ness as you, and publick affairs to look after, yet they were called upon to Meditate. Joshua 1.8. Thou shalt Meditate in this book of the Law. Joshua might have pleaded an excuse, he was a Souldier, a Commander, and the care of marshalling his ar∣my lay chiefly upon him, yet this must not take him off from Religion, Joshua must Meditate in the book of Gods law. God never intended, That the great business of Religion should give way to a shop or farm, or that a particular calling should ju∣stle
out the General. 2. Obj. But this duty of Me∣ditation is hard. To set time apart every day to get the heart into a Meditating frame is very difficult; Gerson reports of himself, that he was sometimes three or four houres before he could work his heart into a spiritual frame. Answ. Doth this hinder? To this I shall give a threefold Re∣ply. 1. The price that God hath set heaven at is labor; our salvation cost Christ bloud, it may well cost us sweat Plurimi mollitie quadam animi e fugiun sudorem quem stbi in pere quendâ fae∣licitate imaginantur, malunt brevi huius vitae curriculo suis indulgeeupinibus & a eam futurerum subive, quam lab∣rem susciper. & porteà vitam praestolari aeternam. Marcell. armamentarij scientis: lib. 2. The Kingdome of heaven suffers violence, Matth. 11, 12. It is as a garrison that holds out, and the duties of Re∣ligion, are the taking it by storm: a good Christian must
offer violence to himselfe, (though not self natural, yet self-sinful.) Self is nothing but the flesh, Gal. 5.17. as Basil, Hierom, Theo∣phylact, and Chrysostome, do all expound it. The flesh cries out for ease, 'tis a Libertine; Tis loath to take pains, loath to pray, to repent, loath to put its neck under Christs yoak, now a Christian must hate him∣self, no man ever yet hated his own flesh, Ephes. 5.29. yes, in this sence he must hate his ownflesh, The lusts of the flesh Rom. 8.13.. He must of∣fer violence to himself by mor∣tification and Meditation; say not it is hard to meditate, ? Chrysost. is it not harder to ly in Hell? 2. We do not argue so in o∣ther things: Riches are hard to
come by, therefore I will sit still and be without them; no difficul∣ty is the whet-stone of industry. How will men venture for gold, and shall we not spend and be spent for that which is more precious then the gold of Ophir? By Meditation we suck out the quintessense of a promise. 3. Though while we are first entring upon Meditation it may seem hard, yet when once we are entred it is sweet and plea∣sant. Christs yoak at the first putting on may seem heavy, but when once it is on it becoms easy. Tis not a yoak but a Crown. Lord (saith Austin) the more I Meditate on thee, the sweeter thou art to me Quanto magis in te meditor, tanto es mihi dulci∣or & ama∣bilior, de lectant me bona tùa, puro mentis intuitu, & dulcissime pii amoris affectu, Aug. Tom. 9.. According to that of holy David, My Medita∣tion of the shall be sweet, Psal. 104.34. The Poets say the top of O∣lympus was always quiet, and serene Olympi ca∣cumen sem∣per quie tum.: Tis hard climbing up
the rocky Hill of Meditation, but when we are got up to the top there is a pleasant prospect, and we shall sometimes think our selves even in heaven Contempla∣tionis plu∣ma nos sub∣levat, atue inde divinâ dulcedine ád coelum erigimur. Bonaven∣ture.. By holy Meditation the soul doth as it were breakfast with God every morning; and to be sure his breakfast is better then his din∣ner. When a Christian is upon the mount of Meditation he is like Peter on the mount when Christ was transfigured, Mat. 17. he cries out, bonum est esse hic, Lord, tis good to be here: he is loath to go down the mount again. If you come to him and tell him of a purchase, he thinks you bid him to his loss: what bidden man∣na doth the soul tast now? how sweet are the visits of Gods spi∣rit? when Christ was alone in the wilderness then the Angel came to comfort him; when the soul is alone in holy Meditati∣ons
and ejaculations, then not an angel but Gods own spirit doth come to comfort him: a Christian that meets with God in the mount would not exchange his hours of Meditation for the most orient pearls or sparkling beau∣ties that the world can afford. No wonder David spent the whole day in Meditation Homo me∣ditabun∣dus. Psa. 119.97. Nay as if the day had been too little, he borrows a part of the night too, Psalm. 63.6. when I remember thee upon my bed, and Meditate on thee in the night∣watches. When others were sleeping, David was Meditating. He who is given much to Medi∣tation shall with Sampson find an honey comb in this duty. there∣fore let not the difficulty discou∣rage Virtus maximè nitet in ar∣duo.. The pleasantness will infinitely countervail the pains. Having removed these two objections out of the way,
let me again revive the ex∣hortation to Meditate in Gods law day and night. And there are two sorts of Meditation which I would perswade to. CHAP. XII. Concerning occasional Meditati∣ons. 1. OCcasional and 2 deliberate 1. Ocasional Meditations, such as are taken up upon any sudden occasion. There is nothing al∣most doth occur, but we may presently raise some Meditati∣on upon: as a good Herbalist doth extract the Spirits and quintessence out of every herb, so a Christian may from every emergence and occurence ex∣tract matter of Meditation. A
gracious heart like fire, turns all objects into fuel for Medita∣tion. I shall give you some in∣stances: When you look up to the heavens, and see them richly imbroidered with light, you may raise this Meditation, if the Footstool be so glorious, what is the Throne where God himself sits? When you see the Firmament bespangled with Stars, think, what is Christ, The Bright Morning Star? Reve∣lation 22.16. Monica, Austins mother, standing one day, and seeing the Sun shine, raised this Meditation, Oh! If the sun be so bright, what is the Light of Gods presence? When you hear musick that Delights the sences, presently raise this Meditation, What musick like a good con∣science . Ignoepist. ad Philadelph.? This is avis paradist,
the bird of Paradise within, whose chirping melody doth inchant and ravish the soul with joy; he that hath this musick all day, may take Davids Pil∣low at night and say, with that sweet singer, I will lay me down in peace and sleep, Psal. 4. 8. How blessed is he that can finde hea∣ven in his own bosom? When you are dressing your selves in the morning, awaken your Me∣ditation, think thus, but have I been dressing the hidden man of the heart 1 Pet. 3.4.? Have I looked my face in the Glass of Gods word? I have put on my cloaths, but have I put on Christ? It is re∣ported of Pambo, that seeing a Gentlewoman dressing her self all the morning by her Glasse, he fell a weeping: O, saith he, this woman hath spent the mor∣ning in dressing her body, and I sometimes spend scarce an hour
in dressing my soul. When you sit down to dinner, let your Me∣ditation feed upon this first course, how blessed are they that shall eat bread in the King∣dom of God Lu. 14.15? What a Royall Feast will that be which hath God for the Founder? What a Love-feast where none shall be admitted but Friends? When you go to bed at night, Dic dor∣mituro po∣tes non ex pergisci amplius, di exper∣recto, potes non dormi re amplius, Sen. imagine thus, shortly I shall put off the earthly clothes of my body, and make my bed in the grave: when you see the Judge going to the Assizes, and hear the Trumpet blow, think with your selves (as Hierom did) That you are still hearing that shrill Trumpet sounding in your ears, Surgite mortui, Arise ye dead and come to judgment. When you see a poor man going in the Streets, raise this Meditation, here is a walking Picture of
Christ, He had no place where to lay his head Mat. 8.20.. My Saviour be∣came poor, that I through his poverty might be made rich: When you go to Church, think thus, I am now going to hear God speak, let me not stop my ear; if I refuse to hear Him speaking in his Word, I shall next hear him speaking in his Wrath, Psalm 2.5. When you walk abroad in your Orchard, and see the plants bearing, and the herbs flourishing, Think how pleasing a sight it is to God to see a thriving Christi∣an; how beautifull are the Trees of righteousness, when they are hung full of fruit Phil. 1.11., when they abound in faith, hu∣mility, knowledge. When you pluck a Rose bud in your Gar∣den, raise this contemplation, how lovely are the early put∣tings forth of grace; God pri∣zeth
a Christian in the bud, he likes the bloomings of youth rather then the sheddings of old age. When you eat a Grape from the Tree, think of Christ the True Vine, how precious is the bloud of that Grape? Such rare clusters grow there, that the Angels themselves delight to taste of. It is said of Austin, he was much in these ex tempore Meditations; A gracious heart like the Philosophers Stone, turns all into Gold; It is all the year stilling-time with a Chri∣stian, he stilleth out heavenly Meditations from earthly Oc∣currences, as the curious Al∣chymist when several mettals are mingled together, can by his skill extract the Gold and Silver from the baser mettals: So a Christian by a Divine Alchymy, can extract golden Meditations from the various objects he be∣holds;
Indeed it argues a spi∣rituall heart, to turn every thing to a spiritual use, and we have Christs own example for these occasional Meditations, John 4.7, 10, 13, 14. While he sat on Jacohs well he present∣ly Meditates on that  and breaks forth into a most excellent discourse con∣cerning the Water of life. So much for occasional Meditati∣ons. 2. Be exhorted to deliberate Meditations, which are the chief: set some time apart eve∣ry day, that you may in a se∣rious and solemn manner con∣verse with God in the mount; A Godly man, is a man set apart, Psalm 4.3. as God sets him apart by Election, so he sets himself apart by Meditation.
CHAP. XIII. For the Right Timing of Medita∣tion. Quest. 1. WHat is the fit∣test time for meditation? Answ. For the timing of it, it is hard to prescribe, because of mens various callings and im∣ployments. But if I may freely speak my thoughts, the morn∣ing is the fittest time for Medi∣tation. The best time to con∣verse with God is, when we may be most private, that is, before worldly occasions stand knock∣ing as so many Suiters at the door to be let in: the morning is, as it were the cream of the day, let the cream be taken off
and let God have it. In the stil∣ling of strong water, the first water that is drawn from the Still is more full of spirits, the second drawing is weaker; So the first Meditations, that are still'd from the minde in a mor∣ning, are the best, and we shall find them to be most full of life, and spirits. The morning is the Golden hour. God loved the first fruits, Exod. 23.19. The first of the first-fruits thou shalt bring into the house of the Lord. Let God have the first-fruits of the day; the first of our thoughts must be set abroach for heaven. The student takes the morning for his study Aurora musis ami∣ca.. The Usurer gets up in the mor∣ning, and looks over his books of account; a Christian must begin with God in the morn∣ing. David was with God be∣fore break of day, Psalm 119.147.
I prevented the dawning of the morning. Quest. 2. But why the morn∣ing for Meditation? Answer 1. Because in the morning the mind is fittest for holy duties. A Christian is most himself then; What weary devo∣tion will there be at night when a man is even tired out with the business of the day. He will be fitter to sleep then to meditate. The morning is the queen of the day, then the fancy is quickest, the memory strongest, the spi∣rits freshest, the organ of the bo∣dy most disposed, having had its recruits by sleep. Tis a sure rule, then is the best time to serve God when we find our selves most in tune. In the morn∣ing the heart is like a viol strung and put in tune, and then it makes the sweetest melo∣dy.
The morning thoughts stay longest with us the day after, the wool takes the first die best, and it is not easily worn out. When the mind receivs the im∣pression of good thoughts in the morning, it holds this sacred dye the better, and like a co∣lour in grain, it will not easily be lost. The heart keeps the Relish of morning meditations, as a vessel that receives a Tin∣cture & savor of the Wine that is first put into it Quo semel est imouta recens ser∣vabit ode∣rem testa diu.; Or as a Chest of sweet Linnen, That keeps the sent a great while af∣ter. Perfume thy minde with heavenly Thoughts in the Mor∣ning, and it will not lose its spiritual fragrancy; Wind up thy heart towards heaven in the beginning of the day, and it will go the better all the day after: It is with receiving thoughts into the minde as it is
with receiving Guests into an Inn, the first Guests that come fill the best rooms in the house, if others come after, worse rooms will serve them; So when the mind entertains holy Meditati∣ons for its morning-Guests, if afterwards earthly thoughts come, they are put into some of the worst rooms, they lodge lowest in the affections. The best roomes are taken up in the Morning for Christ. He that loseth his heart in the morn∣ing in the world, will hardly finde it again all the day after. 3. It is a part of that solemn Respect and Honour we give to God, to let him have Aurorae fi∣lium, the first thoughts of the day; we give persons of qua∣lity the precedency, we let them take the first place. If we honour God (whose Name is Reverend and Holy) we will
let the thoughts of God take place of all other. When the World hath the first of our thoughts, 'tis a sign the world lies uppermost, we love it most. The first thing a covetous man meditates on in the morning is dea pecunia, his money; a sign his Gold lies nearest to his heart. Oh Christians let God have your morning Meditati∣ons. He takes it in disdain to have the world served before him. Suppose a King, and a Yeoman were to dine in the same room, and to sit at two Tables, if the Yeoman should have his meat brought up, & be served first, the King might well take it in an high Disdain, and look upon it as a contempt done to his person. When the world shall be served first, all our morning thoughts attending it, and the Lord shall be put off
with the Dreggs of the day, when our thoughts begin to run low, is not this a contempt done to the God of Glory? 4. Equity requires it, God deservs the first of our thoughts, some of his first thoughts were upon us, we had a being in his thoughts before we had a being, he thought upon us , Ephes. 1, 4. Before the foundations of the World. Before we fell, he was thinking how to raise us. We had the morning of his thoughts; Oh what thoughts of Free grace, What thoughts of Peace hath he had towards us! We have taken up his thoughts from eternity: If we have had some of Gods first thoughts, well may he have our first thoughts. 5. This is to imitate the Pat∣tern of the Saints. Job rose ear∣ly in the morning, and offered,
Job 1.5. David when he awaked was with God, Psalm 139.17. and indeed this is the way to have a morning blessing. In the morning the dew fell, Exod. 16.13. The dew of a blessing falls ear∣ly; now we are likeliest to have Gods company. If you would meet with a friend, you go be∣times in the morning before he be gone out. We read that the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles, Acts 2.3, 4. and it was in the morning, as may be gathered from Peters Sermon, verse 15. 'twas but the third hour of the day; the morning is the time for fruitfulness, In the mor∣ning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish, Isaiah 17.11. by mor∣ning Meditation, we make the seed of grace to flourish. I would not by this wholly exclude evening Meditation. Isaac went out to meditate in the
Eventide, Gen. 24.63. When busi∣ness is over, & every thing calm, it is good to take a turn with God in the Evening. God had his Evening Sacrifice, as well as his Morning, Exod. 29.39. as the cream in the top is sweet, so the Sugar at bottom; in two cases, the Evening Meditation doth well. 1. In case such hath been the urgency of business that thou hast time onely for reading and prayer; then recompense the want of the morning with eve∣ning Meditation. 2. In case thou findest thy self more inclineable to Good thoughts in the evening, (for sometimes there is a greater im∣petus upon the heart, a greater aptitude and tuneableness of minde) dare not neglect Medi∣tation at such a time: who knowes but it may be a quench∣ing
the spirit; do not drive this blessed Dove from the Ark of thy Soul; in these cases evening Meditation is seasonable; but I say, if I may cast in my verdict, the morning is to be preferred; as the flowr of the Sun opens in the morning to take in the sweet beams of the Sun, so open thy soul in the morning to take in the sweet thoughts of God. And so much for the timing of Meditation. CHAP. XIV. How long Christians should be con∣versant with this duty. Quest  2. BƲt how long should I meditate? Answ. For the quamdiu, the how long, if we consider how
many houres the world hath, it is hard if we cannot give God at least one hour every day. I shall only say this for a general rule, Meditate so long till thou findest thy heart grow warm in this duty. If when a man is cold, you ask, how long he should stand by the fire? Sure, till he be throughly warm, and made fit for his work. So, Chri∣stian, thy heart is cold, never a day, (no not the hottest day in summer) but it freezeth there; now stand at the fire of Medita∣tion till thou findest thy affecti∣ons warmed, and thou art made more fit for spiritual service. David mused till his heart waxed hot within him, Psalm 39.3. I will conclude this with that ex∣cellent saying of Bernard, Domine nunquam a te absque te recedam. Bern. Lord, I will never come away from thee without thee. Let this be a Chri∣stians Resolution not to leave
his Meditations of God till he finde something of God in him; some moving of bowels after God, Cant. 5.4. Some flamings of love, Cant. 6.8. CHAP. XV. Concerning the usefulness of medi∣tation. HAving answered these que∣stions, I shall next shew the benefit and usefulness of Meditation. I know not any duty that brings in greater income and revenue then this. 'Tis repor∣ted of Thales, that he left the affairs of State to become a con∣templating Philosopher Diog. in vi∣tâ Thal.. Oh did we know the advantage which comes by this duty, we
would often retire from the noise and hurry of the World, that we might give our selves to Meditation. The benefit of Meditation ap∣pears in seven particulars. 1. Meditation is an excellent means to profit by the word: reading may bring a truth into the head, meditation brings it into the heart; better meditate on one Sermon than hear five; I observe many put up their Bills in our Congregations, and complain that they cannot profit, may not this be the chief reason, because they chew not the cud, they do not meditate on what they have heard. If an An∣gel should come from heaven, and preach to men, nay if Jesus Christ himself were their Prea∣cher, they would never profit without meditation. 'Tis the set∣ling of the milk that makes it
turn to cream; & it is the setling of a truth in the mind, that makes it turn to spiritual ali∣ment: the Bee sucks the flow∣er, and then workes it in the Hive, and makes honey of it. The hearing of a truth preach∣ed is the sucking of a flower, there must be aworking it in the Hive of the heart by meditati∣on, then it turnes to Honey. There is a disease in children called the Rickets, when they have great heads, but their lo∣wer parts are small, and thrive not. I wish many of the Professors in London, have not the spiritual Rickets, they have great heads, much knowledge, but yet they thrive not in god∣liness, their heart is faint, their feet feeble, they walk not vigo∣rously in the waies of God, and the cause of this disease is, the want of meditation. Illumina∣tion
without meditation makes us no better then Divels. Satan is an Angel of light yet black e∣nough. 2. Meditation doth make the heart serious and then it is ever best, Meditation doth bal∣last the heart; when the ship is ballasted it is not so soon over∣turned by the wind, and when the heart is ballasted with Medi∣tation it is not so soon overturn∣ed with vanity. Some Christians have light hearts, Zeph. 3.4. his Prophets are light. A light Chri∣stian will be blown into any o∣pinion or vice, you may blow a feather any way: there are many feathery Christians, the di∣vel no sooner comes with a temptation but they are ready to take fire; now meditation makes the heart serious, and God saith of a serious, Christian as David of Goliahs sword, there is
none like that, give it me. Meditati∣on consolidates a Christian; solid gold is best; the solid Christian is the only metal that will pass cur∣rant with God. The more serious the heart grows, the more spiri∣tual, and the more spiritual the more it resembles the Father of Spirits. When a man is serious he is fittest for imployment. The se∣rious Christian is fittest for ser∣vice, and it is meditation brings the heart into this blessed frame. 3. Meditation is the bellows of the affections, meditation hatcheth good affections, as the hen her young ones by sitting on them; we light affection at this fire of meditation, while I was musing the fire burned, Psalm. 39.3. David was meditating of mor∣tality, and see how his heart was affected with it verse. 4. Lord make me to know mine end and the me asure of my days, what it is,
that I may know how frail I am. The reason our affections are so chill and cold in spiritual things is, because we doe warm our selves no more at the fire of me∣ditation. Illumination makes us shining lamps, meditation makes us burning lamps. What is it to know Christ by speculation and not by affection? It is the pro∣per work of meditation to ex∣cite and blow up holy passions. What sparklings of love in such a soul! When David had medi∣tated on Gods law, he could not chuse but love it, Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy law it is my medi∣tation all the day. When the spouse had by meditation view∣ed those singular beauties in her beloved, white and ruddy Cant. 5. she grew sick of love vers. 8. Ga∣leatius Caraccialus, that famous Marquess of Vico, who had been much in the contemplation of
Christ, breaks out into a holy Pa∣thos, let their mony perish with them who esteem all the gold in the world worth one hours communion with Jesus Christ! 4. Meditation fits for holy du∣ties. The musician first put his instrument in tune and then he plaies a lesson; meditation tunes the heart, and then it is fit for any holy service: as the sails to the Ship, so is meditation to du∣ty, it carries on the soul more swiftly. 1. Meditation fits for Hear∣ing, when the ground is softned then it is fit for the plough and the seed: when the heart is softned by meditation, now is a fit time for the seed of the word to be sown. 2. Meditation fits for Prayer, Prayer is Spiritualis pulsus, the spiritual pulse of the soul, by which it beats strongly after
God. There is no living with∣out prayer; a man cannot live unless he takes breath, no more can the Soul unless it breathes out its desires to God. Prayer Ʋshers in mercy, and prayer sanctifies mercy; 1 Tim. 4.5.; it makes mer∣cy to be mercy: prayer hath power over God, vincit invin∣cibilem Luther.. Hosea 12.4. Prayer comes with Letters of manda∣mus to heaven, Isa. 45.11. Pray∣er is the spiritual Leech, that sucks the poison of sinne out of the soul. What a blessed (shall I say duty or) privilege, is prayer! Meditatio nutrix ora tionis. Ger∣son. Now meditation is an help to prayer: Gerson calls it the nurse of Prayer. Meditation is like oyl to the lamp; the lamp of prayer will soon go out unless meditation cherish and support it: meditation and prayer are like two Turtles, if you separate one, the other dies;
A cunning angler observes the time and season when the fish bite best, and then he throws in his angle: When the heart is warmed by meditation, now is the best season to throw in the angle of prayer, and fish for mercy. After Isaac had been in the field meditating, he was fit for prayer when he came home. When the Gun is full of pow∣der, it is fittest to discharge. So when the minde is full of good thoughts, a Christian is fittest by prayer to discharge, now he sends up whole volleys of sighs and groans to heaven. Medita∣tion hath a double benefit in it, it powres in, and poures out; first it poures good thoughts in∣to the mind, and then it poures out those thoughts again in prayer; meditation first furni∣sheth with matter to pray, and then it furnisheth with a heart
to pray, Psalm 39.3. I was mu∣sing (saith David;) and the ve∣ry next words are a prayer, Lord make me to know my end; Hinc utili∣tas medita∣tionis con∣spicitur quia ani∣mum Davi∣dis ad pre candi stu∣dium erex∣it. Calvin. and Psalm 143.5, 6. I muse on the works of thy hands, I stretch forth my hands to thee; the musing of his head, made way for the stretching forth of his hands in prayer. When Christ was upon the mount then he prayed: So when the Soul is upon the mount of meditation, now it is in tune for Prayer; Prayer is the Child of meditation: medi∣tation leads the van, and pray∣er brings up the Rear. 3. Meditation fits for Humi∣liation. When David had been contemplating the Works of Creation, their splendor, har∣mony, motion, influence, he let the plumes of pride fall, and begins to have Self-abasing thoughts, Psalm 8.3, 4. When I
consider the Heavens, the Work of thy fingers, the moon and Starres which thou hast ordained, What is man that thou art mindfull of him? 5. Meditation is a strong an∣tidote against sinne; most sin is committed for want of medita∣tion: men sin through incogi∣tancy, and passion Omnis pas∣sio inclinat cum impe∣tu. Tho. Quest. 155. art. 2.; would they be so brutishly sensual as they are, if they did seriously medi∣tate what sin is? Would they take this viper in their hand, if they did but consider before of the sting? Sin puts a worm in to conscience, a sting into death, a fire into hell; did men medi∣tate of this, that after all their dainty dishes, death will bring in the Reckoning, and they must pay the Reckoning in Hell, they would say as David in another sence, Let me not eat of their dainties, Psalm 141.4.
The Devils apple hath a bitter kore in it. Did men think of this, sure it would put them in∣to a cold sweat, and be as the Angels drawn sword to affright them. Judg. 22.23. Meditation is a golden Shield to beat back sin. When Josephs mistress tempted him to wickedness, meditation did pre∣serve him, How shall I do this E∣vil, and sinne against God? Me∣ditation makes the heart like wet tinder, it will not take the Devils fire. 6. Meditation is a cure of Covetousness. The covetous man is called an Idolater, Col. 3.5. Though he will not bow down to an Idol, yet he wor∣ships graven images in his coyn. Now meditation is an excellent means to lessen our esteem of the World. Great things seem little to him that stands high, if we could live among the stars,
the earth would seem as no∣thing. A Christian that stands high upon the pinacle of medi∣tation, how do all worldly things disappear, and seem as nothing to him; he sees not that in them which men of the world do. He is gotten into his Tower, and Heaven is his Prospect. What is said of God He dwells on high, he humbleth himself to behold the things done on the earth, Psal. 113.6. I may al∣lude to with reverence, The Christian that dwelleth on high by meditation accounts it an humbling and abasing of himself to look down upon the earth, & behold the things done in this lower Region. Saint Paul, whose meditations were sublime and seraphical, looked at things, , which were not seen, 2 Cor. 4. ult. How did he trample upon the World,
how did he scorn it? I am crucifl∣ed to the world, Gal. 6.14. As if he had said it is too much below me to mind it. He who is catch∣ing at a crown will not fish for gudgeons, as Clopatra, once said to Mark Anthony. A Christian that is elevated by holy meditation, will not set his heart there where his feet should be, upon the earth. 7. Holy meditation banisheth vain and sinful thoughts it purg∣eth the Phancy Chrysost.. How long shall vain thoughts lodg within thee? Jer. 4.14. The mind is the shop or work house where sin is first fra∣med. Sin begins at the thoughts. The thoughts are the first plot∣ters and contrivers of evil. The mind & fancy is a stage where sin is first acted; the malicious man acts over sin in his thoughts, he contemplates revenge. The im∣pure person acts over concupi∣cence
in his thoughts, he con∣templates lust. The Lord humble us for our contemplative wicked∣ness. Pr. 30.32. If thou hast thought evil lay thy hand upon thy mouth. How much sin do men commit in the chamber of their imagi∣nation? now meditating in Gods law would be a good means to banish these sinful thoughts. If David had carried the book of the law about him and meditated in it, he had not looked on Bath∣sheba with a lascivious eye, 2. Sam. 11.2. Holy meditation would have quenched that wild-fire of lust. The word of God is pure, Psalm. 119.140. not one∣ly subjective but effective. Tis not onely pure in it self, but it makes them pure that meditate in it. Christ whip't the buyers and sellers out of the temple. John. 2.15. Holy meditation would whip out idle and vagrant thoughts
and not suffer them to lodg in the mind: what is the reason the Angels in heaven have not a vain thought? they have a sight of God, their eye is never off him. If the eye of the soul were fixed on God by meditation, how would vain impure thoughts va∣nish? As when that woman Judg. 9.52. was in the tower and Abi∣melek came near to the tower to have entered, she threw a mil∣stone out of the tower upon him and killed him: so when we are gotten into the high tower of meditation, and sinful thoughts would come near to enter, we may from this tower throw a milstone upon them and destroy them. And thus you have seen the benefit of meditation.
CHAP. XVI. Setting forth the excellency of me∣ditation. ARistotle placeth Felicity in the contemplation of the mind. Meditation is highly com∣mended by Austin, Chrysostome, Cyprian, as the nursery of piety. Hi∣erom calls it his Paradise Dixit Hie∣ronimus oppida & urbes videri sibi tetros carceres so∣litudinem Paradisum Epist. 72. with what words shall I set it forth? other duties have done excel∣lently, but Thou excellest them all. Meditation is a friend to the gra∣ces, it helps to water the plan∣tation. I may call it in Basils ex∣pression , Basil. the trea∣sury where all the graces are locked up. And with Theophylact, the very gate & portal by which we enter into glory. By medita∣tion
the Spirits are raised, . and heightned, to a kind of angeli∣cal frame; meditation doth sweetly anticipate happiness, it puts us in heaven before our time. Meditation brings God and the Soul together, 1 Joh. 3.2. Meditation is the Saints per∣spective Glass, by which they see things invisible. It is the gol∣den ladder by which they a∣scend Paradise, it is the spy they send abroad to serch the land of promise, & it brings a bunch of grapes with it; it is the dove they send out, and it brings an Olive branchof peace in its mouth; but who can tell how sweet hony is, save they that tast it? The excel∣lency of meditation I leave to experienced Christians, who will say, the comfort of it may be better felt then expressed. To excite all to this Pancre∣ston, to this so useful, excellent
(I had almost said Angelical) du∣ty, let me lay down some divine motives to meditation; and how glad should I be, if I might re∣vive this duty among Christi∣ans. CHAP. XVII. Containing divine motives to me∣ditation. MEditation doth discrimi∣nate and characterize a man; by this he may take a mea∣sure of his heart, whether it be good or bad; let me allude to that Prov. 23.7. for as he thinketh in his heart, so is he; as the me∣ditation is, such is the man. Me∣ditation is the Touchstone of a Christian, it shews what mettle he is made of. It is a Spiritual Index; the Index shows what is
in the book: so meditation shows what is in the heart. If all a mans meditations are how he may get power against sin, how he may grow in grace, how he may have more communion with God. This shows what is in his heart, the frame of his heart is spiritual; by the beating of this pulse, judge of the health of thy soul. 'Tis made the character of a godly man, he fears God, and thinks of his Name, Mal. 3.17. Where∣as if the thoughts are taken up with pride, and lust, as are the Thoughts such is the heart; Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, Isa. 59.7. When vain sinfull thoughts come, men make much of them, they make room for them, they shall diet and lodge with them; if a good thought chance to come into their minde, it is soon turned out of
doors, as an unwelcome Guest; What need we further witness? This argues much unsoundness of heart; let this provoke to holy meditation. The thoughts of God, as they bring delight with them, so they leave peace behind: those are the best houres which are spent with God. Conscience, as the Bee, gives honey; it will not grieve us when we come to dye, that we have spent our time in holy Soliloquies and e∣jaculations. But what horror will the sinner have when he shall ask Conscience the questi∣on as Joram did Jehu 2 Kings 9.22., is it peace Conscience, is it peace? and con∣science shall say as Jehu, What peace as long as the Whoredomes of thy mother Jezabel, and her Witch∣crafts are so many? O how sad will it be with a man at such a time? Christians, as you ten∣der
your peace, meditate in Gods Law day and night. This duty of meditation, be∣ing neglected, the heart will run wilde, it will not be a vineyard, but a Wilderness *. Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris. Meditation keeps the heart in a good decorum. It plucks up the weeds of sin, Plantae no∣biliores sine cultu, silues∣cunt Al∣bertus, Magnus. it prunes the luxuriant branches, it waters the flowers of grace, it sweeps all the walks in the heart, that Christ may walk there with de∣light. For want of holy medita∣tion the heart lies like the slug∣gards field, Prov. 24.31. all o∣vergrown with thorns and briars, unclean earthly thoughts. It is rather the divels hogsty, then Christs garden. Tis like a house fallen to ruine, fit onely for un∣clean spirits to inhabit. The fruitlessness of all other
meditations; one man laies out his thoughts about laying up; his meditations are how to raise himself in the world, and when he hath arrived at an estate of∣ten God blows upon it Hag. 1.9.. His care is for his child, and per∣haps God takes it away, or if it lives it proves a cross. Another meditates how to satisfy his am∣bition, Honour me before the peo∣ple, 1 Sam. 15.30. alas, what is honour but a meteor in the aire; a torch lighted by the breath of people Honor ui∣hi solidi est, sed res imaginaria hominum arbitrio positae. M∣cel. with the least puff blown out; how many live to see their names buried before them Miseram est alinram incumbee famae Sa∣tyr.? When this Sun is in the meridian, it doth soon set in a cloud. Et stult us labor est ineptiarum — Martial. Thus fruitless are those me∣ditations which do not center upon God. 'Tis but portare pul∣verem
contra ventum, as Hierome speaks. But especially at death, then a man sees all those thoughts, which were not spent upon God to be fruitless, Psalm 146.4. In that very day his thoughts perish. I may allude to it in this sence; all worldly, vain thoughts, in that day of death perish, and come to no∣thing: What good will the whole globe of the world do at such a time? Those who have ravelled out their thoughts in impertinencies will but be the more disquieted, it will cut them to the heart to think how they have spun a fools thread. A Scythian Captain, having for a Draught of water, yielded up the City, cryed out, quid per∣didi, quid prodidi? What have I lost? What have I betrayed? So will it be with that man, when he comes to dye, who hath spent
all his meditations upon the world, he will say, what have I lost, what have I betrayed? I have lost heaven, I have betray∣ed my soul. And should not the consideration of this fix our minds upon the thoughts of God and glory? All other medi∣tations are fruitless; like a piece of ground which hath much cost laid out upon it but it yields no crop. Holy meditation is not lost. God hath a pen to write down all our good thoughts. Mal. 3.5. a book of remembrance was written for them that thought upon his name. As God hath all our members, so all our meditations written in his book. God pens our closet devotion. The sixth motive is in the text viz. the blessednesse affixed to the meditating Christian, Bles∣sed is the man, &c. verse 1. say
not it is hard to meditate. What think you of blessednes? . Theodor. in Psa. 1. Lycurgus could draw the Lacedemonians to any thing by rewards; If men can meditate with delight on that which will make them cur∣sed, shal not we meditate on that which will make us blessed nay in the hebrew tis in the plural  blessednesses; we shall have one blessedness upon another. Lastly, delightful meditation in Gods law, is the best way for a man to prosper in his estate, Iosh. 1.8. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth but thou shalt meditate therein, for then thou shalt make thy way pro∣sperous. I leave this to their con∣sideration who are desirous to thrive in the world; and let this serve for motive to meditati∣on. The next thing remaining is to lay down some rules about meditation.
CHAP. XVIII. Prescribing rules about meditation. SECT. I. WHen thou goest to medi∣tate be very serious in the work. Let there be a deep im∣pression upon thy soul, and that thou mayest be serious in medi∣tation do these two things: 1. get thy self into a posture of holy re∣verence. Overaw thy heart with the thoughts of God and the in∣comprehensibleness of his maje∣sty. When thou art at the work of meditation remēber thou art now to deal with God. If an An∣gel from heaven did appoint to meet thee at such an hour,
wouldest thou not address thy self with all seriousness and solemness to meet him? Behold a greater then an angel is here. The God of glory is present. He hath an eye upon thee, he sees the carriage of thy heart when thou art alone. Think with thy self (O Christian) when thou art going to meditate, thou art now to deal with him in private be∣fore whom the Angels adore, and the Divels tremble. Think with thy self thou art now in his pre∣sence before whom thou must shortly stand and all the world with thee to receive their doom. Thou must be remo∣ved and how soon thou knowest not, from the closet to the tri∣bunal. 2. That thy heart may be se∣rious in meditation labour to possess thy thoughts with the solemnity and greatness of the
work thou art now going a∣bout. As David said concerning his building a house for God, the work is great, 1 Chron. 29.1. so it may be said of meditation, the work is great and we had need gather and rally together all the powers of the soul to the work. If thou wert to set about a business wherein thy life were concerned, how serious would∣est thou be in the thoughts of it: in the business of meditation thy soul is concerned; eternity de∣pends upon it; if thou neglectest or art slight in it thou runnest an hazzard of thy salvation. If Archimedes was so serious in drawing his mathematical line, that he minded not the sacking of the city, O how serious should a Christian be when he is draw∣ing a line for eternity. When thou art going to meditate thou art going about the
greatest work in the world. SECT II. 2. Read before you meditate, Josh. 1.8. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth but thou shalt meditate in it. The law must be in Joshuas mouth. He was first to read and then meditate. Give attendance to reading. 1. Tim. 4.13. Then it follows, meditate on these things verse. 15. reading doth furnish with matter Lectio pri∣mò occurrit, et data ma∣teria mittit nos ad me∣ditationem. Bernard.. it is the oyl that feeds the lamp of meditation. reading helps to rectifie medita∣tion. Austin saith well, that me∣ditation without reading will be erroneous Meditatio sine lectio∣ne erro∣nea. Aug.. naturally the mind is defiled as well as the con∣science. Titus. 1.15. the mind will be minting thoughts, and how many untruths doth it mint? Therefore first read in the book of the law and then meditate;
be sure your meditations be grounded upon Scripture. There is a strange Ʋtopia in the fancies of some men, they take those for true principles which are false, and if they mistake their principles they must needs be wrong in their meditations. He that is of the Saduces opinion that there is no resurrection, he mistakes a principle. Now while he is meditating on this he is at last carried to direct atheism. He that is of the Antinomians o∣pinion that there is no law to a justified person, mistakes a prin∣ciple, and while he is medita∣ting on this he at last falls into scandal. Thus the mind having laid in wrong principles, and ta∣king that for a truth which is not, the meditation must needs be erroneous, and a man at last goes to hell upon a mistake; Therefore be sure you read be∣fore
you meditate, that you may say, it is written. Meditate on nothing but what you believe to be a truth, believe nothing to be a truth, but what can shew its Letters of credence from the Word; observe this rule, let reading usher in meditation: Reading without meditation is unfruitful, Meditation without reading is dangerous. SECT. III. 3. DO not multiply the subject of meditation; that is, medi∣tate not on too many things at once; like the bird that hops from one bough to another, and staies no where, single out ra∣ther some one head at a time, which you will meditate upon. Pluribus intentus minor est ad sin∣gula sensus. Too much variety
distracts Varietas distrabit animum. Sen. One truth driven home by meditation will most kindly affect the heart; a man that is to shoot, sets up one mark, That he aims at, to hit. When thou art to shoot thy minde above the world by me∣ditation, set one thing before thee to hit; if thou art to me∣ditate on the passion of Christ, let that take up all thy thoughts; If upon death, con∣fine thy thoughts to that: One subject at a time is enough. Mar∣tha while she was cumbred a∣bout many things, neglected the One thing; so while our medita∣tions are taken up about many things, we lose that One Thing which should affect our hearts, and do us more good Claou claum pellit.. Drive but one wedge of Meditation at a time, but be sure you drive it home to the heart. Those who aim at a whole flock of birds hit
none; Several Medicines appli∣ed together, the one hinders the virtue of the other, whereas a single medicine might do good. SECT. IV. To Meditation join Examinati∣on. When you have been me∣ditating on any spirituall sub∣ject, put a query to thy soul, and though it be short let it be serious. O my soul, is it thus with thee or no? when thou hast been meditating about the fear of God, that it is the beginning of Wisdome Prov. 1.7., Put a query, O my soul, Is this fear planted in thy heart? Thou art almost come to the end of thy daies, Art thou yet come to the begin∣ning of Wisdom? When thou hast been meditating on Christ, his Virtues, his Privileges; put
a query, O my soul, Dost thou love him who is so Lovely Cant. 5. ult., and art thou ingrafted into him? Art thou a living branch of this living vine? When thou hast been meditating upon the Gra∣ces of the Spirit; put a query, O my soul, art thou adorned, as the Bride of Christ with this chain of Pearl? Hast thou thy Certificate for heaven ready? Will not thy Graces be to seek when thou shouldst have them to shew? Thus should a Christi∣an, in his retirements, parly of∣ten with his heart. For want of this Examination Meditation doth evaporate, and come to nothing. For want of Examination joined with Medi∣tation, many are strangers to their own hearts; though they live known to others, they dye unknown to themselves. Medi∣tation is like a perspective glass
by which we contemplate hea∣venly objects, but Self-exami∣nation is like a looking glass, by which we see into our own souls and can judge how it is with us. Meditation joined with Exami∣nation is like the Sun on the Dial, which shews how the day goes, it shews us how our hearts stand affected to Spiritual Things. SECT. V. Shut up meditation with prayer Oratio sine meditatione tepida; me∣ditatio sine ratione in∣frugifera. Bern. de scala clau∣strali.; Pray over your me∣ditations. Prayer sanctifies eve∣ry thing; without prayer they are but unhallowed meditati∣ons; Prayer fastens meditation upon the Soul; Prayer is a tying a knot at the end of meditation that it doth not slip; Pray that God will keep those holy medi∣tations
in your mind for ever, that the savour of them may a∣bide upon your hearts, 1 Chron. 29.18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imaginati∣on of the thoughts of thy people. So let us pray, that when we have been musing of heavenly things, and our hearts have wa∣xed hot within us*, we may not cool into a sinful tepidness and lukewarmness, but that our af∣fections may be as the lamp of the Sanctuary alwaies burn∣ing. SECT. VI. The last Rule is, Let me∣ditation be reduced to practise; live over your Meditation, Josh. 1.8. Thou shalt Meditate in this book, that thou mayest observe to do ac∣cording
to all that is written there∣in. Meditation and practise like two sisters must go hand inhand. Cassian saith that the contempla∣tive life cānot beperfected with∣out the practick. Cassian Collat. 19. We read that the angels had wings, & hands un∣der their wings, Ezek. 1.8. It may be an Hieroglyphical Embleme of this truth; Christians must not onely fly upon the wing of Meditation, but they must be active in obedience, they must have hands under their wings. The end of Meditation is action. We must not only Meditate in Gods law but walk in his law. Deuter. 28.9. Without this we are like those Gnosticks of whom Epiphanius complaines, they had much knowledge, but were in their lives licentious. Christians must be like the Sun, which doth not only send forth heat, but goes its circuit round
the world; 'tis not enough that the affections be heated by me∣ditation, but we must go our circuit too, that is, move regular∣ly in the sphere of obedience. After warming at the fire of Meditation, we must be fitter for work. Meditation is the life of Religion, and practice is the life of meditation. 'Tis said in the Honour of Nazianzen, fecit quae docuit, he lived over his own Sermons. So a good Chri∣stian must live over his own me∣ditations. For instance; First, When you have been meditating of Sin, which for its bitterness is compared to Grapes of Gall, for its damnableness to poison of asps; and you begin to burn in an holy indignation against sin, now put your meditations in practise, Give sin a Bill of Di∣vorce, Job 11.14. If iniquity be
in thy hand put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy Taber∣nacles. 2. When you have been me∣ditating of the Graces of the spirit, let the verdure and lustre of these graces be seen in you: live these graces; meditate, that you may observe and do; 'Twas St. Pauls counsel to Timothy; 1 Tim. 4.7. exercise thy self to Godli∣ness. Meditation and practise are like a pair of Compasses, the one part of the compass fixeth upon the center, and the other part goes round the circumfe∣rence; a Christian by meditati∣on fixeth upon God as the Cen∣ter, and by practice goes round the circumference of the Com∣mandements; A man who hath let his thoughts run out upon riches, will not onely have them in the notion, but will endeavor to get riches; Let your medi∣tations
be practical; when you have been meditating upon a promise, live upon a promise; when you have been medita∣ting of a good conscience, ne∣ver leave till you can say as Paul, Herein I exercise my self to have a good conscience, Acts 24.16. Meditatie sine exerci∣tio similis est lyrae ta∣citurnae. Beloved, here lies the very essence of Religion. That this rule may be well observed, Consider, 1. It is onely the practical part of Religion will make a man blessed. Meditation is a beautiful flower, but as Rachel said to her husband, Give me children or I dye, Gen. 30. 1. So if Meditation be barren, and doth not bring forth the childe of o∣bedience, it will dye and come to nothing. 2. If when you have medi∣tated in Gods law, you do not obey his Law, you will come
short of them who have come short of heaven. 'Tis said of Herod , Mark 6.20. He did many things; he was in ma∣ny things a practicer of Johns Ministery: They who meditate in Gods Law, and observe not to do, are not so good as Herod, nay, they are no better then the Devil, he knows much, but still he is a Devil. 3. Meditation without pra∣ctise, will encrease a mans con∣demnation. If a Father writes a Letter to his son, and the son shall read over this Letter, and study on it, yet not observe to do as his Father writes, this would be an aggravation of his fault, and would but provoke his father so much the more a∣gainst him. Thus when we have meditated upon the Evil of sin, and the beauty of holi∣ness, yet we do not eschew the
one, nor espouse the other, it will but incense the divine Ma∣jesty so much the more against us, and we shall be beaten with many stripes. FINIS.
AN APPENDIX to the FORMER DISCOURSE upon Psalm. 139.18. verse. When I awake I am still with thee. By THOMAS WATSON Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the city of London. . Macar. from. 11. For where your treasure is there will your heart be also, Mat. 6.21. LONDON, Printed by J.T. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Corn-hill. 1657.
A Christian on Earth still in Heaven. PSAL. 139.18. When I awake I am still with thee. THE Scripture is a Spiritual Paradise, the book of Psalms is placed as the Tree of Life in the midst of this Para∣dise; the Psalms are not onely for Delight, but usefulness; they are like the Pomegranate Tree which is not onely for savour, but fruit; or like those Trees
of Ambrose Epist. 42. the Sanctuary, Ezek. 47.12. both for food and medicine. The Psalms are enriched with varie∣ty, and suited to every Christi∣ans estate and condition. They are a Spiritual Panoply and Store-house, if he find his heart dead, here he may fetch fire, if he be weak in grace, here he may fetch armour; if he be rea∣dy to faint, here are cordials lying by. There is no Conditi∣on you can name, but there is a Psalm suited to that conditi∣on. 1. In Case of sickness, Psalm 41.3. Thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness, and sure that bed must needs be soft which God will make; and there is a paral∣lel-Psalm to this, Psalm 73.26. my flesh failes, (my health is de∣clining) but the Lord is the strength of my heart; Septuag. or as the Septuagint renders it, he is the
God of my Heart. 2. In Case of reproach *, I was a reproach among my enemies, Psalm 31.11. But I trusted in thee O Lord: I said, Thou art my God, verse 14. Blessed be the Lord, for he hath shown me his marvellous loving-kindness in a strong City: ver. 18. Here was some Sun∣shine breaking forth of those black clouds Quisquis detrabit fa∣mae mere ad det mercedi∣meae. Aug. in Psal 39.. 3. In Case of unkind dealings from friends, Psalm 55. For it was not an enemy, then I could have born it, but it was thou, mine equal, my guide, and my acquaintance, we took sweet coun∣sel together, verse. 12.13. here was the malady, cast thy burden upon the Lord, v. 22. there was the cure. The Chaldee reads it cast thy hope. The Septuagint, , Cast thy Care. God is power, therefore he is able to help, he is Mercy, therefore he
is willing. He shall sustain thee, here is Gods promise, which is his bond to secure us. 4. In case we are close begirt with Enemies. There is a Psalm suited to this condition, Lord how are they encreased that trouble me? many are they that rise up a∣gainst me, Psalm 3.1. I laid me down and slept, v. 8. David, when beleaguered with Enemies, could lye down and sleep upon the soft pillow of a good conscience and Psalm. 27.3. though an host should encamp against me my heart shall not fear. He shall hide me in his pavilion, in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me, vers. 5. The Hebrew word is  he shall hide me so safe as if I were in the holy place of the sanctuary where none but the priest was to enter. 5. In case of poverty If a Christians estate be brought
so low that like the widow 1. King. 17.12. he hath nothing but a handful of meal, and a little oyl in the cruse left, There is a Psalm of Consolation. I am poor and needy yet the Lord thinketh up∣on me, Psalm. 40.17. I will bless her provision, I will satissie her poor with bread. Psalm. 132.15. here is the dew of a blessing di∣stilled, and Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my portion O Lord. Behold riches in poverty, what though the water in the bottle be spent if this well be at hand? 6. If sin through the immode∣sty of tentation prevail against a child of God, there is a psalm consolatory, Psalm. 65.3. Iniqui∣ties prevail against me, as for our transgressions thou shalt purge them away. In the Hebrew it is thou shalt hide them. It alludes to the mercy-seat which was co∣vered with the wings of the
Cherubims; so are the sins of the godly (when repented off) covered with the wings of mer∣cy, and favour. 7. In case of prayer and no speedy return. Psalm. 69.3. I am weary of my crying, my eyes fail while I wait for my God. But in the same Psalm he draws the breast of comfort, vers. 33. the Lord heareth the poor and depiseth not his prisoners. Would we have fruit before it is ripe? When the mercy is ripe, we shall have it; and besides, there is nothing lost by waiting; we send out the golden fleet of prayer to heaven, the longer this fleet staies out, the greater return it will bring with it. David found it so; therefore he pulls off his sackcloth, and puts on the gar∣ments of praise, Laudabo in Can∣tico, I will praise the name of God with a Song, vers. 30.
8. In case of desertion. This is the poisoned arrow that wounds to the heart, but still there is a Psalm to turn to. The Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheri∣tance, Psalm. 94.14. This is like a star in a dark night, or like the plank and broken pieces of the ship on which Paul and the rest came safe to shore, Act. 27.44. God may conceal his love from his children, not take it a∣way 2. Sam. 7.15., he may change his provi∣dence towards them not alter his purpose. 9. In case of death, there is a psalm revives, though I walk in the valley of the shaddow of death I will fear no evil. Psalm. 23.4. The sting, and poison of this serpent is taken away. Thou art with me; with thy power to support, with thy grace to san∣ctifie, with thy love to sweeten.
Thy Rod and thy staff do comfort me. I have the staff of thy pro∣mise in the hand of my faith, and with this I can walk thorow the dark entry of death. Thus in every condition Da∣vids Psalms like Davids harp may serve to drive away the evil spi∣rit of sadness and unchearful∣ness from a Christian; so much concerning the Psalms in gene∣ral. I come now to the words of the text, when I awake I am still with thee. Where you have the very effi∣gies and portraicture of a godly man drawn out, he is one that is still with God. It was Davids happiness that he lived above the common rate of men, not only as he was higher in power and dignity, being a king, but higher in sublimeness of affecti∣on Animam habuit an∣geliflcatam. Tertul., having his heart and hope
raised above the world, I am stil with thee. Divines give many reasons why David was called a man after Gods heart, but sure this is not the least, because the frame of his heart was so hea∣venly, this being most agreeable to Gods nature and will. Da∣vid was a man that (as Ambrose speaks) lived in the world a∣bove the world. Assoon as he a∣waked he stept into heaven. Da∣vid was a Seraphical saint, a mor∣tal Angel, like a true bird of paradise he did seldom touch with his feet upon the earth. He was least alone when he was most a lone Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus. Tul. Offic.. When he awaked he was with God; Nor was this onely when the fit was upon him, a thought of God and away, but it was a fix∣ed temper of heart. I am still with thee . The pulse of his soul was still beating after God. The
hypocrite may have a blush of godliness which is quickly over, Job. 27.10. but the con∣stitution of Davids soul was hea∣venly, I am still with thee. Not but that David had some diversions of mind; Caution (to have the eye alwayes fixed upon God will be the state of the blessed in heaven) but, David was still with God.  1. Because the bias and bent of his spirit was towards God. His heart like the need∣dle in the compass pointed hea∣venward. 2. Because he was more with God then he was any where else Subjectum a majori parte.. as we use to say a man lives at his house not but that urgency of occasions draw him abroad sometimes, but he is said to live there because he is most resident there. The words hold forth this proposition.
Doct. That it is the sweet temper of a Gracious heart to be still with God. I am still with Thee. David awaked in heaven. He was ever above. We read in the old Law that those creatures which did creep upon all four were to be had in abomina∣tion, but they which had wings to flie, and leggs to leap withall were accounted clean. Lev. 11.20. Those are among the uncleán, and are abominable to God, whose souls creep upon the earth, but they who have the leggs and wings of grace to mount up with, who are still with God, these are pure and precious in Gods eyes. For the illustrating this point there are three things to be ex∣plained, and amplisied. 1. What it is to be still with God. 2. In what sence the soul is still with God.
3. Why a gracious heart is still with God. 1. What it is to be still with God. In general, it is to have a sweet intercourse and Commu∣nion with God. 1 Joh. 1.3. Our fel∣lowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus. In prayer we speak to God, in the Sacrament he kisseth us with the kisses of his lips, he giveth us a privy seal of his love. 2. In what sence the soul is said to be still with God. I an∣swer, the soul is still with God five manner of wayes. 1. By contemplation. So Ains∣worth understands the Text. contem∣platione I am still with thee, that is, by divine contemplation. Davids thoughts were ever and anon running up∣on God. So vers. 17. How precious are thy thoughts unto me. O God! Davids mind was a spiritual mint, he minted most gold, most
of his thoughts were heavenly. Thoughts are as travellers and passengers in the soul, Davids thoughts were still travelling towards the Jerusalem above. In Davids dangers God was still with him, in Davids contem∣plations he was still with God. Anaxagoras said he was born to contemplate Heaven. Thus a Christian is still with God, he is viewing glory, his thoughts are all packed up and gone. 2. Defiderio. The soul is still with God by desire. His anchor is cast in Heaven, Hebr. 6.19. and he is car∣ried thither with the sails of de∣sire. David did shoot his heart in∣to Heaven by desire; Videmus terram tor∣refactam dehiscere, ac si aperto ore potum e caelo appeteret, significat pro∣pheta se desiderio ferventem ad deum accedere ac si vitalis humor eum deficeret Calvin in Psal. 143. he had strong anhelati∣ons and pantings after God. Psal. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee and there is none upon earth I desire besides
thee, he saith not, he had nothing upon earth, he had his Crown and Scepter, but nothing he de∣sired like God. Psal. 42.1. as the hart pants after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee O God. The hart (as Historians ob∣serve) is a dry thirsty creature, especially when chased by the hunter, now nature is on fire and must have water to quench it; thus the pious soul pants after the refreshing streams of Christs blood; . Basil. and these desires of a Christian are rightly termi∣nated; he desires aswell con∣formity to Christ in grace, as Communion with him in glory: he desires the Sun of righteous∣ness not onely for its refreshing beams but for its healing wings, he desires not only Christs pre∣sence, but his image: Lord give me thy self that I may be more holy, what should I do in Hea∣ven
with this unholy heart? what converse could I have with God, or angels? thus the soul is still with God by desire, and he desires not onely mercy, but grace; 3. The soul is still with God by love. Where a mans love is there he is; what an egresse and expansion of heart is there to that which we love. Bonaven∣ture cals love the wing of the soul, on this wing did David flie to Heaven. I am still with thee. Love hath this property, it unites at a distance, Amor est veluti jun∣ctura, duas personas congluti∣nans. Suar. l. 12. de Trii Aquinas li. 1. senten∣dist. 15. Qu. 5. art. 3. it fixeth the heart upon the object. Thus the love-sick spouse when she could not see Christ, yet she imbraced him in her affections; when her eye was not upon him yet her love was. Saw ye him whom my soul loves? Cant. 3.3. Christ my love is crucified, said Ignatius. Ignat. Ep. 12. ad Ro. As Christ was fastned to the Crosse so he is
to a Christians heart. A true Saint is like the Tribe of Manas∣seh, half of the Tribe was on this side Jordan and half on the other side in the holy Land; Josh. 1.14. So it is with a Saint, half of him is on this side and half in the holy Land, his flesh is on earth, his heart in heaven; as it was said of Paul, 2 Cor. 12.2. Whether in the body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell; So it may be said of a good Christian, tis hard to tell whether he be in the body, or out of the body, his love is in hea∣ven Animam meam odio haberem si alibi quam in Christo invenirem. Austin., he is lodged in the Tree of life. The fire of love boils the heart as high as heaven. 4. The Soul is still with God by faith, unbelief is called, a drawing back from God, Heb. 10.39. and faith, a drawing near to God, Heb. 10.22. by an eye of
faith, through the perspective glass of a promise, we look in∣to heaven. The people of Is∣rael stood in the outer Court of the Temple, but the High-priest entred within the vail, into the holy of holies; thus the senses stand in the outward Court of the body, but faith enters with∣in the vail, it sees Christ cloth'd with the Robe of our humane nature, and sitting down in glo∣ry above the Angels; faith im∣braceth Christ. Austin moves the Question, how shall I put out a long arm to reach Christ in heaven Quomodo in Caelum manum mittam? Aug., crede, et tenuisti, be∣lieve (saith he) and thou hast laid hold on him. Faith is au∣reum vinculum, the golden clasp that knits us to Christ; by faith we put on Christ as a garment, Rom. 13.14. By faith we receive and concoct him as food, Col. 2.6. by faith we are ingrafted into
him as the ciens into the stock John. 15.5. indeed, a believers life is out of himself; he lives more in Christ then he lives in himself, Bernard. tanquam radius in Sole as the beam lives in the sun; as the branch in the root, Col. 3.3. even as Juda said concerning Ja∣cob, his life is bound up in the lads life, Gen. 44.30. so is a believers life bound up in Christ. And thus is the Gracious soul ever with God, by faith. 5. Conver∣satione. A Christian is still with God in the whole course and tennour of his life. Not onely his heart is in heaven, but his conversation too, Phil. 3.20. . Our deport∣ment and carriage is in heaven; wee walk as Burges∣ses of that city. It is said of Christ his face was as though he would go to Hierusalem, Luke. 9.53. a good Christian should be
known by his face, his out∣ward carriage and demeanour should show that he is going to the Hierusalem above. Socra∣tes being asked of what coun∣trey he was, answered, he was , a citizen of the world, a true saint is a citizen of heaven; he is known what place he belongs to by his speech, habit, gesture. There is a kind of angelical bright∣ness on him, he shines in holiness, as Moses face did shine when he had been with God in the mount. He is still doing Angels work: his life is  (as Chrysostom speaks,) a very heaven upon earth, Noah walk∣ed with God, Gen. 6.9 It a pie & sancte vixit quasi deum semper prae oculis, ha∣heret. Aug. Tom. 10. Hom. 27.. and in this sense the pious soul is still with God, he walks unweariably with God; though he meets with some rubs and difficulties in the way, yet still he keeps
his walk; and thus we have seen in what sence a gracious soul is still with God; the eagle may sometimes sit upon a low bough, but her nest is built high Job. 39.27. A Christian walks up∣on the surface of the earth, but his nest is built high upon the rock Christ. The moon is seen in the water, yet it is seated in the firmament. So a Christian is seen here below, but he is a∣bove, he is still with God. 3. The third thing is why a Gracious heart is still with God There are five reasons why it is so. 1. from the nature of grace, grace carries the soul up to∣wards God. Grace is like fire est mollis flamma medullis. Tis the na∣ture of fire to ascend. You that ly groveling on the earth feeding like the serpent on dust, or like eels wrapping your selves in the mud and slime of the world had
you that new and holy princi∣ple of grace infused, your souls would sparkle upwards, you would mount up to heaven as Ea∣gles, Isa. 40.31. had you the sharp eye of faith to see Christ, you would soon have the swift wing of desire to fly to him. 2. From that magnetical power of Gods spirit. The spirit hath not only a soul-purifying, but a soul-elevating power, as the sun ex∣hales and draws up the vapors from the Earth. So the Spirit draws up the heart to God, The Spirit lifted me up, Ezek. 3.14. Though there be grace in the heart which would be still mounting upward, yet there is much corruption to pull us down; a Christian in this life, is both check'd and spur'd; Grace spurs him forward in his way to heaven, and then corruption checks him; now here the spirit
comes in and draws up the heart to God Spiritu san∣cto accendi∣tur renato∣rum volun∣tas, Austin.; which is a mighty pow∣er, as if you should see a milstone drawn up into the Sun 3. A gracious heart is still with God, because he is the center of the Soul; and where should it ever be but in its Cen∣ter; while the heart is on the earth it shakes and trembles like the needle in the compass, till it turnes to God Irrequie∣tum est cor nostrum do nec requie∣scit in te., God is the proper Orb where the soul doth fix; he is centrum quietati∣vum (as the Schoolmen speak) A Christian rests in God, as the Bee in the Hive, as the Bird in the nest; Return to thy rest O my soul, Psalm 116.7. Noahs Dove was never well till it was in the Ark, The Ark was a Type of Christ. 4. The Soul is still with God because of those dear relations it
hath to God. There are all the terms of Consanguinity. God is our Father, John 20.17. and where should the child be but with its Father; he is our Hus∣band, Isa. 54.5. and where should the wife be, but with her hus∣band? he is our friend, Joh. 15.15. now friends desire to be still together. God is our Rock, 2 Sam. 22.2. where should Christs Doves be but in the Cliffs of this blessed Rock? God is the Saints Treasure, and where the Treasure is, there will their hearts be also. 5. The gracious soul is still with God, because of those rare excellencies which are in God. 1. Fulness, Every one desires to be at a full fountain. Col. 1.19. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. Observe, Christ is not only said to be full in the concrete, but
fullness in the abstract, nay in him is  all fullness. a vessel may be full of water, but that is not all fullness, 'tis not full of Wine; a Chest may be full of silver, but that is not all fullness, 'tis not full of Pearl; but in Christ is all fullness , macar.. He is bread to strengthen, John 6.48. Wine to comfort, Joh. 15.1. Gold to inrich, Rev. 3.18. He is all and in all, Col. 3.11. Thus there is a variety of fullness in the Lord Jesus. O Christian, what is it thou needest? Dost thou want quickning grace Christ is the Prince of life Act. 3.15. Dost thou want healing grace, Christ hath made a medicine of his own bo∣dy to cure thee Corpus Christi ae∣gris medi∣cina lan∣guorem sa∣nans sanita∣tem servans Bernard., Isa. 53, 5. Dost thou want cleansing grace, there is the bath of his bloud to wash thee, 1 John 1.7. The bloud of Jesus cleanseth us from all our sin.
Let not the Poets tell us of their Aonia and Castalia, Fountains in which they supposed their Nymphs to have washed, These waters distill'd out of Christs sides are infinitely more pure. Pliny saith that the Water-cour∣ses of Rome are the worlds won∣der, Oh had he known these sa∣cred Water-courses in Christs bloud, how would he have been stricken with admiration? and do you wonder the soul is still with Christ when there is all ful∣ness in him? Nay, but that all is not all; the Apostle goes further; it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. . To note the Duration of this full∣ness, 'tis not Transient but Imma∣nent. This fulness is not in Christ as the water in the pipe, or spout; the Spout may be full of water, but it continues not
there, Water doth not dwell in the spout; but this fulness is in Christ as light in the Sun, it dwells there. Christs fulnesse is a never-failing fulness; what can be said more? nay, but the Apostle carries it yet higher; in him dwells all the fulness of the God-head; if Christ had all the fullness of the Creation, the Treasures of the earth; the ho∣liness of the Angels, yet this could not satisfy the soul. In him there is , The fulness of the Godhead, the riches of the Deity are in him; and the communication of this bles∣sed fulness Eph. 3 19. Pro cujus∣que membri medulo. Beza., so far as there is a capacity to receive *, is that which satisfyes the Soul, and fills it brim full; and if there be such a plenitude and fullness in God, no wonder a gracious heart desires to be still with God.
2. Sweetness; God is love, 1 John 4.19. Every one desires to be with them from whom they receive most love; The Lord doth often make himself known to the soul in an ordinance, as he did to the disciples in break∣ing of bread, Luke 24.35. He ma∣nifests himself in the comforts of his Spirit, Gal. 5.22. which are so sweet and ravishing, that they passe all understanding; and do you wonder the soul is so strongly carried out after God? Truly if it be still with God, to speak with reverence, 'Tis long of God. He gives those Jewels and Bracelets, those love-tokens that the soul cannot but desire to be still with God. It shews us an art how to be in heaven before our time, namely by being still with God. A Good Christian begins his hea∣ven here, Grace translates him
into the paradise of God Sunt pennae volucres mihi quae celsa con∣scendant poli. Boeti∣us.; E∣liah left his Mantle behind, but hewas taken up in a fiery Chari∣ot; So it is with a Saint the man∣tle of the flesh is left behind, but his soul is carried up in a fi∣ery Chariot of love. 2. Use is of Reproof, and it consists of two branches. 1. It reproves them that are never with God; Branch. they live without God in the world, Ephes. 2.12. 'Tis made the characteristical note of a wicked man, God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm 10.4. He never thinks of God unlesse vvith horrour and amazement, as the Prisoner thinkes of the Judge and the Assizes; and here two sorts of sinners are indict∣ed. 1. Such as are still with their sinnes. A child of God, though sin be with him, yet he is not with sin, his will is against sin;
Rom. 7.15. Minus est nocens qui sponte sua non est no∣cens. Sen. That which I do I al∣low not; he would fain shake this viper into the fire; he forsakes sin, but sin will not forsake him, so that though sin be with him; yet he is not with sin; but a wicked man, and sin are toge∣ther, as two Lovers mutually solacing and embracing; a wick∣ed man is , a Wor∣ker of iniquity, Luke 13.27. like a workman that followes his Trade in his Shop. 2 Such as are stil with the world; Tis counted a piece of a mi∣racle to find a diamond in a vein of gold: and tis as great a mira∣cle to find Christ (that precious stone.) in an earthly heart. The world is mens Diana. they minde earthly things, Phil. 3.19. . like the Ostrich though she hath wings yet by reason of the weightiness of her body cannot fly high, most men are so weigh∣ed
down with thick clay Hab. 2.6, that they cannot soar aloft they are like Saul, hid among the stuff 1 Sam. 10.22., like Sisera who had his head nalied to the earth Judg. 4.21., so their hearts are nailed to the earth. Ab∣saloms beauty stole away the hearts of Israel from their king, 2 Sa. 15.6. the worlds bewitching beauty steals away men hearts from God Curvae in terras a nim ae et cae∣lestium ina∣nes.. Tis sad whē the hus∣band sends his wife a jewel & she so fals in love with the jewelthat she forgets her husband: an estate should be a loadstone to draw men nearer to God, but it is often a milstone to sink them to hell. There is a moderate use of these things, but there is a dan∣ger in the exercise. The bee may suck a little hony from the leaf, but put it in a barrel of honey and it dies. Christians must stave off the world, that it gets not into
their heart, Psal. 62.10. for as the water is useful to the ship and helps it to sail the better to the haven, but let the water get into the ship, if it be not pumpt out at the leak, it drowns the ship: so riches are useful and convenient for our passage. We sail more comfortably with them throgh the troubles of this world, but if the water get into the ship, if the love of riches get into the heart, then we are drowned with them, 1 Tim. 6.9. 2. It reproves them that are seldom with God. Branch. They are sometimes with God but not still with God. The shell fish (as naturalists observe) hath so little life in it, & moves so slow that it is hard to determine whether it lives a vegetative or a sensative life: so it may be
said of many Christians, their motion heavenward is so slow, and unconstant; that we can hardly know whether the life of grace be in them or no, They are seldome with God. Re∣vel. Menssacris tabescit. 2.4. Thou hast left thy first love. Many professors have almost lost their acquaintance with God. Time was when they could weep at a sermon, but now these wels are stopped. Time was when they were ten∣der of sin; the least hair makes the eye weep, the least sin would make conscience smite: now they can digest this poison; Time was when they trembled at the threatnings of the word, now with the Leviathan they can laugh at the shaking of a spear; Job. 41.29. Time was when they called the sabbath a delight Isa. 58 13., the queen of daies, how did they
wait with joy for the rising of the sun of righteousness on that day! what anhelations and pan∣tings of soul after God! what mounting up of affections! but now the case is altered, what a weariness is it to serve the Lord? Mal. 1.13. Time was when they delighted in the word (indeed it is a glass that mends their eyes that look on it,) now they have laid it aside, seldom do they look in this glass. Time was when they could send forth strong cries in prayer Heb. 5.7., but now the wings of prayer are clipt; they come like could suitors to God, their petitions do even cool be∣tween their lips, as if they would teach God to deny Qui frigi∣giè rogat doet nega∣re.. Oh why have you left of your com∣munion with God? what iniqui∣ty have your fathers found in me that they are gone far from me? Jer. 2.5. Let Christians lay this
sadly to heart. Remember from whence you are fallen and Repent and do your first works. Rev. 2.5.. You are in a spiritual lethargy, Oh never leave till your hearts are scrued up to such a heavenly frame as here Davids was, when I awake I am still with thee. And that brings me to the next. The third use is of exhorta∣tion to perswade all those who professe themselves Christians to imitate this blessed pattern in the text, Exhort. be still with God. You shall never go to heaven when you die, unless you begin heaven here. The church in the reve∣lation hath a crown of stars on her head, and the moon under her feet, Rev. 12.1. Christ is not to be found in the furrowes, but upon the pinacle, now that you may get your hearts losen'd from these things below and be still with God, I shall onely
propound two arguments. 1. Consider how unworthy, it is for a Christian to have his heart set upon the world. I It is unworthy of his soul. The soul is dignified with honour, it is a noble coin that hath a di∣vine impress stampt upon it, Tis capable of communion with God and angels, now it is too far below a man to spend the affections and operations of this heaven-born soul upon drossy things. Tis as if one should embroider sackloth with gold, or set a diamond in clay. 2. It is unworthy of his pro∣fession. Seekest thou great things for thy self? Jerem. 45.5. what thou Baruk? Thou who art a Godly man? a Levite? Oh how sordid is it for him that hath his hope in heaven to have his heart upon the earth. It is just as if a king should leave his
throne, and follow the plough, or as if a man should leave a golden mine to dig in a gravel pit. The lapwing hath a crown on her head and yet feeds on dung. A fit embleme of those who have a crown of profession shining on their head yet feed with eagerness on these things below. Christians should deny themselves, but not undervalue themselves, they should be hum∣ble but not base. If Alexander would not exercise at the O∣lympicks, it being too far be∣low him; (Kings do not use to run Races) then shall they who are the holy seed, the heirs of glory, disparage themselves by too eager pursuite after these contemptible things? The second argument to per∣swade us to be still with God is, consider what a rare, and excel∣lent life this is which will ap∣pear
in four particulars. 1. To be still with God is the most no∣ble life . Ony∣lostom ad Rom. Ho∣mil. 13.. Tis as much above the life of reason as reason is above the life of a plant, the true Chri∣stian is like a star in the highest orb, he looks no lower then a crown; Grace puts hie thoughts, Princely affections a kind of hea¦venly ambition into the soul. Grace raiseth a Christian above himself, it makes him as Caleb a man of another Spirit; he lives in the altitudes, his thoughts are lodged among Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect: and is not not this the most noble life to be still with God? The Academicks compare the soul of man to a Fowl, mounting up with her wings in the ayr: Thus with the wings of grace, the soul flies aloft, and takes a pro∣spect of heaven. 2. To be still with God is the
most satisfying life, nothing else will do it. All the Rivers run in∣to the Sea, yet the Sea is not full, Eccl. 1.7. Let all the golden streams of worldly delights run into the heart of man, yet the heart is not full: strain out the quintessence of the creature, it turns to froth: Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities: but in God is sweet satisfaction and contentment. My soul shall be fatisfied, as with marrow and fatness, Psal. 63.5. Here is an Hive of sweetness, a mirror of beauty, a magazine of riches; here is the River of pleasure, where the soul bathes with infinite delight, Psal. 36.8. and this River hath a Fountain at the bottom, ver. 9. For with thee is the fountain of life: Dulcius ex ipso fonte, &c. and is not this most satisfactory? It is a witty observation of Picus Mirandula, That in the Creation of the World, God gave the wa∣ter
to the fish; the earth to the beasts; the ayr to the fowls; & afterward, made man in his own image, that man might say, Lord, there is nothing upon earth to be de∣sired besides Thee; what can satiate my soul, but to be still with thee? 3. To be still with God is the most comfortable life: what sweet harmony and musick is in that soul? The Bird, the higher it takes its flight, the sweeter it sings: so the higher the soul is raised above the World, the sweeter joy it hath. How is the heart inflamed in Prayer? How is it ravished in Holy Meditation? What joy and peace in believing? Rom. 15.13. and these joys are those mellea flumina, those honey-streams which flow out of the Rock Christ. Tell me, is it not com∣fortable being in Heaven? He that is still with God, carries
Heaven about him: he hath those praelibations and tasts of Gods love, which are the be∣ginnings of Heaven Rom. 8.23.. So sweet is this kinde of Life, that it can drop sweetness into the troubles and disquiets of the World, that we shall be scarce sensible of them Nihil sen∣tit crus in nervo quando ani∣mus est in coelo. Ter∣tullian.. It can turn the Prison into a Paradise; the Furnace in∣to a Festival; it can sweeten death. A soul elevated by grace, can rejoyce to think of dying: Death will but cut the string, and the Soul, that Bird of Para∣dise, shall flie away and be at rest. 4. To be still with God is the most durable life, nunquam defi∣cit semper resicit: Diuturni∣ora sunt praestantio ra. the life of sense will fail; we must shortly bid farewell to all our outward Comforts, these blossoms will drop off: We read of a Sea
of glass mingled with fire, Rev. 12.2. Bullinger, and other learn∣ed Expositors understand by that Sea of glass, the World. In∣deed it is a fit embleme of it; the World is a Sea, and it is sel∣dome calm; and 'tis a Sea of glass, slippery; and this glass is mingled with fire, to shew, it is of a perishable and consuming nature. Riches take wings, and relations take wings: but you that by the wings of grace are still soaring aloft, This life shall never have an end; it is the beginning of an eternal life; happiness is but the cream of holiness: you that are still with God shall be ever with the Lord, 1 Thes. 4.17. You shall see God in all his embroidered Robes of majesty In Coelesti beatitudine sine alique taedio manens aeternitas, inspectio sola divinitatis efficit ut beatius nihilesse possit, Cassidor. lib. 2. Ireneus lib. 4. contra haeres. cap. 37. Greg. Nyssen. lib. de beatitud. Damascen. lib. 4. de fide.. 1 Joh. 3. We shall see
him as he is; and this sight vvill be ravishing, and full of glory Oh then is not this the best kinde of life? He who when he awakes is still with God; when he goes to sleep at death, shall be ever with the Lord. Quest. But how shall I arrive at this blessed frame of heart, to be still with God? Answ. 1. Get a right Judge∣ment: 'Tis a great matter to have the Judgement set right: Get a right judgement of sin, and you will be never with it: get a right Judgement of God, and you will be still with him. In God are all combined excel∣lencies: How sweet is his love, how satisfying is his presence? But as the Painter drew a vail over Agamemnons face, because the greatness of his grief for his daughter Iphigenia could
not be expressed: So when I speak of the glorious perfecti∣ons in God, I must draw a vail, neither pen, nor pensil can set them forth in their orientlustre, the angels here must be silent. 2. If you would be still with God, watch over your hearts every day. Lock up your hearts with God every morning, and give him the key. The heart will be stealing out to vanity Nihil corde meo fuga∣cius. Bern.: Lord (saith Bernard) theres no∣thing more flitting then my heart. Keep watch and ward there; especially (Christians) look to your hearts after an Ordinance; when you have been with God in duty; now expect a temptation. Physiti∣ans say, The body must be more carefully looked to when it comes out of an hot Bath; for the pores being open it is more in danger of catching cold:
After your spiritual Bathing in an Ordinance, when you have been at a Sermon or Sacrament, now take heed that you do not catch cold. 3. Beware of remisness in du∣ty: Sic puta∣mus orâsse Jonam? sic Danie∣lem inter leones? Sic latronem in Cruce? Hierom. when you begin to slacken the reins, and abate your for∣mer heat, and vigour in Religi∣on, there steals insensibly a deadness upon the heart, and by degrees there ariseth a sad estrangement between God and the Soul. And Brethren, how hard a Work will you finde it to get your hearts up again, when they are once down. A weighty stone, that hath been rowled up to the top of a steep hill, and then falls down to the bottom, how hard is it to get it up again! Oh take heed of a dull, lazy temper in Gods service: we are bid to be fervent in spirit, Rom.
12.11. . Lecto neg∣lecto mol∣lem discute somnum. Sarisburi∣ensis in Policrat. lib. 1. The Athe∣nians enquiring at the Oracle of Apollo why their plagues did continue so long; the Oracle answered them; they must du∣plare aram, double their Sacri∣fices Plutarch., those who would hold constant communion with God must double their devotion, they must be much in praier, and mighty in prayer; we read that the coals were to be put to the incense, Lev. 16.13. incense was a Type of prayer, and the coals put to the incense was to shew, That the heart of a Christian ought to be inflamed in holy services; nothing more dange∣rous then a plodding formali∣ty. 4. If you would be still with God be much in the Communi∣on of Saints. (many Christians live as if this Article were blot∣ted out of their Creed) how
doth one Saint whet and Shar∣pen another. As vain company cools good affections, so by be∣ing in the communion of Saints we are warmed and quickned. Be often among the Spices, and you will smell of them; These directions observed, we shall be able to keep our acquaintance with God, and may arrive at this blessed frame as here David had, When I awake I am still with thee. FINIS.
CHRISTS LOVELINES, OR, A Discourse setting forth the Rare Beauties of the Lord Jesus, which may both amaze the eye, and draw the heart of a sinner to him. By THOMAS WATSON Minister of Stephens Walbrook in the city of London. Si scribas, non plac et mihi nisi legam ibi Je∣sum, si conferas, non sapit mihi nisi sonue∣rit ibi Jesus, quia Jesus est in ore meo mel, in aure melos, in corde Jubilum, Aug. 1 Pet. 2.7. Ʋnto you therefore which believe he is pretious. LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Corn-hill. 1657.
CHRISTS LOVELINES. CANT. 5.16. Yea, he is altogether lovely. IN this book (which is a Divine Epithalami∣um or Marriage-Song) are all the strains of holy love set forth in the purest allegories and metaphors, such as do re∣present that dear affection and union between Christ, and his Church. The Text is nothing else but the breathing forth of the Spouses love to Christ, He is
altogether lovely, in the verses pre∣cedent she had made her sacred Panegyricks, and had been setting Christ forth in his spiritual em∣broidery. He is white and ruddy, v. 10. This denotes the excellency of complexion Perfecta pulchritu∣do sita est in sua∣vitate ca∣loris, & harmonia membro∣rum. Plato; in him is a mix∣ture of the purest colours; he is of unspotted beauty. —Niveo natat ignis in ore purpu∣reus— The chiefest among ten thou∣sand. The Hebrew word is . The Standard-Bearer among ten thousand sig∣nificat vexillum erigere, seu insignire.; The Standard is a Warlike Ensign, and he who did bear the Standard in antient times, was the most eminent per∣son in the Army; so Christ is the most glorious Person of re∣nown, the Standard Bearer; Ac∣cording to that Isa 11.10. He shall stand for an Ensigne of the People.
His head is as the most fine Gold, ver. 11 Aurum ob∣ryzum, Vatabl.. Kings have crowns of Gold, Christ is described with an head of Gold. The Hebrew word  signifies, Shining Gold, or sparkling Caput ejus vestitum lapidibus pretiosis, si∣ve gemmis aureo dia∣demati in∣ternextis. Co. de lap.. To set forth the infinite resplendency of Christs Beauty, tis of that spar∣kling lustre, that the Angels are fain to wear a vail. His eyes are as the eyes of Doves, ver 12. Christ is described with eyes like a flame of fire, Rev. 1.14. so indeed he hath to the wic∣ked; He is a consuming fire; but to his Children he hath Doves eyes; which are the embleme of meekness; he hath eyes drop∣ping tears of love and compas∣sion. His Cheeks are as a bed of Spices ver. 1 3. There is an Aromatick perfume comes from him to re∣fresh a fainting soul. Some Ex∣positors understand this Bed of
Spices to be meant of the fra∣grancy of his vertues, which are in Scripture compared to sweet ointments. Thus the Spouse goes on de∣ciphering Christs Beauty; at last being in an holy rapture of spi∣rit, She windes up all with this Epiphonema, or passionate strain of affection, His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether love∣ly. His mouth is most sweet; The Caldee paraphraseth it, the words of his Palate are sweet as ho∣ney; in the Hebrew it is  His mouth is Sweet∣nesses. That mouth must needs be sweet which hath the words of eternal life John 6.68.. That mouth must needs be sweet, a kiss of whose lips can make death sweet to a Believer: well might the Spouse say, Let him kiss me with the kis∣ses of his mouth, Cant. 1.2.
— Dulcior hyblaeo cujus flit ore ve∣nustas Nectare, Boch. An∣tuerpiens. concinnusque lepos— Yea, he is altogether lovely, Isunt ei omnia pre∣tiosissima & splen∣di dissima, Junius. as if the Spouse had said, what do I go to set Christ forth in his se∣veral parts, his Head of Gold, his Eyes like doves, his hands as Gold rings set with the Beryll, his Belly as bright Ivory over∣laid with Saphires, &c. alas, What is all this that I have been speaking of Christ? how bar∣ren is my invention, how dull are my expressions, what ever I have said of him falls infinitely short of his worth, but this I af∣firm, he is altogether lovely , Sept. Christi spe∣cies eximia Gr-Nyssen. The word in the originall is  he is all made up of loves and delights In se con∣tinet emi∣nenter om∣ne quod est expetibile. Lap., ipse totus desideria, he is all that may excite desire. So Hierome and Ambrose render it; he is composed of sweetness, and
amiableness, Dici mus de cedro quam pul∣cher visu, quam fra∣grans cor∣tice, quam dulcis me∣dulla inte∣riori, illum totum esse saccharum, sic sponsa de Christo, Ghislerus. so Gregory Nyssen. The text you see containes a glorious and magnificent descri∣ption of Christ; He is altogether lovely. Behold here a spring full of the water of life, and who∣soever brings his vessel hither, a heart fit to receive this water, may be refreshed, as the woman of Samaria coming to Jacobs Well, for Christ is here. The text is a sacred Cabinet which contains in it, first the Jewel, Christ, in this word He; second∣ly, the Price of this Jewel, alto∣gether lovely. The truth resulting from the Words is this, That Jesus Christ is infinitely and superlatively lovely. He is the most amazing, and delightful object; the very name of Jesus Christ is as a pretious oint∣ment poured forth. Tis said that the Letters of this Name were
found engraven upon Ignatius his heart; Jesus Christ is in eve∣ry Believers heart, Col. 1.23. Christ in you; and nothing can do better there, for he is altoge∣ther lovely. This whole book of the Can∣ticles is bespangled with the praises of Christ. Homer might praise Achilles, It Epitaph Nepot. Hierom might commend Nepotian, but who can set forth Christs praise? all that I can say, will be no more then the dark shadow in the Picture; and yet it will be so much as may represent him very lovely. That Christ is thus transcen∣dantly lovely will appear four manner of waies. By 1. Titles. 2. Types. 3. Resemblances. 4. Demonstrations. 1. By Titles, 1. By Titles. which are so ma∣ny jewels hung upon his crown;
he is called, The desire of all Nati∣ons, Hag. 2.7. The Prince of peace, Isa. 9.7. The holy one of God, Acts 2.27. Elect, pretious, 1 Pet. 2.6. These are lovely Titles. 2. 2. By Types. By Types; he was prefigured by such Types, as were ve∣ry lovely, and these Types were either of persons or things. 1. 1. Type. Christ was typified by per∣sons most lovely. I will name but three. 1. He was prefigured and ty∣pified by Moses. He was a per∣son of Renown in Israel, whom the Lord knew face to face, Deut. 34.10. Moses did type out Christ in four things; 1. In his Natural beauty, he was a goodly child, Exod. 2.2. Josephus faith Moses was so fair, that he drew the eyes of all to him, and that those who had seen him were so amazed at his beauty, and did seed upon it with such
delight, that they were unwil∣ling to look off again , Josephus.. And herein he was a Type of Christ∣in whom are all sparkling beau∣ties to be found; he is  altogether lovely. 2. Moses was a Type of Christ in his Education; he was bred up a while at Court, and (as Josephus saith) Pharaohs Daughter set a Crown of Gold upon his Head; but leaving the Court he went and lived in the Land of Midian, Exod. 2.15. so Christ left the Royal Court of Heaven to come and live in the World. 3. Moses was a type of Christ in his Office; he was a Prophet, Deut. 34.10. and there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses. He acquainted Israel with the mind of God, he gave them the two Tables of the Law. So Jesus Christ is a Prophet, Luke 24.19. he reveals to his people
the mysteries of salvation, He unseals the Book of Gods decree Ideo angelus dictus ob of∣ficium pro∣pheticum. Tertul., and makes known his Will, Rev. 5.5. He is counted worthy of more glory then Moses, Heb. 3.3. 4. Moses vvas a Type of Christ in his Noble Acts; 1. he was a De∣liverer of the people from the Egyptian furnace, he vvas a tem∣poral Saviour. So Jesus Christ, his Name  signifies a Saviour Mat. 1.21. He shall save his peo∣ple from their sinnes. 2. Moses vvas an intercessor for Israel and turned avvay the Wrath of God from them, Num. 14. . So Christ is the Saints Advo∣cate, Rom. 8.34. Who also maketh intercession for us. 2. Christ vvas typified by Da∣vid. 1. David vvas a King, So is Christ adorned vvith Regall povver, he is a King to govern his people, Revel. 15.3. and to
conquer his enemies, Psal. 110.1.2. David was a man after Gods own heart. This did prefigure Christ in whom God was well pleased, Mat. 3.17. 3. Christ was typified by Solo∣mon. 1. In his Name , which signifies peaceable; so Christ is call'd the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.7. This the Angels proclaim'd at his in∣carnation, Luke 2.14. Peace on earth; all his wars tend to peace; he gives that peace which passeth all under∣standing . Ignat.. 2. Solomon typified Christ in his government: His was a most flourishing Kingdom, 2 Chr. 9.22. King Solomon, passed all the Kings of the earth in riches; so Christs Kingdome is very glorious, all his subjects are made Kings; he reigns in heaven and earth, and of his Kingdome is no end. 3. Solomon typified Christ in his Wisdome; he was the Oracle of his age, 1 King. 4.31. He was wiser than all
men . Joseph. antiq. l. 8.. So Christ recei∣ved the unction from his Father; he had a spi∣rit of wisdom and ho∣linesse poured upon him without measure, John 3.34 Isa. 11.2. Behold, a greater than Solomon is here. Thus Jesus Christ was prefigured by those persons who were most lovely. 2. Christ was typified by Things most lovely. I will instance only in five. 1. Christ was typified by the pillar of cloud and fire, which was Israels guide and conduct in the Wildernesse, Exod. 13.21. Erat columna corpus quoddam ex acre conden∣sato mirum in modum à Deo preparatum ad usam Israeliticum in cremo. Tornielli Annal. This did typifie Christ our pillar of cloud, who guides our feet into the way of peace, Luke 1.79. The cloud was unerring, for God was in it; such is Christ, who is the way, and the truth, John 14.6. How lovely is this pillar to behold?
2. By the Manna. This point∣ed at Christ. He is like the Manna in three things. 1. The figure of Manna was cir∣cular, Exod. 16.14. There lay a small round thing, &c. The circle is a fi∣gure of perfection; this typed out Christ in whom is all perfecti∣on. 2. Cibus pa∣ratus. The Manna was a meat prepared for Israel in an extra∣ordinary manner; so the Hebrew word (from whence Manna seems to be derived ) signifies to pre∣pare. Manna was a meat cook'd and dressed in heaven; God himself prepared it, and then serv'd it in; Thus Jesus Christ was like Manna, he was prepared and set apart by his Father to the blessed work of mediatorship, Heb. 10.5. Abody hast thou prepared me 3. The Jewish Rabbins say, Man∣na suited it self to every ones pal∣lat; whatever he desired, that he found in Manna; so Jesus Christ
suits himself to every Christians condition; he is full of quickning, strengthning, comforting vertue Amaritu dines mun∣di dulces reddit. Austin., What fools are they that preferre the earthly mammon before this hea∣venly Manna! 3. By the mercy-seat which was a sacred embleme or hyeroglyphick representing the mercy of God to his people; there the Lord did give forth his Oracles and answers of peace to his people, Exod. 25.22. There will I meet thee, and I will commune with thee, &c. This mer∣cy-seat was a type of Christ Cyrill de incarnat unigen. Greg. hom. 6. sup. E∣zek. Ru∣pertus.; in, and thorough whom God is appeased towards us. Therefore he is called , a Propitiation, Rom. 3.25. O how lovely is this mercy-seat! We could not speak to God in pray∣er, nor would he commune with us, were it not for this blessed propi∣tiatory. The Hebrew word for mercy-seat , signifies a Cover∣ing, to shew that in Christ the
sinnes of beleevers are covered. 4. Christ was prefigured by the brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.9. The brazen Serpent resembled Christ two wayes. 1. It was made like a Serpent, but it was no real Serpent; so Christ was in the like∣nesse of sinful flesh, Rom. 8.3. but he was not a sinner; he was made sin, but he knew no sinne. Christ was as void of sinne, as the brazen Serpent was of a sting. 2. Qui istam Scrpentem metallinum intuerentur à Serpentum morsibus sana∣ti fuerunt; ita qui Chri∣stum fide contemplantur, &c. Tostat. Paradox. 4. When the people of Israel were stung by the fiery Serpents, v. 6. then whosoever did look upon the brazen Serpent were cured. Thus when sinne stings the souls of men (for it is a Serpent with five stings, it stings men with guilt, shame, horror of conscience, death, the curse of God.) Now Christ that brazen Serpent being looked upon with a penitent belee∣ving eye, Zach. 12.10. cures these
deadly stings. Joh. 3.15 Oh how lovely is this brazen Serpent! many of the Jews (saith Tostatus) worshipped the Serpent of brasse; let us in our hearts adore this brazen Serpent the Lord Jesus. 5. Christ was typified by Noahs Ark, which saved Noah and his fa∣mily from the flood. Thus when the wrath of God, as a deluge, over∣flows the wicked, Christ is the Ark in which the beleever sailes above those bloody waves, and is preser∣ved from drowning. And is not the Lord Jesus lovely? all these types did but serve to shadow forth the divine excellencies of Christ, and render him amiable in our eyes. 3. By resem. blances. That Christ is thus lovely, ap∣pears by those things to which the Scripture doth resemble him. He is compared to things most illustri∣ous. There are seven lovely resem∣blances of Christ in Scripture,
1. He is resembled to a Rose, Cant. 2.1. I am the Rose of Sharon i. e. Rosa odoratissi∣ma; ut illa quae in lo∣cis apricis Florent. Junius.. The Rose is Regina florum; the Queen of flowers: 'tis most delici∣ous for colour and scent; to shew that fragrant perfume which Christ sends forth. All Roses, though beautiful, have their prickles; only the Rose of Sharon excepted; so sweet is this Rose of Paradise, that it makes us become a sweet savour to God, Ephes. 1.6. This Rose is sem∣per vivens, it never loseth its co∣lour or fragrancy, and is it not very lovely? 2. Christ is resembled to a Vine, John 15.1. The Vine (as Pliny saith) is the noblest of plants; to this is Christ compared. Oh what lovely clusters grow upon this Vine! the fruits of Justification, Sanctificati∣on, &c. These bunches of grapes hang upon the Lord Jesus. We are beholding to this Vine, Hos. 14.8. From me is thy fruit found Qui vi∣ret in foli∣is, venit à radicibus humor.;
nay, Christ excels the Vine. For, 1. Though there be many things in the Vine tree besides the fruit use∣ful, the leaves, the gumme, the ashes of the Vine Pliny.; yet the wood of the Vine is unuseful, Ezek. 15.3. Will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon? now herein Christ is more lovely than the Vine-tree; There is nothing in Christ but is use∣ful. We have need of his humane nature; we have need of his divine nature; we have need of his offices, influences, priviledges; there is nothing in this Vine we can be with∣out. Oh how blessed are the bran∣ches of this Vine. The Virgin Ma∣ry was saved, not by bearing the Vine, but by being ingraffed into the Vine. 3. Christ is resembled to a corner∣stone, 1 Pet. 2.6. and that in two re∣spects 1 The whole weight of the building lies upon the corner-stone; so the weight of our salvation
lies upon Christ Dicitur Christus lapis eccla∣fiae angula∣ris, quia est primarium ac princi∣pale ejus fundamen∣tum, Estius, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12.2. The corner-stone doth unite and knit together both parts of the building; so when God and man were at variance, Christ, as the cor∣ner-stone did unite them together, yea, and did ceament them with his own blood. Oh how lovely and precious is this stone? 4. He is resembled to a Rock, 1 Cor. 10.3. That Rock was Christ i.e. Meta∣nym: per pe∣tram signi∣ficatur. Estius.. He is a Rock in a threefold sense. 1. He is a Rock for offence. The Rock breaks the waves; the Church being built upon Christ, all the ad∣versaries that come against her are like a ship coming full saile against a Rock. 2. A Rock for defence; the Dove hides in the rock, Cant. 2.14. O my Dove in the clifts of the Rock. Christs wounds are the clifts of the Rock where the beleeving soul, This Dove hides it self. 3. A Rock for comfort; and that two wayes, 1. The rock is a screene to shade off
the heat; so Christ is called, Isa. 32.2. a shadow from the heat; he shades a poor sinner from the scorch∣ings of Gods wrath. 2. Honey came out of the Rock, Isa. 32.13. He made him to suck hony out of the Rock, and oyle out of the flinty Rock. The honey of the promises, and the oyle of gladnesse comes out of this blessed rock. 5. Christ is compared to a river in a dry ground, Isa. 32.2. When by nature we are as a scorched heath, dry and barren, Christ sends forth the sacred influences of his Blood and Spirit, making us like the fields of Sharon, full of moisture and fer∣tility, and are not these silver streams lovely? 6. Christ is resembled to a Rich treasury. Riches are lovely in mens eyes Gratius aurum quàm solem intuemur. Austin., Ephes. 3.8. The unsearchable riches of Christ; the Angels can ne∣ver dig to the bottom of this golden Mine. Christ hath the true mono∣poly,
because he hath those riches as are no where else to be found. The riches of his merit, the riches of his Spirit. Christ hath a partner∣ship with the Father, John 16.15. All that the Father hath are mine: He is crowned with the Riches of the Deity. Alexander regarded not the Kingdome of Macedonia, when he heard of the riches of In∣dia; a Christian will in a manner de∣spise all other riches when he hath Christs Riches, Philip. 3.8. 7. Christ is resembled to a beau∣tiful Robe Rom. 13., Isa. 61.10. He hath covered me with the robe of righteous∣nesse. Hierom interprets it of Christ: His righteousnesse is a lovely Robe; no Robe of gold, or Ermyn where∣with Kings are invested is so ho∣nourable as this: in this robe we shine as Angels in Gods eyes; The High-Priests glorious vestments Voluit Deus plus∣quàm ange∣licum in Christo splendorem istis vesti∣bus often∣dere. Wil∣let.; Exod. 28.2. the Mitre, the Robe,
the Ephod of Gold, and the breast∣plate of precious stones, did all but serve to set out the beauti∣ful garment of Christs righteous∣nesse wherewith a beleever is adorn∣ed. Thus Christ appeares lovely in these several resemblances, which can but faintly shadow out his beau∣ty. 4. Christs lovelinesse appears by demonstrations; these two in parti∣cular. He is lovely 1. In himself. 2. In the account of others. He is lovely in himselfe, and that five manner of wayes. Intrinfice.  1. He is lovely in his person; and that,  1. As he is man, Psal. 45.2. Thou art fairer than the children of men. The He∣brew word  is emphatical in the forme Pulchru∣isti prae fili∣is hominum Pagnin. Ar. Mon∣tanus., it denotes excellen∣cy of beauty: For though it be said he hath no comelinesse, Isa. 53.2. that was in regard of his afflictions, which
did so disfigure, and as it were draw a vaile over his glory, yet certain∣ly the person of Christ was incom∣parably faire, as Hierome and Chry∣sostome observe; and if his body on earth was so beautiful, what is it now in heaven? The Apostle calls it , a glorious body, Phil. 3.21. If Christ can make a Lily of the field more beautiful than So∣lomon in all his glory, how faire is he himself? how white is that Lily which grows in Paradise? 2. Christs person is lovely as he is God-man . Chrysost de sancta Trin.. He may not unfitly be com∣pared to Jacobs ladder, Gen. 28.12. which reach∣ed from earth to heaven; Christs humane nature which was the foot of the ladder, stood upon the earth; his divine nature, which was the top of the ladder, reached to heaven. The Arrians and Socinians deny his God∣head,
as the Valentians do his man∣hood . Ignat. Ep. ad Antioch.. If the God-head be in him he must needs be God, but the God-head shines in him, Col. 2.9. In him dwells , All the fulnesse of the God-head Non dicit  sed  quod discrimen contra Euti∣chianos notatu dignum. Beza.; and to confirme us in this truth, let us consult with those Scriptures which do clearly assert his God∣head, 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and Phil. 2.6. who being in the form of God; Basil lib. 1. Cont. Eunom. which is as much (saith Basil) as to exist in the essence of God, 1 Tim. 3.16. God was manifest in the flesh, and 1 John 5.20. We are in him that is true, even in his sonne Jesus Christ, , THIS IS THE TRUE GOD . Ignat.. Besides these testimo∣nies
of Scripture which do expressely assert the God-head of Christ, it may be clearly demon∣strated by those incom∣municable properties be∣longing to the Deity which are ascribed to Christ, and are the flow∣ers of his Crown. As, 1. Omnipotency Justin. Martyr. Orat. 1. ad Graec., Heb. 1.3. 2. Omnisciency. Mark 2.8. 3. Ubiquity, Mat. 28.20. 4. Power of sealing pardons, Mat. 9.6. 5. The mission of the holy Ghost, John 16.7. 6. Coequality with God the Father, Phil. 2.6. both in power, John 5.19, 21. and dignitie, John 5.23. Thus we see his God-head pro∣ved; and as he is God-man, he is altogether lovely. He is the very
picture of his fathers glory. There∣fore he is called the expresse image, and character of his person, . Heb. 1.3. The very effigies and print of Gods face is seen in Christ, the glory of Gods wisdome, holinesse, mercy doth most transparently shine forth in him. Thus his person is love∣lie. 2. Christ is lovely in his dispositi∣on. A good nature is able to render deformity it self lovely. Christ is lovely, not only in his complexion, but in his disposition; He is of a lo∣ving and merciful disposition, and in this sense may be called deliciae hu∣mani Generis Titus Vespas.. It is reported of Marcus Aurelius the Emperour, that he was of a most affable winning temper, given to clemency, and e∣very day he would set one houre a∣part to hear the causes of the poor. Thus Jesus Christ is of a most sweet disposition . Macar., He will not alwayes chide, Psalme 103.9. He is inclinable to
shew mercy to the penitent. He de∣lights in mercy, Micah 7.18. He en∣vites sinners to come to him, Mat. 11.28. he begs of them that they would be saved, 2 Cor. 5.20. he knocks at their hearts by his Spi∣rit, till his head be fill'd with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night, Rev. 3.20. If any poor soul accepts of his offer, and doth arise, and go to him, how doth Christ welcome him . Macarius.. Christ makes the Feast, Luke 15.23. and the An∣gels make the musick, verse 7. But if men will not receive the ten∣ders of grace, Christ grieves, Mark 3.5. He is like a Judge that pas∣seth the sentence with teares in his eyes, Luke 19.42. And when he came nigh the City, he wept. Ah sinners, I come
to save you, but you put away sal∣vation from you Acts 13.. I come with heal∣ing under my wings, but you bolt out your Physician; I would have you but open your hearts to receive me, and I will open heaven to receive you, but you will rather stay with your sinnes and die, than come to me and live, Psalme 81.11. Israel would none of me. Well sinners, I will weep at your Funerals; Oh how lovely is Christ in his disposition! he comes with his suppling oyle to poure into sinners wounds; He would faine break their hearts with his mercies, He labours to overcome their evil with his good. 3. Christ is lovely in his sufferings; when he did make expiation for our sins 1 Pet. 2.24; but what, lovely in his suffer∣ings? lovely when he was buffeted, spit upon, besmeared with blood? O yes, he was most lovely upon the crosse Rubore sui sangui∣nis nos candidos effecit. Ghislerus., because then he shewed most love to us; He bled love at every
veine; His drops of blood were love-drops. The more bloody, the more lovely Quanto pro me vi∣lior, tanto mibi chari∣or. Aug.. The more Christ endured for us, the more deare he ought to be to us. Osorius writing of the sufferings of Christ, saith, Gal. 6.14 that the crown of thornes bored his head with seventy two wounds Doles do∣mine non tua vulne∣ra sed mea. Ambrose. Quid di∣camin cru∣cem tolle∣re? Tully.; and Tully when he comes to speak of the death of the Crosse, shews his rheto∣rique best by an Aposiopesis, or si∣lence; what shall I say of this death? Though a great Orator, he wanted words to expresse it. Nor did Christ only endure paine in his body, but agony in his soul. He conflicted with the wrath of God; which he could never have done, if he had not been more than a man. We reade that the Altar of wood was overlaid with brasse, that so the fire on the Altar might not consume the wood, Exod. 27.1, 2. This Altar was a type of Iesus Christ. The humane nature of Christ, which was
as the wood, was covered with the divine nature, which was like the brasse, else the fire of Gods wrath had consumed it; and all this Christ suffered was nostra vice, in our stead . Ignat., Isa. 53.5. We eat the soure Grape, and his teeth were set on edge: We climbed the tree, we stole the forbidden fruit, and Christ goes up the ladder of the Crosse and dies. Oh how lovely ought a bleeding Savior Pendet anima, & dulcia poma de ligno de∣cerpit Bern. de Flo∣ribus. to be in our eys? Let us weare this blessed crucifix alwayes in our heart Inspice vulnera pen∣dentis, sanguinem mori∣entis, caput habet incli∣natum ad osculandum, cor apertum ad diligen∣dum, brachia extenia ad amplexandum, totum corpus expositum ad redimendum; haec quanta sint, cogitate, haec in sta∣tera vestri cordis appen∣dite, ut totus vobis figatur in corde, qui totus pro nobis fixus fuit in Cruce. Aug. lib. de Virgin.. Crux Christi clavis paradisi. The Cross of Christ saith Damascen, is the golden key that o∣pens Paradise to us. How beautiful is Christ upon the Crosse: The ruddi∣nesse of his blood took a∣way the rednesse of our guilt. How lovely are those wounds which
wounded the red Dragon; When this blessed rock was smitten, water came out of it to cleanse us, and blood to cheare us, 1 John 5.6. When Christ was on the Crosse (saith Ber∣nard) jam fuit vitis amputata. Now the Vine was cut, and salvation came to us in the blood of the Vine; Oh how lovely is this bleeding Vine! Christs Crucifixion is our Corona∣tion Haec une medela cor∣rofit illas quae in immensum exereverant cicatrices, & vim suam concupis∣centiarum perdidit corruptela, & deleta damnationis conscri∣ptione, novis literis assignata est & restituta libertas; privi∣legio dato, charta indulgentiae figillo plaga lateralis firmata Cyprian. de Pass. Christi.. 4. Christ is lovely in his Graces Christus. Candidus, quia mul∣tifaria vir∣tute deal∣batus. Hierom, Anselm, Rupertus, Abbas.; his graces as a divine embroydery did bespangle and set him off in the eyes of the world. Grace was not in Christ as a quality, but essence; as light is intrinsecal to the Sun, and is of the essence of it. Christ did open a box of precious perfume,
and because of the savors of his oyntments the Vir∣gins love him Cant. 1.2.; In Christ there was a constellation of all the graces . Chrysost. in P. 45.; how did he shine in Wisdom Isaiah 11.7., Humility, Zeal, heavenly mindednesse; and which did not a little adorne him, HIS MEEK∣NESSE Matth. 11.29.. How lovely was Christ in this grace! 1. He came into the world Meek, Mat. 21.5. Behold thy King cometh meek. He came not with a Sword, or Scepter in his hand, but with an Olive-branch of peace in his mouth, He preached tydings of peace. Though he was the Lion of Judah, yet he was the Lamb of God. 2. When he was in the world, he was a patterne of meeknesse, 1 Pet. 2.23. When he was reviled, he revi∣led not againe. He left his Fathers bosome (that hive of sweetnesse) to
come and live here; and truely, he exchanged his pallace for a dung-hill; how oft was he called a friend of sin∣ners, nay, he was charged to have a devil, but see how mildly he an∣swers; (This Dove had no gall) John 8.49. I have not a Devil, but I honour my Father. All his words were steept is honey. 3. When be was going out of the world, he shewed unparallel'd meek∣nesse. He prays for his enemies. Fa∣ther forgive them, Luke 23.34. When the souldiers came to take him by force, one would have thought h should have called for fire from heaven, as the man of God did, 2 Kings 1.10. but behold, Grace was oured into his lips Psal. 45.2; see what a mill answer he gives, enough to have mde the hardest heart re∣lent, Matt. 26.55. Are ye come out as againsta thief, with swords and staves to tke me? What wrong (I pray) hae I done you? What have
I stolen from the world, but their sinnes? What have I robb'd them of, but the wrath of God? Oh the mildnesse of this Saviour! surely had not the souldiers hearts been ve∣ry hard O duri, & indurati quos non emollit tanta flam∣ma mansue∣tudinis! Bern. in Cant. Ser. 20. (for in the whole story of Christs passion, I do not reade of one souldier converted; there was a thief indeed converted, but no soul∣dier) Christs meeknese would have melted them into teares of repent∣ance. When he was led away to be crucified, he went as a Lamb to the slaughter , &c, He opened no his mouth, Isa. 53.7. He opened he sides, but not his mouth in repinins; and was not Christ lovely in his meeknesse? No wonder the holy Ghist descen∣ded upon him in the likenesse of a Dove; not a Lion, or Eale, but a Dove, Vita Chri∣sti in ter∣ris disci∣plina mo∣rum. Aug. de vera. rel. which is the emblen of meek∣nesse. 5. Christ is lovely in h conversa∣tion. What was said of Saul and Jonathan, 2 Sam. 1.23. They were
lovely in their lives; is much more true of Christ. His life (saith Chry∣sostome) was purer than the Sunne∣beames. All the Ethicks of Aristotle, all the wisdome of Greece could ne∣ver so describe vertue as it was live∣ly pourtrayed out in Christs holy example. His life was a faire copy; never did any one write without blotting besides Christ; he is call'd a Lamb without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. . His lips did never speak a word amisse. Luke 4.22. All bare him witnesse, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. Thus were his lips like Lilies, dropping pure myrrh, Cant. 5.13. His foot did never tread a step awry. He who was a way to others, did never go out of the way himself. He was so pure that no tentation could fasten upon him. Tentation to Christ was like the throwing a bur upon a chrystal glasse, which will not stick, but glides off. The Prince of this world
cometh and hath nothing in me, John 14.30. There was no powder for the devils fire to take. What was Christs whole life but a pattern of good works! He went about do∣ing good, Act. 10.38. He was either anointing the blinde, or heal∣ing the sick, or raising the dead; ei∣ther preaching, or working mira∣cles. Thus he was altogether love∣lie. 2. Estimative Christ is lovely in the account of others. Three wayes. He is lovely, 1. To God his Father, 2. To the Saints, 3. To the Angels, 1. Christ is lovely to God his Father. God is infinitely taken with him. Christ is called the Rose of Sharon, and how doth God delight to smell to this Rose Mat. 3. ult . Signif. vel. In illo bene sentire; quē sensum sectatur. Iraeneus. Vel refert ad propen∣sum in Deo patre affe∣ctum. Grot.! Isa 42.1. My elect in whom my soul delights. Surely if there be lovelinesse enough in
Christ to delight the heart of God, there may well be enough in him to delight us. Christ is the centre where all the lines of his Fathers love do meet, 2. Christ is love in the account and esteem of his Saints, 2 Thes. 1.10. He shall be admired of all them that be∣leeve. He is admired now, and he shall be more admired of them. Well may the Saints admire to see Christ sitting in the bright Robe of their flesh above the Angels in glory. Well may they admire to see their nature united with the Deity. O how lovely and beautiful is this sight! Well may Christ be admired of his Saints. 3. Christ is lovely in the esteeme of the Angels Ipse can∣di-ruber, quia An∣gelos quos∣que ad sui excitat de∣siderium. Caiodore. They adore him, Heb. 1.6. And let all the Angels of God worship him. The Cherubims which did represent the Angels, are painted with their faces looking up∣wards, to shew, that the Angels in
heaven all are still looking upward, as admiring, and being ravished with the amazing beauties of Jesus Christ. Use 1. Information. And it hath three Branches. 1. Bran. 1. Behold here as in a Scripture∣glasse the transcendent excellencies of the Lord Jesus, He is altogether lovely Si de pla∣centa mel∣lea aut saccharea, si de fructu sapidissimo v. g. de ficu, quae nulles ha∣bet acinos, sed tota est edilis & delicata, dicimus, haec placen∣ta tota irri∣tat orexin, si de vino suavissimo, falerno, cretico, moscatella∣to dicimus hoc vinum summe est, desiderabile; quid dicemus de Christo, qui omne desiderium non tantum satiat sed longe superat? Corn. d. Lap., here is a faire prospect set before us. I wonder not that Paul, that Seraphique Saint, defired to know nothing, save Jesus Christ*, 1 Cor. 2.2. What would he know more? He is altogether lovely; No wonder the Apostles left all and followed him, Mat. 19.27. had I the tongue of Angels I could never set forth Christ in all his lively and lovely colours. Besides what hath been said, take a further view of Christs lovely excel∣lencies in three particulars.
1. He is our light. Light is a glorious creature, Eccles. 11.7. Tru∣ly the light is sweet; The light puls off the vaile, and draws aside the dark curtaines of the night, making eve∣ry thing appear in its fresh colours. Thus Jesus Christ is lovely; . He is call'd that true light, John 1.9. and the bright morning star, Rev. 22.16. when the soul is benighted with ig∣norance, Christ is the morning-star that enlightens it. He is the Sunne of righteousnesse, Mal. 4.2. i. e. tan∣quamradiis justitiae suae perfun∣dens electos Tremel. This Sun of righteousnesse is more glorious than that in the Firmament, 1. The Sunne in the firmament riseth and sets, but the Sun of righteousnesse, when it once riseth upon the soule in conversion, never sets finally upon him; it may pull in its beames, when the clouds of our sin come between, but it comes out of the cloud again, (as it did to David) it never sets fi∣nally. 2. The Sunne in the Fir∣mament only shines upon us, but the
Sunne of righteousnesse shines within us, Gal. 1.16. but when it pleased God to reveale his Sonne in me. The Sunne in the Firmament shines only upon our faces, but the Sunne of righteousnesse shines in our hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6. God hath shined in our hearts: How sweet are these beames! 3. The Sunne in the Fir∣mament shines only in the day-time, but the Sun of righteousnesse shines in the night. In the night of deserti∣on, and affliction this Sunne shines; Psalme 112.4. Ʋnto the upright there ariseth light in darknesse. Oh how lovely is this Sun of righteousnesse! by the bright beames of this Sunne we see God. . Theodoret. in secund. Ep. ad Cor.. 2. Christ is our food. He is not only lovely to the eye, but to the taste, Iohn 6.55. My flesh is
meat indeed. This is Princely fare; Accedis ad Christum non carne sed corde, edis Chri∣stum non dente sed fide Aust. it was never prepared for the Angels, but for us. 'Tis lovely feeding here; Al the rarities of heaven are serv'd in in this dish. And my blood is drink indeed; This blood is better than wine. 1. Wine may be taken in excesse; Noah took too much of the Grape; but it is otherwise with the wine of Christs blood; there is no feare of excesse here. Though a drop be sweet, yet the more we drink, the better; the deeper, the sweeter! Drink yea, drink abundantly Obeloved, Cant. 5.1. Excesse here makes us sober Hac e∣brietas so∣brios red∣dit! 2. Wine, though it cheares the heart, yet at some times, if it be taken, it may be hurtful; give wine in a Feaver and it is as bad as poison. But this wine of Christs blood is best in a Feaver. When the heart burns as hot as hell in the sense of Gods wrath, and is, as it were, in a spiritu∣al Agony and Feaver; now a drop
of Christs blood doth allay the in∣flammation, and sweetly refresheth the soul, 'tis lovely drinking at this fountaine. 3. Christ is our life, Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appeare. Life is sweet; life makes every thing com∣fortable. In this the Devil said true, Skin for skin, yea all that a man hath will he give for his life, Job 2.3. A man will cast the plate and jewels o∣verboard to save his life; he will lose a legge or an arme, to preserve the vital parts—Vt serves vi∣tam ferrum patieris, & ignem.—Is life lovely, and is not Christ who is our life lovely? He was typifi∣ed by the the tree of life in the Gar∣den, Gen. 2.9. That tree was Sym∣bolical (as Austin saith) it was a pledg and signe of life, if man had conti∣nued in obedience. It was certain∣ly a lovely tree, but it was only a type of Christ, who is called , The tree of life, Rev.
2.7. This tree of life the Lord Jesus is a better tree than that which grew in Paradise; Adams tree in Pa∣radise might preserve life, but it could not prevent death; there was dying for all that; but this tree of life, Je∣sus Christ, prevents death, John 11.26. Whosoever beleeveth in me shall never die; that is, not die the se∣cond death, Rev. 2.14. This bles∣sed tree is an antidote against death. If there were a tree to be found in the world that could preserve men from dying, how farre would they go on pilgrimage? What vast sums of mo∣ney would they give for one leaf of that tree? such a tree is Christ, he will keep you from dying, and is not this tree very lovely? In particular, there is a threefold life flows from Jesus Christ. 1. The life of grace, Joh. 1.16. Of his fulness have we all received, and grace for grace. This life is gem∣ma aeternitatis; a bud of eternity, tis a life purchased for us by Christs death.
2. The life of comfort, which is the creame of life, John 16.22. Your heart shall rejoyce. This is an holy jubilation of Spirit; so sweet and ravishing is this joy, that if David, when he had lost his joy, had lost al∣so his crown, and God had put the question to him, which of these two he would have restored, David would have said, Lord, re∣store unto me the joy of thy salvation, Psal. 51.12. Rather my comfort, than my Crown. 'Tis Hilary Tearm with a Christian while these joys last. 3. The life of glory, John 17.22. This is the most noble life; this is to live the life of Angels, nay to live the life of God; 'Tis the highest elevation, and perfection of the reasonable creature, and may we not cry out with Chrysostom ; What more lovely than Christ, from whom these golden streams of life flow? Oh that all this might make
him amiable in our eyes! What should we admire? what should we rejoyce in, but Christ? Christs beauty, like his coat, is w∣ven without seame. We read of Ab∣salom, 2 Sam. 14.25. In all Israel there was none to be so praised as Ab∣salom for his beauty, from the sole of his foot, even to the crown of his head, there was no blemish in him. This may be farre more truly applied to Christ. He is the mirrour of beauty; the map of perfection, the Paradise of delight. He is the crown of the Gospel; if the Gospel be the field, Christ is the pearl hid in this field; If the Gospel be the Ring, Christ is the Diamond in this Ring. He is the glory of heaven, Rev. 21.23. The Lamb is the light thereof. Well might Saint Paul account all things drosse and dung for Christ Phil. 3.8. 2. Branch. 2. Bran. Inform. If Christ be altogether lovely, it shews us the true reason
why men do not embrace Christ, namely, because they are ignorant of his beauty. A blinde man doth not admire the colours in a raine∣bowe; when the God of this world hath blinded mens eyes, they see not any excellency in Christ . Mac.; there∣fore they cry out as here the Watch∣men did, What is thy beloved more than another beloved? vers. 9. Men admire not this Sunne, because the cloud of their ignorance comes be∣tween. Christ is a treasure, but an hid treasure; he is fairer than the children of men, Infoelix homo qui scit caetera omnia, Christum autem nes∣cit. Austin. but to a natural person he is like Moses with a vaile upon his face. The men of the world see not the stupendious beauty of Christ. He doth not want worth, but they want eyes. Oh unhappy man (saith Austin) who knowest all things else but Christ; thy know∣ledge will but serve to light thee to hell. Quest. But you will say to me,
What, not know Christ? I hope we are better bred than so; hath Christ been preached so long in our streetes, and not know him? Answ. 1. I wish there were not many persons grossely ignorant of Christ, who understand nothing of his person, offices priviledges; A Reverend Divine told me, that not long since, he went to visit a neighbour of his Parish ly∣ing on his death-bed, a man four∣score yeares of age, one that came frequently to Church, and question∣ing with him what sinne was, he said he knew not, and what Christ was, he told him he knew not; but saith the Minister to him, if thou doest not know Christ, how doest thou think to go to heaven? his answer was this, If I cannot get to heaven, then I must stay by the way; Oh grosse ignorance ! Balaams asse spake better sense to the Prophet, Numb. 22.28.
That people have been very ig∣norant of Jesus Christ, appeares by this, because they have been so in∣clinable to errour, so greedy to drink in every new opinion as∣soone as the Devil hath set it a∣broach. But my second answer is this, whereas you say, can we be igno∣rant of Christ in this broad day-light of the Gospel? I say, a man may have excellent notions of Christ, and may be able to make an elegant discourse of him, and yet not know him saving∣ly. Though he be not grossely ig∣norant of Christ, yet he may be spiritualy ignorant. There is a threefold defect in the knowledg of most. It is a speculation with∣out Conviction. Affection. Operation. It is a speculation without convi∣ction. Men are not thoroughly con∣vinced
of the excellencies of Christ; John 16.8. and when he (that is the holy Ghost) comes,  he shall con∣vince the world of sinne. Strange! was not Christ in the world? had not he made many Ser∣mons about sin? it is true, he had, but the Jews were not yet convinced of it, therefore he shall send his Spi∣rit to convince them. And of righ∣righteousnesse] why? had not Christ told them that there was no righte∣ousnesse to be found but in him, that they could graff their hopes of sal∣vation upon no-other stock besides? yes, they had heard Christ say so, but they were not yet convinced; therefore the Spirit shall come and convince them. Hence I gather, that men may have a speculation of Christ, yet be ignorant of him, that is, not know him convincingly; and that they have not a convincing knowledge, is clear; for were they convinced in their conscience of the
lovely excellencies of Christ, would they value a lust or trifle, would they with Judas, prefer thirty pieces of silver before him? 2. It is a speculation without af∣fection; men have notions of Christ, but are not warmed with love to Christ. Their knowledg is like the Moon, it hath light in it, but no heat. True knowledge of Christ is like fire to the yce, it melts it into water; so this knowledge melts the sinner into teares of love. I do the hy∣pocrite no wrong to tell him he beares no true affection to Jesus Christ. There is a great deale of difference between the knowledge that the prisoner hath of the Judge, and the knowledge that the childe hath of the parent. The prisoner knows the Judge, but hath no affe∣ction at all to his person, his know∣ledge is joyn'd with fear and hatred; but the childes knowledge of his pa∣rent
is joyn'd with affection, he loves to be in his presence. The hypocrite knows Christ as the pri∣soner doth the Judge, or as the de∣vils knew him, Mark 1.24. with a knowledge of horrour and amaze∣ment, whereas true knowledge is filial; The affections are drawn forth in an inflamed manner after him. The Apostle hath an elegant expression to set forth the nature of true knowledge, he calls it , the savour of knowledge, 2 Cor. 2.14. as a man tastes a sa∣vory sweetnesse in his meat. Hypo∣crites have no taste. 3. It is a speculation without o∣peration. The knowledge that hy∣pocrites have of Christ hath no sa∣ving influence upon them, it doth not make them more holy; it is one thing to have a notion of Christ, another thing to fetch vertue from Christ. The knowledge of hy∣pocrites
is scientia infrugifera, a dead, barren knowledge 2 Pet. 1.8; it brings not forth the childe of obedience. There is a great deal of difference between a Scholar that studies physick for the theory and notion, that he may have the rules of it lying before him, and one that studies Physick to practise; hypocrites are not practitioners; they are all head, no feet, they walk not in Christ, Col. 2.6. Their knowledge is informing, but not transforming, it doth not make them a jot the better, it leaves not a spi∣ritual tincture of holinesse behinde: The flux of blood runnes still, and such a knowledge is no better than ignorance, 1 John 2.4. He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. A man may have a knowledge of speculation, and be no better than a Devil. And this is the reason why men do not embrace Christ who is infinitely lovely, be∣cause
they know not his worth; though they are not grossely igno∣rant of Christ, yet they are spiritual∣ly ignorant. To this day the vaile is upon their heart. 3. Branch, 3. Bran. Inform. If Jesus Christ be so love∣ly, it shewes us the misery of a man out of Christ 1. That lives without Christ. 2. That dies without Christ. 1. Behold his misery that lives without Christ. He is very deform∣ed and unlovely; for all lovelinesse flows from Christ. A sinner in the state of nature is like an infant tum∣bling in its blood, Ezek. 16.6. Thou wert in thy blood. The Leper in the Law was but the sad emblem of a sinner. 1. Lev. 13. The Leper was to live alone, as being unworthy to come into the congregation of the holy. 2. The Leper did wear three marks
to be known by, his garments torne, his head bare, his mouth covered. 3. He was to cry unclean, unclean. This spirituall leprosie is upon eve∣ry Christlesse sinner. Therefore a man in a state of unregeneracy is in Scripture compar'd to things most unlovely and unbeautiful. To a dog, Revel. 22.15. a swine ., 2 Pet. 2.22. a Viper, Mat. 3.7. Homines à bono defi∣cientes, humanam quoque amisere naturam; evenit igitur, ut, quem vitiis transformatum videas, ho∣minem aestimare non possis. Alienarum opum ereptor, lupo similem dixeris; Ferox, & in quietus cani aut leoni parem; insidia∣tor, fraudibus surripuisse gaudens, vulpeculis exae∣quetur; pavidus, & fu∣gax, cervus habeatur; im∣mundis libidinibus se im∣mergens, porcae comparetur; ita fit ut peccans, verta∣tur in belluam. Boetius lib. 4. prosa. 3. a Devil, Joh. 6.70. a sinners heart is a poyson∣ed spring; 'Tis like a piece of muddy ground which defiles the purest water that runnes tho∣rough it. The Hea∣then had this kinde of notion ingraffed into them, for (as Authours report) they had their stone pots of water set at the doores of their Temple, where they used to wash before they went
to sacrifice; a sinner is blinde, Rev. 3.17. and the more blinde, because he thinks he sees. He is dead ? Chrysost. ad Pop. Anticch.; and though he may be decked with some moral vertues, this is but like strowing flow∣ers upon a dead corps Non vivit homo qui superbia inflatur, qui caeteris insicitur pestibus, quia hoc non est vivere, &c. Bern. in Serm 1. de Apostol., Ephes. 2.1. dead things have no beauty in them; a sinner out of Christ is a filthy excrementitious creature Job 15.16, he runs nothing but dregs, he is hell epitomized. There's no part of him sound, —Totum pro vulnere corpus. The man who had his running issue in his flesh, Levit. 15.2. was but a type of a sinner who hath the plague-sores of sinne running upon him, 1 King. 8.38. Oh how ghastly and deformed is e∣very Christlesse soul! God loathes him, Zach. 11.8. My soul loathed them. So abominable and unsavo∣ry is a sinner, that God stands afar
off, Psalme 138.6. He will not come near the stench of him. The sinner is so deformed and diseased, that when he comes to be convert∣ed, the first thing he doth, is to loath himself, Ezek. 36.31. Ye shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities. Thus unlovely is every person out of Christ. If he brags of his goodnesse, it is because he never yet look'd his face in the glass of Gods Word, that would discover his spots and ble∣mishes. 2. Behold his misery that dies without Christ. Though Jesus Christ be so infinitely beautiful, the sinner shall see none of his beauty. Christ will put a vaile upon his face, as Moses did when his face shined, Exod. 34.33. Nay, that is not all; though Christ be so lovely in him∣self, yet to an ungodly sinner he will be terrible to behold. A wicked man shall see nothing in Christ that
is lovely. The Sunne of righte∣ousnesse will be eclipsed to him, his beauty will be changed into fury. The Lamb will be turned to a Lion. Christs visage will strike the heart of a sinner with horrour and amaze∣ment. King Ahashuerus was plea∣sant to Queen-Esther to behold, when he held forth the golden Scepter, but how dreadful was his visage to Haman, when he arose from the banquet of wine in his wrath, Esther 7.7. His look did carry death in its face: So, though Christ be so love∣ly in himself, and full of smiling beauty to his Saints, yet to those who reject him, and die in their sins, O how gastly and affrighting will his look be? His eyes will be as a flame of fire, Revel. 1.14. Christ is represented with a bewe, and a crown, Rev. 6.2. Give me leave to allude. Christ will appeare to the Saints with a crown, very love∣ly, and glorious to behold, but to
the wicked he will appeare with his bowe, to shoot at them with the ar∣rows of his indignation. We read, Psalme 97.2. clouds and darknesse are round about him. To beleevers Christ will shine forth with his rays of Majesty and beauty, but to the wicked he will cover himself with a cloud of displeasure; This will be the hell of hell to the damned, they shall be shut out from a sight of Christs glory, and shall behol donly a sight of his wrath. They shall cry to the mountains to cover them from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.16. The humane na∣ture of Christ, Hierom. (saith Hierom) will be as terrible to a sinner as the sight of hell fire. Use 2. Exhortation, 1. Branch. If Christ be so infinitely lovely, Exhort. 1. Bran. then let us labour to get a part in Christ, that the cursed deformity of our na∣ture may be taken away, and the
bespangled beauties of holinesse may shine in us. 'Tis little comfort for the soul to say, Christ is altogether lovely, unlesse it can also say, My beloved is mine, Cant. 2.16. Igna∣tius cared not what befel him so he had Christ . Ignat. Epist. 12. ad Rom.. Clear the in∣terest. The ground of priviledge is union. There are (saith Bernard) many Christians who have no∣thing of Christ in them Sine Christo Christi∣ani. Bern.. Oh labour to be made one with Christ, to have Christ not only in thy Bible, but in thy heart .; renounce thy own beau∣ty, all thy parts, morali∣ties, duties, these are a rotten bough to hold by, Phil 3.9. That I may be found in him not having mine own righteousnesse. When Augustus Caesar desired the Senate of Rome to joyn some with him in Consul-ship, The Senate answered that they held it
a great disparagement to him to joyne any Consul with him; Sueton. in vit. Aug. Caes. So Jesus Christ takes it as a great disparage∣ment to him, to joyne our Duties in equipage with his Merits. O sinner cast away thy beggars rags, that thou mayest put on Christs lovely robes. I would not take thee off from duty, but from confidence in duty; Noahs Dove might make use of her wings to flie, but she did not trust to her wings, but to the Ark. A man makes use of his feet to go over a bridge, but he trusts to the bridge for safety; Christians while they walk with the feet of obedience, must trust to Christ as the bridge to lead them over the devouring sea of hell; in short, if thou wouldst get an interest in Christ, rely on Christ by faith, and resigne up thy self to Christ by service. A beleever with one hand receives Christ, with the other hand gives up himself to Christ. Christ
saith to a beleever, with my body, yea with my blood I thee endow, and a be∣leever saith to Christ, with my soule I thee worship. Oh Christian part with all for a part in this lovely Saviour. 2. Branch. 2. Bran. If Christ be thus full of sparkling beauties, then fall in love with this lovely object; and with the Spouse, be sick of love to Christ. Beauty doth draw love. Ministers are Paranymphi, friends of the bride groom. This day I come a wooing for your love. Love him who is so lovely. Let Christ lie as a bundle of myrrhe, alwayes between your breasts. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be A∣nathema Mara-natha, 1 Cor. 16.22. Love (saith Chrysostome) is the dia∣mond that only the Queen weares, viz. The gracious soul. Oh that all these surpassing beauties of Christ might kindle a flame of di∣vine love in Christians hearts. Christ is maxime diligibilis (as the School∣men
speak) he is the very extract and quintescence of beauty, he is a whole Paradise of de∣light . Macar. hom. 31.. He is the flower of Sharon enriched with orient colours and per∣sum'd with the sweetest savour; Oh wear this flower, not in your bo∣some, but in your heart, and be alwayes smelling to it; and shew your love to this lovely Savi∣our. 1. By the degrees of it. 2. By the effects of it. 1. By the degrees of it. Love him above all other things Minus te amat qui aliquid te∣cum amat. Aug.; let him car∣ry away the crown and the glory from the creature, 1. Love him plusquam tuos, more than thy rela∣tions, Matth. 10.37. He that loveth father and mother more than me, is not worthy of me. Nay, our love to rela∣tions
must be hatred in iin compari∣son of our love to Christ, Luke 14.26. Great is our love to relations. The creatures void of reason teach naturall affection; the young stork feeds the damme, and helps to car∣ry her when she is old and can hard∣ly flie. Ciconiae parentes se∣nio confe∣ctos nutri∣unt & vo∣lando fessos juvant. Pliny Ari∣stot. Unde . Children should exceed, and out-flie the stork in affection. There is a story in the French Aca∣demy of a daughter, who when her father was condemned to die by famine, she made meanes to get to him, and gave him suck with her own breasts, which being made known, she obtained his pardon; But Christ must be dearer to us than all; He must weigh heavier than relations in the ballance of our affections; for, He is altoge∣ther lovely. If parents lie as a stumbling-block in our way to Christ, if they either come in competition with Christ,
or stand in opposition against Christ, here odium in suos is pie∣tas in Deum Hierom., We must either leap over them, or tread upon them. 2. Love Christ plusquam tua, more than thy Estate. Gold is but shining dust, though it may be lovely, yet it is not altogether lovely. 1. Gold is worse than thy selfe, it is of an earthly ex∣tract. If thou lovest any thing, love something which is better than thy selfe; and that onely is Christ, who is altogether lovely. 2. Riches availe not in the day of wrath, Proverbs 11.4. Riches are no life guard to defend us from divine fury; but how love∣ly is Christ who can screene off the fire of Gods wrath from thee; Oh then love him more than these perishable things Non satis magni à nobis fit Christus, nisi tanti aestimemus ut reliqua omnia quae homines reddere so∣lent bono∣rabiles prae hoc uihili putemus. Davenant.. Christs gleanings are better than the
worlds Vintage. Be not like Noahs Raven, which when it had found a carrion to feed on, ca∣red not for returning home to the Ark. He that loseth all for Christ, shall finde all in Qui om∣nia propter Christum dimiserit, omnia in∣veniat in Christo. Hierom. ad Paulin. Christ. 3. Love Christ plusquam te, more than thy Life, Revel. 12.11. They loved not their lives to the death. They carried their suffer∣ings as ensignes of their glory. They had pangs of love strong∣er than the pangs of death. Did the Curtii die for the Romans, the Codri for the Athenians, and shall not we be willing to lay downe our lives for Christ who is so in∣finitly lovely? 2. Shew your love to this lovely Saviour by the Effects of love. 1. 1. Fruit of love. The first of love is de∣sire
of converse Ps. 42.2.. Love is a trans∣porting of the affections; Lovers desire to be often talking and con∣versing together before the Marri∣age day. Christ converseth with the soule by his Spirit, and the soul converseth with him by pray∣er, and meditation. The soule that loves Christ, desires to be much in his presence. He loves the Or∣dinances, he thinks it is good lying in the way where Christ passeth by. Ordinances are vehi∣cula salutis. The chariots of sal∣vation. Christ rides into the Be∣leevers heart in these chariots. Ordinances are convivium pingui∣um, the feast of fat things, Isa. 25.6. The soule feasts with Christ here, Cant. 2.4. He brought me to the banquetting house, &c. In the Hebrew it is ad do∣mum vini . He brought me to the house of wine. Word, Pray∣er,
Sacraments are to a Christi∣an The house of wine. Here, often Christ turnes the water of teares into of wine. How lovely is this house wine! The Ordinances are the lattice where Christ looks forth and shewes his smiling face to his Saints. Christs parents found him in the Temple, Luke 2 46. The soul that loves Christ, desires conference with him in the Tem∣ple. 2. 2. Fruit of love. Where there is love to Christ, there is sympathy. Friends that love do grieve and rejoyce together. They have sympathi∣zing spirits. Homer describing A∣gamemnons griefe when he was forced to sacrifice his daughter I∣phigenia brings in all his friends weeping with him, and accom∣panying him to the sacrifice in mourning. And I remember A∣ristotle
in his Rhetorique spends almost a whole chapter upon this, proving a sympathy a∣mong friends. . Arst. Rhet. Lo∣vers grieve together: Thus if we love Christ, we shall grieve for those things that grieve him, Psalme 119.158. I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved. We shall grieve to see truth bleeding, Heretiques increasing.—Victa jacet pietas Ovid.—We shall grieve to see tolleration setting up its Mast and Top-saile, and multi∣tudes sailing in this ship to Hell. Tolleration is the grave of Refor∣mation. It was a charge drawn up against the Angel of Perga∣mos, that he had them there, (nest∣ling and brooding,) who held the doctrine of Balaam, Revel. 2.14. by tolleration we adopt other mens sinnes, and make them our
own. I pray God this doth not hasten Englands Funerals. He who loves Christ will lay these things to heart. 3. 3. Fruit of love. He who loves Christ will endeavour to preserve his me∣mory. Friends that beare re∣spect will preserve the memo∣ry of those persons they love, by keeping their pictures, letters, love-tokens; sometimes by pre∣serving their monuments. Here∣in Artemisia Queen of Caria shewed an act of singular love to her husband Mausolus, for he being dead, she caused his body to be reduced to ashes, and to be mingled in her drink every day, so making her body a living Tomb to hold her dead hus∣band. Thus the soule that loves Christ will be often eating his body and drinking his blood in
the Sacrament, that he may re∣member Christs death till he come. They that live without Sa∣craments shew plainly that they have no love to Christ, because thee do not desire to preserve his memory among them. 4. 4. Fruit of love. He that beares love to Christ, this lovely object, will not entertaine any other Lovers; What have I to do any more with idols? Hosea 14.8. The He∣brew word is with sorrowes : Indeed sinne raiseth a tempest of sorrow in the soule, and he that is espoused to Christ hath now changed his judgement, those sinnes he before looked upon as Lovers, now he looks upon as sorrowes. He that loves Christ can look a tentation in the face and turne his back upon it Posse pec∣care & nol∣le, nobile est. Ambr.. When Cyrus would have tem∣pted
the chaste wife of Tygranes, she took no notice of him, (though a King) she had a husband at home; When sinne like Mer∣curies rod with a snake about it, would winde it selfe subtil∣ly into the soule, he that loves Christ dares not give it enter∣tainment, he saith all the rooms are taken up already for Christ, and a better ghuest cannot come, for He is altogether love∣lie. 3. Branch. 3. Bran. If Christ be so lovelie in himself, then you that professe Christ, labour to ren∣der him lovely in the eyes of others. And that two wayes. 1. By commending him, and telling others of his beauty, that they may admire him. So the Spouse in this Chapter labours
to pourtray and set him forth in his glory. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefe among ten thousand. Tell others that Christ is all marrow, all sweetnesse. He is the richest jewel in the cabi∣net of Heaven: Set up the trophies of his honour; tri∣umph in his praises, that you may tempt others to fall in love with his person. The tongue is the Organ of praise; 'Tis pi∣ty the Organs are so oft out of tune, in murmuring and com∣plaining; Oh let these Organs be still going, let our tongues sing forth the praises of him who is altogether lovely. Daugh∣ters of the blood Royal have the pictures of Kings brought to them, and by seeing the pictures, they fall in love with their persons, and are marryed to them; By our commendati∣ons
of Christ, we should so paint out Christ to others, and draw his picture, that when they see his picture they may fall in love with him, and the match may be presently struck up. 2. Render Christ lovely in the eyes of others by adorning his Gospel, and walking worthy of Christ, Colos. 1.10. It is an honour to a Master to have good servants, and how doth it proclaime Christ to be lovely, and glorious, when they that professe him are eminent for pi∣ety, 1 Peter 2.9? Christ ap∣peares lovely in the holy lives of his people. Brethren, there are some per∣sons among us whose scandalous impieties masked over with Re∣ligion, hath made Christ appeare
unlovely in the eyes of others; it is enough to make men afraid to have any thing to do with Christ. As if he did abet men in their sinne, or at least con∣nive at them. The blood of some will not make reparation for the injury which their teares have done to Christ. I have read of certaine images which on the out-side were covered with gold and pearle resembling Ju∣piter and Neptune Lucian.; but with∣in nothing but spiders and cob∣webs; and have not we many who have been covered with the gold and pearle of profession re∣sembling the Saints of the most high, but within (as Christ saith) full of all uncleannesse, Matthew 23.27? insomuch that we may see the spiders creeping out of them; O that all who professe the Name of Christ might de∣depart
from iniquity, 2 Tim. 2.19. that they might set a Crown of ho∣nor upon the head of Christ, & make him appear lovely in the eyes of o∣thers. Use 3. Consolat.Here is comfort to them who are by faith married to Christ; this is their glorious priviledge, Christs beauty and lovelinesse shall be put upon them; They shall shine by his beames; This is (as learned Davenant saith) caput honoris, the apex and crown of honour; the Saints shall not only behold Christs glory, but be transform'd into it, 1 John 3.2. We shall be like him; that is, irradiated and enameld with his glory. Christ is compar'd to the beautiful Lily Lilium flos emni∣um gratissi∣mucob ui veum can∣dorem. Guadal penss., Cant. 1.2. His Lily-whitenesse shall be put upon his Saints. A glorified soul shall be a perfect mirrour, or chrystal, where the beauty of Christ shall be transpa∣rent. Moses married a blackamore, but he could not make her faire;
but whomsoever Christ marries, he alters their complexion, he makes them altogether lovely. Other beau∣ty causeth pride, —Fastus inest pulchris— but no such worm breeds in heaven. The Saints in glory shal admire their own beauty, . Gr. Nazian. but not grow proud of it. Other beauty is soon lost. The eye weeps to see its surrowed browes, the cheeks blush at their own palenesse. Nec semper violae, nec semper lilia florent, Et riget amissis spina relicta rosis Ovid.. But this is a never-fading beauty; age cannot wither it; it retaines its glossinesse, the white and vermilion mixed together to all eternity. Think of this, O ye Saints, who mourn now for your sinnes, and be∣waile your spiritual deformities (you are comely, yet black) remember, by vertue of your union with Christ you shall be glorious creatures; then shall your cloathing be of wrought
gold, then shall you be brought unto the King in rayment of needlework, Psal. 45. and you shall hear Christ pronounce that blessed word, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all faire my love, and there is no spot in thee. Printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Corn-hill. Loves entercourse between the Lamb and his Bride, Christ and his Church. Or a clear Explication and Application of the Song of Solomon. By Will. Guild. D.D. FINIS.
ERRATA. FOr Mediation. pag. 71. line 12. read medita∣tion. for medulo, p. 304 marg. r. modulo. for isunt. p. 331. marg. r. insunt. for  p. 338. marg. r. . for Isa. 32.13. p. 346. l. 5. r. Deut. 32.13. for love p. 363. l. 6 r. lovely. for  p. 366. marg. r. . In the Sermon upon Psal. 37.37. p. 2. for praemit r. premit. for  p. 38. r. .
THE INDEX. CHAP. I. THat negative goodness is not sufficient to entitle a man to heaven. Pag. 4 CHAP. 2. What is meant by the Law of God. 11 What is meant by delight in Gods Law. 12 Doct. That a true Saint delights in Gods Law. ibid. CHAP. 3. Whence the Saints delight in the Law springs. 13, 14 CHAP. 4. A characteristical difference between a childe of God and an hypocrite. 16, 17, 19
CHAP. 5. Two cases resolved. p. 20, 23. CHAP. 6. The tryal of a Christians delight in God, and his Law. 27, 28 CHAP. 7. An Exhortation to this spiritual de∣light in Religion. 35, 36, 37 CHAP. 8. How a Christian may attain to this blessed delight. 51, 52 CHAP. 9. This delight in God should cause thank∣fulnesse to God. 53, 54 Concerning Meditation. CHAP. 1. That a good Christian is a meditating Christian. p. 59 CHAP. 2. What Meditation is. 61, 62 CHAP. 3. That Meditation is a duty. 66, 67 CHAP. 4. How Meditation differs from memo∣ry. 69
CHAP. 5. How Meditation differs from study. 71 CHAP. 6. The subject-matter of Meditation. 72 SECT. 1. Meditate on Gods Attributes. 73 Six in particular. 1. Meditate on Gods omnisciency. 74 2. Meditate on Gods holinesse. 75 3. Meditate on Gods wisdome. 77 4. Meditate on Gods power. 78 5. Meditate on Gods mercy. 81 6. Meditate on Gods truth. 84 SECT. 2. Meditate upon the promises. 85 SECT. 3. Meditate upon the love of Christ. 90 SECT. 4. Meditate upon sin. 96 SECT. 5. Meditate upon the vanity of the crea∣ture. 101 SECT. 6. Meditate upon the excellency of grace. 103.
Grace is better than gold. p. 105 Grace is better than gifts. 106 SECT. 7. Meditate upon the estate of your soules. 109 SECT. 8. Meditate upon the fewness of them that shall be saved. 113 SECT. 9. Meditate upon the sadnesse of final a∣postasie. 117, 118 SECT. 10. Meditate of death. 120 SECT. 11. Meditate upon the day of judgment. 125 SECT. 12. Meditate on hell. 133 SECT. 13. Meditate on heaven. 139 SECT. 14. Meditate upon eternity. 143 SECT. 15. Meditate upon your experiences. 148 CHAP. 7. Discovering the necessity of Meditati∣on. 193
CHAP. 8. Use 1. Inform. It shews why so few good Christians. 199 CHAP. 9. Use 2. Rept. It reproves them who do not meditate in the Law of God. 201 CHAP. 10. Use 3. Exhort. A holy persuasive to Meditation. 203 CHAP. 11. The answering of Objections. 207, 210 CHAP. 12. Concerning occasional Meditations. 215 CHAP. 13. For the right timeing of meditation. 222 CHAP. 14. How long Christians should be conver∣sant in this duty. 231 CHAP. 15. The usefulnesse of Meditation. 233 CHAP. 16. The excellency of Meditation. 249 CHAP. 17. Divine motives to Meditation. 251 CHAP. 18. Rules for Meditation. 259
In the Appendix to MEDITATION. Doct. THat it is the sweet tem∣per of a gracious heart to be still with God. 289 What it is to be still with God. 290 In what sense the soul is said to be still with God. 291, 292, 293 Why the soul is still with God. 298 Use 1. Shewing how a Christian may be in heaven before his time. 305 Use 2. Reproof 1. Branch. It re∣proves them who are never with God. 306 2. Branch. It reproves them who are seldome with God. 309 Use 3. A persuasive to Christians to be still with God. 312 1. Argument, How unworthy it is to
have the heart set upon the world. 313 2. Argument. What a rare kinde of life it is to be still with God. 314 1. It is the most noble life. 315 2. It is the most satisfactory life. 316 3. It is the most joyful life. 317 4. It is the most durable life. 318 How a Christian may arrive at this blessed frame of heart. 320 Concerning Christs loveliness. Doct. Jesus Christ is infinitely love∣ly. 332 That Christ is most lovely, appears, 1. By his titles, 333 2. By Types prefiguring him; which were either, 1. Of Persons, as Mo∣ses, 334 David, 336. Solomon, 337. or, 2. Of things.
1. Christ was typified by the pillar of cloud and fire. p. 338 2. Christ was typified by the Manna. 339 3. Christ was typified by the mercy-seat 340 4. Christ was typified by the brazen Serpent. 341 5. Christ was typified by Noahs Ark. 342 3. That Christ is lovely, appeares by several resemblances; He is com∣pared to things most lovely. As, 1. To the Rose of Sharon. 343 2 To a precious Vine. ibid. 3 To a corner-stone 344 4 To a Rock 345 5 To a river in a dry ground 346 6 To a rich Treasury ibid. 7 To a beautiful Robe 347 4 Christs lovelinesse appeares by real demonstrations. 1 Christ is lovely in himself five manner of ways 1 He is lovely in his person. 348, 349
2 He is lovely in his disposition p. 352 3 He is lovely in his sufferings. 354 4 He is lovely in his graces 357 5 He is lovely in his conversation 360 2 Christ is lovely in the esteeme of others. He is lovely, 1. To God his Father. 362 He is lovely, 2. To the Saints 363 He is lovely, 3. To the Angels ibid. Use 1. Information. 1 Branch. Behold the lovely excellencies of Christ. 364 2 Branch. It shews us that the reason why many embrace not Christ, is their ignorance of his lovelinesse. 371, 372 3 Branch. It shews the misery of a Christlesse person. 1 Who lives without Christ 379 2 Who dies without Christ 382 Use 2. Exhort. 1 Branch. Labour to get a part and interest in Christ, 384 2 Branch. Fall in love with this lovely Saviour 387
Try your love to Christ. 1 By the degrees of it p. 389 2 By the fruits of it 391 3 Branch. Labour to render Christ lovely in the eyes of others 397 1 By commending his beauty. 398 2 By adorning his Gospel 399 Use 3 Consolation. Christs glorious beauty and lovelinesse shall be put upon the Saints. 401, 40 FINIS.
