a936 99883024 183217
All is ours and our HUSBANDS, Or the Country Hostesses VINDICATION. She durst not Scold 'tis counted for an Evil. Sheel cheat and whore, and yet be counted civil; Sheel fill her Pocketsby poor Drunkards Losses, And send them all to Jayl by weeping Crosses. To the Tune, of the Carmans VVhistle, Or High Boys up go we. COme all you Tribes of Hostises, That Women against do rail, Come lend me some of your advice Their glamorous Tongues to quail; And I will make it plain appear By nothing but what is true, That all that we get in the Year Is nothing but what's our Due. For if anhonest Company Of boon good fellows come: And call for Liquor merrily In any private Room: Then if I fill the Juggs with Froth Or cheat them of one or two If I can swear them out of both The Reckoning is my due. Or if a shurking Fellow come That have no mony at all And take up any of my Room And for my Liquor call: Then if I take away their Coat Let it be old or new: Or worth a Crown more than thee shot, 'Tis nothing but what's my Due. And some their are that are so old, To swear that I must trust, When once my drink they have they think That then besure we must: From such the Court or common Law, What'ere their Wives insue Shall make their Arse to lye in Straw Their Beedding is all my due. My Husband must not Plow or Cart, Or work like other Men: My Children must not learn the art To either Card or Spin? My Tapster must live fine and brave For he of one make two And many a Groat for me he save 'Tis nothing &c. But I must have another way Our livings for get, And when you hear I'm sur you'l say 'Tis nothing but what is fit: If Tap should fayl toot go the Tail The Proverb old is true, If half a piece come to my Fleece 'Tis nothing &c. Perhaps our Husbands would repine, If they of this should know And think our little Babes divine Were got in Cuckolds Row You know their gains come by the pains Of only me and you, They must not scorn to wear the horn 'Tis nothing &c. Come Neighbours drink with one consent A lusty Bowl of Wine 'Twill break our Hearts of discontent And make our Noses shine: Each took the Cup and drank it up And swore shee'd spoken true And vow'd to have the 'tother Sup Before they bid her adieu Then I that heard the Verdict past How this base cheating Crew, Consented all both first and last To make make poor Drunkards Rue; I took my Pen and writ this Song And to the Drunkards send it That they with me may strive to see Their wicked Life and mend it, Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye-Corner
