B4623A 99887568 182293
A brief Relation of an Atheisticall creature, living at Lambert, which is of a strange opinion that his sins are too big for him to goe to Heaven, and too little for him to goe to hell, he thinks he shall dye a Pharisie: Further he desired to have a Commission to burne every new marryed couple in the Buttock, but paying him forty shillings they should escape unburned. To the tune of, Jesper Cuuningam, or brave Lord Willoby. GOod Christians all give eare awhile, and mark what I relate, There lives a man in Lambert Town, govern'd by lucklesse fate: An Arhist he in Judgement is, not fearing Heaven nor Hell, But in presumption every day, 'gainst God he doth rebell. He thus unto his Neighbours spake, my sins quoth he are great, That I my self shall not attaine, to fit i'th Heavenly seate: Nor shall my souls goe down to Hell, (sin doth not multiply) In heart I doe believe that I a Pharisie shall dye. This as a jeere he thus did say, blaspheming of our God, But such that will not him obey, shall surely féel his Rod: Like the Foole he saith there is no God, but Men like Dogs must dye, And have no other just reward, of bliss or Misery, But yet this Viper he is given to covet after Bold, Though neither he fears Hell nor Heaven as this for truth is told: A Commission he did séek to have, a Villanous act to doe, Then lift a while you standers by, and Ile declar't to you; Quoth he, if I a grant might have, and a commanding power, Each marryed Couple I would brand, to make their pleasure lower: But if full forty shillings they, to me would fréely give, They should injoy their Loves in peace, in Unity to live. But those which did this same deny, should féele my cruell ire With irons hot I would them burn, hoat with the flaming fire: With which, impression déep Ide make, and were'em by my side, The first that I in hand did take, should be a young-mans Bride. Inhumane like shus would he deale with those new marryed, His tyrant hand they sure should féele, so soon as they were wed, O what a Tyger would he prove, if he in Office were, The like before in all my life, I never yet did here. The second Part, to the same Tune. HIs savage mind doth thirst for blood, he's of the swinish bréed, And on the churlish Caniball, on mens flesh he would féed: And likewise the poore Female sex he'd punish with A brand, This all young folks he would peplex, unlesse they'd bribe his hand. This great confusion in the Land, about Religion sure, Doe bring Mens hearts to hainous sins, for all they'r counted pure: They climbe so ho high above their reach, it is the Brothers fricks, Then from the top they down doe fall head-long and breake their Necks. So by that meanes there epicures, and Atheists they doe rise, And Pharisees with their wild Sects, Gods glory to despise, The Antinomians lead the way, for to commit all evill, Saying to sin it's for their good, though it lead them to the Divell, When they in these wild wayes are fixt, like Judas some dispaire, And presently goe hang themselves, in conscience troubled are: me dround themselvs, some stob them∣selvs, and some their throats doe cut, When Men run headlong in their wayes, hose God from him doth shut. Good Christians be not thus sedus'd, by Wolves cloath'd in Shéep-skins, For with your eyes you plainly sée, God plagues us for our sins. If there be neither Heaven nor Hell, how comes it then to passe, In Winter time the Snow appears, in Summer-time the Grasse: The Sun the Moon, the Stars give light, as God hath so decréed, But he that saith there is no God, is sure a fool indeed, Let none delude you from the truth, but faithfully believe, That God is just in all his wayes, so mayst thou Heaven receive, These vild Sectarians doe annoy, and fill the land with sin, They'r sevenfold nearer the sons of Hell, then when they did begin: Believe not them, believe Gods Word, so shalt thou live in peace, And let true-hearted Christians pray, that Englands wars may sease. Lord blesse thy Ministers which teach thy word in every Church, And breake in too the Sectaryes, that would thy people lurch: Heaven prosper us that we may live, so as with you to dwell, For goodly men shall goe to Heaven, and wicked ones to hell. FINIS. London Printed for C.D. 1649.
