c6542 99887068 181794
The Country Lovers; OR, Wooing without Ceremony. Being the Successful Amours of Roger and Margaret. A most Delightful New SONG. Hodge grieves to see his Peggy now grow Coy, Whom he so long esteem'd his only Joy; But 'twas, it seems, a trick the Wench had got, To try whether he lov'd or lov'd her not: But finding that he did, she thought it fit To yield to him, (faith I commend her Wit. To the Tune of, Hail to the Mirtle Shades. REmember the standing Corn, remember the Hay-cock where I So oft to Peggy have sworn, that her I wou'd never deny: O there we eat Cheese-cakes & Cream and many another fine thing, And there poor Hodge did dream he fast to his Peggy did cling. But waking it was not so, for I was deceiv'd in my joy, And Peggy did still say no, yea, and seemed woundy Coy; That she'd not give one Leer, though a Poppy Garland I made, For to Crown my lovely dear, Whilst we did sit under the Shade. O Cupid what dost thou mean, unless thou intend'st for to kill, A Lover quite and clean, now force my Peggy to smile: That like unto the gay Rose, (which upon yon Bush does hang) She may a Blush disclose, and with me merrily gang. To see the Kids and Lambs, frisk on the flowery plant, And Blating to their Dams, for want of the Teat complain: To hear the Sky-Lark Sing, and the Lapwing call her young, O Peggy as fair as the Spring, with Hodge wilt thou not gang? Alas I am undone, if that thou dost say me nay, Woe's me I e're begun, if Peggy does turn away: O come my Nut-brown Lass, and pitty thy Love sick Swain, Who to tumble in the Grass, wou'd with thee now all so fain. And help thee Milk thy Kine, whilst that he sing thee a Song, Sweet Bird if thou'st be mine, I'le please thee all the night long: And thou'st shall be my Queen, whilst Hodge he does constant prove And dance with thee on the Green, O then sweet Peggy come love. PEGGY's Answer to HodgesComplaint; To the same Tune. FOrgo your sorrow Hodge, let not my unkindness move, I seemed Coy but to dodge, and thy Constancy for to prove: But now I find thee true, thou shalt no loger complain, Nor so mournfully Wooe, for Peggy don't thee disdain, But freely thou may'st Kiss, and if thou'st do something more, Do not neglect thy Bliss, but gang to yon shady Bower: For I can't be unkind, to Hodge whose fine treat of Cream And Strawherries do so bind, that Peggy must ever esteem. I've heard my Grannum say, that Maidens should bashful be, Once and again say nay, before they to Wed agree: And now my Grannums Will, thy Peggy she has obey'd, She must her own fulfill, which Hodge is thy Bride to be made At this began Hodge to smile, and Peggy Clip'd in his Arms, Where sweetly Kissng a while, she conquer'd so with her Charms, That Hodge could not forbear, but to the next Shade they went, Where he down did lay her, and gave her her hearts content. FINIS. Printed for P Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, near the Hospi∣tal. Gate, in West-Smithfield.
