D1382 99887094 183316
DICK the Plow-man Turn'd Doctor, OR, The Love-Sick Maiden Cured, Shewing how a Country Maid in Kent fell in love with her Fellow-Servant Dick the man, and how he Cured her of her Sick Distemper, &c. To the Tune of, O Mother Roger, &c. This may be Printed, R.P. YOu Maidens all of London City, pray come nigh, and lend an ear: And th'event of this my Ditty, to you all I'le make appear: 'Tis such a one will make you smile, make you smile, make you smile, Then pray Maidens stay a while. Some to hear't would come a Mile, But your hopes I'll not beguile, Nor your expectation spoil. Near Rochester in Kent there lived a brave Lass whose name was Bess, Such a Prank you ne'r did hear of, as to you I will express: 'Tis such a one will make you smile, make you smile, make you smile, Then pray Maidens stay a while, Some to hear't would come a Mile; But your hopes I'll not beguile, Nor your expectation spoil, Now this Maid was brisk and merry, and had all things to content; Hold! I do forget to tell ye, there was something that ill went. To be short, Sir, this is it, this is it, this is it, That this Maid was very sick; Very, very, very Sick: Sick indeed, but pray for what, Oh! for something Dick has got, NOw Dick the Plow-man he was busie and this Maid was sham'd to ask, Yet she thought with prither, prithee, for to win him at the last; But this was no perfect Cure, perfect Cure, perfect Cure, For her grief encreased more, More then e're it did before: And sick she was, but pray for what, Oh! for something Dick had got, One Day when Dick was very jol'y, and as he was diving Plow; Then he spy'd her melancholly, ah! says Dick, how do you now. Ah! quoth she, I'm very sick, very sick, very sick; O, what shall I do, my Dick, I am very, very sick, Sick, says Dick, I pray for what, O, for something you have got. And Dick, 'tis you can only Cure me, prithee do't before you go; Good now Richard, pray assure me, whether you will, aye or no: My dear Richard, don't deny, neither from your promise flye; For my grieve is malady, You can Cure immediately; Then pray now Richard, give me that I need not name it, you know what, Prethee Betty how should I know, what the thing is that you mean; Then she sighed, and cry'd Hithe, such a Fool was never seen: I must languish here and dye, here and dye, here and dye; And can't have a Remedy, For my grievous mallady; Was ever there so dull a Sot, That knows not yet what he has got, When they had understood each other, Dick for joy did leave his Plow; Gave his Whip unto his Brother, and he Swore he'd Cure her now. Then unto her straight he goes, and his skill to her he shows; Brisk and blith she then became, As any one upon the Plain: Now Maids you see what Dick can do, then try if he can Cure you too, FINIS Printed for C. Lennisson, at the Stationers-Arms within Aldgate.
