D2901 53299056 179826
The Dutch-men's Reasons a Dutch Sunday to be observ'd once a Month, &c. ith their last Praer, and final Resolution (if it prove ineffectual) ainst the Excessive Power of FRANCE. To the Tune of the City Gulls. L Dutch and English that are left live within this Land, their Senses not-bereft, now understand easons why we have thought fit proclaim a Fast; is, that Heaven wou'd us permit at the French at last. e our Arms their Aim have mist three Campaigns in Flanders, makes us fear Heaven does assist French King's brave Commanders: uxenburgh, as if inspir'd, ct with that Decorum, when our Troops against his Fir'd ove all strait before him. hen they came with Sword in hand other to attack, French as firm as Rocks did stand, made us all give back: an't they brag nor boast too much intire Defeat; though no English, yet the Dutch ake a brave Retreat. who is able to withstand Excessive Power of FRANCE, Aesop does lead on the Van, his Conqu'ring Troops advance? on him, he's a Witch we fear, so Brave and Stout; et him Charge in Front, or Rear, does our Armies Rout. 'tis madness we confess with France to Fight; let our Force be more or less e Cause been't Just and Right. English Men, when they ingage, y scorn to Flinch, or Waver; y only wish for a clear Stage, from the Foe no Favour. Witness at Steenkirk where they stood 'Till Thousands lost their Lives, And spent their Blood for th' publick Good, And to preserve our Wives And Children all, from being Slaves To France, and made a Prey; They'd rather like Fools dig their Graves, Then like us run away. But what if Mounsieur's Maggot bite, And he should take a freak, To put us all into a fright By besieging of Masteick. There's but one way that can be good To obstruct his marching thither, To pray with all our hearts Heaven wou'd Send some Confederate Weather. But those Designs of Hell, and France, Great William will prevent With English Troops, which he'll advance, And make a great Descent: In Person he has Vow'd to go, Therefore we need not fear, The Descent will miscarry so, As it did the last Year. Since England has Five Millions rais'd In order to Recrute Our Troops this Year, kind Heaven be prais'd, We will once more Dispute; Whether William, Lewis, or King James, Their Right can best maintain: For if we don't the Man it seems Will have his Mare again. And having quite repair'd our Loss We'll Fast and Pray once more; But should the Fates prove half so cross As at Mons and Namure, We do protest we'll never Fast, Nor Pray; but for the future We'll only beg that Heaven at last Wou'd act fair, and stand neuter. Printed at AMSTERDAM in the Year 1693.
