E435 99885247 182628
An ELEGY On the Right Honourable Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, Who dyed on the 21st of January 1683▪ THe Busie Statesmen who by Toyls unblest Torment themselves to give their Country Rest▪ Those publick Great First movers of the State, Who almost turn the Mighty Wheels of Fate, Roul the vast Stone like Sysyphus in vain; Whilst Deaths last Call ends a whole Ages Pain▪ The Graves long Rubicon must all pass o're, Whence launching Caesars can return no more Farewell, Great Shaftsbury! Times Sythe can stretch Where Malice, Sword, and Axes ne'er could reach. Thy Life, great Statesman, stood in Fate so high, That thou by nought but Heav'ns own Hand couldst die. Yes, Heaven alone compiles thy Funeral-Urn: Less than the Sun the Phoenix shall not burn. What did wise Solon, or Lycurgus do? Lycurgus dy'd, like Thee, an Exile too. And whilst proud Belgia thy Bones Entombs, And triumps at the Glory it assumes, Belgia, who in thy Fate has now done more Than all her Trumps or Opdams could before. Belgia has vanquisht more in thy one Grave, Than all the Wounds her Thunder ever gave. Sleep then thou Activ'st of Mankind. Oh make Thy last low Bed, and Deaths long Requiem take; Thou who whilst living kept'st the World awake. Oh may thy Funeral-Rites walk that large round, Till to thy Western-shore thy loss resound; Till Carolina shall in Mourning stand, With all the Cypress of a VVidow'd Land. Let Fools and Knaves through their false Opticks find Thy Spots, and be to all thy Brightness blind. Let Envy all her monstrous Forms suggest, And lodge the Raven in the Eagles Nest. Let 'em rail on, and vent their hurtless Gall, VVhilst Shaftsbury's Renown surmounts 'em all. From his clear Fame the dissolv'd Clouds shall throw, And leave the Earthly Vapours all below. Yes, Mighty Man, lay thy great Reliques down, Thou Idol of the croud, Dread of the Crown; Shaftsbury in popular Arts and Harts so learn'd As with his VVeight the Scale of Nations turn'd: To him the Kingdoms Genius bended low; The Thrones best Friend, or formidablest Foe. If the best Gifts which the kind Stars dispense, The highest Prodigies of VVit and Sense, For Immortality Foundations lay; No Greater Soul e're lodg'd in Walls of Clay. Swiftly his restless Orb of Fire went round, And light and warmth we from his Influence found. His kindest Rays and temperater Heat The Protestants still-favour'd Climates met: There his best Aspect smil'd; whilst Rome alone Felt all the Fury of his Torrid Zone. This was the Cause did such great Foes engage VVith such keen Malice, and such Mortal Rage. For this so high the Roman Vengance boyls VVith Fires more hot that their old Smithfield-piles. But Heavens kind Call has all their Engines crost, Heav'n that has lodg'd thee on that safer Coast, VVhence thou look'st down and seest thy Mighty Hunters lost. EPITAPH. UNder this Stone does Sleeping lye All that was Earth of Shaftsbury. But Funeral-Tears and Weeping Eyes Infallibillity denies. Whilst his wish'd Death's enough to be The Subject of a Jubilee. A more sworn Foe to Roman Pride Not Hannibal himself e're dy'd. For which his Deathless Fame below, His Soul above— His Soul— Ah, no! From Heav'n's lock'd out too sure, if they Who succeed Peter keep the Key. Doom'd to Hells hottest burning Seas, If the Popes Curse can do the Feat. If Papel Rage and Roman Spight For any but themselves Hell-fire can light. An ELEGY On the Death of (the much to be lamented) Anthony K▪ of Poland▪ THe busie Toney who by Toil unblest Torments himself, to break his Countreys Rest; Who, ceasing to be Engineer of State, Turn'd Rogue, yet could not turn the Wheels of Fate: Like Sysyphus, he rowls his Stone in vain; Death plucks his Tap, and ends his PLOTS and Pain. The Graves long Pampus Rebels must pass o're; Thence restless Raskals can return no more. Wretch of 3 Names farwel! Thy Deaths kind stretch, Secures Thee from the Sword and Axes reach; Thy Life, Old Tricker, stood in Fate so high, That Hang-man's hand was fit to make Thee die; Yes, Hang-man only frames Thy Funeral Urn: Less man than Hang-man Traytors shall not burn. What did Old Solon and Lycurgus do? They went to Amsterdam, and died too. Whil'st Belgick Boor Thee and Thy Tap Entombs, And tryumphs in the Brandy he assumes; Boor, who (in burying Thee) hath done much more, Than Trump or Opdam, who were dead before; Boor, with bright Spade, does more in Thy one Grave, Than in all Graves that his bright Spade e'r gave. Trick on, trick on, thou Will-with'-Wisp! now make New Broils in Hell, and never Requiem take, With Plots and Popery keep the Devil awake. May Thy tormented Ghost walk a large round, And its deserved Punishment resound, Till Carolina shall agasted stand, Mourning Kid-napper, who supply'd her Land: Let partial Whigs, through their false Opticks, find Thy Worth, and ever be, like Thee, half blind. Let Factious Varlets monstrous forms suggest; Such Ravens shall never croak i' th' Eagles Nest: Rail on, Phanaticks, vent your envious Gall, Your Toney's Tapping Arts have spoil'd ye all; From Meeting-house dissolved Tubs shall throw, And sneaking Tubster send to th' Room below: Yes, Mouse-trap-man, Thy rotten Loins lay down; Seducer of the Rabble, scorn o' th' Crown; In Treach'rous Arts and Trayt'rous Hearts so learn'd, His weight all hands of Whimsey-boards still turn'd: To him Rebellion's Genius bended low; The Thrones Friend, when at th' Helm, when not, its Foe. If the worst gifts Malignant Stars dispense, If mis-applied strength of Wit and Sense, For lasting Infamy Foundations lay, No greater Kn was ever cloath'd in Clay; His restless Orb of Shams went swiftly round, And none but Raskals his kind Influence found: His gentler Rays, and Life-creating heat, The Land of Whigs and Betty Morris met: Th' unthinking Crowd he courted, and alone He dreamt to domineer i' th' British Zone. But, lost in his own Maze, he doth engage, VVith eager Malice, and with lasting rage; His Brain more hot than Copper-kettle boils, In Shops of Cooks about Py-corner-Piles. But Hells kind Call hath all his Consults crost; Hell, that hath plac'd him on a fiery Coast; Through glass he peeps, and sees his Tricks and Trick∣ers lost. EPITAPH. Under this Stone doth rotting lie All th' Devil has left of Shaftsbury: No Funeral Tears, nor weeping Eyes The melting Sisterhood denies; Whilst Mine-heer thinks his Death to be A joyful Brandy-Jubilee. A firmer Friend to PLOTS and Pride In Holland heretofore ne'r dy'd; For which His Odious Name below, His Soul's above in Heaven. Oh no! It found no Lodging there, if He Speak Truth who always kept the Key: Adjudg'd to sit i' th' hottest Seat, The little Guest will do some Feat; And a fresh Fire in Hell will light, To entertain the wand'ring Salamanca-Wight. LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLXXXIII.
