L2539 99885226 182636
Litterae Consolatoriae; From the Author to the dejected place of his Nativity, the Honourable City of LONDON: Emporium of Great Brittain; In some Prophetick Glances at it's future Glory and Prosperity; Indici of it's present Happiness, from it's Upright and Judicious Lord Mayor, The Right Honourable Sir William Turner Knight; To whom he wisheth a long and happy Life here, and unexpressable Glory hereafter. ALL hail, Blest City! which next age must see Head (as Rome once) the worlds chief Monarchy For tribute, Sun-burnt Affrick, things of price, And the two Indies send thee Gold and Spice; Nilus, Seine, Tyber, Tagus; stoop to Thame. To his great honor, thy immortal fame, Away with tears; let's have no more wet eyes; Thy lofty Roofs already threat the Skies. So Phoenix, grown old, doth by flames expire, To rise more vig'rous from her fun'ral Fire. Dear Mother, hail! behold a fair presage Of times return, or a new Golden Age; Banish'd Astraea again visits Earth, Whose womb is pregnant with th' expected birth; Fear not miscarriage, for wise TƲRNER, he Lucina acts at the Delivery; O happy place! which can at present show Antient Rome's Glory, Cato, The Lord Mayor for his Vigilancy and Care to advance and defend Justice, with the Right and honor of the City, as the Roman Consul did against Catiline, &c. Cicero; Thy vanish'd honors, Rome, to boast forbear, In one united, Censor, Consul are; Worthy to sit in thy adored Chair, If mortal man with Jove might Worship share; Think not (Dear City) thou forsaken art; Wonders my Muse shall suddenly impart; And in smooth Numbers sing mysterious things, Thy fall, thy rise, from whence these changes springs▪ O much belov'd of Jove! thy Fate's his care; Put on a chearful look; of grief beware; No more complaints; vent not a sigh nor tear; Those Emblemes are of an ignoble Fear: Great Hearts such guests do never entertain, Unless they flow from Anger or Disdain. Consider past Events; and thou wilt find That Gods and Fate have evermore been kind: Favours, their Punishment; witness the Fire, Which laid thee low, onely to raise thee higher. When to destroy Jove did an Angel send, He likewise gave an Honorable Friend, Illustrious Craven; whose great Charity And virtuous Deeds unto Eternity Recorded are in Volumes 'bove the skie. Bright day appears; behold a glorious morn; To splendid fortune thou again art born; No longer be transmarine Nations scorn: Boldly advance thy Head; look up, and see Thy Discreet Mayors proceedings, Turner, He, Restoring Justice, doth Foundations lay Whereon thou'lt rise to Heaven: That happy day Thou gain'st thy height, pay Honor to his name Who builds the Groundwork of thy future Fame. London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, at the Sun and Bible in Postern-street near Moregate, 1669.
