L3293B 99887533 182266
The Loving Lad, AND, The Coy Lasse. Or, a new Dialogue between two young Lovers. The Youth did love the Girle entirely well, But she (because her beauty did excell,) Seem'd nice and coy, as Virgins use to bee, And yet at last they both did well agree: The match was finisht but on such condition, That she might fully know his disposition Therefore she did injoyne him not to marry, But for her sake, full seven years space to tarry: And then she is resolv'd (to end all strife,) She'l be his faithful, constant, loving Wife. To the Tune of, my father gave mee House and Land, or, the Young mans joy and the Maidens happinesse. Man. ALl haile thou bright and bonny Lass, my joy and onely swéeting, Good Fortune now hath Brought to passe, that wée should have a méeting, That so I might behold thy face and speak my mind unto thée, And since here is a sitting place, I do intend to wooe thée. For I long time have lov'd thée well, but yet I ne're did show it, Because indéed the truth to tell, I durst not let thee know it. For fear thou shouldst my love disdain, and so in coynesse shun mée, And not my person entertain, which would have quite undone mée. But now I have more courage gain'd, and am resolv'd to try thée, For my affection is unfeign'd, How canst thou then deny mée. Maid. I prethée Will, be soft and swéet, methinks you are too hasty, O talke no more of wooing yet For fear your Master baste ye. You are as yet a Prentice Will. then leave such fond adventures And think not of a wife untill, y'ave serv'd out your inventures. For why I think there's no time lost, but you may longer tarry Your age is twenty years at most, a little too young to marry. Then take my councel if you please, and rest a while contented, Forbear such rash attempts as these, which oft times are repented, Man. Indéed I wish I able were, to follow your direction, But little dost thou know my Dear, the strength of my affection. Love burns so hot within my breast, that if I should conceal it, Besure 'twould never let mée rest, untill I did reveal it, For where true love the heart doth sway, in any Loyal Lover Hée cannot brook one wéeks delay, but must his mind discover. Therefore swéet loving mistresse Jane consider my condition, My heart with love is almost slain, O! prove a kind Physitian, Maid. Fye, fye, thou art a flattering youth, I do not like thy carriage, Leave off such toyes for in good truth, they will thée quite disparage, Think it not strange that I am coy, or that I have deny'd thée, I never will affect a Boy, what ever doth betide mée. Herein I do thée not disgrace, but speak as't doth behove mée, For thou never hadst a manlike face, therefore I cannot love thee. Man. Oh! my Dear that's a killing word, I prethee henceforth forbear it, And let thy sweet lips some comfort afford speak kindly that I may hear it. I prize thee more than Gold or Pearl, thou art my onely Jewell, Then prethee do not frown my Girle, why shouldst thou be so cruel. It thou continuest to deny, and thus in scorn to flight mee, Then surely I, for love must dye, Oh! do not so require mee. But if thou'lt grant mee love at last, and yeild thy self unto mee, My grief and sorrows which are past, us harme at all can doe mee, For in thy love I shall rejoyce, even as it will behove mee, And thou shalt find (my onely choice) how dearly I do love thee. Maid. If that indeed your words be true, and you do so affect mee, Grant this request, and that will shew, how much you do respect mée, Live for my sake a single life, untill seven years a are ended, And then for to become your wife, I fully am intended. But if the same you do refuse, great cause I have to suspect you, Another mate you may go chuse, for I will never affect you. Man. My Dear, this is a difficult task, and yet I tell thee truely, Since thou art pleas'd the same to ask, I will perform it duely, Full seven years space, for thy sweet sake a Batchelor I'le tarry; And eke all other Maids for sake with my True-love to marry. Now give mee leave to kisse thy hand, Maid. my leave is quickly gained, Man The sweetest Damosel in the Land, at last I have obtained. FINIS. London, Printed for F. Coles, M. Wright, T. Vere, & W. Gilbersson.
