M399 53981547 180283
CR HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms The Earl of Manchester's Speech TO HIS MAJESTY, In the Name of the PEERS, At His Arrival at WHITE-HALL. The Twenty Ninth of May, 1660. VVith His MAJESTIES Gracious ANSVVER thereunto. THat this day may prove happy to Your Majesty, is the Hope, the Expectation, and the earnest Desire of my Lords the Peers, whose Commands are upon me to make this humble Tender to Your Majesty, of their Loyal Joy for your Majesties safe Return to Your Native Kingdom; and for this happy Restoration of Your Majesty to Your Crown and Dignity, after so long and so severe a Suppression of Your just Right and Title. I shall not reflect upon Your Majesties Suffering, which have been Your Peoples Miseries; yet I cannot omit to say, That as the Nation in general, so the Peers with a more personal and particular sense have felt the stroke that cut the Gordian Knot which fastne Your Majesty to your Kingdom, and Your Kingdom to Your Majesty. For since those strange and various Fluctuations and Discomposures in Government, since those horrid and unparallel'd Violations of all Order and Justice, Strangers have ruled over us, even with a Rod of Iron: But now with satisfaction of Heart, We own and see Your Majesty Our Native King, a Son of the Wise, a Son of the Ancient Kings, whose hand holds forth a Golden Scepter. Great King! Give me leave to speak the Confidence, as well as the desires, of the Peers of England: Be You the Powerful Defender of the True Protestant Faith, the Just Assertor and Maintainer of the Laws and Liberties of Your Subjects; so shall Judgement run down like a River, and Justice like a mighty Stream; and GOD, the GOD of Your Mercy, who hath so miraculously preserved You, will establish Your Throne in Righteousnaess and in Peace. Dread Soveraign! I offer no flattering Titles, but speak the Words of Truth, You are the desire of three Kingdoms, the Strength and the Stay of the Tribes of the People, for the moderating of Extremities, the reconciling of Difference, the satisfying of all Interests, and for the restoring of the collapsed Honour of these Nations. Their Eyes are toward Your Majesty, their Tongues with loud Acclamations of Joy, speak the thoughts and Loyal intentions of their Hearts; their Hands are lift up to Heaven with Prayers and Praises: and what Oral Triumph can equal this Your Pomp and Glory? Long may Your Majesty live and reign; a Support to Your Friends, a Terror to Your Enemies, an Honor to Your Nation, and an Example to Kings, of Piety, Justice, Prudence and Power; that this Prophetick Expression may be verified in Your Majesty, King Charles the second shall be greater then ever was the greatest of that Name. His Majesties Gracious Answer. My LORD, I Am so disordered by My Iourney, and with the Noise still sounding in My ears (which I confess was pleasing to Me, because it Expressed the Affections of My People) as I am unfit at the present to make such a Reply as I desire; Yet thus much I shall say unto you, That I take no greater Satisfaction to My Self in this my Change, then that I finde My Heart Really set, to endeavour by all means, for the Restoring of this Nation to their Freedom and Happiness; And I have by the  of my Parliament to effect it. Of this also you may be confident, That  GOD, from whom principally I shall ever Own this Restoration to My  the welfare of My People; And shall not only be a True Defender of the Faith, but a  Asserter of the Laws and Liberties of My Subjects. EDINBƲRGH, Re-printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts Close, over against the Trone-Church, 1660.
