p441a 47012565 174532
The Lovers Joy and Grief, Or, A Young-mans Relation, in a pittiful fashion. Being from his Love hindred, by Locks, Bolts, and Kindred. To the Tune of Young men and Maids. AMongst the nine, of Nymphs divine that haunt the forked mountain: If any will, bring me a quill dipt in Castalia's fountain. Ile shew in brief, my joy and grief and her due praises render: To whom I would, come if I coould but locks and bolts do hinder. My joy, in that I had the fate to chuse so rare a jewel, By greif in this, that she my blis is kept by kindred cruel Out of my sight, which day and night doth pierce my heart so tender, 'Tis she to whom, I fain would come but locks and bolts, &c. She is a Lasse that doth surpass her neighbours round about her: Her worth is such, it grieves me much to live so long without her: With strong desire, in Cupids fire my heart burns to a cinder. I would posses my happinesse but locks, &c. As Tisbe fair by Parents care fro Pyramus was hidden, So she to come abroad from home i  bidden: She dare not stir, nor I to her so closely they have pin'd her She would come out, I make no doubt but locks, &c. As Danae was, i'th Tower of brasse inclosed by her father So thée (my swéet) lest we should meet art kept more closely rather Yet as great Jove got to his love though walls did comprehend her, So I did hope to have free scope but locks, &c. I'th interim I, most patiently expect that happy season, I dare not think, that she will shrink for in truth I have no reason: I find that she is true to me in that I must commend her: She would not be, so long from me but locks, &c. It grieves my heart, to think what smart (poor creature) she endureth, What means her kindred use to win her heart wich she assureth Is fixed fast, while life doth last no policy can bind her, To any course love hath such foce but locks and bolts do hinder. SHe hath tis true, to speak whats due too great a Marriage portion: This may I vow, for Cupid now is bent into extortion: I would therefore, her friends were poor, or else in heart more tender; For poor or rich, wéed go through stitch but locks and bolts do hinder. Although my self want worldly pelf unto their expectation, Yet if I may the truth display, without any ostentation; By birth & parts, and due deserts, are not so weak and slender; But that I might, earn any delight though locks, &c. Were I a Prince of eminence and she a Peasants daughter, Had she more, of Learnings store then what wise nature taught her; Her péerlesse face and in ward grace shews in my heart such splendor She mine should be, the like sayes she but locks, &c. Tis not her pelf, but her sweet self, that I in heart do covet: Necessty, let wealth supply for nothing else I love it: Her only love, is that doth move my heart and make it tender: I mourn in grief, without relief but locks, &c. No ease of mind, at all I find but only this assurance: That my dear wench will never flinch though she be kept in durance; She hath her share of woe and care, for which I must commend her, On me she hath bestowed her faith, though locks, &c. Continue still in thy good will, thou Paragon of beauty. And I to thée as true will be so am I bound in duty: Though fortune frown, yet the renown of our affections tender, Abroad is flown, we two are one though locks, &c. With patience weéel expect to feel the fruit of all this sorrow: Though sorrow may, endure this day I shall have joy to morrow: In the mean while, I in exile will be thy true defender And spread thy name, which is my claim though locks, &c. Oh cruel fate, expire the date of two dear Lovers trouble. If once our grief do find relief our joyes will then be double: And all our tears our cares and fears will to our names add splendor, Thy heart is mine, and mine is thine though locks and bolts do hinder. London Printed for F. Cole, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.
