T1323A R185087 [ocm]80924360 192068
To all Iustices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Ministers, Constables, Church-wardens, Headbourroughs, and to all other Officers, and well disposed People whatsoever. THese are to certefie that the Bearers hereof Andrew Dalton Gentleman with his wife, sister, and children, by meanes of the late horrid rebellion in Ireland were deprived of a full estate in the County of Waterford, and Province of Munster to the value of 200l per annum, besides their personall e∣states, amounting to the value of 900l and upward, as is well knowne by the at∣testation of many Honourable personages and Gentlemen of qualitie, through which disasters they are brought by the providence of God to utter misery, no way able to subsist, having a great charge of children in a miserable condition. But petitioning to the late Parliament for redresse could yet procure little or no reliefe. In tender consideration whereof, we whose names are subscribed do request the Venerable Clergie to publish this their sad condition to their respective Congregations, and to animate the hearts of their people (under God) to this most pious worke, verily beleiving that they are fit objects of a generall com∣passion. VVe also desire the assistance of all Constables, Church wardens, and other Officers whatsoever to be so ingenious as to afford them necessary accommoda∣tion fit for travell and repose to people of their ranke and qualitie, allowing them competent lodging in due time to avoid the danger of the law, desiring all Officers now under, his Highnesse the Lord Protector to suffer them to passe without molestation, and so to repaire to Ireland within eight months and no longer, Dated at Westminster February 23. 1653. THe Premises have been examined is allowed of by us Commissioners for the Irish af∣faires, being appointed by his Highnesse the Lord Protector, and the Right Honourable the Councell of State, and is commended unto your charity, and allowed to travell to their friends, Eight months from the date hereof, and no longer; then to take shipping for Ireland the former place of their habitations. Given under our Hands at Westminster, this 20 day of Feb: 1653. Iames Armachanus. Alex. Ranelaugh Iohn VVard. Rob. Forbe. VVill. Cole. Tho. Hammond.
