13264.8 S117034 99852249 177717
A TONGVE-COMBAT, LATELY HAPPENING BE∣tvveene tvvo English Souldiers in the Tilt-boat of Grauesend, THE ONE GOING TO SERVE the King of Spaine, the other to serue the States Generall of the Vnited Provinces. Wherein the Cause, Course, and Continuance of those Warres, is debated, and declared. Pro Aris & Focis. Printed at London. 1623.
To the HONORABLE Sir George Holles Knight, Serieant Major to Generall VERE. HONORABLE SIR: MEeting with a little Pamphlet written by way of Dialogue, and intituled A Tongue-combate, professing to containe a true Discourse of these Warres in the Netherlands betwixt the King of Spaine and the States Generall, I could not, with∣out injurie to Truth, permit so many falshoods (as vnder colour of sinceritie and modesty, were wrapt vp in those waste-papers, to bee vented for rich commodities vpon our Coast, greedie of nouelties) to passe without question or contradiction. The euer-liuing honour of my late Soueraigne deceased, vnder whose blessed Gouernment I was borne, there∣in traduced: The justice and prudencie of my dread Soueraigne now raigning, therein obliquely and apertly aymed at: The truth of the Reformed Religion, wherin I was educated, there∣in oppugned: The loyaltie and reputation of this Nation whom I serue, and for whose just cause I fight, therein defamed; pro∣uoked me to say what I could, and what I knew, in defence of all. And I am fitted and furnished the better to say something to purpose in this point, both by the many yeeres experience I haue had in the Seruice, as also through the manifold discourses I haue often heard, wherein this businesse haue beene diuersly debated; but especially by the many bookes I haue read and translated touching this Subject, for the satisfaction of my selfe and some honorable friends, who are knowne to be too religi∣ous, to enter into courses doubtfull or questionable; at least in∣to warres openly wicked and vnwarrantable. Now being thus fully and clearely resolued in mine owne conscience, I could
not but indeuour to resolue others, who might bee doubtfull, and so seeke satisfaction. It is my duty (I take it) to doe thus; for my meanes I receiue of the States obligeth my tongue, hand, heart, and whole man, to promote their just cause in wordes, waitings, actions, prayers. He is a traytor (as I iudge) to these, to the truth, to his owne, and to himselfe, that doeth not thus thinke, speake, write, and doe, hauing the same ingagements, where occasion is presented. It concernes all Sword-men to sticke to mee, and to vindicate the honour of our deceased Queene, or present Soueraigne, Religion, the Brittish Nation in generall, and our Worthies in particular, who are made, by this blind and bold bayard, abettors of Rebels and Traytours; whereby theirs and our honours are stayned, our Armes defa∣ced, and the memorable workes of Warre which wee haue wrought for these fiftie yeeres continuance, cast away in obscu∣ritie and contempt; nay, condemned as ignoble crimes of in∣gratitude and injustice. Assuredly, he that will not exchange a word with an enemie in this case, for this State and the Truth, which they and we professe in common, is not to bee trusted in actuall disputations, where blowes and bullets are exchanged, and questions of life and death are agitated and controuerted. If any man thinke my style too sharpe, they must consider I am a Souldier, trayned vp from my youth, to haue my sword also as sharpe in this quarrell: besides, I am exceedingly prouo∣ked by a craftie Aduersarie, who vsing mildnesse and modestie to Tavvny-scarfe his owne fained creature, his Puppet, his Pro∣pertie, ouer whom hee insults, as vpon a vaulting-horse lowe enough for his leape, is yet most bitter against the States Generall, and their instruments, who intertaine and employ the true Tavvny scarfes, that will not be so easily baffeled. These he cals Rebels; and for this I often oppose him with the tearmes of Ty∣rannie and Oppression: The successe and Gods blessing vpon these Warres, hauing giuen him the lye, and sealed mee a pub∣lique warrant to say more in this case, with authoritie and eui∣dence of truth. This I dedicate to you, who haue beene a noble instrument in these just Warres for many yeeres past, and will (I doubt not) deigne to protect my Pen, which doth but repeate that which
your hands hath written with bloud, and carued in large chara∣cters vpon the wounded bodies of diuers braue & bold Oppo∣sites. It is now a time or neuer to declare our selues, and stand together for the truth of Religion herein oppugned: which hee that shrinkes from, for any worldly or politicke respect, or any Antichristian ayme, and temporarie temptation, shall surely be denyed hereafter of Christ Iesus, who will publiquely professe to be ashamed of them before God, vvho are ashamed of him here before men; and to spue those luke warme persons out of his mouth, whom the sudden and vnexpected alarum of bold, daring, and desperate opposition for Falshood, will not awaken from that stupide Lethargie, or reserued Foxe-sleepe of Policie, wherein they lye bed-rid, to be as couragious for Truth, as other men are for lyes, in this Age of Atheisme. The Lord by his Spirit kindle this zeale in our hearts for his Cause, and honour the militarie Profession so farre, that as Phi∣neas the Priest, hath heretofore taken his Pike, and led vs by ex∣ample, to execute vengeance on Gods foes that would corrupt others; so vvee may now leade Phineas against that Babylonish Strumpet and her Brood, who commits fornication vvith the greatest Princes of the earth, and would impudently presse into our Tents, to doe, and cause the like villanie to be openly and vniuersally committed by vs and all men. Leade you (Sir) like Iosuah, in the head of the Troupes against this VVhore and her Adherents, and I will follow you as a faithfull. Seruant to Truth and to you, HENRY HEXAM.
To the right VVorshipfull Sir Edvvard PARHAM Knight, Serjeant Major of the Re∣giment of the right Honorable the Lord VAVX, in the Seruice of the King of SPAINE in the Netherlands. IN my late passage downe from London to Grauesend by Tilt-boate, there chanced among others, two Gentlemen at that present also to passe, being both of military profession, but indifferently disposed in their determinations, touching the Sides they went to serue on: for after some course of speech that passed among the companie, the one discouered his intention to goe ouer into the Netherlands to serue the King of Spaine, and the other manifested his purpose to goe serue the States of Holland: but because each of them seemed fortified vvith reason for his determination, and to thinke him∣selfe aswell able to defend it, as hee seemed willing to follow it, all the company, out of a curiositie, were ve∣ry desirous to heare what by either side could bee sayd; but yet with a prouiso, that no inconueniencie or fal∣ling out betweene them vpon it might ensue; and ther∣fore they desired them, that before they began seriously to argue the matter, they should passe their words to each other vpon their honours, that without injuring one another in particular, each might haue his free speech in defence of his owne determined course; and that their arguing being ended, there should no excep∣tions be taken either by them, or any of the companie,
for ought that had beene spoken; but that both they, and all the rest of the companie, (their discourse beeing ended) should in ciuill and courteous manner carrie themselues, and so take their leaues of each other, when their wayes lay to be separated. To this all agreed, and these twaine gaue each other their hand vpon the condi∣tions: and thereupon began betweene them a Tongue-combate, wherein neither of both were slaine or mai∣med: and because it may be some recreation vnto you, to vnderstand how the matter passed, I thought good now at my soonest leysure, and aswell as my memorie would permit me, to pen it downe, and to present it to your view, to whom I hold my best indeuours obliged. And this kissing your hands, I take my leaue, wishing vnto you the atchieuing of all honour, answerable vnto your noble valour and courage. The deuoted honorer of your Vertues, D. N. Tavvnie-scarfe to Red-scarfe. I Lately met with that Conference which I had with you in the Tilt-boat, printed; wherein I found my selfe much in∣jured, in the Answere you put out in my name; and that which you say much mended, and deliuered to the best aduan∣tage. I found also a Dedication fixed to the Front of your Pam∣phlet, as if you meant to make your best friend sharer of the ho∣nour you atchieued by the supposed victorie ouer mee. In all which regard, I could not but take notice of your falshood; espe∣cially
because I saw you did not onely wrong mee, by concealing what I said, and affirming what I neuer sayd, but laboured also to wrong the cause, through the weaknesse of my person. Lest therefore any of my Countrimen should bee wonne by your cun∣ning, to thinke better of your Cause, and worse of ours, then they would, and reason requires; and so bee easily wooed to leaue vs, to seeke and finde repentance with you, I haue incerted what I sayd, or might haue sayd to your emptie allegations; and likewise haue dedicated my indeuours to a worthy Commander; who is not (as yours commonly are) a Souldier Swallow-like for a Sum∣mer onely, or a siege, but whose very name is famous thorow your Armie, and his person knowne to all of yours, that for almost these thirtie yeeres past haue seene an English Enemie in the Field or Trenches: In either of which place if you dare meet me. I will make good vpon your person with Sword and Pistoll, what here I subscribe with my Pen, that you haue wronged me, the truth, and your selfe, if you had any honour to lose by lying.
❧ RED-SCARFE, or the Author of the Tongue-Combat to the Reader. BEcause the ensuing Discourse is Dialogue-wise, and that some note of distinction must of necessi∣tie be vsed, seeing I know not these Gentlemens names, who interchanged this Conference insu∣ing, I haue thought good to note them by their Scarfes; as by calling him that was to goe to serue the King of Spaine by the name of Red-Scarfe, according to the colour of the Scarfe he wore; and to call the other by the name of Taw∣ney-Scarfe, because hee wore a Scarfe of the colour of Orange-tawney. The company after the conditions of quietnesse at parting were agreed vpon, became all silent to heare them begin. The first then (being Tawney-scarfe) began in such words, as you shall finde inserted after this following Preface. Tavvny-Scarfe, or the Ansvverer of the Toung-Combat to the Reader. IMpartiall Reader, I am to let thee vnderstand by way of Preface, that there was no other conference in the Tilt-boate, then vvhat the Authour of the Tongue-Combate himselfe gaue life to, by propounding Argu∣ments, and stirring opposition, howsoeuer now hee would hide himselfe behinde a third person, as if he on∣ly were the Relater or Repeater, not the first broacher of this Word-warre; but I assure thee the contrarie, vpon
the faith of a Souldier. As for that which hee saith con∣cerning the names of the Disputants, that he knew them not, and therefore was forced to call one Red-scarfe, the other Tawny-scarfe, according to the colour of their Scarfes, must thus be vnderstood; that indeed he knew not my name, and for his owne, being a man of many names, he knew not which to assume for that instant, but that some of the companie might haue knowne him by another, worne in some other place, and there∣fore he did wisely dye himselfe into red; which being in graine, will without blushing warrant any falshood, and outface any truth. This I let thee know also, that hee began the Combate, though he giues mee the honour to charge; and that hee retired somewhat confusedly in the end, though he saith (falsely) that I ran away. This shall be sufficient for a touch, and to giue thee warning of the rest, how warily thou art to beleeue him. Tawny-scarfe. It seemeth strange vnto me, that any of our Coun∣trimen should rather resolue to serue the King of Spaine, then the States of Holland, considering how long their Cause and Quarrell had beene by Englishmen supported, and the number of our Countrimen that continue to serue on that Side. Red scarfe. It seemeth as strange vnto me, that men of sense and vnderstanding should not rather regard the iustnesse of the Cause and Quarrell which they are to defend, (espe∣cially when they are not constrained, but that their re∣solution lyeth in their owne choyce) then to let them∣selues be blind-folded and led forward by sinister sugge∣stion, to follow the vn-understanding vulgar Multitude
for companie or custome sake, because they haue conti∣nued so long a time to serue on that Side, without know∣ing or caring wherein right or wrong consisteth. Tawny-scarfe. What care had those, I pray you, of your Religion, to examine the iustnesse of the Cause in the warre of Ire∣land, when they assisted the King of Spayne against their owne Queene and Country? Or those of France in the holy League against their King? were those men with∣out sense or vnderstanding or no? and what care haue you all, in matters of greater moment, euen such as con∣cerne the saluation of your soules, to informe your vn∣derstandings in the truth? Are ye not blindly led on by your forefathers examples, and by the multitudes of men, who vvalke your broad vvay leading to perdition? How then can you blame vs, if in matters of lesse con∣sequence, vve should by your authorities bee remisse? Of all others it sorts not you to reprooue vs. Yet you must not thinke, that the first resolution taken for the assistance of the Hollanders, vvas vvithout good conside∣ration of the iustnesse of their cause; and the same beeing once begun and continued, what needed further doubt or scruple be made thereof by the after-followers of it? Red-scarfe. Because it is no Article of faith, to beleeue that the first resolution taken in England for the assisting of the Hollanders, was not vvithout good consideration of the iust∣nesse of their cause, diuers haue since penetrated into it, to see vvhether it vvere so or not, but could not so finde it, and therefore those you speake of, that haue followed it without scruple, haue beene people that were not scru∣pulous at all: for there is no cause be it neuer so bad, but
some will be found, without any scruple, willing to fol∣low it. Tawny-scarfe. Had it beene warranted vvith a Bull from Rome, as the Irish vvarre vvas, then you durst not haue vnsealed that secret to examine the iustnesse of it, but vvould haue be∣leeued it as an article of faith, (for the articles of your faith ate in your Popes bosome) and perhaps obayed it too, before the Commandements of God. But now you pretend to haue penetrated the bottome, to cen∣sure such as are contrary minded, and to find fault with the ground of a Councell, which you vnderstand not. Red-scarfe. If the Cause of the Hollanders by any vndisprooueable reasons of yours, shall appeare vnto me to be iust, I shall not onely be sorry for mine error, in not apprehending it so to be, but resolue to goe along with your selfe into their seruice. Tawny-scarfe. As for your company, assure your selfe I seeke it not: vve haue too many already that vve cannot trust. And for perswading you to see and be sorrie for your error, it is in vaine for me to hope to worke such a miracle. I know right well, the bright Sunne makes Moles the more blinde; and such as you, who (I feare) haue scared and peruerted consciences, wil sooner beleeue lyes then truth: so that all the euidence I shall bring to cleare this point, vvill but make you the more obstinate and vvil∣full; and I might hope to draw you farther with a fained Legend, then vvith lines drawne from the Booke of life it selfe. Yet since you desire to trie your strength, (for I know you are armed and studied to oppose) I pro∣duce
three reasons, inducing Queene Elizabeth of happy Memorie, to assist the States Generall in these warres a∣gainst the King of Spayne. 1 The first, vvas the oppression and vvrong done them by the King of Spayne, both in violating their aun∣cient and laudable Lawes, Priuiledges, and Liberties, (euen such as vvere fundamentall, vpon vvhich the State stood as vpon a base) as also in tyrannizing ouer their consciences by a most bloody and barbarous In∣quisition. 2 The second reason was, because they vvere our old sure friends, and had bin so, before they had Earles, much more before the Spanish Title in those Parts; and vve desired still to keepe them our neere neighbours, rather then to change them for new friends, more re∣mote both in affection and manners, vvhose propin∣quity vve desired not, beholding it dangerous to Portu∣gall, Naples, and all other Nations, as ayming at an vni∣uersall Monarchy. Especially Queene Elizabeth saw the perill, so great a neighbour might bring to Her and her State, vvhen shee and her Kingdomes onely lay as a blocke in the vvay, to breake the necke of His intended Greatnesse. 3 The third motiue and the greatest, which out∣went matter of State, vvas the maintenance of the Gos∣pel, and peaceable state of the true reformed Church, which began there to inlarge it selfe; and whereof as shee vvas styled, so shee intended to prooue her selfe (and performed what she intended) A true Desendresse of the Faith. Red-scarfe. You haue here alledged sundry reasons to haue cau∣sed
Queene Elizabeth to take the Hollanders parts, it is reason then, that if so be I cannot allow them for suffi∣cient reasons, I prooue them not so to bee, vvhich by your patience and permission I shall be able to doe. The first point is about their being oppressed and vvronged by the King of Spayne, and in danger to bee brought vnder the seueritie of a Spanish Inquisition. That these people liued in obedience of King Philip the second of Spayne, as did all other the inhabitants of the seuenteene Netherland Prouinces, acknowledging him as their true and lawfull Soueraigne Lord, as they had acknowledged his Ancestors before him, from vvhom hee successiuely inherited those Countries, no man can make any doubt or question. The question then is, whether this King, when hee came to the possession of those Countries, did impose vpon the people any pres∣sures, more then his former Ancestors had done; but who is able to shew that he did? the said King beeing then in as full and quiet possession of all those Coun∣tries, as euer any of his Ancestors had beene; and depar∣ting from thence into Spaine in the yeere 1559. hee left none of his Netherland subiects, for any cause of inno∣uation, in any thing any whit disgusted, but in as great tranquilitie as euer they had beene. He left behind him in those Countries no Spanish Gouernours nor souldi∣ers, but gaue the particular Gouernments to the Nobi∣litie of the Country it selfe, and the generall Gouerne∣ment of them all, vnto his naturall sister the Duchesse of Parma, beeing of the same Countrey borne: vvhat wrong in any respect was here done them? vvho com∣plained of any wrong? why was not the good peace and reciprocall loue betwixt this King and his Nether∣land
subiects continued? who began the breach? what actions of innouation caused it? proceeded it from this Prince, or from the Netherland people? When no thought or cogitation was in this Kings minde of any breach betweene him and his subiects, in the yeere of our Lord 1566. certaine of the rascalitie beeing suggested by sedicious Preachers, and those Prea∣chers set on by some of the Nobilitie, little better then bankrupt, they began in most rebellious rage, to fall to the robbing and spoyling of Churches. The Duchesse of Parma being at Bruxels vvhen the newes of this out∣ragious and generall sacrilegious theft vvas brought vn∣to her, was much amazed thereat, and demanded of the Earle of Barlamont, (who then was present) what they vvere that had done this, vvhereunto hee answered her in French, Ceste sont que de Geus, vvhich as much to say, they are but Rogues or Rascals. The Church-robbers, and those that set them on worke, vvhereof some vvere Gentlemen, (though much vnworthy of that title) ha∣uing gotten notice how the name of Geus was giuen them, did foorthwith accept of the name, and wore in stead of brooches on their hats, little woodden dishes, to betoken beggars dishes; and some of that sort did af∣terwards weare Foxe tailes in their Hats in stead of fea∣thers; so as it seemeth they tooke a glorie in this wor∣thy name: for they also caused a print or stampe of a Cocke to be made, at whose mouth the words Viue les Geus par tout le monde were set downe, vvhich is as much to say, Liue, or flourish may the Rogues ouer all the world: and the paper-prints or pictures taken from this stamp, were set vp in all houses, taphouses, and tauernes where they frequented: herehence it commeth, that in all the
Low-countries, this kinde of people doe vnto this day, beare the name of Geuses, howbeit they haue since beene taught to call themselues the Reformed, but Protestants they neither doe, nor euer did call themselues. Here haue you the originall and beginning of the breach betweene the King of Spaine, and these his Ne∣therland subiects; and as touching their beeing oppres∣sed and wronged by the King of Spayne, and in danger to be brought vnder the seueritie of the Spanish Inquisition, the blame that the King of Spaine herein deserueth is, that he was so much ouer-shot, that when hee heard of their breaking downe of Altars and Images in Chur∣ches, of their robbing and carying thence of siluer Cha∣lices, Paternes, Cruets, Candlestickes, Lampes, and Re∣liquaries, with the Tapestrie, and whatsoeuer they might make money of, euen to the very Bels in the Steeples, he had not commended it to be wel done, and sent them rewards for their so doing, and so haue let them runne on euen to the taking of the Crucifixe out of the Church, and hanging it on the Gallowes, as they did at Gorcum in Holland; an act, that albeit the Diuell, Iewes, and Geuses would take pleasure in, yet would ve∣ry Turkes, and Mahometans bee scandalized to be∣hold it. Now because the King of Spayne had sworne at his being in the Netherlands, to defend the Church and Ecclesiasticall persons in their auncient and Christian Priuiledges, and that he apprehended Church-robberie to be theft, he so much wronged these people, as to send the Duke of Alua to punish this theft, which (as I take it) was as little wrong, as to hang a Minister for stealing of a booke of Martyrs out of a Parish Church in London.
Tawny-scarfe. You haue here said something to no purpose: yet first to answere your falshoods, and then to adde that vvhich is true. Your speech consists of two parts: in the one you labour to cleare the King of Spaine from all op∣pression; in the other, you seeke to cast all the fault vpon the people, and especially vpon those of the Reformed Re∣ligion, vvhom by the vvay, as farre as your skill will serue you, you spot vvith three or foure crimes, which I dare say, you count proper to the cause. First, I vvillingly grant the quiet possession of Philip the second King of Spaine in those Prouinces, and the generall obedience vvhich the people yeelded to him, during the time of his stay amongst them, all which augments his obligation of loue. But whereas you lay the cause of these ensuing warres, to the rascall multi∣tude, sedicious Preachers, and bankrupt Nobilitie (as you style them) you shall finde your owne glorious and Catholique Companie to be these Rascals, your owne Popish Clergie to be the sedicious Priests, your owne bloudie Nobilitie, to be these bankrupts of true Bloud and Nobilitie. For the reprochfull name of Geus cast vp∣on them, vvhich you interpret Rascall, they wore it, and the ensignes and badges of it, as an honour, to let the world see, the King of Spaine and his Councell, especial∣ly the Clergie, accounted no better of them, then of Rogues or beggars, and intended with the vtmost speed to make them such, vvhich also they exprest by the woodden dish. As for the Foxe taile, vvhich you say, they wore in their Caps, it was perhaps to put you in minde, that nei∣ther they nor their Preachers were such Votaries as your
chaste Friar Cornelius Adrianson of Bruges; vvho being a most zealous persecuter of the Geuses, and very deuoute and obedient to the Church of Rome and the Catholike King, inuented an Order of humilitie and innocencie, and vsed to vvhip the penitent female soules, that hee confest, with a Foxe-tayle starke naked, telling them it became Innocencie to bee seene so. This must needes bee a sore and seuere kinde of Penance both to them and to him; yet not so absurd and abhord, as that Sodomiticall practise of the Friars of Gant and Bruges; for which much about that time, many were burnt, and many were vvhipt, by the sentence of the Court of Flanders, beeing all men of their owne Religion. For the hanging vp of a Crucifixe vpon the Gallowes at Gorcum, vvherewith you charge the people, I must confesse I allow not of the fact; nay rather I condemne it as an idle and scandalous action, neither can I suppose it true; yet admit it were so, then doubtlesse either it was done by some irreligious persons, who mixed thēselues vvith the multitude of rash Reformers; or if by some o∣thers, out of blinde deuotion and indiscreet zeale, they might defend themselues with these reasons, which you can hardly refute. 1 First, you paint Christ hanged on a Crosse, vvho fits in glory at the right hand of God the Father: for this they hang vp your forgerie; and doe no more indeed in the open ayre, then what you did before by the pen∣sill, vnder the roofe of your owne houses, or in the Church. 2 Secondly, your Masse priests euery day crucifie againe the Lord of life, at least they make such as you beleeue they doe so, vvhilst they offer vp his bodie to
God the Father for sinne, as once hee did for all on the Crosse himselfe. But these onely did execute the pi∣cture, vvhilst your Clergie, like Caiaphas, Annas, Herod, Pilate, and Iudas, betray, accuse, and condemne him eue∣ry day in person, as they say, if hoc est corpus meum, with a crosse or two added, haue power to change a Cake into Christs bodie. 3 Thirdly, that Idol rob'd God of his glorie, and Christ of his worship; vvhilst, either it had all or part of that respect, vvhich was due to the person. If then a man for meere necessitie stealing a Surplice, Chalice, Image, or the like, out of your idolatrous Temples, bee vvorthy of hanging, though he bee the image of God, what, is not your Idol worthy to bee hanged, who robs God of his glorie, & your soules of true felicitie? Christ himselfe whipt theeues out of the Church, and shall that theefe be left there? It is your blinde deuotion to preferre that Idol, before the true, liuely, and liuing I∣mage of Christ, vvhom you daily hang vp for this Idols sake: and so, whilst you thinke to doe God good ser∣uice, doe seruice to the Diuell, making your owne sonnes and daughters passe thorow the fire to Molech. As for the Minister which you bring in by way of in∣stance, who should steale (as you say) a Booke of Martyrs out of a Parish Church in London: if there were any such man, he was worthy to be hang'd; but suppose hee had stolen your god amighty in the siluer Boxe, (as hee vvas very like to doe it, had it stood in his way) what a pitifull case had you beene in, whilst you must haue pursued him as Laban did Iacob, saying,Gen. 31.30. why haue you stolne away my god? And this for answer to your naked and emptie allega∣tions,
which must bee credited vpon your bare word. But whereas you cry out, or rather crow like a Cocke on a dunghill, demanding vvhat wrong in any respect was done the people? who complained of any wrong? why was not the good peace and reciprocall loue betweene this King and his Netherland subiects continued? who began the breach? what actions of innouation caused it? proceeded it from this Prince, or from the Netherland people? I will briefly as I may, satisfie all your demands, shewing first the true and naturall constitution of that mixed Gouernement ab initio, and then proceeding to manifest what new pressures, contrary to the fundamentall Lawes of the State, and what daily incroachments, stolne vpon the peoples Liberties by policie, prouoked this warre, and produced the dire effects following; as a mirrour to warne all Magistrates to beware of tyrannie, and to bee content with their owne in manly moderation, lest Lu∣cifer-like, seeking to become gods, they prooue diuel∣lish Tyrants, and so lose their first angelicall seates of Soueraigntie. But because it is impossible in so narrow a Discourse as vve intend, to speake of all particulars, and to deliuer seuerally, vvhat euery Prouince, and euery City in eue∣ry Prouince, holds apart from others, as proper onely to themselues, I vvill onely shew you a few of those Prin∣ciples (rather then Priuiledges) of State, vvhich these Nations haue preserued intire in generall, notwithstan∣ding the many powerfull hands they haue in that time past thorow; when, euen the most noble and generous Nations, vvho boast and glorie of vniuersall Monarchies, haue indured in lesse time many violent changes, and a totall and finall losse of their Liberties.
The Batanians (for that is the most generall name pro∣per to this people) were originally of the Cattens, now called Hessens; they first possest the Land which they now hold, without iniurie to any other Nation or per∣son, finding it not inhabited by reason of many wants and inconueniences, vvhich their inuincible industries haue since ouercome; and much of it also not habitable, in regard of sundry difficulties vvhich their admirable inuentions haue since remooued, or conuerted into profitable helpes and necessarie commodities. Thus o∣riginally they are free vvithout forraine tenure for the place, or complaint of any person for elbow-roome or intrusion. Their Gouernement also was as free as go∣uernement could possibly be: they chose their Gouer∣nours themselues, vvere he one or more, King, Gene∣rall, or Earle; and euer had respect that their Liberties and welfares should not rest in the bosome or disposi∣tion of one man onely; but so wisely and warily proui∣ded, that were he wise or foolish, vertuous or vvicked, vaant or cowardly, true or false that ruled for the time, he might profit them, but should haue no power to ruine them himselfe, or betray them to be ruined by the Tyrannie of others. For this end also they chose a certaine mixed number of the Nobles and Commons to sit in Councell, whom they called States Generall; and in these consisted a great part of the Soueraigntie, at least power to qualifie the ouer-swelling torrent of Tyrannie in the Superiour, and to represse and stay the headstrong and disobedient fury of the inferiour, and to stand in the midst as a Modera∣tor betwixt Prince and people, as our Parliaments in En∣gland vse to doe.
In these States vnited, together with their Prince, (whatsoeuer title he bore) was the Soueraigne Power in∣cluded; yet so, as they had reference in all great affaires to the people also; vvho were not shut out, (like beastes by Butchers against the day of slaughter) but called to counsell, if the businesse concerned them, and the gene∣rall vvelfare. And to say truth, many of the States were of these Commons, who therefore would carefully looke to preserue the common libertie. With this Councell of the States all great affaires past; vvithout it, nothing of moment. And, that you may apprehend this cleare truth the better, I will produce some of the Articles containing their freedomes, which their Princes vsed to confirme by oath in the presence of the States, before they or the people would acknow∣ledge them for Princes, that is, Iudges and Executors of the Lawe. The Customes and Lavves fundamen∣tall of the Netherland Provinces. THat no Countesse should marry vnto any man, but with consent and good liking of the State. That the Offices, as of the Councell, and Rent-masters, and Pretorships, should be conferred vpon no other, but vpon those that were borne within the Land. That the States shall haue libertie to assemble vpon them, affaires of the State; and that as often as shall please them, without need to haue consent of the Earle for that end. That no Tolles might be raised or imposed, neither any man freed from those that were formerly ordeined, but by consent of the States.
That the Princes should vse the Dutch Language in all their Writings. That the Coyne should be altered and appointed by the Prince, according as the States should finde it conuenient. That the Prince might not make away any part of his Prin∣cipalitie. That the States may not bee warned to assemble vpon any Conuocation out of the Prouinces. That when as the Prince should haue need of any Impositions, Collections, or Contributions, that hee himselfe personally, and not by mediation of his Lieutenant, shall make intercession vn∣to the States, without exacting any thing, otherwise then by a willing and free consent. That he exercise and administer Law and Iustice by the hand of the ordinary Iustices. That the ancient Lawes and Customes being sacred, shouldbe inuiolably obserued; and if the Prince should ordaine any thing contrary thereunto, that no man is bound to obserue the same. These Lawes hauing bin long maintained by meere Custome, were afterwards registred into Articles, and subsigned by the Princes from time to time; to this end, that the natures of the same Princes might not be infe∣cted by the euill incitations of flattering Courtiers, vnto the hope of vnlawfull domination. And at last, in re∣gard that the States made complaint of their Grieuances, that the most of the fundamentall points of the ancient Gouernement, by innouations were ouerthrowne, euen then was there a collection made of all the aforesaid Lawes; and so by some others, but chiefly by Mary Du∣chesse of Burgondy, they were sealed vp, for an euerla∣sting memorie.
This was the state of these Prouinces, when they came into the hands of Charles the fift, who beeing a mighty Prince, (too bigge for the quiet or benefite of those Countries) sought by policie and power to melt and cast them into a new forme of Gouernement, and to vnite the seuenteene Prouinces in one solide body, ma∣king thereof a Kingdome, and himselfe absolute King of that Kingdome. But, beeing hindred by strong op∣position at home, and stronger ingagements abroad, he was forced to leaue that worke imperfect, to bee made vp by the art and industrie of his sonne Philip the se∣cond. He onely had left the rough draught, and first patterne of that Monarchie, which the times succeeding should polish and make perfect: to which end hee re∣signed the Netherlands to his sonne Philip the second, ve∣ry early, to giue him time, and the aduantage of actiue and fortunate youth, to enter vpon this worke, and to finish it. All which was done (the Kings secret intent onely reserued to himselfe and his Chamber-councell) with the consent of the States Generall, who gaue him the Oath, which they administer to all their Princes, to obserue the Customes of the Prouinces, and preserue their Liberties intire. Ignorance makes despe∣rate onsets both in peace and warre: And youth is naturally ig∣norant: so neither the King by reason of his youth, nor the Spanish Councell, who altogether gouerned the King, could tell how to manage this people, being vnacquainted with their natures. And there is as great diffe∣rence betwixt the Gouernement of Spaine and the Netherlands, as betwixt England and Scotland. Great reason they should therefore be gouerned by Natiues that knew them, not by strangers, that did not loue them, and meant onely to make their profit of them.The first onset of this young Prince presently vp∣on his Inauguration, as an ouerture and omen to that which followed, was an excessiue demaund of money from the Netherlands, vnder pretence of paying his debts. But he could not obtaine a moitie of that which hee
sought, neither would that bee granted without a con∣uocation of the generall States of the 17. Belgicke Prouin∣ces. The which was wonderfully ill taken by the Spanish Councell, and by those that inriched themselues with the treasure of the peoples ruine: so that some Noblemen and Gouernours of some Prouinces and Townes, were not onely in disgrace with the King and his Councell, but were also iudged guilty of high treason; and the Noblemen which had in any sort contradicted this de∣mand, were marked vnto death vpon the first oportuni∣tie that should be offered, for that they would not in∣stantly yeeld vnto the first demand, without any con∣uocation of the States. Notwithstanding, that which was granted him (being called the Novenall ayde) amoun∣ted in all, to fortie millions of Florins of Brabant mony. But this conuocation of the States Generall, was both to the King and his Councell (as it hath beene euer since) most odious;Meetings of the Nobles, and councels of the sub∣iects, odious to Tyrants. as we shall see by the beginning of the troubles which happened in the sid Netherlands, whereof grew the warres, which haue continued since the yeere 1566. vnto this day. A while after this the King departs into Spayne, and by the meanes of the Cardinall Granvile,The worse Clergiman, the btter Courtier. (a gracious Courtier; and the more like to bee so, in that hee vvas knowen to be a gracelesse Church-man) Margaret of Austria Duchesse of Parma bastard daughter to the Em∣perour Charles the fift, and so the Kings base sier, was made Gouernesse of the Netherlands. Yet befoe his de∣parture, the warres vvith France beeing finished, and peace concluded, the States hauing a ielous eye for the publike libertie, and seeing the Spanish souldiers grri∣sond in the best Townes of the Netherlands, they vvith
the Nobility petitioned to the King, to haue them sent away; and to vrge it to bee done with more speed, they presented to the King their fundamentall Principles, his Oath to preserue them inuiolate, and their farther ie∣lousies and feares were not altogether denyed or dissem∣bled, but rather plainly insinuated and auouched. This that they desired was at last done, though slow∣ly, and much against hayre and heart: Now therefore the Spanish Faction wrought with such of the Nobilitie as sought Office, or vvere couetous either of fauour, vvealth, or honour, after a more bold and open maner; shewing plainely, that except the Countries were redu∣ced to absolute obedience by forraine Garrisons,Religiō made the maske of State, as is uer vsed by Tyrants and Atheists. and the awe of a conquering Armie, it vvas an impossible work to punish the Heretickes, vvho vvould otherwise so in∣crease, as the Countries would be wholly lost. The wiser and honester sort, of whatsoeuer opinion in Religion they were, saw this snare and shunned it, and gaue others warning also. Notwithstanding some there vvere (as all Hiues haue some Drones, and all States haue some slaues bred in them) that vvere con∣tented to vveare setters, so they might be made of gold, and they might helpe to make them. But for the effecting of this, the Inquisition must bee introduced, vvhich had before beene relected in the time of Charles the fift.No such equal course as is v∣sed in the Star-chamber. Accordingly a Commission vvas sent May the 11, 1565. by the vvhich, according to the vvords thereof, ample and full Commission vvas giuen to the Inquisitors, to make inquisitions, proceedings, cor∣rections and punishments, degradations, deliuerances to the secular Power, to vse imprisonment, and appre∣hension of men, making of Processes vvithout any
forme of Iustice; choosing onely some one of the Kings Councell, vvho should be bound to giue sentence as they should require, according to the forme and tenor of the Apostolicke Letters vvritten touching that, with∣out any attendance or requisition of the ordinary Iudge, or Diocesan of the place; and that against those that are suspected of Heresie, or that shall reade forbid∣den Bookes, or shall make Assemblies, dispute or talke of the holy Scriptures. Item, to call before them as often as they please, all his Maiesties subiects, of vvhat authority, power, state, qua∣lity or condition vvhatsoeuer, be they Presidents, Coun∣celours, Burgomasters, Aldermen or other Officers, to sweare them by Oath, against all those they shall name, vpon paine to be punished as suspect and fauourers of Heresie. In respect vvhereof, all Magistrates, Gouer∣nours, and Officers, vvere enioyned to giue all ayde, as∣sistance and fauour vnto the said Inquisitors, in the exe∣cution of their charge, vvhensoeuer they should bee re∣quired, vpon the same paines, &c. besides many other things directly repugnant to all right, and the auncient Priuiledges and Customes of the Country. Moreouer, the most apparent and notable persons, aswell among the Nobles, as Merchants and Artizans, and especially the richest, vvere already inrolled in these Inquisitors Bookes to proceed against them, as against men subiect to confiscation both of body and goods, at the least in case of repentance, to great pecuniary Fines. Thereupon vvas heard of all sides the brags and threates of Inquisitors, Priests and Monkes, daring to prescribe, yea to name in their Sermons the most apparent; whereof not onely the people of Antwerpe, which heard it, and
the Magistrates, vvhich had beene daily informed, beare vvitnesse, but also the townes of Lille, Tournay, Va∣lenciennes, and others of the Countries of Flanders, Bra∣bant, Holland, and Arthoys, where as these threates haue beene publiquely heard from the mouthes of the Priests and Preachers. Whereupon those of Brabant began first to intimate, that their Duchie was falne to the King of Spaines Prede∣cessors by right of Election, the vvhich depended vpon Conditions sworne of either side: all which Conditi∣ons they said were broken, if they brought the Inquisi∣tion of Spayne into that Country. Those of Brabant did also produce sixe principall Articles, among others of their Priuiledges, whereof the first was: 1This was broken by the introducing of the 14. new Bishops and their Canons. That the Duke of Brabant might not augment the State of the Clergie, more then it had beene in old time. 2This by the death of diuers of the Nobilitie, as the Earles of Horne, Eg∣mond and others. That the Duke might not pursue ciuilly or criminal∣ly, any of his naturall subiects or strangers dwelling there, but by the ordinarie course of the Iustice of the Countrey, whereas the accused may defend and iustifie himselfe by his Councell. 3This was infringed by new formes of exaction of the hun¦dreth and twentieth peny, and of the tenth peny vpon merchandize and handiworkes. That the Duke may not rayse any tribute or other imposition, nor attempt any innouation, without the consent of the State of the Country. 4This was infringed by making Spa∣niards princi¦pall Officers in the Nether∣lands, whereas no Nether∣lander had Of∣fice in Spaine. That the Duke may not place any strangers or for∣rainers in any Offices of Brabant, except in certaine petty exceptions; namely, in his Court, where he may haue two stran∣gers
of his Councell, so as they be of the same Language; as also one that is not borne in Brabant, hauing for a time enioyed some free Seignory there, may be President in the sayd Court. 5 That when as the Duke would assemble all his Estates, were it to demand money, ayde, subsidues, or any other thing of his subiects, that those of Brabant, nor the other Estates of the Countrey, should not be bound to goe out of the limits of the Country, nor to conclude any thing out of it. 6 If it should happen that the Duke would restraine and infringe their Priuiledges, were it by force or otherwise, in that case his subiects of Brabant hauing made a solemne protestation before, should be freed and discharged of their oath and ho∣mage, and as freemen may prouide for themselues, as they shall thinke most conuenient. Which priuiledges, most part of the Townes and Prouinces did chalenge, and doe maintaine them to be in like sort proper to them, and ratified by Maximilian king of Romanes, in the yeere 1488. the 16. of May; not as if then he gaue them any new Priuiledges which they had not be∣fore, or which lay in his power to take away at pleasure, but that he onely ratified their old Principles, as a iust Prince, who was careful to discharge his dutie for their after-safety and libertie. Besides all these allegations and propositions, in the end they durst say openly, that by the feodall Lawes, the Lord loseth the right of his Fee, by the same occasion of fellony, that the vassall forfeits his fee vnto the Lord: inferring thereby, that by reason of the Inquisition, the which did attempt manifestly against the Lands and Goods of the Kings vassals, they might iustly forget their duty of fealty to him that brought it in by force and fraude.
Notwithstanding, they proceeded by vvay of Petiti∣on both to the King and Gouernesse; and after sundry Petitions, at length obtained onely this fauourable mo∣deration of all tyrannies and oppressions, that burning should be turned into hanging; vvhereby vve see what Salomon saith verified,Pr. 12.10 The mercies of the wicked are cruell. Yet the States continued to petition to the King, but to no purpose; for contrarie resolutions were taken in Spaine, (where the King vvas in person, vvhere all councels vvere forged, and from whence they hoped for redresse) that all mens Goods and Lands, together with all auncient Priuiledges, should bee forfeited and lost. And the Duke of Alua, a politicke Gouernour, and great souldier, vvas sent to execute all by strong-hand, and reduce the Countries to absolute obedience, as if they had not beene places of inheritance, but Countries conquered. Now all these pressures vvere vpon purpose cast vpon the people to discontent them, and force the people to rebell, vvhereby hee might haue occasion of that generall Conquest, vvhich those high-minded Spa∣niards supposed to be easie to their daring and slaue-sub∣duing spirits, though the yssue prooues they tooke their leuell too low, and their wisedomes were deceiued and much mistaken in the maine matter. Red-scarfe. But shall I be so simple as to beleeue you affirming, that the King of Spaine sought to discontent his people, that they might rebell, and so hee finde occasion to in∣uade their Liberties farther? Doth not any King rather seeke to rule his people in peace, then prouoke them to rebellion, vvhose suppression vvould both bee charge∣able vnto him, and also dangerous being vncertaine?
Tawny-scarfe. You should shew your selfe very wise if you could disprooue it, and very simple till then not to beleeue it, vpon such pregnant proofes as hath or shall bee produ∣ced. The fore-mentioned practise of prouoking people to profitable offences, hath beene auncient, and is vsual with Tyrants, vvho finde no pleasure in commanding, except they may be absolute. And though perhaps they could bee content vvith obedience to their absolute commands vnder peaceable termes, yet if they see the least opposition or variation, presently they take new Councels to mixe all in combustion and confusion, like another Chaos, thereby to raise vp the worke new ac∣cording to their owne fancies, (which they preferre be∣fore reason, Religion, or all lawfull delights) by the hand of power or policie. Thus the insulting Spaniard thinkes it is not enough, or any thing worth, to haue the addition of Countries by accesse of mariage or any other title, except also hee comes in by a kinde of Conquest; or, being let in vpon termes of peace, proceed to fasten vpon all by force as a Conquerour; otherwise hee thinkes hee cannot lord it enough, and there is some disparagement to his inuin∣cible arrogancie. Let Arragon and Portugal at home, and Naples and these parts abroad, be witnesse of this truth, as also euery other place vvhereupon he sets the print of his feet; let the first conditions of his entry be what they will, the yssue is Conquest, and the worst that Conquest can doe. And to resolue you yet farther of this truth, first, the Letters of Francisco d' Allana, Ambassadour for the King of Spayne at the French Court, vvritten to the Duchesse
of Parma Gouernesse of the Netherlands, doe manifest this amongst many other things; vvhere hee shewes, "That the vprore happening about Images, which you mention as an haynous and capitall crime, would cause his Maiestie to reape so great a benefit, as to see them by that occasion reduced vvholly to his obedience, and to that estate and gouernement whereunto his Predeces∣sours could neuer attaine, and the which he hath so long designed and desired; and withall, to haue the meanes (the which no good seruant will counsell his Maiestie to let slip) to subdueThus al men and all States are subiected one by ano∣ther: but wee they so wise to stand one by another, tyranny could neuer preuaile with all his politique pre∣tences. one by another whom he pleased, that might hereafter oppose themselues to the good of his affaires in those Countries. Againe, in the same Letter, to effect this the better, he giues the Duchesse instructions, how shee shall cun∣ningly carry her selfe to the Nobilitie of the Countrey, who seeme to stand for the King, saying: "And for that (Madam) the point which to mee seemes of greatest importance in this action, is to assure more and more theThat is, the Nobility and States, who petitioned for rdresse of in∣iuries. disguised seruants whom you know. Your Highnesse I hope will not take it ill, if I doe againe aduertise you to temporize with them, and to force your selfe as much as you can, to assure them aswell by your selfe, as by others suborned, of the great good opi∣nion and satisfaction which his Maiestie hath of their actions, and of the loue he beareth them; that he belee∣ueth and saith, that they haue done him so notable a ser∣uice, as he thinkes himselfe bound vnto them, that the Netherlands are yet vnder his obedience; and that with∣out their presence and wisedomes, they had either beene a prey to strangers, or bathed with the bloud of his owne subiects. For although (Madam) they be cunning
and counterfeit, as we know, yet the time and occasions doe require, that for his Maiesties seruice they should vse these artificiall speeches. And I beleeue, that your Highnesse shall finde by experience, that they will helpe something to entertaine them, at the least to containe them; as we haue already found, not onely by them, but also by thoseThe Mar∣quesse of Ba¦gen, and the Barō of Mon∣tigny, who caried the pe∣tition of the States to Spaine by the Regens com∣mand, and be∣ing of the Nobilitie of the Netherlands, stood notwithstanding wholly for the King. Yet the first of these dyed of poyson secretly, as was generally suspected: the other was poysoned by a Page, as was notoriously knowne and confessed. Anno 1567. two which are gone to his Maiestie, with whom they haue caried thēselues so cunningly gi∣uing thē such intertainment, as they do not now sweare, but by the faith they owe vnto their Master. And be∣sides, they haue made such practises in their Families, as they cannot doe nor say any thing, but it is presently aduertised. Thus he: and by this we see the generall ayme, as I haue before laid it downe; and all men may perceiue, especially Nobles, vvhat account is made of them, euen by such as vse them to betray their Countries liberties and their owne; and what spies are set vpon them at home in their chambers: vvhich may make them care∣full of Spanish Followers, or of any commended to them by that Faction, though aloofe off, and comming much about. Besides this Spanish practise, of comming in by Con∣quest, appeares by the Articles of aduise, concluded vp∣on and pronounced by the Inquisition of Spaine the 16. of February 1568. and confirmed by the King the 26. fol∣lowing in this manner: The most sacred Office of the Inquisition so often attempted in the Netherlands by his Maiestie, and hindred vntill this
time, shall be instituted and aduanced in this manner, which is most expedient. They must perswade theHe was too old, and too wise, and too good, ha¦uing had long experience of their euill counsell, to be ruled longer by them. Emperour, beeing gone astray, and wickedly confederated with Heretickes, that he resigne his Kingdomes vnto his Sonne, with the vvhole administration of the Netherlands. None of these would serue their turne, grow∣ing now old, and beginning to be deuout.That the Emperour with his two sisters, hauing giuen ouer all affaires, leauing the Netherlands, shall retire into Spaine to Vs, being assured that they shall neuer returne more to doe any harme. To diuide the Princes loue from the people, a prin¦cipall meanes to aduance Tyrannie.These being dispatcht, we must also draw the King to vs, and keepe him for euer that he part not, and not suffer any Flemmings to haue accesse or conference vvith him. Clergimen made euer in∣struments and actors to in¦uade the liber¦ties of others, if themselues may be free: and the greater places and immunities they enioy, the lesse they care for the publique.That the King write vnto, and commaund the Clergie of the Netherlands, that vvith the Inquisition they should accept of 15. new Bishops, the which should bee free from all secular Iurisdiction, yea in cases of Treason. They are made by force vpon purpose, to reuolt for the Kings sup∣posed aduan∣age.The subiects of the Netherlands through their ma∣lice and waywardnesse, will reuolt and mooue seditions and tumults, pleasing to all but to our companie. Old Nobi∣lity odious to Tyrants, new Nobility not so: for they are raised vpon purpose to serue the Prince and time.The Princes and Noblemen, heads and authors of those Factions vvith the subiects, must be taken away, and the others reduced vnto reason.
The No∣blemen had bookes pro∣hibited proffe∣red vnto them vnderhand by spies of the Inquisition, who accused them assoone as they had bought.They shall hire at our charge, theeues and spoylers of Churches and Images, whose offences shall be by all the world imputed to Rebels, by some subtill meanes, and so we shall vanquish them. The vn∣doing of trade and impoue∣rishing of the people, a step twards Ty∣rannie. So Natiues shall be weeded out, and strangers placed in their steads.That all Commerce, Negotiation, Liberties, and Priui∣ledges, shalbe rooted out, and that all be reduced to ex∣treame pouertie, whereby the Realme shall bee perma∣nent for Vs. Silence of Lawes, confu∣sion of men, office, order, al things, a step towards Ty∣rannie.No man of all those Countries (except hee bee of our Faction) shall be held worthy to liue; and finally all to be rooted out: and all Goods, Possessions, Arts and Trades, and all Order to be taken away, vntill there may be a new Realme, and a new people. Men of authoritie must be made the bawds and brokers for Tyrannie. Cruell natures fittest for such imployment.In this action the wise and valiant Duke of Alua shall be imployed in person; whereas any other, were he of the bloud royall, or a Prince, shall bee of no e∣steeme: so as being suspect, yea in the smallest matters, they must be dispatcht. Where the people can not trust the Prince, how shall the Prince trust the peopl? Tyrants by being false, learne their people to be so: and whilst they count and call good men Traytors, they make them such to their cost in the yssue.No Contracts, Rights, Promises, Donations, Othes, Priuiledges, and solemne Assertions of the Ne∣therlands shall be of any force for the inhabitants, as be∣ing guilty of high Treason. Thus you see the generall purpose of a Conquest and
that deliberately, consulted and layd downe by the Spa∣nish Councell, and accordingly the Emperour remooued, (who being born in the Netherlands, bare the people too great and good affection, to presse them farre enough for the Spanish purpose, nature mitigating his ambition; though otherwise he could haue beene contented to see them easily and willingly subiugated without bloud) and a new King brought in that knew not Ioseph,xod. 1.8. nor might be acquainted either with his seruice, or with any of his stocke, who confirmed these cursed Articles before recited, and the Inquisitors bloudie sentence thereupon, by his kingly authoritie and publike act. Anno 1568. Feb. 16. And awhile after (to finish and perfect this plot to the full) the Duke of Alua was sent with an armie of stran∣gers, to enter like a Conqueror, to lay the yoke vpon them by force, and to humble them so farre, as they should not onely afterward indure the Kings owne ab∣solute commands, but his seruants also; yea the meanest command of the basest vassall that should be borne Spa∣nish, and be there sent to domineete. Yet after the pow∣ring foorth of so much bloud, when d'Alua boasted, that he had caused 18000. persons to passe vnder the hands of the common Executioners, besides those banisht and slaine in the warres, or murthered by the Spanish souldi∣ers in peace, he left these Countries more imbroyled, and farther from the subiection desired, then he found them: hauing onely wasted his Masters men and mo∣ney, giuing the people a iust cause to disclaime his ty∣rannous authoritie, and to brand his beastly and sauage domination with these exceptions, and foule aspertions: First, they charge him, that hee had counselled the
King to vse all extremities in all causes concerning the Netherlands, and was alwaies the head of such as were worst affected vnto those Prouinces. That he was the onely meanes of nourishing the dis∣like and contention betweene Dom Charles Prince of Spaine, and Dom Iohn de Austria, and betweene others and him, by his bad reports. And that hauing gotten the gouernement and charge of the Netherlands, that he had procured his instructions and commission to bee made according to his owne will and desire, conformable to that auncient hatred that he had conceiued against that Countrey; adding thereunto, that hee had beene recei∣ued moreHe hoped and sought resistance, tha he might con∣quer: which opposition because hee found not at his entrie, he forced after∣wards. peaceably, and more friendly into the Ne∣therlands, then he hoped or desired; which was onely in regard of the honour and dutie they owe vnto their na∣turall Prince, and vpon the promise made by the Re∣gent, the Duchesse of Parma, that shee would haue seene all things past forgiuen & forgotten, for that euery one had done his best indeuour, to the vtmost of his power for his Maiesties seruice, and the peace of the land. But the Duke being come, he presently declared, that the Priuiledges and Freedomes of the Countrey, the insti∣tution of the Order of the Golden Fleece, and the Priui∣ledges of the Vniuersitie of Lovaine, (which the King had personally sworne to obserue) were all forfeited and lost; thereby to hold and account the Land as a strange Countrey, newly wonne and conquered by the sword, and therein to rule and raigne according to his will and pleasure. They say further, that his cruelties were so vnnatu∣rall and vngodly, that neither Nero, Pharaoh, Herod, nor any heathen Tyrant could euer haue deuised or inuen∣ted
greater; that hee had brought the King into con∣tempt and great dislike of the Netherlands, althogh they vvere his patrimoniall inheritance, contrary to he admonition and counsell of Aristotle giuen to Alexan∣der the Great, That to the Grecians he should shew him∣selfe a father, and as vnto a free Nation; but to the con∣quered Barbarians and strangers, as a Lord and Com∣mander. That he had caused iudgement to be giuen, and exe∣cution to be done vpon Noblemen and great persona∣ges, by strangers, defamed persons, and men of base con∣dition and qualitie, and not without great and particu∣lar desire of reuenge; being such personages, without the vvhich the King, nor the Emperour his father, should euer haue attained to so great estate and glorie. And that in Bruxels vnder pretence of hatted of Religion, he had tyed one Anthony Vtenhow a Gentleman, to a stake with a chaine, compassing him about with a great fire, but not touching him, for the Spaniards to passe the time withall, turning him round about like a poore beast; who was forced to liue in that great paine and extremi∣tie, roasting before the fire so long, vntill that the Hol∣landers themselues hauing compassion of him, thrust him thorow, contrary to the vvill and intent both of the Duke and Spanish Priests. Marke well these wayes of Conquest and Tyranny.That he had mooued the King to helpe himselfe by foure tyrannicall meanes; first, to disarme the Countrey, not suffering the inhabitants to exercise Armes, but im∣ploy strangers in his warres: Secondly, to make and keepe them poore by oppressions, and laying great taxes vpon them: Thirdly, by making of Castles and Cittadels (vvhich some call the dennes and nests of Tyrants) to bridle them:
and further, by feeding and nourishing of Diuision among his subiects for Religion. They obiect, that he had with holden the King for so many yeeres (notwithstanding those great dangers the Country stood in, and the need of his presence) from comming personally into the Netherlands, as the Empe∣rour his father did, onely for the troubles of the towne of Gand. That hee had incensed the King so much against the Netherlanders, as he would not vouchsafe to heare them,If a Prince b∣gin once to hate a people, then his eares stand euer op to all sinister informations. And there can be no better flatterie, and so no better Court-seruice then to bring him a flse cal to incense him farther. but rather to heare flatterers, their enemies; as it appea∣red by a packet of Letters sent into Spaine, where they were kept vnopened nine moneths together, vntill the comming of Cardinall Granville into Spaine. That he had contemned the generall Estates of the Netherlands; persecuting, iudging, condemning, and exe¦cuting the Nobilitie and Gentlemen thereof, as traytors to their Countrey, because they onely presented an humble Petition to the Dutchesse of Parma being Re∣gent, to craue an Assembly of the Generall Estates. That he was not contented to haue destroyed and brought so many Noblemen, Gentlemen, rich▪ and poore people vnto their ends, and to haue banished and driuen so many out of their Countrey, but had so hard∣ly and badly vsed those that remained in the Countrey, as they were falne into despaire, and were pitied and la∣mented in all Kings and Princes Courts: vvhereby those that were in the Land, had beene compelled to ioyne with the banished persons, when as they percei∣ued, that the Pardon made by the Pope and the King, by his onely meanes and procurement, tended onely toGracious Pardon, holy Dispensation deceit, as being full of double interpretations, excep∣tions,
and restrictions, whereon they might not trust; theThis was the case be∣twixt Catho∣like and Ca∣tholike. Marke it, O all ye English Catholikes, it is not suffici∣ent to be Ro¦mish Catho∣lickes, except ye he Spanish Catholickes also. Netherlands for the most part, that are a people that commonly are good, old, and Catholike Christi∣ans, being esteemed for Heretickes by the new Spanish Mauritane Christians, for which cause many spirituall persons fearing the rigour and crueltie vsed, by punish∣ing and banishing of the people, procured attestations, certificates, and testimonials from their Bishops and Pa∣stors, to testifie them to be cleere, and not to haue of∣fended, whose names he caused to bee written and sent into Spaine, thereby to bring the Spiritualtie into suspi∣tion of Heresie, and so to bereaue them of all honour and credit, seeking to bring the spirituall goods and li∣uings of the Countries of the Netherlands into the Kings hands, after the Spanish manner, thereby to bestow them vpon the Spaniards. That his crueltie appeared by his ransacking, spoi∣ling, ruining, expelling, destroying, imprisoning, chay∣ning, banishing, and confiscating of mens goods, bur∣ning, hanging, beheading, breaking vpon vvheeles, han∣ging men aliue by the feete, and vvith most horrible and incredible tormenting, racking, and murthering of so many noble and vnnoble, rich and poore, young and old, widowes and orphans, men, women, and young maides, of all estates and conditions: so as hee bragged sitting at meate, that he, hauing done the best he could doe to root out all Heresies, had caused eighteene thou∣sand men to be executed and put to death by the ordi∣narie minister of Iustice, within the space of sixe yeres that he gouerned the Netherlands, not accounting those that his soldiers in the Netherlands by the warres, by their cruelties, and other tyrannous meanes had murthered
and miserably consumed and brought vnto their ends, which without all doubt could not chuse but bee an in∣numerable number: and yet Vergas the President of his bloudie Councell, that went with him into Spaine, com∣plained and said, that nimia misericordia, too much mer∣cie, spoyled the Netherlands: which too much mercie of his was such, that a man could hardly keepe and pre∣serue his owne goods from spoile, because of his and his souldiers couetousnes; nor his vvife and daughter from abuse, because of their lecherie, nor his life from vio∣lence, because of their bloud-thirstinesse: neither could Nobilitie, riches, honestie, nor yet any fore-passed merit or seruice, helpe or auaile any man, if he were once fal∣len into hatred and dislike of him. That he vsed to helpe himselfe to effect his will by suborning of false witnesses, at it appeared at Dornicke at the death of Martin Hutten, who was the Kings Officer, executed for the same. That without respect of any iurisdictions and ordina∣rie Customes of the Countrey, hee tooke all authority from the Iudges, both of criminall and ciuill causes, which in any wise might concerne the Confiscations v∣sed and executed by his bloudie Councels; whereby nei∣ther spirituall nor temporall persons, widowes nor or∣phans, poore Hospitals, Lazer-houses, Orphans houses, nor spirituall Hospitals, that had iust and due pensions, and yeerely Rents comming, proceeding, and to bee yeerely payed vnto them out of the reuenues of the ba∣nished and executed persons goods, could be payed; but he to the contrarie, drw it all into his owne hands, without giuing any charge to see the said Rents payed out of the confiscated goods and lands once registred,
the list whereof he sent vnto the King, amounting (as he set it downe) to about eight millions of Guldernes yeerely, that so he might couer his cruelty with the pro∣fit thereof, and thereby winne great commendation in Spaine. That the vnreasonable and vnspeakable exactions and taxes the one following the other, (besides the con∣fiscations aforesaid) exacted and laid vpon the poore people were exceeding great, as the hundreth peny gran∣ted vnto him for sixe yeeres, which amounted vnto ma∣ny millions of Guldernes; the twentieth peny, and also he asked the tenth penie of all goods mooueable and vnmooueable, yea and of all wares bought and sold, and sought by all the meanes he could, to raise the same (a∣gainst the aduice of all the Estates and Councels of the Countrey) not onely proceeding of the cleare gaines of the things sold, but the tenth and twentieth peny of the capitall and principall value of all things sold: so as they should haue driuen all Trade of Merchandize, han∣dicrafts, and dealings (whereby the Inhabitants for the most part get their liuings) out of the Netherlands; which exaction hee thought with all rigour and extremitie to haue raised and put in practise, if he had not beene im∣peached and hindred from the same by the warres; wher∣as before that, the Countrey gaue him twenty hundred thousand Guldernes yeerely, besides certaine extraordi∣narie millions continually payed. To conclude, he cau∣sed the King and the Netherlands in sixe yeeres gouerne∣ment to spend at the least fiftie two millions of Gul∣dernes, which came for the most part out of the Nether∣lands purses That he caused the English Merchants goods that did
traffique in Antwerpe, (vpon hatred of Religion, and thinking thereby to driue them from thence) amoun∣ting to seuen hundred thousand Guldernes,This money belonged to the Merchants of Genoa, as is afterward shewed. to be arre¦sted vnder pretence of money that should bee arrested and withholden from him in England, (which neuerthe∣lesse appeared to be none of his) writing to the King of Spaine to doe the like, without any consideration, that the Netherlands had more to lose in England; who thereby lost in England twelue hundred thousand Guldernes, wherewith the most worthy and famous Queene of n∣gland recompenced her subiects for their losses: But the Duke of Alua, neither yet the King of Spaine, vvould not offer, promise, or pay the Netherlands one peny; not∣withstanding afterwards, that by the reckoning made by the Merchants on both sides, he (hauing receiued in the Merchants names, about two hundred thousand Guldernes of ouerplus found to be in the English Mer∣chants hands) would not giue it vnto those persons that had lost it, as the Queene of England did; but rather cau∣sed many men (by reason of stopping the Trade) to be∣come Bankrupts, to the generall hurt and preiudice of the whole Countrey. Besides, for want of paying his souldiers, hee suffered them, without all militarie disci∣pline, to vse all ryotous, disordered, and forcible actions; as threatning of the people, striking, robbing, ransack∣ing, forcing of women, and such like actions, and to burne and spoile diuers faire Villages, as Catwicke vpon the Sea, Santfort, Alfen, and many others; and rasack∣ing diuers Townes, to murther the people, thinking to haue entred forcibly into Vtrecht and other townes, and to haue spoyled and ransackt the same: what they did to Dornicke, Valencia, Ypre, Mastricht, Deuenter, Mehelen,
Oudenard, Dermonde, Naerden, and elsewhere, is yet in most fearefull remembrance. In his time in Bruxels, there was aboue one hundred and thirty Burgers murthered, and cruelly brought vn∣to their ends by the Spaniards. In Gand in a cetaine vp∣rore made by the Spaniards, there was sixtie or seuentie Burgers at one time, and after that an innumerable number of men and women slaine and murthered. In Ypre likewise at the execution of a Preacher, there was two and twenty Burgers shot thorow and killed, besides those that were hurt. In Dornicke at a certaine vprore betweene them of the Castle, and the townes Garrison, two Spaniards beeing slaine, they cryed Spania, Spania, and therewith wilfully killed fifteene Burgers: and there likewise they forcibly entred into the widow Pottiers house in the day time, and killed her daughter and her cousin, thinking to haue found great store of money in her house; for the which there was no other execution done vpon the offenders, but onely they that had done the deed, were sent away from thence, and put into another Garrison. In Flessingue was there not a Bill found about Pacieco, (that was kept prisoner by them) wherein was the names of an innumerable number of men both Gentle∣men and others of the chiefest Bourgers, which by the Dukes commandement should haue beene murthered in the yeere 1572. in diuers townes, thereby to compell them to yeeld to the tenth penie? What horrible mur∣thers were done and committed in Naerden and Harlem, contrarie to the faithfull promises made in Dom Frede∣rickes name, is manifestly knowne to euery man: where he caused all the soldiers (not sparing their young boyes
and Pages) to be executed, suffering their dead bodies starke naked to lie a whole day and a night vpon the scaffolds, and in the market place, to the great shame and feare of the women and maids; and some of them that had deliuered the Towne vnto him, he determined to send them into Spaine to be Galley-slaues, and those that lay in theA Sconce so called neere Haerlem. Fuyck by Harlem, he suffered them to die for hunger, saying, That he promised them their liues, but not to giue them meate. The good Bourgers he compelled to be Pioners before the towne of Alcmar, that so hee might bring them vnto their ends. There is no honest nor godly Christian, but abhor∣reth and is ashamed to doe any iniuries vnto the bodies of the dead; and the buriall of the dead is thought a fit and an honourable thing amongst the Heathens and Barbarians: but the Duke of Alua caused diuers dead bodies (to spite both God and man) after they had beene buried and lien certaine dayes in the ground; to be dig∣ged vp againe, and to bee drawne vnder the Gallowes, and there to be hanged or burnt; alledging, that they died without receiuing the Sacrament, or being confest: but in truth it was done onely, that according to his Proclamation, he might confiscate their goods. The state of marriage (the onely foundation of all societie in euery place and Towne, and the bond of loue and peace, the right ground of all good life and conuersation amongst men, which most consisteth in true and right consent) was by the Duke of Alua broken and disannulled; for that the parties that were married in the reformed Assemblies, were held as Heretickes vnlesse they married againe, (which many did) intending therby to bestow the rich women vpon his souldiers for a prise.
To conclude, he did openly breake and disannull all honest amitie and loue, that one man is bound to shew vnto another, murthering and executing vvomen that holpe their husbands, and children that comforted their parents in their vttermost and greatest extremities, and such as did but comfort them with a Letter; as was to be seene in the towne of Mastricht, vvhere the father was cruelly put to death because he lodged his sonne (that he had not seene in a long time before) one night; and an∣other, because he gaue a poore widow (vvhose husband had beene put to death for Religion) certaine corne for almes; another, for that he sent certaine money vnto his friend which was then in England, and confiscated the goods of many honest and rich women, because they had lodged their husbands in their houses, whereby they were compelled to begge their bread. Hee likewise prophaned the holy Sacrament of Bap∣tisme, causing the children that had beene openly and publikely baptized in the Name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, to be baptized againe, because they had beene baptized (as hee said) by Heretickes, vvhich vvas against the Decrees of Councels, and all the Lawes both of God and man. To shew his extreme pride and high minde, in the Castle of Antwerpe he caused his image to bee made and erected of brasse, (like Nebuchadnezzar) placing vnder his feet the Nobilitie and States of the Countries of the Ne∣therlands: and at Antwerpe in the market-place, where he published a Pardon, he caused a princely Throne to be erected, which is vsed to be set vp, onely therewith to honour Princes and Kings, which he of himselfe cau∣sed to be set vp and sate thereon, to the diminishing of
the Kings honour, vvhich no Lieutenant to the King before him durst attempt. This is part of that vvherewith the Countries of the Netherlands, both of the one and the other Religion doe charge your great and glorious Duke of Alua, who vvent out of his command like a snuffe in the nostrils of all the Netherlanders, that loued their Countries li∣berties, howsoeuer they varied in points and opinions of Religion. After his departure the King sent the great Com∣mander of Castile, not to moderate any thing of his Pre∣decessors tyrannie, but to pursue it more couertly and cunningly. In his time, vnder colour of a mutinie, An∣twerpe, Bruxels, Mastricht, Alost, with diuers other places, (beeing then vnder the peaceable gouernement of the King) were surprised by the Spanish Souldiers, ransackt and burnt, as if they had beene townes of enemies, and at last forced to redeeme their owne liberty, by satisfying the Souldier their vnreasonable demands; so vnderhand paying the Kings Army. The Captaine of these coun∣terfeit Mutineers was one Ieronymo de Rhoda a Priest; who (as it plainely appeares) had secret instructions to mu∣tine, or pretend Rebellion, or doe, or counterfeit any other falshood, which might impouerish the people, make them vnable to resist any violence, and so faci∣liate the Kings maine end of Conquest, and absolute subiection of those Countries to Tyrannie. According∣ly (the great Commander being dead) hee tooke vpon him, by some priuate instruction from Spaine, to rule all: whilst notwithstanding by publike Decree the King had established the Generall Estates in the Gouernment. But it plainely appeared, the face and heart of these de∣signes
and actions was not all one. For howsoeuer the publike countenance stood for the States, the secret in∣tent was that Rhoda should gouerne; which he knowing, vsurped the Kings name, authoritie, and Seale, and re∣turning into Spaine afterward, in stead of punishment, vvas vvell rewarded for it: because, though he crost the publike Act of the King, yet he performed the secret in∣tent, and priuate instruction giuen him. And this vvas manifestly discouered at the comming of Dom Iohn of Austria to gouerne, vvho was forbidden to speake, or see Rhoda, or giue him any countenance, but to demeane himselfe towards him, as if he had beene an enemy and Rebell, yet vnderhand to carry himselfe in the Gouern∣ment of those Countries, onely as he should be directed by the instructions of Rhoda. Thus Dom Iohn seemed to hold altogether with the Nobles and with the Countrey, to pitie their pressures, to promise a speedy redresse of all grieuances; notwith∣standing all this was but fained to betray them; for hee sought and aymed at the same end that all the rest had done before, though after a new manner; labouring to winne and conquer one part by another, and to diuide the Countries, that he might rule as hee list. All this plot vvas disclosed by the prouidence of God, who (be∣ing no Tyrant, but a father himselfe) is an enemy to all oppression and tyranny; and beeing Truth it selfe, hates all dissimulation and falshood: for a Letter of the Kings to Dom Iohn was intercepted, wherein all these snares, traines, and plots, vvere amply layd downe and delineated to life, for the better execution of them when time serued. Vpon which, the whole State be∣holding nothing that might mooue them to hope for
reformation, but vvhat might cause them rather to de∣spaire of faire dealing, they altogether agreed and resol∣ued to renounce their allegeance to the King of Spayne, and finally to declare him falne by Tyrannie from the Seignorie, Principalitie, Iurisdiction, and Inheritance of those Countries; vvhich accordingly they did, Anno 1581. by publike act. And here you see some of the true causes of their fi∣nall breaking off from their obedience, and many of the new pressures you so earnestly enquire after; all which you must needes iustifie for reasonable, if you be a rea∣sonable creature, and haue not the eyes of your vnder∣standing, as well as of your faith, seeled vp with a fether from one of those Romish Geese that kept the Capitoll; or put cleane out by the application of Spanish Catholicon tempered vvith golden Drugges of the East and West Indies. For is it not reasonable, that hee who disclaimes his owne interest, vvhich is right and just, though not so large as he desires, and flyes to another vvhich is answe∣rable to his desire in the extent, though vniust and vio∣lent, should lose the iust title which he disclaymes, and receiue no manner of benefit from it? In case of tenures (I haue heard) that our Common Law (which is for the most part grounded vpon Reason) sayth; That if a Te∣nant for life seekes to the prejudice of another person, to chalenge a state of Inheritance, and to pleade it; being euicted therein, he loseth his first title, and cannot fall backe to assume that Right vvhich before he disauowed. But you will say, The King of Spaine did not disauow his title of Inheritance by birth. I answere, by wordes (per∣haps) he did not; but it is plaine, that by ouert acts hee
did, vvhen he sought to conquer his owne Inheritance; and so taught the people to resist him as a common and publike enemie, who sought the subuersion of their fundamentall Lawes and Liberties, and the bondage of their Countrey. Thus for∣getting his owne duty first, hee taught them to forget theirs afterwards; and seeking to inthrall them vniustly, he gaue them a iust cause and ground of farther liberty. Red-scarfe. The Duke of Alua had neuer charge from Spaine, nor neuer intention of his owne to bring an Inquisition into the Netherlands; this is but a meere calumnie which hath beene spread abroad, and giuen out by the sediti∣ous, to foster the obstinacie of the people: but had the Inquisition beene brought into the Netherlands, it had but returned from whence in long fore-going yeres it came: for you must note, that the Inquisition was neuer inuen∣ted or brought vp in Spaine, or there euer intended for Protestants, seeing it vvas in the world many ages be∣fore euer the world was acquainted with the name of the Protestants, or with any such kinde of people as Protestants are: for the Emperour Charles the Great, who liued about eight hundred yeeres past, did first pro∣mulgate and put it in practise; and the cause was, that after the Saxons in their Countrey of Saxonie, (Holland, and those annexed Prouinces beeing at that time part of the nether Saxonie) had beene brought from Paganisme to Christianity; this pious Emperour hauing greatly fur∣thered it, he had no sooner turned his backe by reason of his being impeached with warres in other parts, but these Saxons turned from Christianity backe againe to Paganisme; and for such Apostata's and forsakers of the Faith, he ordayned an Inquisition, the memory whereof
gaue example, that some ages after it was renued and put in practise in Spaine, for such Moores and Iewes, as hauing receiued the character of Christ, fell back againe to Mahometisme and Iudaisme; and albeit this Inquisi∣tion was neuer intended (as before is said) to haue beene renued in the Netherlands, yet peraduenture it might haue prooued as necessarie, vvhen signes appeared of the good disposition of some there aswell to Mahome∣tisme as to Iudaisme. For diuers that are yet liuing haue seene written vpon the Targets or Roundasses vvhich some of these Geus-gallants did beare, their resolution thereunto, in these words, Rather Turkish then Popish; vvhich is in effect, Rather Mahomet then Christ: and Hol∣landers report themselues, that some of their Countri∣men haue beene so edified in the present Synagogue at Amsterdam, that they haue relinquished their Christiani∣tie, and are become Iewes; and for defect of an Inquisi∣tion, had not any thing said vnto them for it; nor must they, where profession is made of such conscience-liber∣tie, that euery man may chuse what he will beleeue, or whether he will beleeue any thing or nothing. But this may seeme the lesse wonder, when there haue beene found among these Geuses, a companie that marched vnder the Ensigne of the Deuill; for so was the Ensigne called, because there were depicted therein the Deuils clawes, vvhich many that are yet liuing, haue seene displayed in the towne of Leire in Brabant, at such time as it stood out in rebellion against the King: and so may you now see how rebellion against the King, and rebellion against God doe concurre together; for where∣as ancient good Christians hauing beene taught by the example of the most glorious Christian Emperour Con∣stantinus
Magnus to fight vnder the signe of the Crosse, these new contrary Christians abhorring that signe, haue more deuotion to the clawes of the deuill, a wel-de∣uised and befitting ensigne for such as fought vnder it. Tawny-scarfe. Whereas you say that the Duke of Alua had neuer any charge from Spaine, or intention of his owne to bring an Inquisition into the Netherlands, affirming this report to be a meere calumnie; I must tell you, he had not onely instructions to bring in the Inquisition, as hath been for∣merly manifested; but, as if that had not bin sufficient to vexe and exasperate the people, by violating their pri∣uiledges or principles of State, he creates a bloudy Councell, or Councell of troubles, whereof hee made some Netherlan∣dish Lords, (who had giuen ayme whilst their Country was brought into bondage, or were vsed as instruments to captiuate it the sooner and safer by their ayde) the sha∣dow of this Tyranny, whilst Spaniards onely (vvho vvere ioyned in the same Commission) swayed the whole bu∣sinesse; and all other Councels, whether Prouinciall, or that of the Councell of Estate it selfe, were subiected to this; and by this means all things reduced to the sole ar∣bitrement and absolute will of the Duke himselfe, vvho had full and soueraigne authoritie from the King;The King gaue the duke more authori∣tie then he himselfe had, because by that meanes he hoped to haue it the better himself afterward. So he gaue what he sought, to receiue backe with aduan∣tage. An old point of Law-cunning, to gaine a title by forged presidents. Euery wran∣gling Attur∣ney knowes this tricke. not tyed nor limited to any instructions, but was inuested with libertie, freely to giue sentence in any thing at pleasure. And vvhereas concerning the originall of the Inquisi∣tion, you say (like a learned Antiquary) it vvas begotten by Charlemain the Emperor, vvho liued 800. yeres since, and brought vp in Germany not in Spaine, but thither ca∣ried onely for the vse of Moores and Iewes, and might be profitably (as you say) returned into the Netherlands
againe, to keepe them from turning Turkes and Iewes, to vvhich you finde them very prone: I answer in a vvord, that the tyrannies of the Spaniard, and their impure and beastly conuersation, with their abominable Idolatries, doth more scandalize the Moores and Iewes, and keepe backe, and driue more of them from the Faith, then can be reuoked by the Inquisition, or any other such bloudy course. And me thinkes, it is better, amongst euils, to bee a profest Turke or Iew, then a counterfeit, cruell, proud, couetous, bloudy and barbarous Christian; though (as one saith) it were better to be no man, then either of both. Wherfore I would haue a generall Inquisition in all coun∣tries of Christendome, onely to finde out such as vvere hispaniolized in the Dominions of other Princes; and such would I haue worthily put to the same torments vvhich they inflict vpon others for their consciences. Those Turks and Iewes you speake of, vvould I haue con∣uerted by prayers, disputations, and good examples of vertue and justice: for no man hath sure hold vpon that conscience, which is retained by force from its own choyce and liberty; and therefore you finde fault very wisely, for that euery man may beleeue what hee list in the Netherlands, as if your holy Inquisition had power to make a man beleeue what it list in Spaine; you may force men to confesse, perhaps, but you cannot force them to beleeue; which is an action of the will subiect to no vio∣lence, but the force of perswasion, or the holy Spirits motion. And therefore considering what a heauy iudg∣ment lyes vpon them, and how their eyes, eares, and hearts are seeled and sealed vp, that they cannot see, heare, and vnderstand, Rom. 11.9 10, 11, 12. it were rather fit for Christians to pitie them, and pray for their conuersion,
then by cruelties to persecute them, and so to cause them to hate and abhorre the Name of Christ, and the profes∣sion of Christianity yet more then they do. Dauid in the 59. Psalme, vers. 11. doth learne vs to make better vse of their neighbourhood, then to become their butchers. As for that which you charge diuers of the Geuses withall, that they marched vnder an Ensigne whereup∣on was depicted the deuils clawes, which you oppose a∣gainst that banner vvith the signe of the Crosse vpon it, borne by Constantinus Magnus; I answer, they rather thus correspond; Christs crosse is caried in token that he hath triumphed vpon the Crosse,Col. .15. ouer the Crosse it selfe; the Law, Death, and Hell; and now as an Ensigne of our spi∣rituall liberty, that signe is spread and displaid abroad; so those perhaps caried the deuils clawes as it were in tri∣umph, to shew how they were escaped from the deuils clawes; (your deuillish Inquisition and bloudy seruitude) and might now serue God vvith the liberty of consci∣ence, according to that song of Zacharias, Luk. 1.7. That be∣ing deliuered from the hands of their enemies, they might serue him without feare. Red-scarfe. Where free liberty of Conscience is allowed, why may not euery one beleeue as him list? vvhat shall restraine him? if you doubt of the Hollanders making difficulty of turning Turkes, doe but enquire what they haue done at Tunis, where they haue falne to Mahometisme by vvhole shipfuls at once; and afterward to mend the matter, haue taught the Mahometans of those parts the laudable science of Piracie, for the more affliction of Christians;
and as for Iudaisme, such as like thereof, and like no swines flesh, or can be content to forbeare the eating thereof, may be circumcised when they will, and then speake as much blasphemy against Christ, as the Deuill will direct them to doe. Thus haue I here shewed you what great wrong the King of Spaine hath done this people, and what great cause they haue to complaine of his breach of their Pri∣uiledges, vvhich is alwayes in their mouthes, albeit they would neuer vouchsafe to produce any old Priuiledge for the robbing of Churches. I haue also shewed you where the Inquisition began, and the cause vvhy it vvas first put in practise in Saxony, and afterwards in Spaine; the name whereof is now as much put in practise in Hol∣land in continuall Pamphlets and Preachings, as is the name of a Bulbegger to make little children afraid. Tawny-scarfe. Still you harpe vpon beleeuing, till you make me be∣leeue, and all this good company vvho heare vs this day, that you know not what it is to beleeue. All the Lawes of the Land against Romish Recusants, though they were as duely executed as they haue beene, could hardly per∣swade you to beleeue aright as you should doe. And all the euidence vvhich your eares haue heard before the Iudges on the Bench, and eyes haue seene vpon the Bridge, and top of the Parliament-house, can hardly perswade you to beleeue, that those Romane-catholike crownes vvhich now pearch aboue, did once plot and practise below, to blow vp the State. An Inquisition were fit for you therefore, lest you proue worse to vs through
your vnbeleefe, then the Turkes of Tunis, or the Maho∣metists of Amsterdam that you mention, can doe. You need not in the sterne of your Discourse recapi∣tulate the notable pieces which you haue proued: for all tht you say, doth but prooue how little you are able to say for your selfe and how you are led rather by your af∣fection then reason. You haue had euidence enough, that the King of Spaine sought to plant a tyranny in the Netherlands; and yet lest these should seeme in your eyes, or the like, not to be sufficient, I produce an honorable Ambassage sent from the Archduke Mathias and the Ge∣nerall Estates, to a solemne Assembly of the Princes of the Empire, holden at Wormes in Germany, anno 1578. vvhere the Seignior of S. Aldegond declared at large, the miserable estate of the Netherlands, the designes and in∣tent of Spaine, the tyranny of the Duke of Alua, Dom Iohn and others; and vvithall, what danger the Empire vvas to expect thereby, whilst those Countries should be made the seate of the vvarre, a place of retreit and garison, and a ready and able Magazine, by reason of their trading by Sea and the nauigable Riuers, to reduce all Germany, and so consequently all Christendome, vn∣der their obedience; if yet their ambitious aymes looked no farther. This then vvas thought sufficient to put all Christen∣dome vpon their guard; and yet all this is not sufficient to make you beleeue any thing, but the golden Legend of Spaine. Then haue you the resolution of the Queene of En∣gland to helpe them, after mature deliberation and consi∣deration of this their cause, and the question betwixt them and the King; and after she had long and in vaine
interceded for them to the King, and presented both the iustice of their cause, and the danger of his iniustice by diuers demonstrations of loue to him. Now this her re∣solution must needs bee grounded vpon the manifest and apparent iustice of the cause, otherwise Monarches, and a timerous woman especially, vvould haue beene wary, euen for consequence sake, if not for conscience,This Iustu Lipsius no well in his Letter of ad∣uice. 1595. how they fauoured or supported the subiects of another Prince, at least if they iudged them Rebels. But it is cleere both by the act it selfe whereby shee vndertooke their protection, as also by the reasons whereupon shee grounded that resolution, that shee tooke them for no Rebels, but for distressed people tyrannized ouer by a cruell, mercilesse, and bloudy enemy, who by strange dealing, had made himselfe a stranger to his owne. This also might appeare by the Duke of Anjous ac∣ceptance of the title of the Duke of Brabant and Flanders; and by the King of France his declaration made for ap∣probation of the cause, and conditioning for the title af∣ter the death of his brother the Duke of Anjou; vvhich he would not haue done, being of the Romish Religion al∣so, if hee and his wise Councell had not by pregnant proofes seene, that the King of Spaine by his tyranny and intrusion, was falne from his Right, and had manumis∣sed them from all necessary obedience. This lastly is confirmed beyond question, by the last accord made betwixt the King of Spaine and these States, vvherein the title he had is wholly relinquished; and he treates and concludes peace with them, as with free States, to whom he pretends no title; and so entertained their Ambassadours, as the Ambassadours of a Confe∣deracie. Besides, the King of great Brittaine, France, Den∣marke,
Sweden, the State of Venice, the Germane Princes, with other Nations in Christendom & without, haue treated vvith them vpon the same termes, and haue concluded peace, and made leagues and alliances vvith them as vvith free States, acknowledging them to bee inuested with soueraigne power in the vnited Body. Now there∣fore it is iniustice for the King of Spaine to fall backe from his former conclusion, made so aduisedly, and to reuiue his title, as an immortall cause of vvarre and bloudshed; yea it is iniustice in you, or any other person, to defend that title by tongue, pen, or hand. For it cals both the vvisedome and honour of our owne King, and of all other Kings, Princes, and States, vvho haue made peace vvith that State, into question; yea it censures and condemnes them all; it dissolues all those Leagues and Confederacies of trade and commerce, of warres offen∣siue and defensiue, concluded with them for the gene∣rall good; and sets all Christendome in combustion, with a Romish squib of reseruation, and Catholike equiuocation. And surely, howsoeuer you, and such as you, may in∣considerately thinke meanely, and speake basely of the wisest and worthiest persons employed in that State, be∣cause you finde them without traine, or pompe, or titu∣lar vanities; and many of them raised for their experi∣ence, fidelity and vvisedome, from meane stations, to treade in those high steps of authority and superioritie, (as the Romane Consuls had vvont, of whom one sayd, they were all Kings) yet whatsoeuer is vnfit to bee spoken of other Princes, is vnfit to bee spoken of them in their places; and the iust attributes you giue other high Com∣manders, ought to be giuen them in their vnited Body: And that they exact it not, proceedes from their lenity
and humility; that you giue it not, proceedes from your ignorance, arrogance, malice, and pride. Therefore to conclude this poynt, the scrupulous souldier, vvho be∣fore either vvould not see the truth, or could not iudge it, may now be resolued of the iustice of the warres, euen from the King of Spaines owne confession and concessi∣on, and from the publike acts of his owne Prince and State vvhere he liues. Besides, the miraculous blessing and prosperity which God hath giuen to their warres, shewes it is of him; and the policie and power of Princes doth enuie it, and oppose it in vaine. God blesseth them with peace, and plenty, and riches in the midst of warre, and impouerisheth and embroyleth their opposers, in the midst of peace: as Tantalus is thirstie with water at the lip, so these beggar and breake at the fountaine head of Gold and Siluer: God by all these meanes confir∣ming their cause, and shewing himselfe to be their God, if they will be his people. And this (I thinke) shall serue to satisfie you, at least to silence your further clamour; shewing, that the Queene of England was mooued to take the Netherlands parts out of meere commiseration of their iust cause, and the detestation of those Spanish cruelties and tyrannies vnder which they groned. Now if you be not weary of your taske, let vs come to speake of the second reason, inducing that good Queene to succour them; which was, partly domesticke respects, mixed with other important reasons of State; namely, Because of our auncient leagues with that peo∣ple, our daily commerce and intercourse, the dependan∣cie of one State vpon another, the assurance of their good and approoued neighbourhood, the feare of Spa∣nish propinquitie, especially as the case stood with the
Queene, being sole, of a contrary Religion, and obno∣xious to the pretences and claimes of the next Succes∣sor, vvho might be colourably assisted by the inuincible Arme of Spayne, to dismount the true Owner; and then the pretender by the same Arme hoysted ouer the sad∣dle, and so himselfe easily settled in the seate of Soue∣raignty, by the Popes donation, as hath beene accusto∣med in other places. Red scarfe. Before I come to discourse about Queene Elizabeths reasons for taking the Hollanders parts, giue mee leaue, I pray you, to speake a little of the vulgar multitude here in England, to the end you may consider of the reasons, why they hate the Spaniard, and loue the Hollander, to see how vvell and vvisely this loue and hatred is founded. That England and Spaine haue anciently remained in great amity together, Histories and Chronicles wil wit∣nesse, and the diuers alliances and marriages often made betweene these two Countries, can also giue testimony thereof. True then it is, that the great breach and hostility be∣tweene England and Spaine began but in these our dayes: let vs now see and consider, vvhy and how it began; to wit, whether by Spaine or by England. King Philip the second of Spaine, as all the vvorld knoweth, did vpon the death of Queene Mary his wife, giue place and quiet entrance vnto Queene Elizabeth; and for further proofe of his desire of continuance of peace and amitie with her, hee freely gaue vnto her all Queene Maries Iewels, they iustly belonging vnto him∣selfe: he also kept his Ambassadour Lidger in England, as the said Queene kept hers also in Spaine, professing
outwardly vnto him all loue and amitie; and yet this notwitstanding shee permitted secretly and vnderhand, the transport of Artillery and Munition of warre to the Moores of Granado, to enable them to rebell, iust about the very same time, that the Netherland-rebellion was determined to be begun, that thereby the King of Spaine might haue his hands full, by beeing thrust into two vvares at once; both which shee vnderhand furnished, but more the warre of the Netherlands, then that of Gra∣nado, because of the readier commoditie. Soone vpon the contriuing of this plot, when the King of Spaine, to appease the Netherland broyles in the beginning, had sent the Duke of Alua with Forces into those parts; and after his arriual there, sent him a supply of 600000. crownes; some affirme it to haue beene 800000, She ceized vpon his money in the vvest part of England; and hauing got∣ten it vnder her hands, did therewith assist his Netherland Rebels, vvhereby this money ordained to haue serued himselfe against his Rebels, came to serue his Rebels a∣gainst him, and bred besides this a farre greater incon∣uenience: for it was the cause why the Duke of Alua demaunded the tenth penie of the country peoples goods, whereby they became the more alienated and apt to Rebellion. Some yeeres after this, Captaine Drake was employed from England to the vvest-Indies, vvhere hee robbed the King of Spaine of about a million and an halfe of his treasure. These and sundry other wrongs and detri∣ments were done by the said Queene vnto the King of Spaine, at such time as either had their Ambassadours, the ministers of peace, in each others countrey, they professing to each other loue and amitie: the King of
Spaine doing against the Queene of England no act whatsoeuer to the contrarie, whereas shee con∣trariwise continued to doe against him vnderhand as many wrongs as shee could, besides those great notori∣ous wrongs here mentioned. But when these grew so frequent, that the smart vnto the King of Spayne became intolerable; and so manifested vnto the world, that all other Princes and people tooke notice thereof, how was it possible that it could stand with the honor of a King, and of such a potent King as is a King of Spayne, still to continue to put vp wrongs, as fast as shee continued to doe them? hee was therefore at the last mooued with the preparation of his great Armada nauall of the yeere of our Lord 1588. the memory whereof, by the inces∣sant clamors of puritanicall enemies of peace, hath possessed more place in the heades of the inconsiderate vulgar multitude, then the many great wrongs that inforced it. But thankes bee to God, our peacefull King Iames comming to the Crowne, and well knowing how mat∣ters had passed, did (to the great happines of the Realm) salue vp this sore from further festring, vvhereunto hee found Spaine most ready and willing, and well content to let passe and forget all English iniuries. For to giue the Spaniards their due, certaine it is, they are men that are not of vnreconciliable and reuengefull natures, nor such long entertainers of desire of reuenge, as some o∣ther Nations are said to be: And this appeareth mani∣festly in this Nation more then in others; for notwith∣standing all fore-going hostilitie betweene Englishmen and Spaniards both by sea and land, and inuasions euen in Portugal and Spaine it selfe, vvhereof people may re∣maine more sensible, then of an vneffectuall Armada;
yet hath not any English Ambassadour, nor any other of the English Nation beene by Spaniards in Spaine bar∣barously abused; but I am ashamed (euen for the honor of our Nation) to repeate, how Spanish Ambassadors and other Spaniards haue beene vsed in England. As for the sundry benefits which the commerce and traffique betweene England and Spaine hath brought vnto our Nation, I doubt not but many of our Merchants, sea faring men and others will confesse, and farre more profit and benefite will no doubt ensue the most hono∣rable and great alliance now expected. But let vs come to our good neighbours and friends the Hollanders, and consider of the gratefull goodnesse and benefits which we reape by them, that thereby wee may know how well and wisely wee are aduised to e∣steeme them for our good neighbours and friends, and so friendly sticking vnto them. That we haue for aboue these fifty yeeres taken their parts is sufficiently knowne; that the people of England haue oftentimes generally smarted by the great pressures and parliamentall payments imposed vpon them by Queene Elizabeth, to vphold these friends and neigh∣bours withall, is likewise well enough knowne; as also that great aboundance of English bloud hath beene shed in their quarrell, and an infinit number of Englishmens liues lost, vvhose courage and valour was worthy of more honour, then in their base and dishonourable ser∣uice could be deserued; and now when all comes to all, they are so farre from honest ciuilitie, that they will not acknowledge any friendship done them, and therefore can they not entertaine any thoughts of obligation or gratitude; nay, they dare plainely tell vs, that wee are
beholding vnto them, which is as much to say, that they expect gratitude at our hands. Tawny-scarfe. You long to breake your malice vpon Queene Eliza∣beth, and will goe farre about, and much out of the way to doe it, you should not otherwise shew your selfe a right Romane Catholike, or a right Spanish Papist. For our ancient Leagues with the Spaniard which you mention, we confesse it; but you must consider, then both States were vassals to the Pope, and England was then accounted by that Strumpet the elder brother. Now Spaine hath got priority, and vve haue so much vvit as to know the iniury offered vs, and to acknowledge our heauenly progeny, renouncing that earthly bastardie; and therfore must looke for opposition from the Prince of this world, and all that take part with him. Besides, then Spaine was not so potent, and so not so formidable; the accesse of so many Kingdomes hath since possest him with a more imperious spirit, and made him terri∣ble to his neighbours and confederates, rather then (as he had vvont to be) helpefull vnto them. The quarrell betwixt England and Spaine you cast wholly vpon Queene Elizabeth; and by the vvay, blame her for suffering Artillerie and Munition to bee caried out of her Land to the Moores of Granado, and for ceizing vpon a great summe of money belonging to the King of Spayne, vvhich fell vpon her coast. Then you huddle vp that vvhich Sir Francis Drake did against the King of Spaine in the Indies, making the King of Spaine like ano∣ther Melchisedec, or king of peace and iustice, to stand still all the vvhile in a maiden-like posture, and neuer lift vp his hand to defend himselfe and annoy her, till in 88. he
vvas constrained to send that inuincible Armado, vvith a hope and full purpose vvholly to subuert the State of the Kingdome, and possesse himselfe of all. Now because you finde a sort of people; vvho thank∣fully and religiously keepe this deliuerance in memorie, and praise God for it, those you brand vvith the name of Puritans, and are wonderfully angry, that they will not giue the Catholike King and the Romane Catholikes his assistants, thankes for his courteous inuasion, and his royall, religious, and gracious purpose to rule ouer them as mildely, as ouer the Netherlands. For answere to all this, take a view of vvhat the Councell of England pre∣sented to her Maiestie, vvhilst shee stood in doubt whe∣ther or no shee should ayde the vnited Prouinces against the King of Spaine, where they alledge: The greatThe Coun∣cel of England say, the King of Spaine ha¦ted the Queen & shew their reasons for it: you say vpon your bare word, the Queene hated the King of Spaine, but you shew no reason for it. hatred conceiued against her by the King of Spaine, for the altering of his Religion in England, which he not long before had planted therein: which appeared by the treatie of peace made at Chasteau in Can∣bresis, holden in anno 1559. wherein hee was very slacke and carelesse for procuring the deliuerie of the towne ofThe losse of Calls, was a fruite of the Spanish match: this killed Queene Marie to behold, when she considered how contrary to the aduice of her best Councelors, shee would proceede withi this marriage, though they had warned her of these euils aforehand, and told her that the Spaniards had no respect but to themselues, which shee would not beleeue, till it was too late to remedie. Calis vnto the English againe, the which was lost by meanes of his warres; and on the other side, he caused the French to deliuer many townes ouer vnto the Duke of Sauoy, and left het in warre both against France and Scotland without any resistance. You charge her for furnishing the Moores of Granado vnderhand with muniti∣on, which she is forced to buy (as we see) in Germany, for her owne vse.They shewed likewise the vnkinde refusall by him made, of passage thorow the Netherland Countries with Mu∣nition,
Armes, and Powder, which shee as then had caused to be prouided and bought by her Factor Sir Thomas Gres∣ham, vnto whom it was denied. She seekes to make leagues, and you say shee desires to breake them.Further, that when her Maiestie by her Ambassadour, the Lord Viscount Montague, desired the King of Spaine to re∣uiew and confirme the ancient contracts made betweene his father the Emperor Charles the fift, and her Predecessors, hee vvould by no meanes be drawne to yeeld thereunto. You complain of vs for the Spaniards and Spanish Am∣bassadors, but will not heare nor see this iniurie offered by them to vs and ours.That he had suffered the Inquisitors in Spaine, to prosecute her poore subiects with all cruelty and extremitie, and com∣manded her Ambassador out of Spaine, because of his Reli∣gion. You say, the detaining of the Kings mo∣ney was the cause of this: but could he haue prooued it his, it had not beene detained, Certaine Merchants of Genoa layed claime to the money.That his Gouernour, the Duke of Alua, in the Netherlands had vsed all manner of hostilitie and violence against her subiects, arresting both their bodies and goods, contrary to the ancient contracts betweene England and the Netherlands. All this is no∣thing in the eyes of the Romane Ca∣tholikes, who were them selues parties in the busines, and therefore we will heare with your wilfull blind∣nesse: it con∣cernes your credits to o∣uersee and de∣ny all this.That he had sent an Army into her Maiesties Kingdom of Ireland, and with colours flying inuaded the sayd Kingdome, vpon a supposed gift thereof, made vnto him by the Pope of Rome, which he thereby excused, intending also to enterprise the like against the Realme of England, as it manifestly appeared by the Iesuit Sanders letters to that end dispersed abroad, and by the Iesuit Chreyghton, who was then a prisoner: and many other such like practises also were discoue∣red by the dealings of bis Ambassador Dom Bernardino de Mendoza in England.
Besides these many forepassed iniuries, the Councell laid before her Maiestie the danger that shee was to ex∣pect, if the Spaniard once obtained merum imperium, that is, full and absolute authoritie in the Prouinces of the Netherlands; how hee would alter their Re∣ligion, breake their auncient Priuiledges, and subiect them wholly to his will and pleasure: vvhich done, out of his malicious heart and intent, hee would easily in∣uade England, vvith the ayde of the multitude of ship∣ping and Saylers of those Countries, together vvith his Indian treasure: First,Beware and looke about you, all true-hearted En∣glishmen, when you see these practises reuiued: for they are to the whole Kingdome as Beacons fited, to rouze you vp to watch∣ing and pray∣er, and all o∣ther meanes to preuent these mis∣chiefes. depriuing England of all trade of merchandize with the Netherlands, and within the Land pro∣curing domesticall dissention: and that therefore shee was not then to let slip the present occasion, nor yet to at∣tend vntill the Netherlands were fully planted with Spani∣ards and Italians; for that the vvarre was not vndertaken against the Netherlands, but with a further intent and mea∣ning to make a greater conquest. Concerning that which you say of the good vse our Ambassadors haue receiued in Spaine, and the iniuries the Spanish Ambassadors haue receiued in England: I an∣swere, first you see the English Ambassadour was com∣manded out of Spayne for his Religion sake; vvhilst all the Spanish Ambassadors haue had free exercise of their superstitions in England, and liberty to corrupt others; so as none are barred from hearing of their Masses, but all things done as publikely as in Spaine. Besides, we ne∣uer had an Ambassadour that plotted treason in Spaine, but the King of Spayne hath had such in England; as namely, Dom Bernardin of Mendoza, who thereupon was chased out of the Land like a spie, and tooke not leaue like an Ambassador. The Chronicles of Spaine cannot
accuse any of our Ambassadors to haue medled farther, then in the protection of Merchants, or discharge of duties and commands proper to their places: but how farre the Ambassadours of Spaine haue intruded them∣selues in the affaires of England, for the aduancement of the Romish Religion, and disposing Offices for that pur∣pose, is so notorious to the people, as it is no maruell, if they haue suffered some indignities; nay, it is a wonder they haue runne no farther hazard. I make no question had the like actions beene vndertaken in Spaine against the Romish Religion, by an English Ambassadour, the ve∣ry Clergie of Spaine would haue stoned him out, and the people would scarce haue suffered him to passe vn∣punished, perhaps though the King himselfe would haue beene his protector. The benefits of our commerce, especially by this ex∣pected alliance you speake of, the successe will manifest; and we haue great cause to hope it may be good, at least better then it is, in regard wiser heads haue the handling of it, then either yours or mine: and yet I must tell you, we begin with no good omen hitherto, since by way of preuention, our Clothes, Stuffes, and English commo∣dities of Wooll are excluded, vvhereby the gaines wee get by the alliance, vvill soone be drawne home againe; Princes delighting to out-reach one another in these respects of State. Had wee once beene as wise to keepe our sheepe from thence; or were we now as warie to ba∣nish their Silkes, Veluets, Tobacco, and other needlesse com∣modities from hence, then wee might hap indeed to gaine by the Trading, otherwise we may put the gaine in our eyes. But the Customes would so bee lessened; nay rather let the Commonwealth sinke.
For the Netherlands ingratitude, I cannot accuse them, neither vvill I excuse them: I know many old and wor∣thy Commanders, who haue lost their bloud and bones in their quarrell, complaine of neglect, contempt, and forgetfulnesse of former good turnes; and perhaps there is too much cause of their complaint: but for my parti∣cular, as I fight for them, so I haue my meanes from them, and should be taxed of ingratitude my selfe, if I should taxe them of vvhat I know not, or feele not. Souldiers haue neuer the happinesse to bee well rewar∣ded, or vvorthily regarded as they ought in any place; the reason perhaps is, because their employment is bur∣thensome euen to those that employ them: and there∣fore though necessitie procure their entertainment, yet that compulsion, together with the person, is alike vn∣gratefull. Looke into Greece and Rome, and all great States, how they haue vsed their owne, and then you vvill not so much vvonder, that the idle, vnexperienced, and most inconsiderate sort of people in these Coun∣tries, vse strangers no better. Men are apt to bury ma∣ny benefits vnder the ruines of one iniurie: and the West-winde from our Coast, blowes not so fauourable a gale vpon this as it had wont; neither doe the Starres from our Firmament, cast vpon them so happy an as∣pect and fruitfull influence, as heretofore: they there∣fore cannot dissemble the alteration, but shew it also in the alteration of their lookes towards vs. Another reason vvhy we receiue no better vse, may be the buying and selling of Places; of which, vvhen the States haue taken notice, as of Offices valuable at high rates, they haue inquired into the secret vvayes of that gaine, and haue abridged it vvhat they could. Whereas,
if preferment might haue proceeded the right way in any reasonable manner, according to the law of Armes and Armies, that is, freely to the next successor as heire to his predecessor; or to the best deseruer, as purchaser by personall woorth and valour, then neither should the Souldier complaine of his Officer, or the Officer of the State: whereas now the price is euer in the eye of the Commander, that he may gather vp his money speedily by exaction, vvhich he hath disbursed, lest it proue too deare a bargaine; and it is also in the eye of the State, causing them to imagine the Commanders profit to be farre more then it is, for vvhich he venters so much mo∣ney, and his life to boot, as if hee intended to buy dan∣ger. Another reason may be, that the State takes the Offi∣cer and the Souldier to be incorporated into their Body; now vvhen naturally (of all people in the world) they loue frugalitie, (euen so farre, as often it turnes into a vice in many) they beholding the contrarie prodigalitie of our people, especially in apparel and diet, aboue their rankes and abilities, doe dis-affect them as vnnaturall o∣uergrowne members to that spare Body; not conside∣ring, that brauety is tolerable in Souldiers, if it be so in any profession. I doe not meane that courtly and effe∣minate brauerie of perfuming and powdring; (as they vse to doe, who would keepe corrupt flesh from tayn∣ting) a Souldier neuer smels sweeter, and lookes better, no not in the eye of a Lady, then when he is perfumed vvith sweat, and powdred with dust, and painted or be∣smeared with bloud: nor yet doe I meane that beastly brauery, wherein the golden-spangled Asse struts, and thinkes himselfe better then the man that rules him and
rides him; but that brauery in action (whilst euen the outward shew is not affected nor neglected) which madeThis is re∣corded for their glory, and others imitation, by the renowned Souldier Sir Roger Willi∣ams, who was one of those that brought this kinde of brauerie into fashion. Sir Francis Vere, and Sir Thomas Baskeruile (to mention no more) so notable in the eye of the Prince of Parma and his Army; when maintaining a breach furiously as∣saulted, the one was knowne by the skarlet Cassocke dyed deeper yet in his owne and enemies bloud, and the other by his white Scarfe and Fether, worne as markes for his enuious and emulous enemies to shoote at in vaine, beeing aboue their reach. Now this brauery (which is truely their owne) may aswell bee performed in Buffe and Broad-cloath, as in all the anticke imbro∣deries, and apish inuentions of our idle Age: and this brauerie is not contemned, but procures them honour and respect, vshers them into the company of best Prin∣ces and Peeres, makes their waies easie in the greatest presse and crowd; attracts all eyes to gaze vpon them, though clad in rust and copwebs; yea the more torne, and rent, and tattered, scarified and mutilated euen to deformity, the more faire, and glorious, and admirable they shine both in the eyes of this Nation, and all o∣thers, if they be honorable, though they be enemies. Besides, that brauerie in clothes, as it is euer borrowed of beasts, birds, fishes, and wormes, so it is often bor∣rowed, or taken vp in trust of poore men; and this must needes mooue hate and enuie, when the Souldier pas∣seth by with the Merchants wealth on his backe, and he in the meane time, his wife & children must fare hard, goe thrid-bare, and at last breake for lacke of payment, except by complaint he get redresse; which nips the pro∣digall debtor also, and causeth him to fret, rage, and re∣pine, as if the iniury were done him, because hee is not
suffered to doe what iniurie hee would, and by his idle excesse to vndoe the industrious Merchant and Artizan, of which this Common-wealth principally consisteth. Now this his profuse prodigalitie makes others (though sober) thought the worse of, and so to receiue the harder measure and censure at all hands, as if it were not a per∣sonall and speciall fault, but a generall disposition of the Nation, vvhich is a great mistake in this matter. Lastly, the censorious Cato's of that Commonwealth, seeing not onely themselues by trust, but also their youth spoiled by the example and conuersation of these ouer-reaching Gallants; and that now their sonnes and daughters begin to reuell away their estates; to shackle and manacle, to bridle and saddle themselues in silkes and veluets, in gold and siluer, and to waxe wearie of that ancient and commendable frugality, which main∣taines their liberty, must needes hate those that they be∣hold to be the cause of this vanitie, vvhich threatneth and introduceth slauerie: especially when they see it proceedes from the imitation of the French, English, and Scottish Nations, who were first called in by their vertue and valour, to be the bulwards and walles of their Com∣monwealth; but now pull downe with the left hand, what they built with the right, laying open by their Lu∣cifrian pride, a breach wide enough for the wrath of God, and politique power of ambitious man, to enter in front for their destruction, These or some of these may be the causes, vvhy the modester and better sort (whereof there are many) re∣ceiue no better vse, being mixt with bad deseruers; and vvhy (perhaps) they seeme to bee hated, or at least dis∣respected, euen of those for whom they fight, and vvho
ought to prosecute them vvith all honorable attributes, reuerent respects, and ample rewards. But howsoeuer, if we compare their vse of vs, vvith the vse you haue and doe finde vnder the King of Spaine, they will appeare most gratefull and respectfull people. How basely doe all the English vvaite vpon the Spanish Dons, as if all Nations vvere bound to fight for the Spa∣niard by a duty of nature? You are promised mountaines at the first entertainment, but are payed with a bit and a knocke as Apes deserue. We haue lesse promised, but that is surely payed, though sometime something slow∣ly. When the King of Spaine is runne farre in debt to any troupes, the Generals know how (like good husbands for their Masters profit) to put such troupes vpon some desperate seruice, where few may come off: nay, they vse to force them on vpon such vnassaultable and impreg∣nable vvorkes, as appeared in the siege of Bergen. So the great Turke vseth to take townes, by filling vp ditches vvith his owne men. And this is generally obserued as a difference betwixt our Generals and yours; your Ge∣nerals care not how many men they lose to saue money; our Generall cares not what mony he spends in making vvorkes for the sauing of his souldiers liues vpon appro∣ches. The difference of our accommodation is such, as we neuer vvant victuall, and you almost euer want it: so that euery souldier with vs, is, or may be (if his owne idlenes or ryot be not in the fault) better prouided, then the Commanders with you. This appeared before Ber∣gen, where 1500. of your side came running to vs, driuen by meete necessity, for lacke of meat or pay; of vvhich number, though most were English, yet there were ma∣ny of all Nations; as Walloons, Dutch, Italians, and Spaniards.
Yea I my selfe saw at Rees, a seruant of the Earle of Gon∣domare, the late Spanish Ambassadour, running away in his Liuerie, to the English Beefe and Brewesse: and if such as he, so commended, fared so hardly, vvhat shall vve thinke of other friendlesse people? And if the Netherlanders should say (as you report) that vve tooke their parts partly for our owne sakes, they should say nothing but truth, and it concernes vs so to doe; yet this diminisheth not the cause of their grati∣tude; for as in tennis the ball must be tost to and fro; so amongst friends, benefits and gratitudes must be inter∣changed, or else amitie ceaseth, or perhaps dieth or tur∣neth to enmitie. It concernes vs both equally therefore to keepe this ball vp, if we intend to continue gamesters long; for assuredly vvere these Countries reduced to such termes as the Spaniard desires, vve could not be safe, but might certainly expect a present inuasion; and so might they expect suddenly to be swallowed vp, if ours were enemie. This the vvisedome of their State sawe, vvhen they fought protection rather from the Queene of England, as beeing more fit, then from the King of France, as being more potent. And this the wisedome of our State then confessed also, vvhen they ioyned vvith them for the aptnes and oportunity, each State had to helpe or annoy one the other, aswell in commerce and trade, as also in warres offensiue and defensiue: and I vvonder thorow vvhat new Spectacles your vvisdome, (the vvisedome of the present times) sees the contrarie to the vvisedome of the auncient, vvhich our experi∣ence hath proued & approued prosperous to both States. Red-scarfe. You say England might feare an inuasion from Spaine;
but what reason was there, why wee should haue any feare of such an inuasion, but only for our taking their parts against their true and lawfull Soueraigne the King of Spaine? Tawny-scarfe. Great reason; for England stood onely full in the vvay to hinder his imaginary and intended Greatnesse: and this appeares in the Letters of Don Iohn, and Escouedo his Secretarie, to the King of Spain, discoursing of that point; vvhich vvere happily intercepted in their passge tho∣row Gascoigney, to discouer that plot and practise, and to warne both the Queene and the States, and these times also, if they will bee warned, to beware of that Snap∣hance. Whereupon the Queene sent an Ambassadour to the King of Spaine to justifie her proceeding, to accuse Don Iohn, to desire his remoouall from that Gouerne∣ment, and withall, shut vp that message with this con∣clusion, That if the King should not bee induced to like of her proceedings, (wherwith shee plainely made him acquainted) her Majesty should thereby discouer, that his intention was, by force of armes to alter and dissolue the ancient forme of Gouernement in the Netherlands, and by taking away their ancient Lawes and Liberties, to make it a Land of Conquest, and to people it vvith Garrisons of men of warre; and that the end and scope of his deseignes should tend to that which was discoue∣red by Escouedo's Letter, wherein he writeth, that the en∣terprise of England is of more facilitie, then that of the Islands: whereby her Majestie should finde the disposition of so bad a neighbour to her and her royall estate. And then her Majesties resolution would be, to imploy all the power shee was able to make, for the defence of her
neighbors, and preseruation of her owne estate. Red-scarfe. But I must tell you further concerning the Hollanders, that they doe not only deny all gratitude where it is due, and vniustly claime it vvhere they owe it; but passing further beyond the limits of reason and humanity, they discouer themselues to be such monsters, as to beare a very deuillish hatred both vnto our Nation, and to our most gracious Soueraigne himself: Against our Nation, their actions declare it; against our Soueraigne, their vil∣lanous tongues. Of their most vile and contemptible vsage of our Nation in the East Indies, I shall not here need to speake, the Letters written by our Merchants and others from thence, doe declare it; their vsage of vs in Groonland, and the vndoing of our long-continued Trade in Moscouie, I will also omit; but we find that they are the very caterpillars and destroyers of our Com∣monwealth, by all the vvayes and meanes they can de∣uise; for they haue not onely by meanes of their corre∣spondent countrimen, conueyed and drawne by stealth our Gold and Siluer out of the Realme, but they haue brought the whole Realme in a generall decay of traf∣fique, to the impouerishing and vndoing of thousands of the inhabitants, as all that deale in Clothing in all parts of the Realme will confesse. As for their villanous speeches against our Soueraign, I could name vnto you that Englishman, vvho passing not long since betweene Rotterdam and the Haghe, and hearing some of those varlets speake ill of his Maiestie, vvhich he (being an Englishman) could not endure but as became him, did in good manner reprehend them for it; vvhen straightwayes a couple of them drew their
kniues vpon him to haue stabbed him; and so had they done, had they not bin held and kept backe by others there present. We haue a Prouerbe, that it is better for some to steale a horse, then some to looke on. What detriments indure vve by Spaniards? vvhere doe they binde vs hand and foot, and cast vs ouer Indian rockes like dogs? where vndo they our Trade? how impouerish they our Coun∣trie? vvhere rayle they vpon our Soueraigne? are wee in our right vvits I wonder? vvhen vve resolue to goe to shed our bloud for those that sucke our bloud? when vve fight for those at home, that kill vs abroad? mee thinkes purging with Helleborus vvere fitter nowadayes to be taken in vse of our Countrimen, then the smoake-drinke of driueling Tobacco. Tawny-scarfe. The iniuries and abuses offered to our Nation in Mos∣couy, Groonland, and the east-Indies, vvere not the acts of the State, but of some wicked persons, who wearie of their owne welfare, would as gladly haue the King of Spayne their Master againe as you, or any other Spanish Pentioner could wish. I know that the baser and igno∣bler sort of these, being mungrell Spaniards in affection, and perhaps in bloud, vvhere they get the vpper hand, are as mercilesse as Moores or Spaniards, and like them (being ouercome) are as humble, seruile, and deiected. But vvhat meane you to mention this? vvhen all the iniuries they haue done vs, though they be great, incre∣dible, intolerable, vnworthy that they should inflict them, or vve suffer them, yet they are nothing to that vvhich the Kings children haue suffered by a Spanish Ar∣mie. Here priuate Merchants, or a Societie, or Com∣panie receiued iniurie by them, There the Kings chil∣dren,
Religion, the Reformed Church, suffered ship∣wracke, by the insulting, cruell, and bloudy Spaniard; and many thousands of Christians were martyred after a barbarous and butcherly manner; yea vpon all aduan∣tages, euen vnder tearmes of Treatie and Peace. And this vvhilst Spaine had league vvith our State, yea whilst the Townes vvere vnder our Kings protection; vvhilst the Army vvas payed by our King, and the Generals hands bound for attempting against them, yea almost from defending himselfe; and vvhilst an Ambassadour lay vpon purpose to make their entrance more easie, and to grant what their ambitious humours could desire, in hope vvith kinde vsage to glut their vnsatiable gorges, and to force them reciprocally to returne some solide and reall (besides complementall and verball) courte∣sies: yea vvhilst they vvere kissing the one cheeke of our King, they vvere smiting the other; kissing the Prince, as if they meant to deifie him, and giue him all theirs; smiting his royall, louing, and onely Sister, and by force taking away all that vvas Hers. For that vvhich you say concerning the Netherland ca∣terpillers drawing away our Gold, and destroying our Trafficke, I acknowledge it to be partly true, yet I doubt the Romish locusts, those Babylonish Merchants spoken of Reuel. 9. and 18. are more in fault in those respects, then the Netherlandish caterpillers. If vve consider the pensi∣ons, the vnder-hand gatherings, the maintenance giuen towards Schooles and Seminaries in all Popish Coun∣tries, euen out of England; the building of Nunneries, Monasteries, and other irreligious Houses; the hee and shee Votaries, that of late dayes (especially since the Proclamation commanded the contrarie) haue carried
out their plentifull portions thither, you will easily iudge, that the caterpiller hath not cropt our blooming fruit of Hesperides, so much as the locust; and so by con∣sequence, spirituall merchandizing in Idolatrie, hath more hindred our Trade, then the vnder-hand pettie thefts (in comparison of the other) committed by a few pedling and pilfering Merchants. And all men know, decay of Trade necessarily and naturally followes the decay of Coyne: so the spirituall traffique of Rome hath more decayed our Trade in all Countries, then the temporall trading of Amsterdam. For I haue credibly heard related from the mouth of a worthy witnesse, that at one time there hath beene payed 200000. pounds in English gold in to one of those spirituall Bankes, for and toward the building and repairing of certaine Monaste∣ries, and payment of portions, and other allowances for such of the English, as haue entred into religious Orders; for they will take none empty-handed; and vvhat they take is with a mort-main, whereas the Merchant yet trades, and returnes something againe that hath sauour. I produce this one payment, not as if it were all, but that by this one notable transportation of English trea∣sure, we may guesse at many others vnknowne. Besides, with what disaduantage our Merchants trade by reason of Religion, and how this also deads their dealings, making them obnoxious to the couetous Spaniards, and so a prey to their pleasures, all the world knowes. I am glad to heare you so angry with those varlets that betwixt Rotterdam and the Haghe spake ill of his Ma∣iestie: The case is either alterd with you since father Parsons died, or else perhaps you thinke it becomes none to rayle but men of your Religion; you forget the
bookes printed at Louaine, and those published in Flan∣ders, Brabant, and Spaine, for repressing of which, Ambas∣sadours haue beene sent from England, and pensions gi∣uen to some for bastinadoing the Authors, vvhen no other satisfaction could be gotten of the State. You forget also those infinit songs, libels, and obscene dis∣courses made against his Maiestie heretofore; for wri∣ting, or venting, and dispersing whereof, such as you haue gotten Romish pensions. All these are forgotten, or by you past by, though their sweet remembrance re∣maines still with many, as the snuffe of a candle new put out. As for the Bores you speake of, they are as wide mou∣thed as you; their throats open sepulchres, their tongues stretcht out vpon the largest Last, and in the midst of their cups and Tobacco, will forget the honour of God and man, caring no more to raile at a Prince being out of his reach, then you do to blaspheme God himselfe, when a Priest stands at your elbow ready to absolue you; nor to draw their kniues vpon you beeing inraged with drinke, then you vpon Kings, made drunke before vvith the cup of the Whores abomination. But this must not be made a fault of a whole Nation, no more then your personall follies shall be imputed to all Romane Ca∣tholiques; nor must wee for a drunken Skippers tongue, leaue the protection of our more modest friends and neighbours, vvith whom these are mixed, as base earth amongst gold-Ore; such a resolution were madnesse, and vvould require a purge of Hellebore indeed, as you learnedly aduise; though your aduice, if it were vvise∣ly followed, would be to the great hinderance of the Spanish Trade, that we in England should giue ouer To∣bacco,
beeing a principall Commoditie wee fetch from thence, to the vndoing of our selues, and the inriching of him and his State, vvhich I am sure is agreeable to your Catholike wish. Lastly, where you demand what detriment we endure by the Spaniard, and where they binde vs hand and foote, and cast vs ouer Indian rockes like dogs, &c. I am forced for an∣swere to touch vpon two or three strange and stupendi∣ous stories, amongst infinite others left behinde as ill or worse, thereby to giue your blinde and wilfull partiali∣tie some satisfaction. I passe by all that incredible crueltie which the Spani∣ards haue and do exercise towards the Indians; the Lyon,History of the West-Indis. the Wolfe, Dogge, Vulture, Kite, or if there bee any o∣ther bird or beast more rauenous and apacious, are not so cruell to their owne kinde nor to others, (perhappes as not knowing the vvayes to doe it) as these men, (if vve may call them so) who seeme to haue reason to no other end, but to exceed these bruits and beasts, in all sa∣uage, brutish, or (beyond that) deuillish cruelties. Eyes, eares, nose, lippes, hands, feet, body, soule, nothing is spared, but all spoyled for their pleasure: as if it were not this or that man, but mankinde, that they intended to destroy; and vvith cursed Cain, would haue the pos∣session of the whole earth alone; and with Ismael, hauing their hands against euery man, would stirre euery mans hand against them in their owne needfull defences. Neither vvill I once mention vvhat they doe by Sea or Land to the Netherlandish people, vvho commonly pay them a∣gaine in their owne coyne, hauing learnt of them to de∣face Gods images, and to stampe the deuils there in
bloud and reuenge, especially in the East-Indies. Nei∣ther yet will I mention what the French haue felt in Flo∣rida,History of Florida. vvhere Pedro de Melendes hung vp all the Frenchmen vnder the command of Laudouice, with this inscription ouer their heads, I doe not this as vnto Frenchmen, but to Lu∣therans and Heretiques. A vvatch-word and a mirrour to ours abroad in Virginia and the Bermuda's, as also to vs at home, to teach vs to beware, and behold what cour∣tesie we are to expect from them where they are masters; and how they can hang vp some for being Heretiques, o∣thers for being of this or that Nation, and others for being men, and so spare none, but in fine hang vp all for their profit. But they will not deale thus by the English; no doubtlesse, they loue their heart blouds too well; looke vpon these examples that follow for your learning, and then tell me vvhat you thinke: for these are knowne for truths to euery Sayler in Radcliffe. About twelue or fourteene yeeres since, there was a ship sent from London called the Vlysses, to Trinidado to trade for Tobacco; vvhich our Merchants had wont to doe, in the time that Berea gouerned there: but at this time the gouernement vvas changed, Berea beeing sent vnto Mexico, and those parts gouerned by the King of Spaines Officers. The Merchants and Owners of this ship thinking they might trade peaceably as they vvere wont, shot off a piece of Ordinance according to the custome, to signifie their arriuall, and desire to trade as they vsed to doe; vpon vvhich the Spaniards came to the shores side, shewing out their vvhite Flagges in token of peace: and our Merchants so assured, after the manner of all Nations that beleeue a God, or loue men like
themselues, came ashore; where presently the Spaniards ceized vpon all that landed, to the number of 27. persons, and kept them, as they pretended, for hostages, but would neuer deliuer them, till they had for their ran∣some drawne the ship so dry of Amunition, clothes, vi∣ctuals, and all other necessaries, as shee could spare no more, hauing left her selfe scarce enough to bring her home: vvhich when the Spaniards perceiued, nd sawe withall, that they could not by falshood possesse the ship, they tooke the 27. prisoners; and in stead of setting them free, and sending them home as they promised and conditioned, bound each of them to a seuerall tree, and in the sight of the Sunne, and in the eye of their lamen∣ting friends on shipboord, vvho could not helpe them, cut their throates, and left them there and went their vvayes: so that when their companions came on shore, they beheld the vvofull spectacle, but could doe no far∣ther courtesie to them, then couer their bodies vvith earth, burying them with a peale of cryes and impreca∣tions sent to heauen, for iust vengeance to bee powred vpon that perfidious place and people. About two yeeres after, a ship of South-hampton came thither, the Merchant of which named Chamberlaine, had beene there the yere before, and there was owing to him an hundred pounds of Tobacco: hee, making no question but all had beene well, leaped ashore to trade with the Spaniards, and was presently taken, and his throat cut in the sight of them that were in the Boate, vvho hardly scaped. In that Apologie written by Sir Walter Raleigh a little before his death, he shewed, how the Spaniards in Ame∣rica
did tye the English (out of a ship wherein M. Hall of London and him selfe were partners) backe to backe, and cut their throats after they had traded with them a whole moneth, and trayned them ashore in trust of their fide∣lities, vvithout so much as a sword or any other weapon amongst them all to defend themselues. And if (saith he) the Spaniards to our complaint made answere, that there was nothing in the Treatie against our Trading in the Indies, but that we might trade at our perills, I trust to God (saith he) the word perill shall euer be construed in∣differently to both Nations, otherwise wee must for euer a∣bandon the Indies, and close all our knowledge and pilotage in that part of the world. Thus hee: And how vnreasonable this is, euen such as looke into the Map of America, may judge at first sight. America is more then the fourth part of the knowne world, the hundreth part whereof is neither possest nor knowne by the Spaniard, who wants men to people what hee hath grasped already. Why then should not our King employ his numerous Nations that way, for the strengthening and enriching of his owne State; enlarging the bounds of Christen∣dome, and spreading of the Gospel with freedome? espe∣cially considering, as the Spaniard lackes men for his land, so the King lackes land for his men, vvho therfore are forced to people Poland, Sweden, Denmarke, Germanie, France, and to range in those and other parts, as if thy had no natiue habitation: for in all these places there are swarmes of our people, vvho are meerely lost and scattered out o his Majesties Dominions, to the streng∣thening of other parts, and weakning our owne State. Surely God intended not the Indies to be ingrost by the
Spanish Nation alone, vvho cannot people the least part of it; but rather for all Nations that can plant it, and vvithall plant and spread the Gospel of saluation through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord, vvhich belongs to all Nations as well as to the Spanish; though they, to blinde the eyes of ig∣norant and superstitious Christians, haue styled them∣selues the onely Catholike Christians. Thus much by the vvay, though I hope I be not out of the vvay in saying so much: for this engrossing of the earth is a note of their cruelty. I now with your patience, will returne to the matter in hand more directly. I hope (saith the same Sir Walter Raleigh a little after) the Ambassadour doth not esteeme vs for so wretched and miserable a people, as to offer our throats to their swords without any manner of resistance. The law of the Land, nor any powerfull Proclamation, did euer intend to binde our hands and feete, and deliuer vs like calues to Spanish butcheries, & neuer-before heard∣of cruelties; amongst which, take this one for conclu∣sion, because it is a prettie one taken out of the Schoole where all kinde of extracted tyrannie is taught, and per∣formed in imitation of the Spanish Inquisition, which you and so many Romish Catholiques so much like and allow of, and desire to hue transported into these parts, for the profit of the Netherlands, and perhaps of England also. The storie is this; a short one, and a sweet one, if honie could make it so: One M. Burch a Factor, beeing in the west Indies to trade peaceably, vvas taken by the Spani∣ards, stript starke naked, bound to a tree, anoynted all ouer vvith wilde honie, in a fennie place subiect to Mus∣ketoes, and so suffered either to perish by famine, or stung to death by that new-inuented torture of Flies. Was not
this a most exact peece of crueltie, vvhich none but the great-witted Spaniards, who daily trade in bloud vp to the eares, could possible haue found out? These were their crafts-masters in the art of Murther; Phalaris him∣selfe might here haue beene bound prentise. To con∣clude this poynt, it is present death for any Nation but the Spanish, to bee found vpon that Westerne Conti∣nent, though they commit no other fault; nay, though they bee driuen by stormes vpon that Coast; but they leaue the manner of he death to the arbitrarie sentence of that person, vvho gouernes the place vvhere such are taken; because they know them to bee very mercifull men, and such as studie the easiest vvay of vndoing that great Worke of humanitie vvhich God hath made, and of breaking that knot of ciuill Commerce and Societie, vvhich man vvith man hath found out by Gods dire∣ction to Noah. And now I hope you will take heede how you aske any more such childish Questions as this, lest you giue mee occasion to lay more of your Spanish courtesies open to the eare and eye of euery hearer and beholder, much against your gorge. Howsoeuer, all that you can say is not auaileable to draw vs from this people to a vvoorse, as you vvould; or to mooue vs to leaue that seruice vvherein vvee haue beene rayned vp in all mili∣tarie perfection. This change might shew out leuitie, vvhen Souldiers should doe actions that onely sauour of settled soliditie, a vertue proper for the best men.
Red-scarfe. Nay Sir, you should by leauing the seruice of that vngratefull Nation, giue a good example to the rest of the English to follow. Tawny-scarfe. I haue serued some yeeres alreadie in Holland, and intend to returne thither againe vvith more heart then euer before; in regard I haue heard the vvoorst you can say, and that woorst is little or nothing to the purpose, to alter any mans resolution, that is not before a Tray∣tour or Turne-coate, but rather may serue to confirme them in the iustice of those Warres. Red-scarfe. I could then wish, if you bee obstinately bent, to re∣turne and serue them, that both you and the rest of your English friends vvould resolue to serue them as they ought to bee serued; such trickes I meane, as might reuenge some of the villanies and vvrongs they haue offered vs. Tawny scarfe. I guesse at your meaning; for now you discouer your selfe, and appeare in your right colours: but such cour∣ses become not the Religion of Christians, but Anti∣christians;
such as were Stakenbroek, Berwoets, Merchant, Stanly, Yorke, Patton, and Symple, vvith many others, vvho may haue Dispensations for their Oathes, and Vmbrilloes for their humours, as Philip the second had for his Oath taken to maintaine the Netherland Liber∣ties; vvee that know there is a God who will not bee mockt, know, that Honour cannot bee vvithout Hone∣stie. Therefore in answere to this poynt, I may vse the vvordes of the olde Prince of Orange in his Apologie, vvhere hee sayth: If the Spaniards esteeme such traytours for Gentlemen, and that men by such meanes bee aduanced to honour in Castile, it is no maruell if all the vvorld beleeued, that the most parts of the Spaniards (especially those that held them∣selues Nobles and Gentlemen) descended from the Moores and Ievves, and obserue that good qualitie, as ingrafted in them from their Fore-fathers, that betrayed our Lord and Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ, and gaue Iudas money to deliuer him vnto them, that they might cru∣cifie him.
The true honorable bloud of the English know bet∣ter, except it be tainted by Romish corruptions, then to dishonour themselues, Countrie, and Nation, by such perfidious and treasonable Actes: yea if the States should deserue as ill (as Standly, Yorke, and the rest pretended for their owne excuses) yet wee know, that there is a precept that willeth vs, to doe good for euill. Red-scarfe. That is well done where euill is thereby amended, but your doing good where you doe, makes evill become worse. But let me now returne to speake somwhat of Queene Elizabeths reasons to take the Hollanders partes. And first I must tell you, that Queene Elizabeth did ne∣uer take their partes vpon compassion of their cause, in re∣gard of any wrong which she knew the King of Spaine did them; for she could not but know them to be as ve∣ry notorious rebels as euer were any in the world, and therefore was her assistance not giuen, because she loued them, but because she hated the King of Spaine, and so made vse of them as the instrumentes of her hate. Tawny-scarfe. All this is answered before, yet you must repeate old matter, where you want new. Wee must heere take your word, and beleeue you by an implicite faith, without rea∣son or proofe, before the manifest reasons of Religion and State, and before the honorable and publique prote∣stations of that worthie among women, Queene Eliza∣beth, who never brake her word. She tooke their part, partly for compassion; she neither knew them Rebels, nor counted them so; but if she hated the King of Spaine, then must there be cause why she hated him; and hating him, she had reason to fauour and foster those that hated him aswell as her selfe, or rather that were hated by him as she herselfe was.
Reds-carfe. I pray, Sir, for the instruction of my ignorance, tell me the cause why she hated him. Tawny-scarfe. You should tell the cause, since you produce the effect, and it were enough for me to say there was no cause, ergo, there could not be such an effect; yet because this will not answere men of your humor, I say farther, that I doe not thinke she hated his person, but rather prosecuted it with all honorable offices of loue; yet I may imagine (and wee see it euident) that she feared his encroaching power; and whom wee feare in any kinde, wee are said to hate in some sort. Red-scarfe. You know no iust cause nor any man els, why she should hate him; but you say, you must imagine there was a cause; but this must is not forceable, vnlesse it were a cleere case, that neuer any man were causelesly hated. But to tell you the true cause why indeed she hated him, it was no other then for doing her good. Tawny-scarfe. That me thinkes is impossible. Red-scarfe. Impossible only to good & gratefull minds. The King of Spaine in her sisters Queene Maries time, did her no lesse good then the sauing of her life; and experience hath often shewed, that there are some kinde of people, that can neuer abide those that they are very deepely beholding vnto; because they thinke the obligation of gratitude to be a bondage; whereas want of gratitude, when it consisteth in the will, and not in the power, is monstrous and not humane. Tawny-scarfe.
In laying ingratitude to that blessed Queenes charge, you shew your malice, you vomit your poison, and say all that a diuelish aduersarie can invent against an innocent Lady. Neuer could any of her owne obliged men, neuer could any priuate person accuse her of this crime; much lesse would she giue iust cause to such a potent King, such an able State, apt to take exceptions, so attended by vipe∣rous-tongued raylers of an other Religion, to publish her ingratitude in this kinde to the world. Besides, that the King of Spaine saued her life, can neuer be proued, albeit she was imprisoned in her Sisters time, yet she was neuer brought to any publique tryall, and so there was no sauing of her life needfull, she not being by law found guilty. Red-scarfe. If it had come to that it had gone hard with her, but the King of Spaine preuented it, and thereby not only saued her life, but also her honor. Tawny-scarfe. But how is this proued? Red-scarfe. That there were diuers conspiracies of treason in her sisters time is euident, that she was apprehended, and put in prison vpon them is euident; that she was the only hope and obiect of the conspirators is euident, and that some of them accused her, is also euident: for Religion her troubles were not, because she made profession of the Re∣ligion of her sister, and daily heard Masse: some cause there must be of her apprehension, which must also be some great cause: for noI returne your owne interrogati∣on: was neuer any apprehen∣ded and imprisoned without cause to be the Queenes siiter & next heire to the crowne, is cause e∣nough to worke iea∣lousie and suspicion a∣mongst Princes, who will take an easy occasion to imprison their Expec∣tant. small cause can vrge the cal∣ling in question & apprehension of the sister of a Queene Regnant, and her next and apparent heire: but I will leaue the beleefe of this to your owne leisure and plea∣sure, when you shall haue better thought vpon it, or bet∣ter
enformed your selfe about the matter. Tawny scarfe. Now you come to supposition, collection, and pre∣sumption, where you want proofe, and so colour or couer the hatred of your Popish Clergie and their cursed cruel∣ties against Queene Elizabeth, with a supposed crime in the cloudes. But this is sufficient to cleere her innocency, that neither those who then sought the ruine of her bo∣dy, nor you who now seeke the ruine of her fame and ho∣nor, could or can produce any thing against her, but imagi∣narie concealements; for if they could, she had not liued to be the obiect of your envie, & if you could, the whole world had bin filled long before this, with your long-ton∣gued Libels, and bellowing Buls against her. Therefore I shall not neede to thinke vpon this point long, as if what you sayd were vnanswerable: Queene Elizabeth herselfe hath saued me a labour, where in an∣swere to an infamous libell written against her in Italian, which chargeth her with vnthankfulnes to the King of Spaine, who (as the authour reporteth, being a man of your minde) in her sisters Queene Maries time, had saued her life, she saith, That her faith and fidelity was neuer in any such question in her sisters time, and much lesse that euer any sentence of death was pronounced against her, and that therefore he had no cause why to seeke to saue her life: Confessing and ingeniously acknowledging neuerthelesse, that she was as then somewhat beholden vnto him, and that in all princely and honorable manner she had been thankfull vnto him for the same. Now therefore if you haue any more to say in this mat∣ter, produce it; if not, let vs come to the third reason of greatest importance mouing Queene Elizabeth to take the Hollanders part, which was, the cause of Religion:
they professing with vs one same Gospel. Red-scarfe. I doubt whether they professe with vs one same Epi∣stle, but one same Gospell I am sure they professe not. Tawny-scarfe. You are wonderfully witty and merry in distinguishing betwixt the Epistle and Gospel, when I am afraide you scarce vnderstand what you say: Perhaps you take no∣thing for Gospel, but what is conteined in those partes or portions of Scripture which are appointed to bee read in the Masse, (though in a strange tongue vnknowne to the vulgar) for the better vnderstanding of the solemnitie of certaine Feastes celebrated to the Memory of Saintes, or perhaps, though you be not so neere of kinne to one of Saint Paules Ideots, yet you may thinke nothing Gospel,1. Cor. 1.16. but what is expresly conteined in the writings of the foure Euangelists: so that whilest Saint Paule, and Saint Peter, Saint Iames, Saint Iude, and Saint Iohn write Epistles conteyning the doctrine of the Gospel or glad-tidings of Christ crucified, this shall not be Gospel but Epistle; nor they Preachers and writers of the Gospel, but Epistlers with you, and your grave vnderstanding: So whilst S. Paule saith, Ro. 2.16. In the day when God shall iudge the secrets of men by Iesus Christ according to my Gospel, you will alter and correct the Apostles phrase, and for ac∣cording to my Gospel, put in by your Index expurgatorius, according to my Epistle: leaue your wittie cenceites if you loue your owne credit, they doe very vilely, and come off against the haire, according to that prouerbe, inuita Mi∣nerva. And here I waxe wearie with following your wandring Discourse, (as he that playes with a childe all day, and is tyed to treade in his steps) wherefore I intend for that
which remaines, not altogether to take it vp, as you lay it downe, and giue occasion of answere, nor yet to insert verbatim what I then sayd when we discoursed in the Tilt-boate, (though then I made no such idle and ayrie answers, as you forge for me, but forced you to greater streights then you wil acknowledge) but I purpose directly to gather the strengh of your Arguments, and lay them downe truly, with such answers as I did, or might make to such of them, as seeme worthy of any reply. You first pretend, our Gospel, and that Gospel which is preached and professed in the Netherlands differ, because there is difference betweene Protestants and Puritans in England; for so you are pleased to style such true Chri∣stians as protest against your falshoods, and would reforme your impurities in life and doctrine, Protestants and Puri∣tans. How well this hangs together, the premisses and conclusion, you cannot but see, and smile to behold, being a man so merily disposed by nature as you seeme. But you demand, how contention should otherwise arise amongst vs? why else should some bee silenced or bani∣shed? Doe the difference betwixt Iesuites and secular Priests in England proue their Gospels differ? Doubtlesse their Portuces are the very same: why doe the Thomists and Scotists differ? Is their Gospel diuerse? why doe the Dominicans and Franciscans pursue each other with deadly quarrels, is it because their Gospel differs? Doubt∣lesse many of these know not the Gospel; most of them care not for it; nay, let me say boldly, few of them prize it, as they doe that which they call their vnwritten veri∣ties, or traditionall Gospel, whereabout yet they fall out with eagernesse. And had not the Councell of Trent cunningly trust vp all their trinkets, and taught them what they must hold, none could haue known what it had beene
to be a Papist: But Antichrist then vnsealed the secrets of his Mysterie;Apoc. 13.16 17. for then it was a time for him to discouer himselfe, that such as tooke his marke on their foreheads, or in their hands, might be knowne for counterfeit Chri∣stians. You demand, if our differences be small, why then are some silenced, some banished. some put to death? Iniurie may be done somtime vnder the colour of iustice; and Mephibosheth may be forced euen by David himselfe,2 Sam. 16.3. 2. Sam. 19.24. to diuide his lawfull inheritance with Ziba the tel-tale, the traducer, the traytour. Sometime also many iust occasions may prouoke such seuere punishments to be inflicted v∣pon persons for circumstantiall poynts, though they dif∣fer not in fundamentall verities contayned in the Gospel. But tell me in good earnest, why were the Iesuites bani∣shed France, and a pillar set vp to eternize the memorie of their banishment, was it for that their Gospel differed from the French Church? Or why were the Iesuites ba∣nished out of Venice? or why are the Cardinals iealous to make a Iesuite Pope? Is it for that their Gospel differs from the rest, whilst they hold all one Epistle? I trow not. You pursue this discourse (I suppose) to the same end to proue the difference of our Gospel from the Hollan∣ders; for that is the proposition. And such as you tearme Puritans in England, you callWe might with as much, or more reason call the Pa∣pists, Bellar minists, Parsonists, Garnetists, &c. as your call vs Lu∣therās, Cal∣venists, Go∣marists, or the like, . Cor. 3.5. Gomarists in Holland, be∣cause that learned and vigilant Minister Gomarus opposed such as would haue brought in the innouations of that subtill D. Arminius, and prepared the tenets of such as imped out and inlarged his doctrine, fit for the Synods in∣spection, censure, and decision. Now such as these you will haue by no meanes defended; for then we defend (as you would say) another Gospel. But you see euen the Doctors and Bishops who were sent out of England, ioy∣ned
with Gomarus and the rest in that memorable Synod of Dort: so that by that vnitie, they declared a consent in doctrine, howsoeuer they might differ in some poynts of lesse consequence about ceremonies; so they had all one Gospell. All agree, that the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist, and that we should separate from him; the difference is, how farre we should doe it; some desiring it farther then others iudge fit: yet those that iudge it not fit to separate so farre as others desire, doe it not in any other respect, then because they would winne the Papists to reforma∣tion, by letting them see, how they depart from them in nothing, but where they are forced to doe it, by the cleare euidence of Scripture, being willing otherwise in things indifferent to descend to their weaknesse, & rather to giue their brethren offence, with whom they joyne in all fun∣damentall Verities, then these of Rome who haue strong delusions to cause them to beleeue lies,2. Thes. 2.11. and therefore must be won by all strong and gentle inducements to beleeue the truth. You see also in that Synod, how the Goma∣rists (as you call them) can endure the societie of Bi∣shops, though not the superioritie; & judge not the gouer∣nement of Bishops simply vnlawfull, but neither fit for them,Al gouern∣ment from God, this or that forme from man. nor to be Iure diuino. For as they condemne not, but commend Monarchies, though they doe not finde that Gouernment the best for their dispositions, nor to be imposed vpon all Nations iure diuino: so they censure not, at least condemne not, Episcopall Gouernment, but preferre a brotherly communion, where superioritie is rather giuen then exacted; rather shunned, then sought; And all in giuing honour,Rom. 12.10. goe one before another: where with you they take, beg, and buy honour, and plot and poyson for place and preferment, that they may goe one before another.
2. In the second place you labour to proue, that such as defend the cause of the Netherlanders, defend al the Re∣ligions, Sects or Schismes there tolerated. But this is drawne out by a constrayned consequence; and by the same consequence, he that fights for the Pope of Rome fights for the Iewes there maintayned, nay worse, for the maintenance of the male and female slewes, and so by your consequence, for the defence of Sodomitrie, practi∣sed in Rome and all Italy. So he that fights for the Empe∣rour or Venetian, fights for the Iewes, vnder whom they find toleration: So by consequence, he that fights against the Catholike King, fights against Antichrist, whom the Catholike King defends and supports, and he that ioynes with the Catholike King ioynes with Antichrist, by your artificiall wire-drawne Argument of euill consequence. You produce by the way, a sect of the Persectists there (as you say) profest. Perhaps there may be some such mad-men; for Bedlam containes not all the crackt-braynd crea∣tures in England: you, and many such as you are out: so though there be Dull-houses in the Netherlands, all that deserue to be put there, are not. Yet why should you finde fault? This Sect doth suprabound with you; euery Order pretends a perfection by it selfe, onely proper to them and their Founder. Here onely is the dfference be∣twixt your mad-men and these; These place perfection in knowledge, yours in practise, whilst both erre. These whilst they know something, being ignorant of them∣selues, suppose they know all things, the first chapter of a foole. Yours, whilst they fast from flesh, pray they know not to whom, and whip themselues they know not why, suppose by these parts of wil-worship vnrequired, to de∣serue heauen for themselues and others too: for from hence is the treasurie of the Church, that pooremans
Boxe of Merit and Supererrogation, wherewithall Peters supposed successor is trusted, filled full drop after drop, and emptied againe by Pardons and Indulgences more then a good many. Thus yours also not knowing them∣selues, their owne basenesse, vilenesse and vnworthinesse, seeke perfection in themselues, and through spirituall pride ship-wracke their owne soules, and the soules of such as depend vpon their rotten principles. Amongst the Ethnikes there were diuers Sects of Philosophers, which were their wise men, & supposed themselues more perfect then the rest. The Academickes, such are your Iesuites: the Stoickes, such are your preaching Friars: the Peripatetickes, such are your begging Friars: the Epi∣cures, such are your Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and rich Abbots. You haue Cynicks too amongst you, who raile at all they vnderstand not; Septickes onely are forbid∣den, an implicite faith is sufficient by which ye beleeue the perfection of Romish dogmatizing. Therefore speake not you of these Perfectists, they are of your owne breed, we disclaime them. They erre in science, whilst they pro∣fesse it; you in practise, whilst you laugh at their fooleries, and commit worse your selues. A third Argument you bring to proue our Gospel and theirs differ, and that wee seeke to defend a wrong Gos∣pell, seeking to defend theirs. The reason, for their Gos∣pel allowes of theft. If it be so, we disclaime their Gospel and the cause also; marke the solide proofe therefore. The Netherlands steale whole Prouinces from the King of Spaine, whilst they hang theeues for trifles, and that by their Gospels warrant, for so it must be, or you say nothing. Surely I thinke if they had you, they would scarce hang you, they are so mercifull: many that deserue it perhaps as well as you haue done, doe yet scape, and en∣ioy
their libertie in hope of amendment, as you doe, if you haue grace to make good vse of it. But if they be theeues and steale Prouinces from Spaine; How hath Spaine gotten superioritie ouer his neighbour-Nations? how hath he made many intrusi∣ons vpon Savoy, Nauarre, France, Italy? How vpon the East and West Indies? How vpon Ireland, and how v∣pon England also, whose purse he would haue taken, whilst you and yours were setters and plotters for the pur∣chase? Is he a thiefe for this? Is this Catholike doctrine? I feare you must passe vnder the rod of penance for this ouer-sight. Remember what the Pirate said to Alexander the Great: I am a Pirate and a thiefe robbing with one ship, and taking away a little; and because thou robst the whole world with a Nauie and an Armie, thou art styled an Emperour. Indian gold is able to purchase many more able flatterers and supporters, then you are. And what power did euer want praise, though neuer so wicked, ty∣rannous, or vniust? He cannot but be defended and com∣mended, who hath Antichrist and the whole Romane Conclaue at his command. That which remaines is matter of controuersie in Re∣ligion, which you haue propounded at pleasure, making me a very simple fellow fit to be coopled with you for company in the answers annexed by you: Yet that which you propound is such stuffe, and so followed, as you need not protest your selfe to be no Diuine; you bewray it suf∣ficiently in your Discourse, though otherwise I might haue doubted a Priest or Iesuite (as they had wont) might haue lurked vnder a buffe Ierkin, a red scarfe and feather. And indeed though I acknowledge there are many lear∣ned men on your side, yet me thinkes such kind of know∣ledge is a matter superfluous, and leading towards here∣sie,
for since that infallible spirit of decision, direction, and exposition is in your Popes brest, what need other Doc∣tors, then such simple and illiterate persons as Christ first chose to be his Apostles, and to plant his Church, since there remaines in your Church still extraordinarie and primarie power to dispose of the spirit miraculously, and so to bestow the gifts of tongues and miracles, as it was with Christ himselfe, and his Apostles after? For which cause your Sea of Rome is called the Apostolique Sea, from whence all that supernaturall power is deriued, as from an ordinarie Minister or Vicar appointed by Christ to that end. But to leaue this still in doubt, come to your Diuinitie: Two points you insist vpon: The Eucharist, & auricular Confession: In speaking of these, you labor to justifie your owne doctrine & practise, and disproue ours. You first labour to free your selfe from Idolatrie, and say, If Christs body be not truly in the Masse, that is, as you vnderstand it, if the bread be not truly transubstanti∣ated into the bodie of Christ, then you doe not intend any worship to it, and so you commit no Idolatrie. But as an oth (which is a special part of Gods worship) is not vnderstood according to the secret intent of the swearer (for then your equiuocation and mentall reserua∣tion might be iustified,Lingua iu∣ro, mentem injuatam to. Non enim quando in∣ras, tibi iu∣rs, aut la∣pidi iuras, sed proximo tas, Aug: de verbis S. Iacobi. cap. 5. Ser. 30. and there were no vse of an oth at all, the oth being only to bewray and assure the cer∣taine inward intent of him that makes it) but according to the plaine, open, and direct intent of him to whom the oth is made, and of all others that see the end wherefore it was made, and so can iudge of the truth or falsehood: So outward worship of the bread in the Sacrament, is not to be vnderstood according to your inward intent, which hath ifs and ands in it, (if it be Christs body you worship it; and if it be not, then you do not intend to worship
it) but according to the vnderstanding of all that be∣hold you (the eye being the iudge of bodily worship) and they beholding you giue to the bread the same out∣ward worship which they see you giue vnto God, iudge presently and plainely, that you commit grosse idolatry: for the same eye that beholdes your bodily and exterior worship, beholds withall, that the obiect of that bodily worship is bread which they see, and not the body of Christ which they see not, to which you say, your intent hath reference. Againe, your worship which wee now speake of being the exterior reuerence of the body, must be for the Ideots satisfaction aswell as for the greatest Clerkes: for it is S. Paules Argument against publique vse of an vnknowne tongue in the Church, especially in preaching, or prayer: If when the the whole Church is come together in one,1. Cor. 14.2 and all speake strange tongues, there come in they that are vnlearned, or they which beleeue not, will they not say that ye are out of your wits? and a little after,1. Cor. 14, 26. Let all things be done to edification. Thus wee see the Apostle had a care euen in things not simply vnlawfull, to giue no scandall or offence to the vnlearned; nay, to giue such satisfaction, & to prouide, that nothing should be done in the Church, but that which tended to edification, and to the opening of the mouthes of babes and sucklings to confesse him; at least to the stopping vp of their mouthes, that would not confesse and praise him. And wee see he hath a care to giue satisfaction to the vnlearned. How then dare you do an act which is directly prohibited, & which doth not only scandalize the Iewes, who hate the apparance of Ido∣try, but all sober Christians, who are not drunke with the whores cup of fornications, and bewitched with her in∣chantmentes & deuillish incantations, whilst they see you
giue worship to that which they see and taste to be bread as euidently, as they see you kneele and worship? Must they not needes count this idolatry, and iudge you to be out of your wits, practising this publiquely, and defending this practise impudently and obstinately? This tends not to edification of the weake, but to the destruction of the strong, euen of the strongest Sampson or Salomon a∣mongst you, though he be able otherwise to carry away all the gates of his enemies, and to resolue all the riddles, doubtes, and anigmaticall controuersies that haue beene, are,Iob. 34.9. or may be propounded. The eare (saith Elihu in Iob) tryeth wordes; thats the Apostles argument, to proue the the necessarie vse of a knowne tongue in the congregati∣on: The Mouth tasteth meates, (saith Elihu in the same place) thats my inference vpon the Apostles words, who would haue all things done soberly, that men might not judge vs mad;Es. 44.25.26 but when your knee tels me, that Cake is God, which the Baker tels me is breade; bread that he made, part whereof hee eate himselfe, part whereof he crammed his Capons and Chickings withall, and part whereof he employd in meaner vses; when my eye tels me it is so, and my taste and feeling tels me the same, shall not I thinke you mad or drunken Idolaters to beleeue the contrary,ap. 14.28. or to perswade me, or any other person wise or simple, to beleeue the contrary? This opinion and your Latin Lyturgie are well coopled together in communi∣on, being direct euidences of Antichristianisme, and parts of that Mysterie of Iniquity which began to worke euen in the Apostles time, and was afterward by inches (as the Masse grew by time in greatnesse to a monstrous Masse of superstitions indeed) introduced vnder the dangerous co∣lour of good intent, to obfuscate truth, & cause men to re∣ceiue & beleeue lyes.. Thef. 1.10.11.12. The bold attempts, and desperate on∣sets,
together with the euill euents and dangerous successe of good intents grounded vpon ignorant zeale, you may obserue in your selfe; who, like an Italian Montbanke or Romish Iuggler, play fast and loose with your faith, euen in the point of worship, the supreme and souereigne ser∣uice of Christianity; If the Cake be Christ, you worship it; if it be not Christ, you intend no worship to it. But thus may the Heathens argue for themselues, That they intend no worship to their Idols, except they be gods, but by them they send vp their worship to the true God; for what they doe, they intend to the true God, or to none. You build vpon Christs words who cannot deceiue, and is sufficient to performe what he speakes: and he hath said, The bread is his bodie, and were it still bread, (say you) yet he hauing said, it was his bodie, and you be∣leeuing it to be so, he cannot condemne you of mis-be∣liefe: for if he had neuer said it, you had neuer beleeued it. We acknowledge Christs truth and power: but here we looke to what he did and said, and do not with you presume to change his words or workes: He neither said, the bread was transubstantiated into his bodie, nor did he will his Apostles, or their successors to worship it, but to take and eate it, and doe it in remembrance of him. Christ said, This is my bodie:Luk. 22.19. we say so too with him and with you: The difference is about the manner of his presence: You say, the bread remaines not, though you see, feele, taste bread: We say, Christs bodie is taken and eaten by the soule of the faithfull, whilst his hand takes, & mouth eates the bread. So it is his body (as he intended) though bread remaines; bread really, his body Sacramentally and Spiritually, both truly. Christ as concerning his bodily
presence is in heauen at the right hand of God the Father, so we are taught to beleeue; and from thence as concer∣ning locall decession, shall not come, till he comes in glo∣rie to iudge the quicke and dead: this we see confirmed, Act. 3.21. Whom the heauens must receiue, vntill the time of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets, since the world began. And Ioh. 16.28. I leaue the world, and go vnto the Father. Mat. 26.11 Ye haue the poore alwayes with you, that is. You shall not haue me alwayes present in bodie for I goe so vnto the Father, but in spirit and power alwayes; for loe, I am with you, so, to the end of the world, Mat, 28.20. What can be more plaine and cleare? Then looke for a figuratiue vn∣derstanding of these words, and for a spirituall eating of Christ, or else you denie your Creed, and contradict S. Pe∣ter and Christ himselfe; for the flesh profiteth nothing, Ioh. 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickeneth; not the literall, but the spirituall vnderstanding and eating nourisheth the Spirit. That which the bodie eates, cannot benefite the soule, that which the soule eates cannot nourish the bo∣die. The bodie eates bread; the soule, Christ; the one by the teeth, the other, by faith: both are thus nourished according to their seuerall natures and essences. If you will not grant a figure in these words, what say you to those that follow immediatly as part of this Sacrament?1. Cor. 11.13 Drinke ye all of this; for this is the new Testament in my blood, &c. You must beleeue the Chalice is the new Testament in Christs blood; that is, transubstantiated into the new Te∣stament in Christs blood; not the wine only, but the Cha∣lice also; or else admit a figure in the speech. And if you grant a figure in this, why not in the former? the same Christ spake both, the same Christ is able alike, the same Christ wils me to doe both in remembrance of him, and
to beleeue both alike. Nay rather thus I may argue, since you must needes grant a figure in this, by consequence, a figure must be vnderstood necessarily & properly in the o∣ther, our Sauiour had else spoken improperly: words must agree with the workes. And this being a figuratiue or sa∣cramentall action, must be deliuered in a figuratiue forme or phrase of speech, as being most proper and congruous to the occasion. Therefore though this errour of Tran∣substantiation began to be busie betimes in the Church, by reason of diuerse carnall eares who vnderstood Christ as Nicodemus did, Io. 3.5.6. and as the Capernaits did, Ioh. 6.51.52.63. Yet it was held indifferent, and not prest vpon any to beleeue the manner of his presence till the Coun∣cell of Lateran, as Bishop Tonstall,De vertat corp. & Sang. p. 46. though he were one of yours, confesseth; but then this errour was confirmed by Antichrist and his associates. Before, Christ was the Word and spake it, He tooke the bread and brake it, And as his Word doth make it, So I receiue and take it, Was enough to be professed and confessed to make a man a worthy receiuer, without farther disquisition into the secret closet of the conscience, to know if men had rea∣son and sence or no, and then to make that a sufficient quarrell to exclude them: For now if we will not beleeue that which contradicts sence, reason, faith and Religion, from the table we must be cast and to the fire we must be haled as Heretickes. Now therefore this is the note: Priests make Christs body and soule, ye need not doubt; They eat, they drinke, they boxe him vp, and beare about. One is too little; Bread and Wine Holds him seuerall: so wee dine, I with my Christ, thou with thine.
Is thy mouth the Virgins wombe, is bread her seed? Are thy words the holy Ghost? Is this the Creed? O presumptuous vndertaker, Neuer Cake could make his Baker: Yet the Priest can make his Maker. What becomes of al those Christs that Priests haue made? Doe these Hoasts of Hoasts abide? or do they fade? One Christ liues, but all these die: One Christ bides, when all these flie: One is true, the rest a lye. You then from the matter, fall to the manner of cele∣brating; debating whether to doe it vpon a table as we doe, or on an altar with you, be the truest forme. Christ instituted it, and celebrated it at a table; this you confesse; he is the safest patterne to follow. Before I heare you say; Hee hauing said, it was his bodie, and I beleeuing it so to be, his iustice and goodnesse is such, that he cannot condemne me of mis-beliefe, himselfe hauing beene the cause why I so beleeue; for if he had neuer said it, I had neuer be∣leeued it. So say I, and so ought you to say, he instituted it vpon a table, not vpon an altar; he gaue bread and wine, not bread alone; he gaue common bread, and broke it, not printed wafers to be swallowed whole; he willed me to eate, not to swallow whole and vnbroken; to take it, not to adore it; to doe it in remembrance of him, not as if he were present corporally: Till he comes, saith S. Paul, not as if he were come; and if he had neuer said it, I had neuer beleeued it; if he had neuer commanded it, I had neuer done it. But now I beleeue, and obay, and will doe as he bids me, whatsoeuer an Angel, much more what∣soeuer a Shaueling can say to the contrarie. 1. Cor. 11.23Besides, I see S. Paule and the Corinthians celebrating at a table, I neither heare of the bread transubstantiated,
nor of the wine withdrawne from the people, nor of in∣uocation or adoration, but all done as we doe it, in remem∣brance of Christs death, by way of thankfull acknowledge∣ment of the benefit wrought for mankind thereby. All the rest is of your owne inuention, superstitious, idola∣trous, antichristian. Looke the place and it will confirme you in all these plaine and euident truthes: for they tooke the Sacrament at their loue-feastes, so far then from superstitious adorati∣ons, as they were irreverend and almost prophane in not discerning betwixt that, being a religious action, a spi∣rituall meate, and other ciuill actions and corporall meates: wherefore the Apostle reduceth them to the primitiue institution, far from mad Idolatry and drunken prophane∣nesse, in christian sobriety as becomes persons made worthy partakers of so great a Mystery. That which you adde to auoide your Idolatry, as if the reuerence you doe to your Idoll in the Masse, were no more then what we in the presence shew to the Kings chaire of State, is ridiculous. Our reuerence is ciuill, yours is religious: all men, yea the simplest old wife can distin∣guish ours from a religious act of worship to God; it trou∣ples your greatest Doctors to cleare your point in the Schooles by imaginarie distinctions; how then in actions they shall be distinguished, especially when they are to be performed by an old ignorant woman, it will trouble a man no lesse wise then your selfe to imagine, much more to manifest. That which S. Augustine saith of Images, being Lay∣mens bookes, is concerning their historicall vse; but we see they haue taught the people so many lies, that if Augu∣stine were now aliue, he would barre them both from preaching and praying in the Church too. For if a woman
be forbidden to be a teacher there, I know not why a dumbe Idoll should be there admitted to teach.Zach. 11.15.17. I presume, both the pretence and intent of the first introducers was good, to banish heathen Idols, to please the new conuerts with something sutable to their olde superstitions; but we see the euill successe of this, and of all other points of hu∣mane Policie, of worldly wisdom intermixt with the wor∣ship of God, either directly against, or simply without the authoritie of the word of God it self, how it brings cōfusi∣on, & helps in the issue to pul down Siō, & build vp Babel. The last point you handle is auricular confession; for which you bring a proofe from Scripture: The proofe is Christs generall commission giuen to the Apostles and their Successours, Receiue the Holy Ghost, whose sinnes you shall forgiue,Ioh. 20.20.1. they are forgiuen; and whose sinnes you shall retayne, they are retayned. But here you leaue out what Christ spake to them before, namely, As my Father sent me, so send I you. Christ was sent to forgiue sinnes, not by hearing auricular Confession, but by preaching the Gospel of Repentance, from dead workes and faith in Gods promises made in him; and so sent he his Apo∣stles, not to heare priuate confessions, but to publish the Gospel for remission of sinnes, and sauing poore repen∣ting and beleeuing soules, who made publique confession of their sinnes, as the Apostles did publiquely preach re∣pentance and confession. You bring in also the example of Iohn Baptist, Mat. 3.6. Where the people are said to come out to him to be bap∣tized, confessing their sinnes; which makes nothing for your purpose, to prooue auricular Confession, but shewes how glad you would be to finde shelter to couer your nakednesse in the garden of God, when your owne figge-leaues will not serue your turne.
The truth is, they that came to be baptized publikely, were publikely to acknowledge that guilt & sinne which they would haue washed away, and remitted by Bap∣tisme: for before the receipt of cure, they were to know and acknowledge themselues sicke; but all this was pub∣like and generall, not priuately and particularly whispered into Saint Iohns eare, as you vse and imagine. A Monke of your owne confesseth this;Dionis. Cart. Mat. 3.6. For then (saith he) was not the Sacrament of auricular confession instituted by Christ. We allow confession, and our Preachers doe often in∣force it, what they may, vpon the bleeding conscience, vnable to stanch her owne wounds. But herein is the dif∣ference betwixt you and vs: 1. Yours is of necessitie, ours voluntarie. 2. Yours requires an exact numeration, ours saith with David, Psal. 19.12: Who vnderstandeth his faults? Therefore we seeke to haue those confessed, which notwithstanding our former confessing to God, we finde still to leaue a sting behind. 3. Yours is full of supersti∣tion, as if the worke wrought, that is, the confession of the sinner, & absolution of the Confessor, were sufficient to assure saluation; when with vs there is no remission, but by the free grace of God alone. 4. Lastly, yours is horri∣bly abused, to vnlocke the secrets of Princes, to rule ouer the consciences of men, (for I am master ouer that man, whose naturall inclination I vnderstand, and know how to rule him by his vices, which are constant and importu∣nate, better then by his vertues, which are no fauourites, and are also seldome at home.) Yea, this hath beene, and is too often vsed, to deflowre Virgins and Matrons, and to to perpetrate and faciliate other darke and blacke actions, for which cause it was banished Constantinople by Necta∣rius the Bishop there, and is worthy to be banished all Christian Common-wealths: for by this alone, hauing
either the Prince himselfe, or any of his neere seruants or his wife, or any of theirs, vnder your imperious fingers, you know cunningly how to open the closest cabinet of secret counsell; and to make a superstitious and trembling soule your instrument to say, sweare, reueale, conceale, whatsoeuer you command, that may be for the aduan∣tage of your Catholike cause. And so euery Priest is an ab∣solute priuie Councellor. But you haue taken an oath to conceale all secrets de∣liuered sub sigillo confessionis. Indeed this must needs se∣cure all men; I had forgotten this. Yet now I remember me, you may be absolued and dispensed withall, if you should reueale any secret deliuered in confession: Besides, you haue taken an oath first, to conceale nothing that may be prejudiciall to the Romane Catholike Religion, but to reueale all that may aduance it, or any way concer∣nes it. Now the first oath bindes, and assoiles the latter, which is but secundarie, and with subordinate respects. And for matter of meere conscience, howsoeuer world∣ly wisedome would thinke, and you say, that auricular Confession serues to bridle sinne by shame, it is farre other∣wise; my experience knowes, that it makes men and wo∣men impudent, so that they care not at last who knowes or sees their filthinesse. I haue seene the written confessi∣ons of some before they were sent to their Confessors, and that without the least touch of modestie, or sence of shame in the impudent penitents, when I haue blushed to reade those horrible crimes, which they gloried to iterate, both in confessing and committing interchangeably. Thus our new-converted Gallants (who neuer had a God before, till now that they haue gotten him about their neckes, and in their Tobacco-boxes) can goe to a Play, and from thence to a baudie-house, and from thence
in a morning to confession and Masse: and thus make themselues new men, that is, of men, monsters euery day. And this is the onely reason, they so easily turne to be yours; because, though your confessing, and penance, and whipping, and haire-cloth shirts seeme strange things, and make a faire shew at first blush; yet they are nothing in comparison of leauing those sweet sinnes whereunto we haue beene accustomed; and betaking our selues to ho∣ly and reformed courses, without which our Preachers say, and shew plainely by Scripture, that there is no hope of saluation. And this is the reason our Libertines easily turne Papists; (though you cry out against vs, and call vs Liber∣tines, because we professe the libertie of the Gospel, from yourOur soone to the their best soone turne to vs. When you be at the best, you are neerest vs, and when we be at the worst, wee are neerest you. Iewish ceremonies and superstitions) and this is the cause your honestest Professors, who are not intangled and kept backe by honours, or pleasures, or profit, or hu∣mane respects, are easily induced to be ours, without which they cannot be Christs and Gods. The rest that remaines of yours, is such extrauagant stuffe, as shall need no other answere then silence and contempt, which I shall still vse both towards you, and all others that take your part in this subject, or shall audaci∣ously reply on your behalfe. Assuring your selfe, that not∣withstanding all you can say, many of the English who are yours in Religion, doe assist the States in their warres with body and goods, both in regard of the iustnesse of the cause which you impugne, and the necessitie they see of vpholding them, or falling our selues with them to Spanish subiection and slauerie, which they are not such traitors to permit; howsoeuer you, and such as you wish it. And for our owne, I meane, such as are reformed Ca∣tholikes indeed, they laugh at all that you say, as knowing the truth much better, then to be mis-led by iuggling. And
therefore you see how easily they are drawne to goe ouer with me to serue the States General, when you haue lien long in London, and spent much money, & promised large meanes, (much more then you meane euer to performe) yet goe ouer weakely prouided; and such as you carrie, you haue gotten by faining your selfe to be for vs, & now hold by force, or they would now leaue you, and come to vs. But the best is, you put the King of Spaine to booteles cost to carrie them ouer for vs at his charge: for within this three moneths we shall haue all that are left aliue, come to vs, for bread, or meanes, or their Passes. And for such as are with vs alreadie, all that you haue; or can say, doth but rather cause them to binde themselues more close together, for the cunning and industrie they see vsed on all sides to diuide and seuer them. And this (I doubt not) will moue the wisdome of the States General, and his Excellencie, seeing our people at home so well affected to their Cause and Countrey, and the Commanders and Souldiers so sure and trustie to them, (as persons interested in the same quarrell) to vse them not as meere mercenarie and sa∣larie Souldiers, but nobly, freely, and bountifully as Natiues; who though they take pay, as their owne, for meere necessitie, (for vvho goeth to vvarfarre at his ovvne charge?. Cor. 9.7.) yet fight freely, not with res∣pect to the money, but loue of the Cause and Countrey; for which they deserue to haue vsage as Natiues, to be payed with aduantage, to haue their meanes advanced without exaction, or grieuance. And this I wish for conclusion, and would aduise if they wanted it, or I were wise enough to aduise, that the Lords would carefully foresee, that neither they, nor the Coronels preferre young men vpon letters and commends, to places of command; for so thy may aduance enemies, & permit (through couetousnesse) Indian gold in the hand of a Spanish Ambassador, Agent, or Pentioner; Hee or Shee to stickle in the Camp, as it doth often in the Courts of Princes; but haue an eye to old Soul∣diers of merit, seruice and experience, and freely preferre them, and then (God being their helpe, and still keeping them in concord) they need feare nothing, nor care what you and your associates can say, nor what your Master and all his ministers can doe against them: Si Deus nobiscum; quis contra nos? To this Emanuel, this God vvith vs, be all honour and glorie by vs ascribed, novv and euer, Amen. FINIS.
