18507.346 S103048 99838807 177443
Septemb. 9. Numb. 23. A CONTINVATION OF THE FORMER NEWES. Three great Inuasions already attempted: the one by Bethlem Gabor, who with the Turkes is already come downe beyond the Riuer Donaw: the other by the Count of Thurne, hauing the command of the Marquis of Iaggendorps Forces, hath now entred into Selesia: the last by the Tartars vpon Polonia, which hath driuen them all to amazement. With the present estate of the Siege of Breda, and in what manner Spinola hath beleager'd the towne. Likewise the resolution of the Colledge of Electors, concer∣ning the succession of the Palatinate; as also the late com∣motion newly hapned in Rome; with the arrest of the Emperors Ambassador in Turkie, and diuers other occurrents. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Archer, and Beniamin Fisher: and are to be sold in Popes head Alley, ouer against the Signe of the Horse-Shoo, and in Pater-noster Row at the Signe of the Talbot.
A CONTINVATION OF THE WEEKELY NEWES. From Vienna the 7 of August. VPon the tiding which the Post of Brussels brought here of the Treatie which is now in France apppointed; there were here diuers speeches, rumours, and con∣iectures spread abroad of the designes of the King of France; and the order which was alrea∣dy giuen before to some Colonels to march towards Alsatia, was also againe renued by the Imperiall Councell. And the Colonell Schauwenberg who lay with his Regiment at Eger vpon the Frontiers of Bo∣hemia, marcht presently with it towards Alsatia, and there were also yet two other Regiments, and some horse appointed to follow him with all speed they could make. The Duke of Bauaria hauing conferred at No∣renberg, with the Electors of Mentz and Saxony,
they sent the Emperour word of the resolution by them taken; namely, that they desired that a meeting might be appointed, at which the Electors might one∣ly appeare for to treat about some particular points concerning themselues, as to prouide that the Empe∣rour might not any more hereafter dispose of the E∣states and Lands of any Elector, without the consent of the vvhole Colledge: And to consult also, and to conclude, who shall haue right to succeede the Duke of Bauaria after his decease in the Electorate, intending to exclude the Prince Palatine and his issue for euer. The Generall meeting which was appointed in Morauia is now ended, and the States of the Land haue agreed to pay within the space of sixe moneths 250000 Florins (each of them is worth three shillings Sterling) vpon condition that they of the Countrie shall haue an absolute pardon, and bee discharged of the Souldiers vvhich are in it. Although the Basha of Buda hath againe made an inuasion vpon our frontiers, there are neuerthelesse yet many that thinke the Great Seigneur will breake the Peace betwixt the Emperour and him. The Cossacks haue not as yet receiued the money which is promised vnto them for a part of their pay, and are therefore continuing their excesses and inso∣lencies. The money is not yet ready which the Archduke Charles is to haue to trauell withall.
From Vienna August 14. It continueth still, that the Turkes hauing made themselues very strong about Offen, inuaded Lowentz, and did there great hurt both by fire and sword. There is now great doubt made of the Peace betwixt The Emperor and the Great Seigneur: for Bethlem Gabor sent hither an Ambassador with a Letter writ∣ten in the name of the Great Seigneur to him (Beth∣lem Gabor) by which he desired to know whether, if occasion should be offered, hee would take part with him, or the Emperor. Whereupon Bethlem Gabor the Prince of Transiluania, desireth to know of the Emperor how and in what manner he may assure his owne Estate, and in what fashion he will protect him, what ayd, and how soone he will bee ready to send it vnto him: and protested moreouer, that in case of deniall of such ayd as is required, the Emperor should haue no reason to blame him, if to preserue his lands and subiects he turned to the other side. The Tartars haue done great hurt in Polen, and de∣feated many Polonians: and the King of Polen hath sent for the Cossackes which are in these lands, but they will not depart before they be payd. Whereby it appeareth, that it is not true that (as some repor∣ted) the Polonians should haue defeated the Tartars which made the late inuasion in Polonia. From Vienna Aug. 14. The Elector of Bauaria hauing made at Nurenberg his oath (as an Elector) before the Elector of Mentz,
who is Chancelor of the Empire, the Land-graue of Darmstadt was presently sent to the Elector of Bran∣denberg, for to learne his mind concerning the resolu∣tions that haue beene taken at Schlensingen, which are thought to agree with them of the Elector of Saxony. And it is now almost generally beleeued that the en∣deauors which Monseur Marescot hath vsed in Ger∣many, for there establishing of seueral Princes of Ger∣many, are not likely to take any good effect. It is here also euen now rumored, that the Regi∣ment of the Colonell Schauwenbach is to bee staid at the instance of the Archduke Leopaldus, who stands at this time in greater feare of the oppression of the im∣periall Souldiers, then of the threatnings of the French. He resigned lately his Bishopricke of Pas∣saw in the fauor of his Brother the Archduke Charles, who hath receiued the Deeds of it: and it is held for certaine, that he himselfe is to marry with the widow of the late Duke of Vrbin. The dismissing of the Cossacks is not so much de∣ferred for want of money, as by reason of the immi∣nent troubles in the Empire, and the other neighbou∣ring lands. And the Turks euen themselues haue made lately an inuasion as farre as Lowentz. And although Bethlem Gabor protesteth that hee hath had no hand in the late stirrings of the Turkes, hauing but few dayes agoe sent an Ambassador to such effect to the Emperor, who is yet here, and hath promised in his name, that he on his side will keepe the Treaty of a∣greement, and desires that the Emperor wil shew him this fauour, that he may send some persons into the
Empire to find out a Lady or Princesse fit to match with him. Neuerthelesse, seeing that here are come aduices, that he maketh great warlike preparations, and that it is to bee mistrusted, that vnder colour of friendship and confidence hee will worke new com∣motions, the Emperour to preuent mischiefe, hath sent a Letter to the Pope to desire him that by the in∣terposition of his authority, hee will be pleased to ef∣fect so much, that the King of France, the Veneti∣ans, and the Duke of Sauoy ioyne not their forces with them of the Protestants. And it is here rumored, that if the Peace bee once broken with France, that 8000 or 10000 Cossacks shall bee sent thitherwards to waste and spoile the Country. From Vienna, August 16. The tiding is confirmed againe of the great war∣like preparations which Bethlem Gabor hath made, ha∣uing mustred after the generall Meeting of Hungary was ended 30000 men, many Turkes and Tartars be∣ing amongst them, and all furnished with their armes, and ready to march: He hath likewise 12 great pee∣ces of brasse, besides great store of other ordnance, and (as they say) giues it out that the Emperor hath not kept the Agreement made betwixt them, and that he is therefore not bound to keepe it any longer. The Count of Thurne gathereth likewise a strong army, with intention to come into Silesia. But his Imperi∣all Maiestie hauing gotten notice of his designe, hath prouided all the frontier places and passages with all
manner of necessaries to hinder his intended en∣terprise. The Cossacks which were going homeward, are againe called backe by a Poste, and there are yet some 12000 other that were vpon the Frontiers of Silesia, lately taken in the Emperors seruice to resist Bethlem Gabor. The Count of Monte-Negro hath likewise gotten order againe to goe againe with his Regiments into Hungary. They goe here daily on with their pretended re∣formation, and many of the principall Citizens haue already gotten warning that they must within the space of three moneths either forsake the City, or turne to the Catholicke Romane Religion: where∣vpon many of them haue sent already out of this City a great part of their best moueables. There are like∣wise many Schooles of the Protestants shut. And see∣ing that many Iourny-men haue lately vpon those proceedings left the Towne, the handi-crafts men of it stand in great need of them. From Vienna, August 22. The Regiments of the Dukes of Saxony and Hol∣stein are to be mustred, and shall thereupon receiue six moneths of their pay. His Imperiall Maiesty hath lately giuen order for the leauying of 4000 horse, which are to goe into Germany, for feare of Count Mansfield and his sup∣porters. We haue here tidings that the Lord Curtz the Emperours Ambassador is arested by the Tur∣kish
Bashw of Offen, who will keepe him vntill such time as the 36000 Rixdallers which the Imperialls tooke a while agoe from the Turkes be restored back againe. The Lord of Lambach writ with a Letter dated at Cremitz the 11 of this moneth: That three Bashaws, & diuers other of the chiefest Turks were with great forces come ouer the Riuer of Donaw, and that they hauing done great hurt by robbing and pillaging, had moreouer taken some twenty Villages which are ly∣ing about the townes which stand on the Hils of Hungary, and desire likewise to haue all the other, and seeme to haue taken a resolution to surprise New∣hensel, from whence they haue already taken great store of beasts and cattell that was in the neighbou∣ring Villages. And seeing that Bethlem Gaber hath great correspondencie with the Turkes, there are many townes which the Emperour kept yet on the Mountaines of Hungary, that yeelded to Bethlem Gabor. Whereupon the Lord of Lambach hath written to the Emperor, desiring him to send with all speed that be made, great aide both of men and all other maner of prouision. Although there was lately a resolution taken to dismisse the Cossackes vpon the receiuing of the pay∣ment which is to be made vnto them, there is now giuen order that they shall not depart seeing the Em∣perour standeth now in need of their seruice. The Count of Monte-Negro is within the space of few dayes to goe towards Olmits in Moravia, to ga∣ther
there an Imperiall army to conduct the same in∣to Hungary. From Prage, August 10. Within the space of this moneth was there a Bur∣ger of this City, who fired on purpose a house in the new City of Prage, and threw himselfe thereupon in∣to the riuer of Moldaw. And happening the 4 of this moneth that some Fisher-men tooke his body, the Magistrate caused it to be quartered by the hangman, who buried it afterwards. This tenth day of August got the Burgers of the aforementioned new City, warning, or rather insi∣nuation that they had lost their right of Burgership, which they gat some sixe yeares agoe, seeing they would not embrace the Catholike Romane religion, and that the day of Saint Iames, which was prefixed vnto them, was already past. Whereupon their traf∣fickes and trades are forbidden to them all, and their shops shut vp, except fiue, the masters of them being turned to the Romane Religion. In all these three Cities of Prage are the Burgers now daily vrged by the Imperiall Commissioners to pay such moneyes are demanded for the generall par∣don which the Emperour hath granted vnto them. And euen within these two dayes, there were about some fifty persons brought as prisoners to the Town∣house, where they gaue to vnderstand, that they had no monies, nor could borrow any, and that they were willing therefore to yeeld their houses and goods. But how they shall speed the time will shew. To day there was giuen order, that both the pri∣uate
and publike schooles of the Protestants should be pulled downe or rather shut vp, and euen at the same time there were patents granted to cause the Protestants to depart. It is here very confidently reported that the Church of S. Stephen which standeth in the new City shall be demolished, besides some 300 houses more to build a Castle there. The Dutch Church of the Protestants in the small City shall be giuen to some Monckes called Carme∣lites amongst which Pater Dominicus who was at the battle before Prage shall be one. And there are short∣ly yet some patents to be dispersed to dismisse all such Protestant preachers as tarry yet in some other towns of Bohemia. From Prage, Aug. 17. The tyding continueth still of the shutting vp of the shops in the new City, and it is generally thought, that the like will likewise bee done in the two other cities of Prage. The 13 of this Moneth were here in the City a∣gaine some three houses fired with the losse of one woman besides great store of moueables. From Prage, August 19. Few dayes past a Poste whom the Archduke Charles sent through this City to the Generall the Count of Monte-Negro, to giue notice of the great danger that Silesia is in by reason of the imminent inuasions of the Turkes and Tartars, and desired him therefore to come with all his forces in Silesia.
But as we vnderstood before, hee had order of his Imperiall Maiestie to goe towards Morauia, and Hun∣gary. It is certaine that the Regiment of Lichten∣steyn is there already ariued; and, as it is rumoured, the Forces which lay about Eger, are likewise to goe thi∣therwards. The seuenteenth of this moneth was here a Prouost of a Regiment, hencht, by reason that he tooke with some horsemen forty thousand Florins which were sent to pay the Regiment of the Count Colaldo: the horse escaped with the money, but hee was hencht in his rich apparell within this Citie. Wee haue tidings out of Polonia that the Tartars haue beene a hundred leagues farre in the same Land, wherevnto they could neuer attaine before, since it was a Kingdome: that they did there great hurt, ha∣uing taken great store of Cattle, thirty thousand horse, and aboue twenty thousand Christian soules, which persons they haue presented to Bethlem Gabor. We heare now againe that the last Order which the Count of Schauwenberg got, is called back againe, and that he with all speed is to go vvith his Regiment to∣wards Alsatia. They write out of Austria, that Bethlem Gabor hath summoned the fifth man in his Dominions to come in Armes. There commeth tidings out of Silesia that the Cos∣sacks which lay in Morauia, haue gathered themselues about Troppan, and intrencht there all their forces, doing great hurt to the Country. And it is rumoured, that they are resolued to send the chiefe transgressors
amongst themselues into Polonia (seeing that they were the occasion of their banishment) vpon hope that they shall obtaine thereby a generall Pardon for the remainder. We vnderstand also likewise that ma∣ny hundreth of them are already without Pasport or leaue gone homewards. They write out of the vpper Hungary, that seeing it hath not rained in Tartaria, within the space of two yeares, that there is great want and misery; and that therevpon some 400000 men, women, and children, haue ioyned themselues together, with a resolution to seeke another land. And as they write thence, some of them haue tryed their fortune in Polonia, to the great damage of that Kingdome. We haue heare tidings out of Austria, that both ma∣ny horse and foot come to Bethlem Gabor to serue him. Neuerthelesse hee sheweth as yet no actions of hostilitie to the Emperor; and as some report he is to send to Venice both the forces which hee hath leauied in Polonia, and them which are come to him out of Germany. Our Generall the Marquis of Monte-Negro is within the space of few dayes to goe towards Ol∣muts in Morauia, to forme and gather there an Im∣periall Army, to suppresse perhaps as well the insolen∣cie of the Cossacks, as to preuent the inuasion of the Turkes and Tartars: for it is rumoured that they haue cast an eye vpon Newehensel, with an intention to sur∣prise it. And haue already taken thence great store of beasts and cattell.
From Rome, the 10 of August. Besides diuers other cares which are here taken to defend this Citie from the Plague, there are some souldiers sent to the mouth of Tyber where this Ri∣uer runneth into the Sea, to stop all such ships as come out of Sicilia, seeing that there dye many of this in∣fection, and especially at Trapano and Palermo, And they vvhich come thence say that there vvas lastly a great commotion at Palermo, vvhich hapned by reason that a Spaniard would not suffer a certaine Ladie to enter into the Lazaretto. Where∣vpon some Italians fell foule vvith the Spaniards: In which fray there were some seuen of the Inhabitants and twelue of the Spaniards slaine, and many hurt, for the whole Citie was almost all in Armes, and if the Cardinall of Doria had not stayed this tumult by his presence, there would haue beene done a great deale more mischiefe. There are yet some 10000 persons more sicke, and there dye almost a hundred persons euery day. The French Ambassador had on Thursday last au∣dience by the Pope, and treated very long with him about the affaires of the Grisons, and Veltolina. From Venice, the 16 of August. Wee vnderstand by Letters from Constantinople that the Great Seigneur hath sent a great Armie to∣wards Aleppo to recouer Babylon againe, which the King of Persia, hath fortified (since he tooke it) and strengthened it both with men and munition.
They write likewise thence, that the Bashaw of Ar∣zirum is gone with 30000 men towards Caramania. We haue here tyding from Alexandria, that the Pyrats haue taken foure French ships in the Port of the same City. By seuerall Letters from Millan wee learne that there was come tyding with a Poste that came from Madril that the King of Spaine hath lately chosen 24 Captaines to leauie souldiers in seuerall parts of Spaine seeing that many foraine Princes, and especial∣ly the King of France, make great leauies. From Franckfort the 25 of August. On Friday last crost the Colonell Cordenbach (who is of the Armie of the Generall Tilly) with his Regi∣ment, and 5 Cornets of Horse, the Riuer of Maine by the meanes of a bridge which was layd betwixt Franckfort and Hanaw. And to day there are yet two other Regiments to passe the same, namely, one of horse vnder the Lord Herbersdorf, and the other of foot vnder the Colonel Smith. They are to march straight on towards the Riuer of Neckar, and haue Commission to inquarter themselues in the Marquisate of Durlach. Some ill willers of Bethlem writ that the Turks haue begun the warre againe vpon the Emperour, and that they haue already made a great spoile, and done great hurt in Styria, which is one of the Patrimoniall lands of the House of Austria: and they report likewise, that Bethlem Gabor will shortly begin with the Empe∣ror
on another side, but time will reueale the truth and try the certaintie of their predictions. It is as yet not knowne when the Dyet or the Electorall mee∣ting shall begin. Wee haue here gotten aduise of the agreement made betwixt the Kings of Denmarke and Sweden. Here is also much talk of the leauyings which are made both in France, and in the State of Venice. From Lisbon in Portingaell, the 6 of August. We haue here gotten certaine tyding by a Barque that came from Brasil of the taking of the Bay which the Hollanders tooke by maine force the 10 of May last past, with some 32 ships, out of which they lan∣ded some souldiers behinde a Mountaine, and went thereupon with the ships towards the towne, and got it very fpedily. They made presently thereupon a Proclamation that all the Indians might tary in their Villages without any danger or molestation of them. They went afterwards by land to surprise yet another place, and it is though that if they can get the same, that they will presently be master of all Brasil. From Brasil, the 24 of August. The last weeke were some Waggons with money sent both to the Marquis Spinola, and Count Henry Vanden-berg, besides two whole and foure demi Ca∣nons. It is now generally thought that the Marquis Spinola will now be in earnest, and doe his best ende∣uour
to make a great exploit for the preseruation of his reputation, and this is the rather beleeued, seeing that the Marquis Spinola made his Will before his departure and caused moreouer his Picture to bee drawne according to the life. The plague beginneth to kindle at Antwerpe, and many Burgers of it retire therefore both to this, and other Townes. They write from Madril that there was in the last moneth of Iuly, some falling out betwixt his Excel∣lency Mons: Lorenzo Noro, and the Ambassador of the Emperor the Lord Francis Christopher Keuanhil∣ler, Count of Frankenberg, being both in the Ante∣camera or priuie Chamber of the King of Spaine, but the matter was presently taken vp by the intermed∣ling of many Knights and Gentlemen that were there present. Euen the same day was there a French-man of Rochel in one of the Churches of Madrill named Saint Philippo, who tooke at the time of the Eleuati∣on, the Sacrament out of the hands of the Priest and crummeling it in peeces threw it on the ground. At the same instant was there liknwise a Spaniard in the Church of Saint Barbara of the same towne, who tooke likewife the Host at the Eleuation out of the hands of the Priest, but when he had kist it, hee lay it againe vpon the Altar without doing an thing else with it. Then they were both presently taken by the Inquisition, which condemned afterwards
the French man to be burned as was with great speed done, and sent the Spaniard (as a mad man) to Tole∣do, to bee kept there in prison during all the dayes of his life. By reason of these strange accidents, were af∣terwards seuerall dais of fasting and prayer kept in many Cloysters of Toledo. From Amsterdam, the 25 of August. They write from Arnhem with Letters of the 18. of this moneth, that the 150 Wagons which were sent from Rees towards Huesden lay there still expecting further order frō the States, or the Prince of Orange. The English which came lately ouer are dayly in seuerall places armed, and when the new apparell shal be made for the common souldiers, it is thought that many Companies of them shall be sent towards Rees where the Count Henry of Nassaw is. There were some few dayes agoe about 6000 Boers mustered in the valey, being armed with Ca∣liuers, lope-staues, and harches, to defend the riuer of Isel against the freebooters which were vsed to come now and then ouer it. And it is certaine that about Bronkhorst where Count Henry of the Berg crost last winter the same Riuer, the States are raising of a strong sconce.
From Cullen, the 28 of August. The Marquis Spinola lyeth still with his Campe before Breda, and is there making many sconces and trenches. We haue here gotten tyding from Nimmegen that the Count Henry of the Berg, hauing besieged the 16 of this moneth, the small towne of Gennep, beset it with the Regiment of Colonel Isensburg: they of the Castle shoot very fiercely vpon the town, and behaue themselues very brauely. Count Henry of Nassam is come to Nimmegen with his forces he had at Rees. From Antwerpe, the 28 of August. Wee haue here gotten certaine tyding, that the Marquis Spinola hath besieged Breda round about, so that nothing can any more be brought into the town; as likewise how that Count Henry Vandenberg is to come with his Army to ayde Spinola, who hath now lately sent towards Lire for more Ordnance and war∣like prouision which he hath there, but time will shew the issue. From Winox-bergen in Flanders, the 9 of September. On last Saturday when I was at Brussels, ariued there the Prince of Polen, who was met without the towne by all the Lords and Gallants that were there at the same time, besides many Citizens that went in armor vnder their seuerall colours to conduct him to the Ci∣tie,
and to honour him the more, the Ordnance was also placed on the wals of the towne, and discharged at his ariuall. Hee hath in his Company 300 braue Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, many of them being Princes, Dukes, Counts, and Barons. Hee is lodged in the Palace of the Infanta, and lyeth in the same quarter in which the Archduke Albertus him∣selfe lay when he was aliue. There hath been already great triumph, mirth and honour showne vnto him. Hee stayeth there but a while, seeing that (as the rumor is spred abroad) hee is to goe towards Spaine to wooe the Infanta. Breda is besieged round about that nothing can enter but by maine force, the Marquis Spinola intren∣cheth himselfe very strongly, and his Excellency the Prince of Orange was yet within these 8 dayes at the Hage, but had in a readinesse 2000 Wagons, and ma∣ny boats, and it is since rumored, that he is marcht to∣wards Gorkum with an Army of 20000 men. But what he intendeth to doe we cannot learne as yet. On Wednesday last were at Brussels yet some new Patents or Commissions granted to leauie some 1000 men of which 1000 are to be Burgonions, and the rest Wallons and Flemmings, or other Low-Country-men. They of the Castle of Gennep hold still out, and de∣fend themselues very brauely and valiantly. The last Letters which came out of Spaine, haue againe confirmed the taking of the Bay called Todos Los Santos, which maketh the Hollanders to say that all the Saints are become Geus or Protestants.
The King of Spaine (as they say here) hath armed at Lisbon some 25 Galeons, & other ships, with an in∣tention to send them with some thousands of souldi∣ers to recouer the Bay againe. But the Hollanders will be ready for them, in sending another Fleeet to succour the first. But there are many which hold that the King of Spaine shall hardly at this instant bee able to get either Mariners or souldiers enough to make such an enterprize. Two men of Warre chased lately a Dunkercker and draue him vpon the sands by Blanckenberg not farre from Ostend, tooke seuen or eight of the men, and the rest saued thmselues a shoare, and fired the ship thereupon. FINIS.
