A607C 551.a.32[74] R232540 99888929 196065
ADVERTISEMENT. At the Golden Head in King's-gate-street, near Red-Lyon-Square in Holborn, is to be had Extraordinary Remedies for the fol∣lowing Distempers, at Reasonable Rates, viz. FOR the EYES, most choice and rare Remedies, which infallibly cure all sorts of Sore Eyes, be the Distempers hot or cold, moist or dry, in three or four days at furthest. And likewise takes off all Pearls, Pins, Webs, and Skins of all kinds growing upon, or setled on the Eye. And gives Sight to those who are term'd Stone-Blind, in five or six days, where the vis∣sive Faculty is not quite lost: Insomuch that Multitudes have recovered their perfect Sight, even those who have wanted the Comfort of that Blessing for 30 or 40 years, and upwards. So that none need to despair, or be disheartned, although their Distemper hath been from their Infancy. And, to Admirati∣on, recovereth dim and weak sighted People, be they Young or Old; and makes them see so well in a short time, that they have left off their Spectacles, although they have used them for many years before. And to the End all Persons concerned may be fully satisfied of the speedy Operation of these Remedies, Be pleased to come and accept of a Tryal, and if they do not in less than a quarter of an hour, find great Benefit thereby, they need not put themselves to any Expences. And, for further Satisfaction, I here insert the Names of some Persons, who within these Three Weeks have received the great Benefits, as follow. Madam Graham, living in Dukes-street near Lincolns-Inn Fields next House to the Arch, had, for a great while, a burning heat and weakness in her Eyes, that she could not read great Print without a great deal of Pain; yet after using my Remedies but three times, she could read the whole Gazette without any trouble. Christopher Phiswick, living two Doors off the Red Bull in Drury∣lane, aged near 70 years, was so Blind with a thick Pearl of about 15
years growth on the one eye, and a white Cataract on the other; so that he could see but a glimmering of Light with one Eye, and ver ill with the other; yet, by the blessing of God, in less than three weeks, he came to see great Letters in a Book with his worst Eye, and in a month was perfectly cured of the other. Widow Firth, at the Two Black-Posts in Great Queen-street near L∣colns-Inn Fields, her Son of about seven years old, had the Kings-Evil in one of his Eyes, and had tryed some able Physicians, and all Remedies imaginable; yet notwithstanding all Endeavors, the Humor was so ve∣hement, that he was not able to lift up his Eye, and had a Pearl growing upon it; yet it pleased God, that after using my Remedies six days, the Pearl was taken off, and his Eye perfectly cured. Mrs. Mary Gooderick, living where Captain Whitcomb did, as you go to Tottenham Court, had for three Weeks time such a vehement pain in her Head and Eyes, which were raw and thick, blood-shed, that she could not sleep; and had tryed the be Physicians and Oculists about Town, and could find no Ease: yet, by God's Blessing, my Remedies cu∣red her in less than a week. Mr. Fox a Taylor, next door but one to the Queens-head in Shorts Gardens, his Daughter of Three years old having a skin on her Eye and a thick Pearl upon it, insomuch that she was quite blind, and likewise a terrible Rheum and Blood-shed that she could not rest; yet it pleased God by the use of my Remedies all the skin and pain was taken away, and she brought to her perfect sight in Three weeks by me. A Child at Nurse, next door to Mr. Hancocks a Gardener, at the up∣per end of Islington, about Three years old, had a Pearl on her Eye, but after using my Remedies, in one week was perfectly cured. I could insert several others which I omit for brevity sake. A most curious, pleasant Cordial, which is excellent for the Stone and Gravel, Consumptions; for all Fainting Fits and Vapors, Giddiness and Swimmings in the Head. It purifies the Blood, and by snuffing it up the Nose, gives immediate Ease, al∣though the Pains in the Head be never so vehement. It is ad∣mirable against the Scurvy, and is good for the Stomach It helps Digestion, and is excellent against all Pestilential Fevers. It drives out the Measles, and Small-Pox. It cures all Cholicks; And by rubbing any grieved place before a Fire, it takes away all Aches, Pains, and Numbness of the Limbs. It cures Sore Throats, and is an immediate Remedy for Burnings and Scald∣ings, if presently apply'd.
