B561 R6469 [ocm]12192755 179303
THE POWER OF GODLINES, BOTH Doctrinally, and Practically handled. Wherein The Nature, Comprehensiveness, Parts, and Properties Of a Godly Life Are discovered by Scripture-evidence, and Authority: The special helps, and Furtherances thereof declared, the Lets, and Discouragements removed, and many necessary Practical Cases of Conscience resolved. Whereunto are annexed distinct Treatises 1. Of the Affections. 2. Of the Spiritual Combate. 3. Of the Government of the Tongue. 4. And of Prayer. Together with 5. An Exposition upon the Lords Prayer, By that Faithful Servant of Christ Mr JOHN BALL late Minister of the Gospel at Whitmore in Stafford-shire. Published by Simeon Ashe, Preacher of the Gospel at Austins London. Exercise thy self unto Godliness. For bodily exercise profiteth little, but godliness is profitable unto all things having the promise of the life, that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.7, 8. For the Grace of God that bringeth salvation, hath appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying ungod∣liness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13 London Printed, by Abraham Miller, for George Sawbridge at the Bible on Ludgate-hill, 1657.
TO THE Right Honourable EDWARD Earl of MANCHESTER, Vicount Mandevile, Baron of Kimbolton. MY LORD, I Have presumed on this Dedication, upon a three-fold Account. 1. In reference to the Reverend Author. 2. From reflections up∣on my self. 3. And especially with respect unto the subject Matter of the Treatise. 1. The Author, when obscure and scarcely known by Persons of Honour, (being ne∣cessitated to ly hid in a corner, by reason of prelaticall Persecution) was owned, ap∣proved, and honoured by Your Lordship, for his high Parts, and eminent Piety, being a Learned, well-studied, self-denying Or∣thodox Divine, zelous of Gods Truth, then maligned, studious of the Churches Peace then disturbed, and very able to appear an Ad∣vocate for both, by strenuous Disputation. In this regard, my Lord, I am confident you will not be offended, finding Your Name prefixed before the Work of this worthy man. 2. As for my worthless self, I have for many years been look∣ed upon, not only as related unto Your Lordship in publique ser∣vice
(when You sincerely improved and adventured Your Person, Your Interest, Your All, for Religion and Englands Liberties) but also obliged by manifold Testimonies of respect, both then, and since received: And upon the remembrance hereof, I judg it my duty, so to declare my gratitude and honourable respects unto Your Lordship, that this testimony hereof, may abide, when my body is laid in the dust. 3. The Subject Matter of this Book, is that which hath princi∣pally prevailed with me, to present it unto Your Lordships Pa∣tronage, because true godliness, in the Doctrine and Practice of it, hath been, and still is, befriended by You. Mr Jer. Burroughs did long since represent Your Lordship, unto the world, under this Character:Epistle Dedi∣catory before his Treatise of a gracious Spirit. Malice it self cannot but acknowledg, that godliness in the strictness of it, and natural excellencies in the eminency of them, have a blessed conjunction in Your Honour. And he ap∣plieth unto Your Lordship, that high commendation, which Nazi∣enzen gave of Athanasius, that he was Magnes & Adamas. A Load-stone in his sweet, gentle, and drawing nature; And yet an Adamant, in his resolute, stout carriage against those who were evil. Dr Spurstow hath more lately Dedicated his Treatise of Gods Promises to Your Honour, desiring that it may prove in Your hands, as the Rod of Myrtle in the hand of the Traveller, which as Historians report, doth keep him from growing weary. And now (my Lord) I make bold to commend this Book un∣to Your perusall, as a further help, for Your guidance and en∣couragement in the path of Piety, that none of the Temptations of these shaking Times (whereby Multitudes are drawn aside, some to the right hand, and others to the left) may in the least pre∣vail against You. Hitherto, Your steddiness in holding close to Your old Principles, Profession and Engagements, doth render You a Christian established by Grace, in their account, who see many others of all Callings and Conditions, turned round about (like giddy men) in their Opinions and Conversations. Your Lordship hath seen and felt, the assaults of sundry changes, and yet neither the frowns, nor the fawnings of men, neither the showrs, nor the Sun-shine of the Times, have caused You to change Your Habit, to put off Your Robe of Righteousness, which hath been Your Honour amongst men, is Your comfort, in Your most secret, serious retirements, and will be Your Crown of rejoycing in the Day of Christ.Principium, me∣dium & finis Christianae vi∣e. Calv. in 1 Tim. 4.8. 1 Tim. 6 5, 6. Verissima sunt, non pauca, quae tamen sunt mi∣nimè veri. mi∣lia. Arist. Rhet.  Meionymia subjecti ocu∣pantis. (vid.) Sussi∣cienria pro opi∣nione sufficientia (Piscator.) Prov. 14.14. . Gen. 17.1. Heb. 13.5. Godliness is profitable for all things, in the beginning, progress and conclusion of a Christian Course. And, though the world saith, Gain is godliness, yet St Paul turneth the proposition backward, affirming, that godliness is gain. And there is much reall Truth in this Assertion, how∣ever it be commonly and impudently contradicted in the world. The Apostle insinuateth a convincing Argument, to conclude the
great gain which cometh in by godliness (viz.) because it produceth and continueth true contentment. The Original Language hinteth, that there is an All-sufficency in Piety, unto which Solomons ex∣pression seemeth parallel. A good man shall be satisfied from himself. Yea, the Heathen Philosophers placed a kind of satisfaction in Vertue. By godliness, we are made possessors of Gods All-sufficiency, and by the Rules of godliness, we may know our selves to be happy in the enjoyment of him. The Apostle moveth contentment with such things as we have, by this Argument; For, he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.Psal. 16.5, 6. And Gods Servants have attain∣ed this gracious frme of heart, by this Consideration. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; I have a goodly Heritage. The Lord is the Portion of mine Inheritance.Ʋltra summum bonum non est locus. Senecu. Nemo faelix est, qui judicio suo miser est. Salvian. Eccistinos ad te Domine, & inquietum est cor dence requi∣escat in te. Aug. Psal. 116.7. Eccl. 12.13 Est. 3.1, 2. with Est. 5.13. 1 Kin. 21.1, 4, For what kind of true good, can possibly be needed, or desired, which is not vertually en∣joyed in God? And, as that soul only, which is thus perswaded, can be judged happy: So it is not possible, that an awakened, well-informed conscience, should conclude its satisfaction without God. The Dove which Noah sent out of the Ark, found no rest, till she returned back: So neither could David, nor Solo∣mon his Sonne, take up with contentment, till they found a resting place in God. Histories, both Sacred and Prophane, do report experiences of men deeply distempered with discontentments, in the midst of creature-greatness and possessions. Haman the fa∣vourite of Ahasuerus, could take no comfort in Court-content, fretting for want of Mordecai his obeysance. And King Ahab could not eat, but goeth sullen-sick to bed, because he could not get Naboths Vineyard. Alexander the Great, having conquered the World, sat down and wept, because not satisfied, and yet there was not ano∣ther World to conquer: Yea, in the midst of all his abun∣dance he was disquieted, because he could not get green Ivy to grow in his Garden at Babylon. But what need is there of Histo∣ries,Majore tormen∣to pecunia possi∣detur, quam quaeritur. Seneca. when our own Times do yeeld us more then a good many of experiences, of the torment which racketh and per∣plexeth the spirits of the greatest amongst men. In the mean time (My Lord) Godliness bringing content∣ment, is sound reall and durable gain, as I hope your heart doth experimentally understand. My Lord, you know that Theodosius did more rejoyce in being a Member of the Christian Church, than in being Emperor. Go on, (my much honoured Lord,Tit, 2.12. Haec tria perpe∣tuò meditare Adverbia. Pauli.) undauntedly and un∣weariedly in the waies of True Religion, and while others contend and scramble for sublunary unsatisfying vanities, con∣tinue, yea increase Your care to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, and to enrich Your self and all
Yours with the incomparable gain of godliness.Haec tria fiat vitā regula Sancta tuae. This (My Lord) in reference unto Your Person, is the de∣sign of this Epistle Dedicatory, which will be followed with his hearty Prayers, who is, My Lord, Your Honours humble and faithfull Servant SIMEON ASHE. April 27th 1657.
TO THE Christian Reader. READER, THe Reverend Author of this Book, was plea∣sed to commend all his Manuscripts to my trust; which being noised abroad, I was moved by many; to make more of his Works Publick: and some of these Treatises, which are here conjoyned in one Volume were parti∣cularly mentioned: But I (with the con∣sent of some of his worthy Friends) gain-said these motions for many years, upon these grounds. 1. Because they were penned long since, and therefore may be ac∣counted to fall short of the ripened abilities which he afterwards at∣tained. 2. Because, as some Passages herein were borrowed from Authors, whom he hath not nominated: So some short Notes gathered out of these Manuscripts (when lent unto Friends for private use) have al∣ready in their printed tracts been committed to publique view. 3. And because my self (through want of health and leasure) could neither carefully peruse the Work, nor attend the Press. While I was, by these Arguments concluded under this resolution, some pieces of this Book did fall (through an unexpected provi∣dence) into the hands of a worthy Friend, who upon the reading of them, was earnest with me to make them publique, being con∣fident that thereby I might do an acceptable and profitable service un∣to many. This importunity was the more prevalent, coming from one whose Eminency in Learning and Piety, had deservedly gained high estimation in my heart and judgment. And I have the rather yeelded unto this request, not only because these Papers might possibly after my death, fall into some hands unto prejudice, but also con∣sidering, that (through Gods mercy) such savoury Discourses do
find good acceptance among many, even in these erroneous, broken Times. I know that there are many Treatises upon the self-same profitable Subjects here discoursed of, which have been published, both in former and later Times, by sundry Eminent and Faithfull Servants of Jesus Christ: yet I hope, that in this case, store will be no sore, but that the same Divine Practical Truths, by meanes of many hands, will be the more fully cleared, strongly confirmed, and prevailingly perswaded unto the Readers profit. Every believing Christian from a Principle of spiritual self-love, will make a godly life his chief business, because no other course can possibly be so advan∣tagious, either here or hereafter. And this is the great Argument whereby St Paul perswadeth the study,1 Tim. 4.7, 8. and practice of it. Exercise thy self unto godliness. For bodily exercise profiteth little, but godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. Some men toyl at home, and take journeys abroad to gain worldly wealth, others by running Races, by Wrestlings, Feats of activity, and by Acts of Magnanimity,. Sign. hanc esse occupatio∣nem hoc studi∣um hanc cu∣ram Calv. Exerce Athle∣ticè. Lapid. Est proprie exerceri in gymnade in∣de capit trans∣feri, ad omnia ea quae agerdo discimus, &c. Grot. Eccl. 1.2, 17. Eccl. 1.13. Necesse est, ut homo, inde bea∣tus fit unde fit bonus. Aug. Rev. 20 6. Psal. 1 1. & 102.1. & 119.1, 2. &c. acquire honour amongst men. A third sort by motion and bodily exercise, maintain health of body. And others by outward works of worship and devotion, do procure to themselves much estimation. But alas, how inconsiderable is all this advantage, being compared with the soul happiness to be enjoyed in the waies of godliness. Upon this account the Apostle calleth for vigour and double industry, in all the practices of Piety, as the Original word which he useth doth im∣port. King Solomon, the wisest and the wealthiest of the Sonnes of men (having together with all worldly contentments, compleat a∣bility to improve them) doth write vanity and vexation of spirit upon them all, and preferreth the fearing of God, and the keep∣ing of his Commandments, farre above them all. It is Piety, and not things sublunary which brings us true felicity. Blessed and ho∣ly is he that hath part in the first resurrection, on such the se∣cond death hath no power, &c. And in the holy Scriptures, not the great ones, but the godly ones, are pronounced happy. Mani∣fold Reasons may be rendred hereof, unto the satisfaction of such who are truly ingenuous. Jer. 10.16. Lam. 3.24. Mic. 7.17. Deut. 33.26.29. Ps. 144.13.15.1. Because they are reall possessors of God himself, as their Por∣tion, who is infinitly better, both in himself and unto them, than all things besides. Upon what account soever men call those happy, who have the world at will, either in reference unto personal, or relative satisfactions, this may truly be added. Rather blessed is that people, who have the Lord for their God. The Master of the Mint (saith our Proverb) cannot want money, but there is much more truth in this conclusion of Davids faith.Psal. 23.1, 6. Qui habet ha∣bentem omnia, omnia hebet. Aug. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want: Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the daies of my life. The glorious Angels, and the glorified souls of just vnes made
perfect in Heaven, are pinched with no lack, neither look they out after any creature-content, being satisfied with the enjoyment of God, who is All-sufficient. 2. Because of the manifold engagements of the Almighty, unto such who are really godly. Men are accounted rich by means of Bonds and Evidences for Lordships, though they have neither Land nor Money for the present in their own possession.1 Tim. 4.8. Erasmus legit  promissiones nu∣mero plurali. Beza. Psal. 84.11. Mat. 6.33. Rom. 8.28. Heb. 12.10. Iob 5.16. Ier. 25.6. Nihil accidere bono viro, mali potest. Seneca. 2 Cor. 4.18. & 12.7. Phil. 1.21. Etiam peccatum etiamsi non bonum, tamen in bonum etiam mors, vel maxime. Aug. Psal. 119.57. Lam. 3.24. Rom. 2.7, 10. Rv. 14 13. 1 Tim. 6.17. Prov. 13 5. Luk 12 19. Finem habeut, aut tuam, aut sum. Bern. Col. 1.21, 23. 1 Tim. 4.7. . Beza. Pov. 28.21. Heb. 121 13. with Gen. 25.33. Amo. 8.5. Efficacius est vi∣tae tstimonium, quam linguae. Cyprian. Et validior est vox operis, quam oris. Bern. Quiescat lingua loquatur vita. Aug. Mat. 5.16. Qui vel potest, vel potuit, vel poterit inventri, qui esse nolit he∣atus. Omnes beatitudinem concupiscunt, sed quomodo ad cam perventant plurimi nesci∣unt. Aug. Now who can relate the various precious obligations of Gods love, unto every godly soul. God will be a Sun and Shield, he will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them who walk uprightly. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all other things shall be cast in unto you. And as all things good shall be conferred, so all things seemingly evil, shall be converted to their good, their best good. Their heavenly Father correcteth for their profit, that they may be partakers of his holiness. When they are engulfed into troubles, and overwhelmed with afflictions, no evil doth touch them: for, God intendeth them no hurt, but the worst of providences, whether from men persecuting, Devils tempting, or corruptions rebel∣ling, whether they imbitter, or shorten life, yet they shall according to Gods purpose and promise effect infallibly, their internal and eternal advantage. The high rough windes do hasten the Ship to shore. Winter weather, frost, snow, and stormes, do bring on the expected Harvest. 3. And God All-sufficient, with all the Promises of his rich grace, shall abide as a Portion for his people to live upon for ever, when turned out of the possession of all creature accommodations. Thus Gods Servants have expe∣rienced in their lowest condition upon earth, when opposed and overpowered by men. And this God himself is engaged by the Word of his grace, to make good unto the godly in all Generations. Whereas, riches are uncer∣tain. They have Eagles wings to fly away. Either they will leave their owners, or their owners leave them. And this is most true, in regard of all sublunary satisfactions, they perish in the using, like the sweet Flowers, which do wither by our smelling. As they profit but little in degree, so but for a short time in respect of duration. But here I may justly take up a Lamentation, because the most amongst the children of men, do by their practices oppose this Position, concerning the gain of godliness. For whence else is it, that men will sin for a piece of bread, as Esau sold his birth-right for a mess of Pottage, and had much rather be trading for worldly wealth, than conversing with God in holy Ordinances, that they might ad∣vance in godliness: yea, multitudes, who with their lips will applaude the waies of holiness, yet by their lives give the ly to the language of their tongues, in the judgment of all knowing ingenuous persons, who do converse with them; and therefore I heartily wish that those people would speak less and do more. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in Heaven. Although a desire of being happy, is the effect of natural self-love, planted in the hearts of the children of Adam: yet alas, alas, how few either take or know the right way to obtain it: therefore the good hand of Divine providence is
thankfully to be acknowledged, in the many precious helps vouchsafed, both in former and later years, for our guidance and encouragemet through the Wilderness to the Land of Promise. And I humbly hope that through Gods blessing, this piece, being seriously perused, will prove profitable. As the subject Matter of the Book (being the whole Body of godliness in its Properties and Parts) may strongly plead for its entertainment: so the Name of the worthy Author will make way for its welcome amongst all such who knew him, either by communion with his Person, or by acquain∣tance with such of his Works as have heretofore been made publique. Much I could speak upon mine own personal knowledg, concerning this my honoured Friend, whose life was eminently answerable to this his Discourse of godliness, but I will forbear, for his works do praise him in the gate. Reader, the several Parts of this large Treatise (which are now collected into own Volume) were written in many Books by the Authors own hand, and thou hast them by way of Question and Answer, as he Himself had framed them: The first Chapter only I have presumed to prefix, because it was judged expedient that some such introduction should make way for the following Discourse. I commend the whole to the blessing of God, that spiritual edification being thereby received, great glory may come to his Majesty, by the thanks givings of many through Jesus Christ, In whom I am, Thy Friend and Servant SIMEON ASHE. April 27. 1657.
The Brief CONTENTS OF THE Principall Matters contained in each BOOKE. BOOK I. Of the Properties of a Godly Life. I. IN this book is discovered the nature and extent of true Godliness with the several Properties of a Godly Life, viz. 1. Wisdom, or Prudence. 2. Exactness, or Circumspection. 3. Uprightness, or Streightness. 4. Integrity, or Perfection. 5. Truth, or Faithfulness. 6. Righteousness. 7. Willingness, and Chearfulness. 8. Purity, and Cleanness. 9. Humility, and Meekness. 10. Dilligence, and Constancy. And under each of these heads is declared. 1. What these gracious Properties are, with the Nature, Offices, and Parts, Excellency and Benefit thereof. 2. The Rules to be observed in their Practice, with sundry reasons to stir men up to seek after them. 3. The especial furtherances and encouragements thereunto, with divers necessary helps for the attaining, strengthening, and preserving there∣of. 4. The Effects, or Tokens by which it may be known whether we have at∣tained these Godly Properties. 5. Lastly, The danger and mischief of the contrary evil qualities, with di∣rections to prevent and remove them.
II. Is shewed, 1. The Titles that are given to Believers. 2. The priviledges of the Elect. 3. The signs of Election. BOOK II. Of the Parts of a Godly Life. I. IN this Book is shewed, 1. That all sin is to be for ever forsaken, not onely in Judgement and Af∣fection, but also in Life and Conversation. 2. That it is not enough to abstain from Evil, but we must be alwayes ready prepared for the doing of good. 3. Divers enouragements to well-doing, with comforts against all discour∣agements in the way thereof. II. There is a particular discourse of the several operations of Man, viz. 1. Of Knowledge or Understanding. 2. Of Memory. 3. Of Thought, or Cogitation (under which head is a large discourse of Meditation. 4. Of Invention. 5. Of Judgement. 6. Of Willing and Nilling. And under each of these heads is shewed, 1. What these Operations are. 2. The End, and Benefits thereof. 3. The seat or subject of them. 4. What the sins are, that, are contrary thereunto, which must be shunned. 5. Wherein the Sanctified Use thereof consists. 6. Directions how to exercise these Faculties in a regular manner.
BOOK III, Of the Affections. I. IN the first place, There are divers Reasons to shew that our Affections must be exercised according to the Rule of Gods Word, and what the disorder of Affection is, that must be shunned. II. General Rules to deal with them that be Passionate. III. Of the kinds of Affections, viz. Intellectual and Sensual, and that these Affecti∣ons are not to be abandoned, but onely moderated and corrected. IV. There is a particular discourse of these Affections, viz. 1. Of Love. 2. Of Hatred. 3. Of Pleasure or delight. 4. Of Grief. 5. Of Hope. 6. Of Courage. 7. Of Fear. 8. Of Shame. 9. Of Anger. 10. Of Mildness. And it is Discovered, 1. Wherein the holy exercise of these Affections consists, and how they are to be rightly ordered. 2. The means, and helps whereby holy affections may be stirred up in us; And all disordered, and irregular Affections corrected or subdued. 3. Sundry motives, and encouragements to the practice thereof, with the exceeding benefits, and advantages that will accur unto us by the right ordering of our Passions and Affections.
Book four, In two parts. I. Of the Spiritual Combate 1. SHewing from whence the Spiritual Combate betwixt the Flesh, and the Spirit proceeds; and what we are to understand by Flesh, and by Spirit. 2. The Properties of these enemies, with encouragements to undertake the Combate. 3. Concerning the subject of this Combate, and how two contraries can be said to subsist in the same subject: 4. The cause of this Combate, with the manner of the fight. 5. Of the divers kinds of Combate that be in unregenerate men, and how they differ from that which is proper to the Regenerate. 6. Lastly, The means to be used for the weakening of the Flesh, and strengthen∣ing of the Spirit upto this Combate. PART II. Of the Government of the Tongue. 1. SUndry Reasons to perswade the Well-Government of the Tongue. 2. Discovering, The Spring or Root of a well-ordered Tongue, and that no man of himself is able to order his Tongue aright. 3. Wherein the Well-government of the Tongue consisteth. 4. What the matter, and manner of our Speech must be, with the season mea∣sure, and end thereof. 5. Of Holy Silence, Reasons to perswade thereunto, the Root, Cause and Kinds thereof. The things that are to be concealed, and the Rules that are to be observed in lawful silence. 6. Of the abuse of the Tongue, wherein it consists, viz. in sinful speech, and un∣lawful silence; with the several kinds of unlawful silence, that are to be a∣voyed. BOOK V. Of Prayer. 1. DIscovering what Prayer is: The Principal efficient cause thereof. The Benefits, and advantages thereby; and that liberty to pray is a rare priviledge. 2. Motives and Encouragements to Pray, and continue in Prayer, notwith∣standing all Discouragements. Divers Objections answered, and many ne∣cessary Cases of Conscience resolved.
3. Shewing who can, and may pray; and that Prayer is a Work of the inward Man; with the special helps and furtherances thereof. 4. Concerning the Lawful use of a stinted Form of Prayer, in Publick or Private; also of reading and using a stinted Form devised by others. 5 Discovering the common and general impediments of Prayer. 6. Of the End, Place, and Time thereof, with the Gesture to be used therein. 7. Of the parts of Prayer, viz. Petition, and Thanksgiving. 8. Shewing that we are to Pray to God alone, and how we are to conceive of God in our Mindes, in Prayer. 9. Lastly, Proving, That invocation of Saints, is neither Necessary, Pious, nor Profitable, but Blasphemous. BOOK VI. An Exposition upon the Lords Prayer. I. OF the Preface, the Reason thereof, the things therein to be considered; who are allowed to call God Father. II. Of the Prayers of unregenerate Men, and how God hears them. III. Discovering, That though it be Lawful for a Christian to pray especially for himself, or certain others, yet he must be mindeful in his prayers, of all that belong to the Election of Grace. IV. Concerning the Rules that are to be observed in the Exposition of the Petitions in this Prayer, and how they are to be distinguished. V. The several Petitions distinctly handled, the meaning of the words (as they are to be understood in each petition) clearly expounded. VI. Shewing, The ground of these petitions, and what we especially desire of God therein, either for our selves or others. VII. The Evils that we pray against therein.
VIII. The wants that we bewail. IX. The special Blessings for which we must be thankful. X. Lastly, Discovering how a man should stir up himself to make these Petitions de∣votionally, with several excellent Practical Conclusions that may be drawn from each Petition. 2. Of the Confirmation, viz. For thine is the Kingdome, &c. declaring how these words are a Close, and Confirmation of our requests in the Lords Prayer. 3. Of the Conclusion AMEN: with the Principal Use that is to be made of the Lords Prayer; And why we must neither refuse, nor confine our selves to this Form. Reader, besides the literal mistakes, which will easily be observed and amended by every intelligent eye, in the perusal of the book: these hereafter particu∣larized, being more gross, thou art intreated to correct, to prevent thy fur∣ther trouble in reading of it. PAge 3. line 10. read what is the first property of. p. 8. l. 39. r. fifh rule. p. 10. l. 7. r. he should choose one. and l. 9. r. never choose. p. 15. l. 41. r. eternal service. p. 16. l. 2. 3. r. week p. 20 l. 2. r. let down p. 21. l. 31. and p. 22 l. 41. and 44. and p. 23. l. 2. for rights r. rites. p. 22 l. 51 r. service of Jerobo∣am p. 29. l. 7. Marg r. . p. 32. l. 13. r. doth make. p. 33. l. 5. r. Armour of light. p. 36. l. 9. r. word. l. 32. d. not. l. 25. r. by Just and p. 40. l. 2. Mar. r. . p. 41. l. 1. r. as rest in. ibid l. 3. r. as it is no∣ted. ib. Marg. l. 8, r usurpator, and l. 37. Mar. r. divers objects. and l. 40. r. it is divided, and l. 47. Mar. r. Con ugabis Amor. p. 51. l. 1. r. maketh it to melt p. 54 l. 33. r. then that which is p. 6. l. 6. r. have an, for is an. p. 83. l. 4. but it is. p. 89. l. 42. r. much dress. p. 90. l. 43. r. Son of righteousness. p. 41. l. 19. r. Iewels of price. p. 93. l. 34. r. though it seem little ever that. and l. 42. r. for is it could not seem agree∣able. p. 94 l. 42. r. he speaks peace p. 104. l. 1. Mar. r. . p. 133. l. 4 r he hath not onely learned and l. 38. r. their thoughts. p. 150. l. 34. r. with all men. p. 173. l. 43. r. the wit represonteth. p. 178. l. 14. r. purchased by Art. p. 181. l. 45. r. wonderfully wary. p 186. l. 4. r. by the course of nature. p. 232. l. 29 r. if Christians be devided for. p. 235. l. 10. r. seems to commend. p. 252 Mar. l. 4. r. exoserisolent. p. 28. l. 48. r. like unto him. p. 283. l. 12. r. seale. p. 199 l. 16. r. his sanctification. p. 306. l. 10. r. the fourth ef∣fect is. p. 358. l. ult. r. what truths are. p. 340. l. 18. r. about which. p. 342. l. 34. r. soon turned. p 37. Mar. subaccusari. ibid. praefidio. p. 372. Mar. r. utrumque. ibid. & procurationis. ibid. simul cum. p. 386. l. 33. that  is to be honored, or that to be honored, is to be worshiped religiously. and l. 43. r. speech there. p. 419. l. 24 r. new worlds. p. 425. l. 40. r. the manner of doing. p. 426. l. 27. for see r. viz. p. 437. l. 34. r. . p, 454. l. 11. r. not consumed. p. 457 l. 26. r. and Christianity p. 474. l. 1. r. be not asked. p. 480 l. 0. r. grave con monefaction p 481. l. 5. r. if be forgive. ibid. l. 1. r. hurts himself. p. 482. l. 20. r. Walter. p. 485. l. 10 for knew. r. tried. p. 495. l. 20. r. without him. p. 449. p. 24 r. his dispensation
THE FIRST BOOK. Of the PROPERTIES Of A Godly Life. CHAP. I. Discovering the Nature, and Extent of true Godliness, together with Arguments to perswade both the knowledg and practice thereof. Question: WHerein doth true godliness consist? A. True godliness doth consist in mans obediential conformity unto Gods revealed will, with respect un∣to his Name. 1. Man having received his being from God, and having his constant universall dependence upon him, this is a necessary inference, according to the princi∣ples of nature, and right reason, that therefore he is bound to acknowledg Divine Soveraignty, together with his own subjection, by taking Laws from his Highness, for the right ordering of his conversation. And so farre as the children of men are carefull to frame their lives according to this Rule, they are in the Scripture account, judged godly; As it is said of Ananias,Act. 22.12. that he was a godly or devoute man, according to the Law. Whereas, those actions which with most specious pretences, seem to express devotion,Col. 8.20, 23. Act. 17.23. being the meer inventions and prescriptions of men, are to be esteemed no better, then will-worship, and superstition. 2. And though the matter of obedience be according to Gods express Com∣mand,
yet it is not to be reputed godliness, except man therein hath reall reference unto God. It is considerable, that in the holy Scripture, both mens actions, and dispositions, are denominated godly upon this account; Thus the Apostles St John commending Gaius, for his charity to the Church-mem∣bers addeth these words:3 Joh. 6. Whom if thou bring forward on their journey, after a god∣ly manner, thou shalt do well. And the great Characteristical difference betwixt morality and piety, lyeth in this particular, that the one determineth in man, and the other relateth unto God.Gen. 20.6. 2 Cor. 1.12. Act. 24 2. Hb. 12.28. 2 Cor. 7.9. 1 King 2.27, 29. Prov. 6.34. Gen. 4 23. 2 Cor. 11. There was integrity in Abimelech, which fell short of that godly sincerity, which administred comfort unto the holy Apostles of Christ. And Faelix his trembling was farre inferiour unto that godly fear, unto which the Heires of Heaven are perswaded. That godly sorrow, (that sorrow according to God) for which the repenting Corinthi∣ans are commended, did much exceed Ahabs mourning. And the like diffe∣rence is to be put betwixt the jealousie of a man, such as is expressed by Lamech. And that godly jealousie which St Paul found burning in his bosome towards the Corinthians. This therefore must be known, that as the Rule of a godly life, is Gods Word, so the object, and the end unto which godliness re∣lateth, is God himself. Q. How farre doth true godliness extend, and reach in a Christian Course? A. It's manifest from that which was before suggested, that godliness is of equall latitude with the holy Scripture, which doth direct man whole course of life in reference unto God. It is true, that sometimes the word godliness, is strictly taken, and restrained unto the duties of Divine worship, when it's mentioned as distinct from temperance,2 Pet. 1.6, 7. brotherly kindness, and charity; In which sense also it is to be taken, when the Apostle exhorteth to live soberly, righteously,Tit. 2.12.  Psal. 12.1. which the 70 render, , 1 Tim. 6.6. . Act. 10.2. & 22.12. & 17.23. 1 Tim. 4.8. and godly in this present world. And the Original words whereby the Holy Ghost doth express it, both in the Old and New Testament, do fa∣vour this restrictive sense. The Hebrew word is indifferently translated godly, or holy; And the Greek word, applied to persons, is rendred godly, or devoute; As when applied to actions, it's translated worships, or devotions. But although this be acknowledged, yet in the holy Scripture godliness is more comprehensive. And when the Apostle perswading godliness, saith, That it is profitable unto all things; Some render the wordBeza. true worship; OthersTrem. righteousness; SomeGrot. vertue. And Mr Calvin saith, It comprizeth obedience to the Commandements of both Tables.2 Pet. 2.8, 9. Luk. 1.6. St Peter also maketh godly and righteous equivalent, and of equall extent. And we know that the truly righte∣ous man, is carefull to walk in all the Commandements and Ordinances of the Lord universally. Therefore let the comprehensiveness of godliness be conside∣red briefly in these Particulars. 1. It relateth unto all the holy truths on record in Scripture, which are to be known, believed, and converted into practice. The discovery of Christ in the Gospel,1 Tim. 3.16. 1 Tim. 6.3. Tit. 1.1. is called the mystery of godliness, and the whole Systeme of Divine Revelations recorded in the Bible, is said to be, the Doctrine, and the truth ac∣cording to godliness. Godliness therefore doth as well respect opinions entertain∣ed, as duties discharged. 2. The practice of godliness doth imply a cautious declining of all lusts whatsoever,Tit. 2.12. Indefinita pro∣positio, in mate∣ria necessaria, equipollet uni∣versali. Act. 10.2, condemned and decryed in holy Writ. Denying un∣godliness and wordly lusts, we should (saith the Apostle) live godly in this present world. In which words the casheiring of all corruptions, without in∣dulging any, is intended. 3. Godliness containeth the conscientious performance of all positive du∣ties, whether they do concern God or man. Cornelius is called a godly, or de∣vate man, because, fearing God, he gave much almes, and prayed to God alwaies.
And St Paul perswading piety towards Parents doth more then intimate that godliness doth comprehend the several services,1 Tim. 5.4. required in our various hu∣mane relations. 4. Lastly, Reall godliness doth comprehensively graspe, the right manner of Christian obedience, with the whole matter thereof commanded in the Word of Truth. The Original word, (most ordinarily used to signifie godliness) doth evidently point at serving God well, whether in acts of immediate, or mediate worship, which the Lord both requireth and accepteth.Isa. 1.17. Gen. 4.7. Tit. 2.12. And this ser∣ving of God godly, in regard of the manner, doth comprize 1. the root, 2. the rule, 3. and the end of mans obedience. 1. Love to God is the root from whence godliness doth spring; In which re∣spect Nehemiah his goodness in taking care of holy worship,Neh. 13.14. is called his kind∣ness. The same word in the Original, we have else-where translated (godly.) And the word is very significative [Chesidah] being the name of the Stork,Psal. 32.6. Psal. 104.17. which Bird is the emblem of Love, because the young ones, when grown strong, are wont to carry the old ones, being infirm, from place to place upon their backs. 2. The rule or guide of godliness,Act. 22.12. Gal. 6.16. is Gods Word (as was touched upon be∣fore) which is the constant Canon of the true Israelites conversation, making way for his acceptance with the Lord. That goodness of Josiah, which God approved, is thus discribed:2 Chro. 35.26. That it was according to that which was written in the Law of the Lord. 3. The glory of God is the end wherein true godliness doth determine. This followeth undeniably from the two former Particulars; For whosoever acteth from a principle of good-will to God, eyeing his word as the compass by which he steereth, cannot but intentionally aim at, and center in his praise.2 Tim. 3.12. Joh. 12.28. & 17.1, 4. As it was with Jesus Christ, (the Fountain from which godliness doth arise) who made his Fathers glory the chief end both of his active and passive obedience. All these things being premised, That Treatise of godliness which fetch∣eth in the whole duty of man, will not be censured as improper or imper∣tinent. Q. By what Arguments may the study of godliness (in this comprehen∣sive Consideration) both in the knowledg, and practice thereof, be perswa∣ded? A. First, A principle of self-love may prevalently perswade this endeavour; Whereas, many say, who will shew us any good? And,Psal. 4.6. Jam. 4.13. 1 Tim. 6.6. 1 Tim. 4.8. We will go to such a place and tarry there, and get gain. The best, and most abiding gain, cometh in by meanes of godliness. For it hath the promise both of this life, and of that which is to come. 1. In this life it's profitable to all things: I shall point at some. 1. By means here∣of every Talent is fruitfully traded, every Relation Christianly filled, every duty conscientiously discharged, every Ordinance profitably improved, every comfort spiritually seasoned, and every Cross more easily carried. 2.Psal. 4.3. Psal. 32.6. God hath marvellously separated to himself the man that is godly; And therefore when he prayeth, he may confidently look for audience Godliness alone layeth the foundation of reall con∣tentment in every state and change of life. For in God,1 Tim. 6.6. Gen. 33.11. Psal. 84 11. Phil. .20. Jer. 32.41. the godly man hath suffi∣ciency, and may safely say with Jacob, I have all. And enjoying God, he may assure himself, that all creature-wants shall be supplied, and all occurences undoubtedly sanctified. 2. Neither is the gain of godliness confined unto this present life: for at the end of this life, unto those who have given diligence to adde godliness unto other vertues,2 Pet. 1.5.11. shall entrance be ministred abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ. When death shall smmon to appear at Christs Tribu∣nal, others shall tremble to think of that dreadfull Day, they who have lived
godly, shall with the expectations of faith, look for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of Christ.Tit. 2.12, 13. 2 Pet. 3.11, 12. And as a fruit of their holy conversa∣tion, and godliness, they shall with joy hacte unto the coming of the Day of God.—Having these Promises, therefore (unto which very many more might be added) we all,2 Cor 7.1. should alwaies be perfecting our holiness in Gods fear. Secondly, The study of godliness may be quickned by this consideration, if well improved, viz. That the Lord himself doth propound it as the great end of the sweetest providences which do concern us. 1. Whereas freedom from commotions and persecutions from men (which do waste and imbitter our creature-comforts) is a blessing of much worth. We are advised to beg it with respect to godliness; That we may live a quiet and peaceable life,1 Tim. 2.1, 2. (saith the Apostle) in all godliness and honesty. 2. And whereas outward peace in the world would be of small value without the light of the Gospel, it pleaseth the Almighty to shine amongst us, by the Word of his Grace, that thereby we may be taught, denying all ungodlinss and worldly lusts,Tit. 2.10, 11. to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. 3. Lastly, Neither peace amongst men, nor the plentifull and clear pub∣lication of the Gospel, can make us truly happy without Christ. Therefore God exhibiteth, and conferreth Christ with the benefits of redemption by him,Luk. 1.74, 75. That we may live godly, righteously, and soberly before him all the daies of our lives. If then there be any respect, either to our own comfort, or to Gods content, these Arguments will be prevalent with us, to use double industry, in husbanding all holy helpes, that we may not take up with a form and image of godliness, but express the power of it in our whole conversation.
CHAP. II. Of the first Property of a godly life, viz. Wisdome or Prudence. What Wisdome is. The Author, Offices and Parts thereof. Rules to be observed in the practice of Wisdome, (as touching the collation of Laws, and our obedience thereunto; of Simulation, or Dissimulation; of bodily presence at Idolatrous services; and what a Christian may do to tame his life.) Also Rules to be observed in our carriage to∣wards all sorts of men; wherein many necessary cases are resolved. Lastly, of the excellency and profit of Wisdome, with sundry motives to stirre men up to seeke after it. Q. WHat are the Properties of a godly life? A. It must be wise and prudent, for wisdome is the guide of life,Prov. 2.9, 10. Rom. 16.19. Eccl. 10.1. Psal. 07.43. Hose. 14.9. the governesse of vertues, directing what is to be given unto God, what is due to man, what choice or election is to be made. The godly man is called wise. Q. What is Wisdome or Prudence? A. To joyne both these together, which by the most are distinguished, it may be defined; A singular gift of grace, whereby we know the will of God, what he commandeth, forbiddeth, alloweth, accepteth,Prov. 10.1.5. Mat. 7.24. Eccl. 8.5. Prov. 14 8. & 23.19. Prov. 2.6. & 8.14. Jam. 1.6. and rightly foresee or judge what ought or is fit to be done in respect of time, place, manner of doing, event, and other circumstances. Q Who is the Author of this heavenly Wisdome? A. God giveth wisdome, out of his mouth cometh knowledge and un∣derstanding. Q What are the Offices or Parts of Wisdome? A. The first Office of Wisdome is to know the Laws according to which we must live, which is called spirituall understanding,Col. 1.9, 10. Rom. 12.. whereby we are in∣abled to know and conceive spiritually, truth and falshood, good and evill. And this first Office of Prudence is the rule of all the rest.Prov. 13.16. The second Office is to compare Laws equall, inferiour, or superiour; and thereby to deliberate and advise according to spirituall understanding what is good or bad, true or false, expedient or inconvenient, to be embraced or to be avoided.Phil. 1.10. Heb. 6.5.14. The third is to determine, resolve, and judge aright; what is to be esteemed, chosen and put in practice. And herein stands the very nature and forme of of true Christian Prudence: when a man, (upon true knowledge and due con∣sideration of things and actions, together with their properties, and circum∣stances) rightly esteeming, discerning, and weighing, all and every thing that must come into consideration: doth proceed to an holy, free, and setled re∣solution; to choose and pursue what is good and acceptable in the sight of God.Psal. 119.30.173. Q. What Rules are to be observed touching the practice of this holy Prudence? A. The practise of it is very large, and the Rules many: for all coun∣sels and deliberations in the choice of things pleasing to God, honest and profitable, together with all reasonable actions: are directed by wisdome. Prudence adviseth also touching the circumstances of every action: as the time,Prov. 21.5. place, persons, and manner of doing. It teacheth to take the season and opportunity, for the exercise of Vertue, to preferre the best things,Rom. 13.11. to be pre∣ferred,
to set after things, to be set after; and to esteeme of every thing according to its worth and necessity,2 Cor. 4.18. & 5.8, 16. in a time free or otherwise. Q. Let us hear some common Rules of Wisdome to be observed. A. First, in the first place, and above all things, a man must provide for the forgivenesse of his sinnes, and the salvation of his Soule. Sinners and un∣repentant Persons are sundry times in Scripture termed fools;Mat. 6.33. as in many other re∣spects? so principally in this, because they faile in this point of wisdome, go∣ing on in their sinnes without repentance. It is the part of a wise man to use no delaies in heavenly matters, nor to deferre repentance from day to day: for the daies are evill, and man may be surprized in his sinnes before he be aware. Secondly, we must diligently observe the danger wherein we are by reason of temptations, and labour daily to search and finde out the secret counsels,Mar. 13.33.35, 37. 1 Pet. 5.8. sal. 33.6. Jam. 3.13. Prov 26.12, 16. Prov. 3.7. sal. 111.10. Psal. 31.. practises, and enterprises of our enemies, that we may prevent them; especially we must watch against our spirituall enemies; the corrupti∣on of our hearts, the temptations of the Devill, and the day and houre of our death, that we be not found unprepared. Thirdly, the fear of the Lord, throughout all our whole life, must be our chiefe Treasure: and our care must be to grow in meeknesse as we increase in knowledge, for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdome. Fourthly, every man must measure him∣self by his own strength, and do nothing beyond his ability. To this purpose is that of the Apostle, Let no man thinke of himself more highly then he ought to thinke,Rom. 12.3. 2 Cor. 10.13.14. but to thinke soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith. And as he exhorteth all men to be sober and mo∣dest, and not to take more upon them then they have graces and calling of God to answer and to discharge:Esa. 6. so he applieth this generall exhortation particularly and most directly unto them who have publique callings to trade in the Church, as those by whose overweening the Church might suffer grea∣test hurt. Wherefore his charge to them is, that they teach not vauntingly nor ambitiously, making a greater shew of knowledge then indeed they had, but according to the proportion of faith: that is to say, of the gifts that they had received by faith. Fifthly, things dishonest and of evill report must be let passe: but things honest and of good report carefully practised. Whatsoever things are true,hil. 4.8. Rom. 12.17. 1 Cor. 8 21. whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertaine to love, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any vertue, if there be any praise, thinke on these things. Sixthly, we may not be temporizers, but we may and must give place to the sway of the Times wherein we live, so farre forth as may stand with faith, a good conscience, and the discharge of duty, in our due per∣ticular Vocation. This rule was practised by Paul, who living among the Heathens, was constrained to speak as they did; and therefore he stickes not to say, that he departed in a Ship to Rome, whose badge was Castor and Pollux.Act. 28.11. Act. 19.10. Again, he was three years in Ephesus, an idolatrous place, where the great goddesse Diana was worshipped; yet in all that time he had so contained himselfe,Act. 19.26. that Demetrius could not charge him to have spoken directly against that Idoll; onely he had preached, that they were no gods, which were made with hands. And as Paul, so the rest of the Apostles no doubt, did become all things to all men, that they might winne some. Seventhly, Prudence will not advise, intend or do any thing, either by way of simulation, or dissimulation; that is contrary to the glory of God, or tends any way to the prejudice of the least truth: to the scandall of our weake Brethren, or neglect of duty in our particular Vocation. Abraham lied not in saying that Sarah was his sister; nor did he simply offend against the truth, against piety towards God, or common charity towards men; but against the love which he owed to his wife by particular calling,Gen. 20. whereby he was
bound to protect her against wrongs, and not expose her to danger as by that saying he did. Eighthly, Wisdome keepes a man within the limits of his calling,1 Pet. 4.15. 1 Thes. 4.11. 2 Thes. 3.7.11. 1 Tim. 5.13. Calvin opsc. Epist. 1. Pag. 550. 1 Tim. 5.22. and withholds him from medling with that which no waies pertains unto him: yet so as he will not communicate in the sinnes of other men. A wise man will not challenge that authority to himselfe alone which be longs to many; nor presume to do that by his sole power, which pertains to many in joynt commission: nor will he suffer himselfe to be so over-ruled by them, as to partake in their sinnes Lay hands suddainly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens sinnes: Keepe thy selfe pure. Ninthly, in necessary duties prudence directeth to do what God requireth, and then leave the successe to him, that can do more then we are able to comprehend, and will effect his own pleasure by unlikely meanes in the judgement of men. Tenthly, we may not trust men upon faire pretences, that they make unto us, with∣out further tryall. The common Proverb is, First try, and then trust.Jer. 9.4. & 12.6. Be wise as Serpents: Take heed of men.Mic. 7.5. Mat 6.17. Simplicity and plaine dealing must be embraced with the one hand, yet so as circumspection and prudence fall not from the o∣ther. Our Saviour Christ would not commit himselfe to them that beleeved in him when they saw his Maricles, because he knew what was in them.Joh. 2.24. The like circumspection was practised by Nehemiah,Neh 6.1, 2, 3. Ezra. 4.2, 3, 4. when Tobiah and San∣ballat conspired against him to hinder the building of the Temple. Eleventhly, if we cannot effect the good things we desire, in that exquisite and holy manner that we would, we must not tumultuously contend, or make un∣lawfull separations; but commending the cause to God, and waiting further opportunity to do good: we must content our selves with the meane, and take the lesse, when the greater cannot be obtained. For example; In many Churches sundry abuses are not reformed: superstitious customes do still con∣tinue: Images do stand undefaced. The good desire of the godly is, that they may be removed, amended, pulled down: but this cannot be brought to passe. What then must they do in this case? They must not raise tumults, nor seperate themselves from the Congregations where the substance of Doctrine is sound∣ly taught, and the Ordinances of God are truely administred: but they must seeke unto God for helpe, keepe themselves innocent without offence, and by humble supplication intreate the lawfull Magistrate for redresse of what is out of order: and in the meane time rest content with that they have done. Twelfthly, it is an high point of wisdome to lay up knowledge,Prov. 10.14. rov. 15.23. Prov. 18.13. 1 Cor. 4.5. Eccl. 7.21, 22. rov. 17.27. Tit. 2 2, 3. to speake in season, to answer no matter before we hear it, to judge nothing before the time; to passe by many things in mens words and actions, as if we did not heare or see them, and to speake sparingly, with all meeknesse. Q. What Rules of wisdome are to be observed touching the collation of Laws, and of which regard especially is to be had, comparison being made? A. First, What Laws do simply respect God, in comparison they are al∣waies to be preferred before other Laws commanding just things: much more the law of man, must give place to the Law of God, and the love of our neighbour to the love of God. Love of Christ over-ruleth the love of Parents, of Wife, Children, Friends, Brethren: Yea,Psal. 139.21. 2 Chr. 19.2. Luc 4 26.1.33. Deut. 13.6, 7, 8. so farre must the one yeeld unto the other, that for the love of Christ, the love of Parents must be turned into hate. For their is nothing of such weight, that man can with any pretence of equity set before the Lord Almighty; to whom no∣thing in the world is to be compared, much lesse preferred. Not our Father, For he is our chief Father; and not ours onely, but the maker of our Pa∣rents. Not our life: For God is he, who if we die for his Name sake, can adorne us with life eternall: but if we preferre our life before him, he can afflict us with torment of eternall death. If any Friend therefore should aske me to tell a lie for his sake, I must answer him, it behooveth me to helpe
my Friend, but in the Lord. If the Magistrates should threaten banishment, or other extremity to my Parents almost spent with age, unlesse I will depart from the known confession of faith: I must rather leave my Parents to the lust and rage of the Magistrate, then deny the faith. It is just to succour Parents, but not with breach of Piety. Secondly, Betwixt evils of sin there is no election: but all, even the least, are to be avoided. Of two sinnes, we must choose neither; but submit our selves to the greatest extremity, even death it selfe, rather then be compelled to that which is evill or dishonest: All sinnes are equally to be shunned.Job. 13.7, 8, 9. We must not tell a lie for the glory of God, much lesse to save our life. Their condemnation is just, who teach that men may do evill, that good may come of it. If in time of trouble an offer were made,Rom. 3.8. that if we would save our selves, we should breake the Laws of piety or honesty, as that we should deny God, or murther our Brother, neither is to be chosen: but we must commit our selves into the hands of God in wel-doing. Thirdly, In free time superiour Laws are alwaies preferred to inferiour, things more common to the lesse common, publique to private, and amongst the private they that are linked unto us by most bonds. Thus we must give more to Citizens, then to strangers, to our Kinred, then to Citi∣zens,Rom. 16.4. Gal. 5.14. to our Parents, then to our Kinred, to the Magistrate Church and Countrey, then to Parents. For we are bound to strangers onely by the Law of humanity, to our Kinred by the Law of humanity and affinity; to the Magistrate by a triple band of humanity, affinity and peculiar Covenant. By this Rule of wisdome, the speciall Calling must give place to the Trade of Christianity. 1 King. 17.15.Q. The Widow of Sarepta relieved the Prophet, before she made provision for her self or her sonne. A. Unlesse the widow had certainly known it to be the speciall will of God, she should not have done this; namely to defraud her selfe and her sonne, to the intent she might sustaine a man being a stranger. Neither ought Pro∣phets, or men of God, by the accustomed rule of Piety, to require this of any man, that they should maintaine them without taking care for themselves and their Children. For even the Apostle to Timothy did plainly pronounce; that,1 Tim. 5.8. They which have not care of their own, and especially of their Family, have denied the faith, and are become worse then Infidels: And therefore he would that widows should be maintained by them of their own Kinred. But when the widow was now certified by the speciall will of God, it was not for her to have respect what was commanded by the Law in generall; neither might that take place, which is made a common Proverb: Charity first beginneth at a man himself. Howbeit, as touching the common course, that we may per∣fectly discerne, to whom we be more or lesse bound, and not be deceived; we must consider, that there be divers kinds of Societies, kinreds and friend∣ships. One is spirituall; another is bodily, or of the same stock; another is civill, and such like. Wherefore, when we reason concerning love, and doing good unto our neghbours, there ought a comparison to be made of those things, which belong unto our degree: which being not made, an error will soon happen. As for example; If a man shall be instructed by a godly Pastor and Teacher of the word of God, and shall be brought to sanctification; and the same man have therewithall a Father, of whom he was begotten, or have Children, and the question be asked, Whether he be more bound to his Pastor, or else to his Father and Children? We must not answer absolutely, seeing with our answer, the matter would not be expressed: But we may say, that in those things, which concerne spirituall friendship, we ought more to obey the Minister of the Word, that teacheth us rightly, and admonisheth us out of the holy Scriptures, then either the Children or the Father, if they
perswade things that be contrary and repugnant. But if we demand as touch∣ing things of another sort; namely, of food, and of maintenance, there is more due unto Parents, and unto Children, then unto others, though they be Ministers of the Word of God: Indeed the Ministers of the Word must be maintained, but yet not so, as any man should defraud either himself, or his Family of necessary living. By another similitude the matter may be cleared. Admit that a man be in the Campe, where just warre is taken in hand, when the general Captain chargeth him in something concerning the affairs of warre, and the Father being present commandeth him to the contrary: in this case the sonne shall rather offer himselfe to the General, then to his Father. But if we shall determine of houshold businesse, and of things per∣taining to living and sustenance, the Parent shall be heard, and not the general Captaine. Q. Is a man to preferre a stranger eminent in Piety and Vertue before his Brother, not so much adorned with the tokens of Vertue, or no? A. Wisdome commandeth thee to discerne Offices due to nature, from duties consecrated to Piety and Vertue: and counselleth to give what are of nature, to thy Brother, what pertaines to Vertue, to thy Friend beautified with it. Thou must rather nourish and relieve thy poor Brother then thy Friend: for this Office is coupled with nature and blood, according to which thou art more obliged, and nearer to thy Brother then to thy Friend. On the contrary, thou must advance thy Friend to publique honours or Offices in Church or Common-wealth, rather then thy Brother: and by this means, thou shalt give to Piety what is proper unto it, to nature what belongs un∣to it. Q If I see many strangers to be in danger, and one good man that I know: whether shall I helpe many strangers, or that one I know? A. A good man is to be preferred before a man of no worth; but many strangers before one known person: for the more common good is the better. Q. What if liberty of chusing the chief good be granted to any man, should he chuse it for himself, or for his Countrey? A. For himself: because every man ought first and principally to love him∣self. The former Rule, that things more common are to be preferred, doth hold onely in those actions by which we perfect our selves, and are in the way to the chiefest good. A good man must be willing to lay down his life for the good of the Church or Common-wealth, not that he doth pre∣ferre the good of his Countrey before his own happinesse: but that this is the way, by which he may attain true blessednesse. Q. Let us now proceed to some other Rules of Wisdome. A. The fourth Rule is, That things of profit and pleasure, must give place to things that belong to Vertue and honesty. The light of nature teacheth, that in election things simply honest must never be set after Laws of profit, though the greatest and most common: Godlinesse is the great gaine; there∣fore all gaine must give place to godlinesse. The Heathen man saith,1 Tim. 6.6. Gaine gotten by losse or hazard of a mans good Name, is no gaine but losse:Prov. 22.1. which is much truer of gaine gotten with the breach or hazard of a good Conscience. But on the other side, when profit in a mans Purse would pro∣cure a breach in his Conscience, and the gaine of Gold prove the break-neck of his soul: such refusall of gaine, is the greatest gaine that can be. For saith an Ancient Father well, To let go, though never so great a matter, for the compassing of a greater, is no losing bargaine, but a gainefull nego∣tiation. Worldly men say, who will shew us any good? But Davids Prayer is,Psal. 4.6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Peradventure some small un∣seemlinesse
may be undergone to obtaine some great and common profit: but no dishonesty is to be committed in hope of gaine, for we must not do evill, that good may come thereof: neither doth it excuse, that they say it is done for a good end: for actions are not onely distinguished by their ends,Scalig. exercit. 307. 26. but by their efficient causes and formes. Q. Did not Lot well to offer his Daughters to the lusts of the Sodomites, to pre∣vent a greater mischief intended against his guests?Gen. 19. A. In so doing he sinned against his Daughters, whose chastity and credit he was bound to defend. It is the duty of a Father to defend the honesty of his Daughters, though with the danger of his life: much lesse not to yeeld and offer them to wicked men to be defiled. Again, he sinned against his own soule, in the offering his Daughters to be defiled, he con∣sented to their wickednesse, and made himself, if not the author, yet an accessary to their sinne. As for his respect unto the greatnesse and grievous∣nesse of the crime, it excuseth not: for the recompensing of one sinne with another, is not to be suffered; It was not lawfull for him, to yeeld his Daugh∣ters to the lewd lusts of the Sodomites, thereby to keepe them from a more grievous sinne: neither is it lawfull, that we in our selves should commit a lesse fault, to avoid the greater. Wherefore when the matter cometh to sinne, although it seeme to be but light, it is wholly to be forborne; And if any matter more hainous might seeme to ensue by the delay of sin, the care thereof must be committed to God: but under that pretence we must not commit any sinne. Whatsoever is sinne, the same must straight-way be rejected, let there afterwards follow what will; What sin almost might not be excused, if it were lawfull to redeeme a greater sin with a lesser? Rom. 9.3.Q. Did not Paul preferre the lesse sin before the greater, when he said; That he could wish to be accursed from Christ for his Brethren, rather then they should continue in that blindnesse and obstinacy wherein they were holden? A. The Apostle desired to redeeme the Jews with the perill of his own selfe:Martyr. comple. Epist. 1 p. 2. c. 3. sect 13. Ʋrsin. cat. p 3. q 49. olan. Synt. lib. 9 c. 29. Perk. treat. of cons. c. 2 not with sinne, but with his losse and hurt; namely, to be accursed from Christ: not that he meant to be an Apostate, or to forsake his be∣lief in Christ, but onely to be without the fruition of eternall and happy life. He doth not wish to be made the enemy of Christ, but not to enjoy the blessed Vision of Christ, that his Brethren might be saved. He doth not wish of an Elect to be made a Reprobate: but remaining a chosen Vessell to be deprived of the glory of the Elect, that the Israelites might be sa∣ved; if the will and counsell of God would suffer it, to which he wholly sub∣mitteth himself. Q. What is a fit Rule to be observed? A. When two Precepts of God seeme one to be repugnant to another, so as the one is a hinderance to the other, that they cannot both at one time be observed; yea rather, it is necessary that one of them for the time being be omitted; then that which shall be judged weightiest and greatest, must be retained. But yet in the meane time, that other, which is reckoned to be lesse and lighter,Eph. 4.11. is not violated; because in the same there is nothing done against the Law of God.1 Tim. 3 6. There is a Law, that the Church must not be deprived of Ministers, so as it should be destitute of them, and Paul hath another Law, that a Minister must not be a Novice, or man newly entered into Religion: the Church of Millan was much troubled, because it could not finde a meet Bishop, that as well was free from the heresie of Arius, as also that had great authority and learning given him of God: onely there was Am∣brose; but yet a Novice, and newly come to the faith. Here are two Laws met, in shew contrary one to another: but it was meet for the lesser Law to give place to the greater: for Christ so taught, when by the sen∣tence
of the Prophet he saith; I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. How∣beit he meaneth not, that he will not have sacrifice:Ma. 9 13. Hose. 6.6 Mat. 12.7. but that if two Com∣mandements meet together, whereof the one belongeth unto mercy, and the other unto sacrifice: he testifieth that he had rather have mercy, then sacrifice. In this Rule sundry Particulars come to be noted. First, the circumstantiall and ceremoniall duties of the first Table, must give place to the necessary and morall duties of the second Table. Thus the strict rest of the Sabboth, may be broken without sinne,Joh. 5.7, 8, 9. Mat. 12.10, 11, 12. Luc. 13, 14, 1. & 14.5. Mat. 12.5. when the performance of any work of instant necessity or mercy doth require our labour. Secondly, the circumstances of the first Ta∣ble, must give place to necessary ceremoniall duties. The Priests in the Temple prophane the Sabboth (not simply and properly, but in the opinion of the adversaries doing that which had not been lawfull, if the worship of God did not excuse) and are blamlesse. Thirdly, the substantials of the second Table of greater reason, do over-rule the substantials of the second Table of lesser rea∣son. Thus Moses permitted the Jews to put away their Wives for every cause,Mat. 19.3. Deut. 24.1. (as namely, for some filthinesse espied in them) to prevent many grievous incon∣veniencies in the whole policy of the Jews, arising from the obstinacy and cruel∣ty of that obdurate people. But though the civill Magistrate may tolerate some evils in the Common-wealth to prevent the utter ruine and desolation of it; yet we must not think it lawfull to redeeme a greater sinne with a lesser: wilfully to cast away the good creatures of God, which may serve for the use of man,Job. 6.12, 13. Mat. 15.26. is evill and unlawfull: but in a case of necessity to preserve life and prevent vio∣lence, Paul and the rest of his company which were in the Ship with him,Act. 27.19, 28. did law∣fully cast out their Provision into the Sea. Fourthly, the more substantiall and necessary duties of the first Table do over-rule the lesse necessary of the same. In the time of Hezekias, the Priests admitted the people to the Passover,2 Chro. 30.19. who had not prepared themselves according to the preparation of the Sanctuary. The sixth Rule, In a time not free, when we are pressed with some more grievous evill, we may preferre inferiour Laws to the superiour: where regard is not had of the excellency of the Law, but of our need. But things superiour are not pro∣miscously to be set after things inferiour in the case of necessity: But this electi∣on hath place in the collation of good things especially profitable, in the com∣parison of things comely, with profitable; and in propositions lesse necessary, whose opposites do not bring in the destruction of nature, but some unseemliness, and that such as doth admit excuse in regard of circumstances. In the time of famine the Servants of God have been compelled to leave the places of their habitation, where God hath been worshipped, and to sojourne in strange Coun∣tries, where the Name of God hath not been known. The seventh Rule, We must do the most necessary works of our callings that belong unto us, though we leave other for the time undone. When Peter was inquisitive,Joh. 21.21. what John should do; Christ gives him this answer, What is that to thee, follow thou me? In which words he teacheth, that not onely Peter, but also every man must at∣tend upon the necessary and proper works of his own Vocation, and not deale with things whereunto he is not called. The eighth Rule, Of evils of punishment, as troubles, losses, and such like, the lesser is to be chosen. As the Merchant in danger upon the Sea, may cast away his Wares to save his life: The Traveller may deliver his Purse unto Thieves, to prevent further mischief. When the Prophet propounded three Plagues to David, of which he was to choose one,2 Sam. 24.12, 13. he chose to fall into the hands of God. The reason is, because in things of this nature, the lesser evill hath a respect of good. The ninth Rule, When choice of evils or punishments is offered to one that is innocent, or questioned for the profession of true Religion, he is to choose neither, but to expect and patiently endure whatsoever his enemies shall decree. For by choice of punishment he consenteth to his own unjust vexation, and is accessary to his own persecution:
Also by the free election of evill, he brings himself into suspicion of sinne or blame, and exposeth his credit and reputation of the calumnies of his adversaries, who will be ready to object, that he would never freely have chosen punish∣ment, if he had not been guilty of some fault. An example of such spirituall wisdome we have in the French History in Prince Conde. When Charles the ninth King of France, in the year 1572. sent for Prince Conde, and propound∣ed three Conditions to him, of which he choose one: the Masse, death, or perpetuall imprisonment. Conde answered, that by the grace of God, he would neither choose the first, and the other two he left to the pleasure of the King, being assuered that God would governe the whole matter by his pro∣vidence. The tenth Rule, When Tyrants and Persecutours of the Church, give space to deliberate, whether thou wilt obey their idolatrous decrees, or be cast into prison, deprived of thy goods, thrust into banishment, or miserably massacred, thou must not deliberate, nor accept of the space offered to delibe∣rate: but simple Idolatry, and obedience to that wicked decree, is to be re∣fused.Dan. 3.16, 17. When the three Companions of Daniel were questioned for their refu∣sing to worship the Image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up, they crave not respite to consider of the matter;Martyr. com. p. 2. c 4. sect. 22. Calvin. opusc. Epist. 1. but returne this resolute answer, Be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not bow down. Cyprian (as Augustine report∣eth) when he was led to execution, the President being desirous that he might escape, said unto him; Now I give thee space to deliberate, to choose which thou wilt, whether thou wilt be thus miserably executed, or obey, and so be dismissed. The man of God answered: In a thing so holy, deliberation hath no place. For such deliberation is a degree of yeelding, and doth much harden the enemies of the truth in their ungodly courses.Non carnis sed Spiritus hac est prudentia, si∣quam veritatis diminutionem foras saluti ad∣versantem, vbi non potest corri∣gi sine perturbae∣tione Ecclesiae. Jun in Gen. Polan. Syntag. Tom. 2. lib. 8. c. 8. Psal. 116.10. Jer. 20.9. 1 Reg. 18 21. Apoc. 21.8. 1 Cor. 12.7. Jer. 1.17. Mat. 28.29. Act. 20.28. Num. 32.6, 7. Jud. 5.23. 2 Sam. 11.11. 2 Tim. 4.16. Eph. 4 14. 2 Cor. 2.11. Act. 17.16.  Cor. 16.9. Tit. 1.10, 11. Isa. 59 4. Jer. 9.3. Isa. 63.5. Ex. 10.26. Dan. 6.11. And not onely so, but it argues that the minds of men are not fixed upon the truth, nor affected towards the glory of God, as is meet. What? that they which are over carefull, least their life, goods, dignities should perish (which is the ground of that deli∣beration) do easily defile themselves with impure superstitions. The eleventh Rule, Christian wisdome will not permit men to promise silence in any necessary point of Gods truth, which they are called to testifie and make known, that they might procure their own liberty, and free themselves from vexation: for such promise of silence is a kinde of halting, doth argue timorousnesse, and hinders the edification of others. The Ministers of the Gospel must faithfully publish the whole truth of God, and keep nothing back from the people, which they have received of God, but that they do not, who promise silence in any necessary truth, to purchase peace. Moreover, this keeping silence doth hearten the adversaries in their courses, and tends greatly to the prejudice of the truth, which by this meanes is suppressed by little and little; What is this? but to for∣sake their Brethren in the time of danger and difficulty, in a sort to deny the truth, set open a gappe for superstition to enter, give opportunity and advan∣tage to the adversary, and cast an imputation upon them that are most forward, as if they were humorous, indiscreet, furious. When God calleth men forth to beare witnesse of the truth, what is it but a kinde of starting back, to binde our selves by promise not to publish that part of Gods will, which is now op∣posed and called into question? Then especially are we to abide in our Station, and to quit our selves like men, when the truth is opposed by many adversaries. Moses being sent to deliver Israel out of Aegypt, would not leave one hoofe behinde him. Daniel would not forbare to pray thrice a day, nor to set open his window, and look towards Jerusalem, that he might redeeme longer time, wherein he might profit the Church. Wisdome will neither run hastily, nor deale unfaithfully. The twelfth Rule is; In a case of necessity imposed by God himself, it is lawfull to transgresse a circumstantiall or ceremoniall precept, for the performance of a morall duty: for then according to the minde and will
of the Law-giver, the lesser Commandement must give place to the greater, and in that case no precept is broken. But if men upon their own will and pleasure shall impose Ordinances upon the Church, contrary to the Rules of Scripture, it is not lawfull to break the lesser Commandement of the Law, that we might obtaine liberty to do the more excellent.When the br ach of a ce∣remony, carri∣eth with it the trangression of some moall duty: in that case a man ought rather to die, ten to be forced to that transgression, where there is no necessity. So for a Chri∣stian, to eare things sacrifi∣sed to Idols for his ncessity, when it may be done without offence, is law∣full: but to eare it in ap∣probation of an Idoll, being thereunto compelled by the enemy, were a deniall of his Profes∣sion. Willet in 1 Sam. 21.7. q 4. Mat. 12.4. 2 Mac. 7.1. A lesser duty in quality or kind, (if comparison be made) may be more strait and greater in knot and band. Divine necessi∣ty, by Gods Ordinance, al∣tereth the na∣ture of the fact, not humane by mans infor∣cing authority. Tayl of circ. walk. c. 21. Bellar. de matr. l. 1. c. 27. Deut. 23.24, 25. For the Lord hath not dispenced with his Law, in any such consideration. Mans pleasure in commanding this or that under a great penalty, makes not the precept of God forbidding it, of none effect, as instant danger or necessity doth the Law, touching the circumstantiall rest of the Sabboth in that particular case. Had Daniel forborne the ceremony of kneeling at prayer, and looking towards Jerusalem out of any naturall ne∣cessity, or by reason of any infirmity, which might have been prejudiciall to his life thereby, it had been none offence: but when he is forbidden to pray up∣on paine of death, he will not obey. It is lawfull to fight against our enemies, in defence of life and Countrey, upon the Sabboth day, if we be assaulted: but a Minister of the Gospel might not go to the Fencing-School an houre or two upon the Lords day, being thereunto commanded, that he might procure liberty afterwards to preach the Gospel. In extremity it was lawfull for Da∣vid to eate the Shew-bread, when he was an hungred: but the Jewes, when there was no such necessity, did choose rather to die, then to eate Swines flesh. And thus when a man is called forth to beare witnesse to this or that point of Gods truth, it is not lawfull for him, either by silence or denial of it, to pro∣cure liberty to teach matters of greater importance in themselves. When God thrusteth us upon greater duties, the relinquishing of obedience to a lesser du∣ty leaveth to be a sin: because the Law-giver in that case hath released us from the inferiour Law. But when God calleth to the practice of inferiour duties, then to slip aside under pretence of doing greater and better service in the weightiest matters, what is it but to do evill that good may come thereof? Ne∣cessity (we say) hath no Law, but is to be understood in mans Laws, when some suddain case falleth out, so as the inferiour cannot have recourse to the Law-maker, that then he may interpret the Law himself, and break the letter of it, to follow the reason and intent of it: as in case of the murther of a Thief. But in the Law of God, one onely case doth dispence with it, and that is, when ne∣cessity from God so altereth a fact, as it taketh away from it all reason of sinning. As for example; It is not lawfull to marry ones sister, but in the beginning of the World extreme necessity altered this fact, and gave dispensation. So it is not lawfull to take away that which is anothers: but (as some Divines think) ex∣treme necessity makes it lawfull: because it is not anothers any longer, seeing the Law of nature it self maketh some things common in such extreme necessi∣ty. On the Sabboth we must hold our selves strictly to Gods worship: but if an house be on fire, we may leave it without sin. But that the pleasure of the Church, should so alter the nature of the fact, as to make that lawfull which is contrary to the Law of God, is a Paradox in Divinity. Say the Ministers of the Gospel should be enjoyned to weare Womens Apparell, under the pe∣nalty of deprivation; might they redeeme their liberty by such conformity? If not; then the meer pleasure of men, cannot make that lawfull, which in some extreme necessity is not to be condemned. And yet, if men were disposed to plead for that practice, they might say; When two works or duties command∣ed of God, do meet in one practice, so as we cannot do them both, but one of them must of necessity be done, the other of necessity must be left undone, in this case the work or duty of greater reason, must be performed, and that of lesser reason must be neglected and omitted, and it is a sin to neglect the greater to performe the lesser. But to preach the Gospel is a work of greater reason, then to suffer deprivation for refusing to weare Womens Apparell. Therefore it is necessary the Ministers of the Gospel should yeeld to weare Womens Ap∣parell
in the case of deprivation. If the conclusion be absurd, one of the Pre∣mises must needs be false at least,Datur quidem venia necessitati, sed necessitati, quae instituto efficientis re∣pugnat, & vo¦luntati. Down. in Ram. Log. lib. 1. cap. 50. or the whole frame inconsequent: for of a truth nothing but truth doth follow. In spirituall things to preach the word is so necessary, as Paul cries woe upon himself if he does not, because the Flock of God depends upon him: But if I may not preach, unlesse I wound my con∣sicence, by compounding with Hereticks, and blending truth with error, I must never preach, but leave the care of the Church to God, who without my lie, will provide for the good of it. Thus Elijah fled and left his Mini∣stry, because he could not exercise it, unlesse he would have received Baals ce∣remonies, and flattered with the Baalites: and if he had not thus forsaken his place, he had forsaken the Church. Great Athanasius choosed rather to leave his Church, then to yeeld any thing to the Arians. St Paul knew, that after he went from Ephesus, grievous Wolves would come in not sparing the Flock: and yet because he could not stay to preach, unlesse he would have restored some Pharisaicall Observations; and unlesse for peace sake he would have yeelded to the rites and Image of Diana, he left the place: because he must not do the great∣est good by any evill meanes. Act. 20.29.Q. The Apostles, and Elders, and whole Church at Jerusalem concluded and determined, that the Gentiles should abstaine from things strangled, and from blood, and that by the inspiration of the Holy Hhost. A. 1. The ground of this Decree, was the direction of the Holy Ghost: but out of the Text it cannot be gathered, that it was concluded by the infallible guidance and immediate inspiration of the Spirit. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us,Act. 15.28. Act. 15.21, 22, 23. Rain. cens. Apoc. Tom. 1. Prelect. 1. Whitak. de Conc. q. 3. c. 3. & q. 6. c. 2. p. 220. Lubbert. de conc. lib. 2. c. 2. Field of the Chl 5. c. 51. Cartw. in Rhem. an. on Act. 15.21 22. Whitak. cont. stap. de auth. sac. sc. lib. 1. cap. 3. Gal. 3.6. say the Apostles: To whom? To us Apostles, Elders and Bre∣thren, even the whole Church at Jerusalem. What? were all these immediatly inspired? It would be hard to bring a brobable Argument of that assertion. I make no doubt, but the Apostles were certainly assured what to resolve in the matter proposed, being specially assisted by the Spirit of Truth: but out of the History it cannot be collected, that they did waite for a new immediate Revela∣tion, and relied not on the knowledge they had of the Scriptures and truth of God. The Holy Ghost speakes in the Scripture, as well as by immediate insp∣ration: Whatsoever is soundly, truly, directly gathered thence, and contained therein, that is of God, no lesse then that which is, from him by immediate Re∣velation. Therefore the Apostles in saying, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, do declare that they subscribed to the Holy Ghost speaking in the Scrip∣tures, and approved what there he taught: but intend not to intimate an extra∣ordinary inspiration to make that Decree. For as the Scriptures are said to foresee in respect of the Author of them, so it may be said in respect of the Scriptures, that it pleaseth the Holy Ghost. And it is apparent by the Councel, that those Decrees pleased them, because they concluded them out of the Scrip∣tures. And this is evidently set down by the Greek Scholiast, which saith, that therefore the Holy Ghost is there set down: For that Christ had not taught this, but the Councell uttered them,Oecum. in hunc loc. grounded of the Law. 2. The things imposed were necessary before they were injoyned, not necessary because injoyned. Necessary, not simply in themselves, but by accident in respect of that time for the preventing of offence, the weaknesse of the Jews, and collation of the Gentiles with them, was the reason why the Apostles commanded abstinence from blood,Lyra in Act. 15 and strangled, among the Gentiles: and that reason ceasing, the the Observation it self ceased. For the authority of Moses, and the common and Ancient Custome long in use, abstinence from these things ought not rashly, could not suddainly be laid aside without scandall: And for that cause, the A∣postles tendering the weaknesse of the Jewes, commanded the Gentiles to ab∣staine from these things, respecting the offence, not the things themselves. It was indeed imposed without expresse limitation of time, but not without re∣spect
to scandall; which was the maine cause of that constitution. The Apostle Paul who was present at this Assembly did well know the sence of the Law,Harm. confes. August. confes. sect de Eccl. Potest. p. 64. Whitak. cont. durae. lib. 8. sect. 103. p. 780. 1 Cor. 8.8, 9, 13. & 10.25.26, 27, 28. Rom. 14.3, 6, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17. Col 2.16. 1 Tim. 4 3.4. Tho. Aquin. in 1. 2. q. 103. art. 4. ad Arg. 3 Deut. 14.21. and minde of the Councell, doth so explaine it, that he teacheth it is not unlaw∣full to eate of any meate that is sold in the Shambles, unlesse it be in case of of∣fence: yea, that every creature of God is good, and ought not to be refused, if it be sanctified with the word and Prayer. And the very scope and drift of the Apostles in that Decree was, to deliver the Gentiles from the yoake of the ceremoniall Law: therefore they command not abstinence from things strangled, and blood, as from things uncleane (that had been contrary to their intent and purpose to establish the ceremonials) but for the peace and quietnesse of the Church, that the conscience of the weake Jews might not be offended. In time of the Law, when the use of these things was prohibited to the Jews, it was lawfull for the Gentiles to eate thereof: much more in time of liberty they were not forbidden, as things in themselves, or by institution simply unlawfull. The giving of offence, not the eating of blood, or strangled, further then it was offensive, is that which is forbidden; the one as the end, the other as the means during the time it did continue to be scandalous. And when the offensive eat∣ing onely, and not the simple use of blood and strangled is prohibited, of what necessity could it be to adde any limitation of time to that constitution. Nei∣ther can any object, that it is urged as perpetuall, upon an ordinary and stand∣ing reason of necessity, and fitnesse: for abstinence from these things is not ur∣ged at all as fit or necessary in it self, but with consideration of those times and occasions. So that the Gentiles might lawfully without breach of Law or scruple of conscience, eate of either, in so doing, they did not scandalize. But it is observed, that Christians abstained from blood and strangled, till the time of Tertullian, Origen, Cyrill, Eusebius, Councell of Ganga, yea of Augustine, foure hundred years after Christ. I confesse, abstinence from these things was still in use, when the weaknesse of the Jews was past: but for another end (as our Writers have observed) drawn proportionally out of the Apostles first De∣cree; viz.F. Jun. cont. 3. lib. 4. cap. 16. not. 32. 35, 36, 37. F. Jun. ibid. to teach how much Christians abhorred and had in detestation the bloody sacrifices and ceremonies of the Gentiles. And this seemes to be con∣firmed by the words of Tertullian and Cyrill. But if the faithfull of those times, did ignorantly mistake that Apostolicall Decree, taking that to be sim∣ply for it self, perpetually condemned, which was forbidden onely in respect and for a time they dealt superstitiously, contrary to the minde of the Apostles, and are not to be excused therein. In one place Augustine is of opinion,Arg. Ep. 154. ad ublic. that a man ready to famish should not eate of meate sacrificed to Idols to save his life, though he might do it without offence; wherein without question he is too severe, not well weighing what he said. But else-where farre more truly he teacheth,Aug. confes. lib. 10. cap. 31. & cont. Fauman. lib. 32. cap. 14. that that Law was abrogated, and not observed of many; that Christians were ac∣customed to eate blood, and that prohibition was onely that the Jews and Gen∣tiles might be reconciled, and knit together in the corner Stone, Christ Jesus. Again, the Apostles in that constitution, enjoyne onely the forbearance of some act indifferent: they prescribe not the use and practise of any Jewish ceremony. Now it is one thing for a Minister of the Gospel, to abstaine from flesh upon a Friday, or in Lent, in the presence of a popish or superstitious person, whom he is loath to offend, and of whom he conceives hope, that by condescending to him in this or the like, he may be wonne to the Gospel: another for him to con∣forme to their use of Oyle, Creame, Salt, Spittle, and the like in Baptisme.1 Cor. 10.23, 24. Rom. 14.21. Rom. 3.3. T. Aquin. . 2. 43. art. 7. resp. ad. 5. Acts of Christian liberty must be practised or forborne, according to the Rules of charity, which bind us to respect the edification of our Brethren: but things forbidden must not be yeelded unto upon any such pretence: No sinne is eli∣gible. The Apostles who forbad the Gentiles to offend the weake Jews, by their eating of blood, will not have them burdened with circumsion, and other
rites of that nature,Act 21 25. which were necessarily to cease at the coming of Christ. Moreover, the Gentiles before were accustomed to abstaine from blood, and strangled, especially they which had been subdued of the Jews, were bordering round about them, or did sojourne amongst them as strangers. It was an opi∣nion constantly received amongst the Jews, that God did deliver to the Sonnes of Noah seven Precepts:Hooker Eccl. pol. lib. 4. sect. 11. Ainsw. in Gen. 9.4 Namely, first to live in some forme of regiment under pub∣lique Laws: Secondly, to serve and call upon the Lord: Thirdly, to shun Ido∣latry: Fourthly, not to suffer effusion of blood: Fiftly, to abhorre all unclean knowledge of the flesh: Sixthly, to commit no rapine: Seventhly, not to eate of any living creature, whereof the blood was not first let out. And the Hea∣thens that would yeeld to the obedience of these seven Commandements,Ainsw. in Exod. 12.45. though they received not Circumcision, nor observed the other Ordinances given after∣wards to Israel: they were suffered to dwell as strangers amongst the Israelites, and to sojourne in their Land: but whosoever transgressed any of these Pre∣cepts wilfully, the Jews held he was to be killed with the Sword. So that it was easie and not burdensome for the Gentiles to observe these things in common with the Jews: and to the Jews it might seeme hard, that the Christian Gentiles should be incorporated into the same Common-wealth and be exempted not only from the Law of Moses, but even from those things positive, which were ob∣served before Moses. In a word, abstinence from these things was necessary for the time, and for the fitnesse commanded: the imposition of it was warranted by Scripture, commanded onely in case of offence: and when the season of that Law ceased, the observation it self fell to the ground. It will be said, The Law requiring abstinence from blood, and strangled, was abolished by the coming of Christ:Calvin opusc. Epist. 1. p. 554. in which respect it was in nature no lesse evill, though it might be lesse inconvenient then the ceremonies of practice. The speciall Law forbidding to eate blood, or strangled, was abolished by the death of Christ, so that it was now lawfull, which was before unlawfull: but the act of abstinence was and is in it selfe indifferent, and we may eate or abstaine as we please, so it be without su∣perstition or offence. And how abstinence from blood, and strangled, should in nature be no lesse evill then circumcision, purification, or other legall ceremonies of that sort, I am yet to learne: seeing in that which was necessarily to cease at the coming of Christ, the Gentiles were not made conformable to the Jews: yea, the Apostle Paul taught the Gentiles, not onely that they were not bound to keep the Laws of Moses, but that Observation of those Laws, which were ne∣cessarily to be abrogated, was in them altogether unlawfull. Act. 16.3. Act. 18.18. & 21.23, 24.26. Act. 13.14, 42. & 18.4. & 17.2.Q. The Apostles observed the Jewish ceremonies, and advised one another so to do. Paul circumcised Timothy; shaved his head, purified himself, made a Vow, contributed; offered sacrifice for his purification, observed the Jewish Sabboth: and to some of these things he was advised by James, and the Elders of Jeru∣salem. A. What the Apostles did, they did voluntarily: because they judged it most expedient so to do; no necessity of command, but expediency of fact at that time and place inducing them thereunto. If the Argument that some Divines would draw from this their practice, be of any force, we may conclude, That a Minister of the Gospel, living amongst popish and superstitious people, who do hold and esteeme the observation of most or all popish rites, customes and ceremonies, to be essentiall parts of Gods worship, and necessary to salvation: he, to please the people, and to winne the more liberty to preach the Gospel is bound to conforme unto them all, yea, though their use be not enjoyned, but prohibited by Law. For the Apostles had in the Councel defined, that the Gentiles should not be burdened with Jewish observances, but onely abstaine from blood, and strangled; neverthelesse, Paul after this circumcised Timothy, purified him∣self, and not because he was thereunto compelled by the Law of any superiour,
or stood in danger of deprivation in case he did refuse; but that he might not of∣fend the weak Believers, that he might winne the unbelievers to the Gospel. Now draw this into forme of reasoning, and it runneth thus: The practice of the Apostles in submitting to Jewish ceremonies, is a patterne and samplar for us, what we may and must do in receiving or refusing significant, scandalous, inconvenient ceremonies devised by men, imposed by authority, abused to super∣stition or idolatry. For in what cases they admitted of Jewish ceremonies, in the same or like, it is lawfull, yea necessary for us to receive and tolerate by pra∣ctice, ceremonies of like nature devised by men. But the Apostles, when they were conversant amongst the Jews, did submit to the use of Jewish ceremonies inconvenient, urged by contentious Brethren, with an opinion of holinesse, ne∣cessity, and worship, perniciously abused for confirmation of most false, hereti∣call and impious Doctrines, for use and continuance, the occasions of many pernicious effects to them that abused them: and this they did twenty years after they had preached the Doctrine of Liberty, not by compulsion of Law, but voluntarily to please the people, and winne liberty to the Gospel. Therefore the Ministers of the Gospel should voluntarily and of their own accord, yeeld to the practice of any or the mos part of popish or Jewish ceremonies, if they be urged by superstitious and contentious Brethren as essentiall parts of worship, necessary to salvation, though the use and continuance of them be the occasions of many pernicious effects to them that abuse them; and that a long time after they have preached the Doctrine of salvation, and laboured to informe them in the truth of God.Martyr comp. p. 2. From this example of the Apostles going up to the Temple at the time of Prayer, and their conformity to other legall rites, some would gather, that it is lawfull for Christians to present themselves bodily at the Masse, so in heart they detest the abomination there committed. A collection much like the former, in respect of the truth of the matter concluded, and the manner of arguing: and what sheweth the weaknesse of the one, turneth the edge of the other. Wherefore we are to know,Calvin Epist. 265. Zanch. de red. cap. 17. de vitijs ext. cult. Thes. 11. Resp. 5. Object. Con∣rad. Schlus. Tom. 13. Mar∣tin. comple. in legem Disp. 28. de leg. cerem. abrogat. Id. de seder. sacr. tre. 2. c. 2. q. 9. &c. 3. q. 5. &c. 4. q. 30 31. Martyr comp. p. 2. c. 2. sect. 31. Deut. 6. sal. 137.4. that the ceremonies of the Law command∣ed by God, were necessary till Christ, and being abrogated by his death, they ceased not to be of use amongst the Jews, till the destruction of Jerusalem. For God would not have his Temple stand without some ceremonies: which as long as it stood was an holy Mansion of heavenly Doctrine, and a place where he might lawfully be worshipped. The Apostles did not so teach the abrogation, no not of those things which were necessarily to cease, but that even the Jews being Christians, might for a time continue in them. It pleased God to deliver the Law of ceremonies unto the Jews, to confirme it by visible Signes and Won∣ders, to appoint a Place, even a Tabernacle, where they should meet to practice that ceremoniall worship, and to tie the exercise of it to that place onely. The same God appointing a second Place to be built by Solomon, did fill it with his Glory, and gave commandement to all the Tribes to resort thither, to performe the eter∣nall service of the Law, and within the Gates of Jerusalem to eate the Passover: And when the City and Temple was destroyed, the exercise of the legal wor∣ship of sacrifices, was suspended and stayed till their returne out of Babylon. Then God purposing to re-establish his Ordinances, stirred up the Spirit of the Persian Kings, to further the building of the Temple, incited the people to that work by Haggie and Zachary, and after the finishing of it, promised his presence therein, renewed again his Covenant with them, and bound them to worship him with legal service in that place. Now as God did thus visibly and apparantly (dealing with the Jews as Children) confirme the Law of the carnall Commandement: so it was expedient (considering his wonted manner of dispensation with the Jewish people) that by some visible signes he should manifest unto them the utter abolition of the Law and rites thereof: which was not done so fully whiles the Temple stood. For the standing of the Tem∣ple
did imply a continuance of the Leviticall Rites, for the exercise whereof the Temple was dedicated and set apart. The Prophet Daniel did fore-tell when the sacrifices and ceremonious worship was utterly to be abolished, in these words: And he shall confirme the Covenant with many,Dan. 9.27. for one weak: and in the middest of the weak, he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspred∣ing of abhominations, he shall make it dessolate, even untill the consummation, and that determined shall be powred upon the dessolate:Fran. & Jun. an. in Dan. 9.27 Jun. in Dan. 9. olan. ibid. Alsted. prt. Theolog lib. 2. cap. 115. Fol. 429. Maldonat in Mat. 24 5. which according to the interpre∣tation of the Learned, must be referred to the time of the destruction of Jeru∣salem. The Disciples of Christ hearing him speak of the destruction of the holy City, when one stone should not be left upon a stone; they asked him when those things should be, and what signe there should be of his coming, and of the end of the World; joyning these three together, The desolation of the Tem∣ple, the coming of Christ, and the end of the World, as it were all pertaining to one time: and therefore for that which is demanded in Matthew touching the signe of his coming, and the end of the World; In Marke and Luke this onely is asked,Mat. 24.3, 4. What signe should be of the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem: Upon which occasion our Saviour doth discourse unto them of the desolation of the Temple by Vespasian and Titus, alluding to the very place of Daniel before cited, in which the finall ceasing of the Sacrifices with the Temple, is plainly fore-prophesied. Till that time then, the outward and civill Government of the Jews Common-wealth with their Ceremoniall service and Law-worship,Mat. 24. When ye see the abhomina∣tion of de∣solation, stand in the holy place. Martyr. com. lib. 2. cap. 15. sect. 24. still remained in the holy City and Temple of God, and that by speciall dispensa∣tion. When the Temple was made equall to the ground, the ceremonies were honourably buried under the ruines of it, and afterwards they ceased to be in∣different: but till that time their use was not wholly determined, as that which was presently to be abandoned, and no longer to be continued amongst Believers. Christ Jesus by his death did fulfill the bloody and foreshewing Tipes of his death, and so the substance coming in place, the shadow vanished of its own accord: neverthelesse, seeing the Jews had solemnly received the ceremoniall Law from God, it had by many evident and visible signes and tokens been confirmed to be divine and from above, it was necessary, they should as plainly and plentifully be assured from Heaven, that now according to the good pleasure of God, it was to cease. For none but God himself can dispense with his Law: Authority in∣feriour cannot set us free, when superiour power hath laid his bond upon us. The Jews knew for certaine, that they had been obliged in conscience to the ob∣servation of the Law of Rites and Ceremonies; and in all quity the Doctrine of Liberty and Freedom, must fully and manifestly be published and made known unto them, before they could be urged to relinquish and forego the use of it, which after so solemne manner was pressed upon them. Yea, so graciously was the Lord pleased to deale with them, that till the efficacy of Christs death was plentifully manifested, and the abrogation of those ceremonies by visible signes and tokens undoubtedly ratified, he dispensed with the weak believing Jews in those observations. The legal Figures were given to the Jews till Christ should shine in their hearts, which was done by little and little: and the infirmity of the believing Jews was excusable, till they were plentifully enlightned with the beames of truth, and infallibly certained of the ceasing of those Ordinances, to which for a long season they had been obliged and acustomed. But the mat∣ter it self speakes, That Christ for a long time was unknown to many of them; other were so illustrated with his beames, that they wanted much of full shining brightnesse: the most were ignorant of their freedome and deliverance from the bondage and burden of the Leviticall Law. Peter himself, who had familiari∣ty, conversed with our Saviour more or lesse, from whose mouth he daily heard most heavenly directions, and saw the Wonders that he did; who by many signes and tokens had been infallibly confirmed of the assurance of Christs resur∣rection,
and with the rest of the Apostles was furnished with the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, to preach the Gospel of the Kingdome to all Nations: he, two years or thereabouts after the ascension of our Saviour, was so ignorant of this truth (as were other of the Apostles also) that he needed information therein by Vision from Heaven Can any man imagine, that the through infor∣mation of the Jews in this point, is a work of small time and labour? Full in∣struction and a good space of time was needfull to acquaint them with, and to root them in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty: And this time granted, was from the death of Christ, till the destruction of Jerusalem. Our blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, the wisdome of the Father, speaking of the time of sacking and eversion of Jerusalem, did expresly command his Hearers and Disciples the Jews to pray,Mat. 24.20. That their flight might not be upon the Sabboth day; to wit, that day which the Jews observed for their Sabboth: which admonition is proof more then probable, that the observation of Jewish Ceremonies, was tolerated amongst the Jews till the overthrow of the Temple, and that by speciall dispensation from God. For if the observation of the day had been utterly abrogated, as a thing unlaw∣full to be kept, he would never have charged them to pray against that time of flight, as a thing unfit and burdensome. To this may be added, that in Jerusa∣lem the first Christian Bishop not circumcised was Marke,Euseb l. 4. c. 5. 6. Nic. l. 3. c. 25. Sulp. Seu. p. 146. in edit plant. Osiand. Epit. Hist. Eccl. cont. 2. c. 4. and he not Bishop till the daies of Adrian the Emperour, after the overthrow of Jerusalem; there having been fifteene Bishops before him which were all of the circumcision. What lets now to conclude (according to the constant judgment of Divines) that the Ceremonies of the Law were de jure abrogated by the death of Christ, but de facto their use ceased not altogether, till the utter eversion of the City and Temple, and that by the wise permission of God, who was pleased, so long to beare with the weaknesse of his people. Nay,Aug. Epist. 19. ad Hieron. Calvin Epist. 265. Willet cont. 6 q. 3. prop. 1. Jun. Thes. the. de leg. 23. sect. 11. Hooker. Eccl. Pol. lib. 4. Act. 15.1. it doth not appeare in Scrip∣ture or other waies, that the Apostles did teach the Jews necessarily to lay aside the observation of the carnall commandements, till the day of their buriall came, when the Lord should from Heaven declare, that they were no longer pleasing unto him: For when certain of the sect of the Pharisees who did believe, went forth: and coming to Antioch, taught, that it was necessary for the Gentiles to be circumcised, and to keep the Law of Moses: Paul and Barnabas disputed against them, and continued still teaching the Gentiles, not onely that they were not bound to observe the Laws of Moses, but that the observation of those Laws and Ordinances which were necessarily to be abrogated, was in them al∣together unlawfull. This they preached concerning the Gentiles onely, not touch∣ing the Jews: and therefore Paul coming to Jerusalem,Act. 21.22, 23, 24. when he plainly understood from James, how his Doctrine was misreported, as though he had taught all the Jews which were amongst the Gentiles to forsake Moses, he was contented by his actions to make it apparent, that those flying reports were untrue,Calvin. opusc. confut. Hol. p. 659. and that he himself being a Jew kept the Law, and walked orderly, even as they did. But as for the Gentiles, they altogether disallowed in all them all conformity with the Jews, in those things which were of necessity to have an end by the coming of Christ. And therefore when Peter withdrew himselfe from the Gentiles at Antioch, and conformed to the Jews, Paul withstood him to his face: and when other false Brethren would have compelled Titus to be circumcised,Gal. 2.2, 3, 4. he withstood them bold∣ly, and gave no place unto them, no not for an houre, neither fearing their offence, nor dreading their malice, nor shrinking for peace. Wherefore the erroneous conceit of the obstinate, misbelieving, ignorant or weak believing Jews, touching these Ceremonies, or the avoidance of persecution stirred by the malicious, were not the reasons that simply moved the Apostles to conforme un∣to them: But they perfectly understood it to be the good pleasure of God to beare with the Jews frailty for a time, and knowing it to be their duty in such and such cases, to please them, and not to trouble the Church; they with all
readinesse and not upon constraint submitted themselves, when those circumstan∣ces did occurre. Q. Is it not lawfull for a wise man to use simulation or dissimulation in some matters? Prov. 29.11.A. It is lawfull for a prudent man to conceale some part of the truth, and utter another, and so to dissemble some things, if it be done without injury or fraud of piety, truth and charity, of justice and our Vocation. The Angels that appeared to Lot in the likenesse of men,Gen. 19.2. did at first refuse the courtesie that he proffered, and made answer, they would lodge in the streets. Joseph car∣ried himselfe strangly towards his Brethren,Gen. 42.7. and spake roughly unto them, that he might search out the truth and accomplishment of his Dreames, understand the mindes of his Brethren, and know the whole manner of his Fathers Fami∣ly.1 Sam. 16.2. Samuel going to Bethlehem to anoint David, doth by the commandement of God conceale some part of the truth, the chiefe end of his coming. So the Prophet Jeremy being asked by the Princes,Jer. 38.27. what communication he had with the King, onely he telleth them, that he had intreated him, that he might not returne to Jeonathans house to die there, but the rest of the conference he ut∣tered not. When the Kinsmen of our Saviour urged him ambitiously to go up to the Feast of Tabernacles,Joh. 7.6.8. he answereth them, My time is not yet, Go ye up to the Feast, I will not go up. This negation of Christ, which seemes to be sim∣ple, must be understood according to the opinion of his Kinsmen, that is, he would not go up to purchase humane glory to himself. But to prevent mista∣king, there are foure things in the act of semblance or dissimulation to be obser∣ved, the minde of him that dissembleth, the thing or subject wherein, the man∣ner, and the end: If all these be good and lawfull, the dissimulation it selfe can∣not be condemned;Vid. Jun. in Gen. 42. Pol. Tom. 2. l. 8. c. 8. if any one be evill, the dissimulation is evill. If it come from a distrustfull minde, doubting of Gods providence, it is sinne: not so, if in things lawfull it be used onely as a meanes, the heart still depending upon the Lord. In matters of Religion, in which the glory of God, and the salvation of our selves and our neighbours is handled, there is no place for dissimulation: But in civill, externall, and politick things it may be used, if the root, manner, and end of it be allowable;Luk. 24.28, 29. so our Saviour used a kinde of semblance, when to take triall of the Disciples humanity, he made shew, as though he would have gone further:Gal. 2.13. but Peter offended, was justly reproved of Paul, that in a religious matter dissembled, withdrawing himself from the Gentiles, with whom he had eaten before, for feare of them of the circumcision. In the manner of dissimulation heed must be taken, that nothing be done in fraud of the truth, and love in things of truth, nor of justice, and our Vocation in matters of right and wrong, whether the semblance be serious or in another kinde. Also respect must be had to the Persons, before whom and towards whom we make semblance: for it is one thing to make semblance or use dissimulation before the ignorant, another before men of knowledge; it is one thing towards the weake, another towards the strong; one thing towards friends, another to∣wards enemies; one with the simple, another with the obstinate. The end of lawfull dissimulation, is the edification of the Church in generall, or of the godly in particular, the finding out of the truth necessary to be known, the keep∣ing close of the truth unfit and unprofitable to be revealed, the preventing of danger,1 King. 3.25, 27. and such like. Thus the two Women contended before Solomon, touching the living Child, whose he should be: he used an holy dissimulation to finde out the truth. But if semblance tend to an evill end, it is evill: as for a man to make shew of Religion to aspire to honour, as Hypocrites do; or to speake faire to our neighbour,Gen. 4.8. when Warre is in the heart, as Cain did to Abel. Q. What then, may a Christian use no wisdome to save and deliver himself out
of the hands of persecutors, or to preserve his liberty in the Gospel? A. Our Saviour requireth prudence in his Disciples tempered with simplicity.Mat. 10.16. Behold I send you forth as Sheepe in the middest of Wolves: be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmelesse as Doves. This serpentine wisdome, stands in these things. First, that they be wary, attentive, provident and circumspect, not to thrusts themselves into needlesse danger, by laying themselves open to the malice of the adversary without cause,Ezra. 4.4. Mat. 10.7. or trusting false Brethren that cuninngly insinuate themselves. Beware of men. It is necessary in a sort, that we joyne our selves to some Church: but it is not necessary to salvation, either simply or in any sort, that a whole Church or any particular member of it, should at all times make open profession to the world, of that religion which they hold, and secretly practice: for this were to cast themselves wilfully into the mouths of the blood∣thirsty and ravenous Persecutours. It is too true, that an over great-zeale of martyrdome carried some men, now and then, further then they should have gone to the endangering and losing of their lives. But it is as true, that our Saviour, his Apostles, and the Churches, from time to time,Joh. 4.1, 2, 3. & 8.59. & 9.3. Act. 8.1. & 9.24.25. have been carefull to hide, themselves from the sight of Tyrants, when the Gospel was persecuted, as farre as their callings, and other occasions would give leave. Indeed they never would (nor is it lawfull) to deny the truth of God, or themselves to be Professors of it: yet, did they conceale as much as they could, from the Perse∣cutors, their times and places of meeting, and also the severall members of their Churches. To deny Christ, or the truth of his Religion, is alwaies damn∣able, and without repentance, bringeth damnation unavoidably; not to make publique profession of Religion is not alwaies so: but then onely, when the Lord, by some speciall occasion, according to the generall duty of a Christian, or a mans particular calling, thrusteth or draweth him forth to give testimony to the truth, by maintaining it, or suffering for it. The Apostles Calling nece∣ssarily required, preaching of the Word,Mat. 28.19. Act 10.42. and for them to have failed in that duty, for fear or shame, or otherwise, had been to deny their Lord and Master. Yet were they not so tied to this duty, that they must needs continue their pub∣lique preaching in those places, where persecution was raised against them, but they might flee from one City to another: and yet not to be counted to deny the Lord Jesus. As for the Churches,Mat. 10.23. that were gathered by the Apostles preaching, there is neither charge, nor reason to be shewed, why they should bewray themselves to their Persecutours, by open practice of Religion in the eyes of the world. Indeed the worship of God is not to be neglected, though we cannot performe it without manifest danger of our lives, but there is no neces∣sity to worship God publikely, where the truth of God is persecuted. There∣fore did the ancient Christians, in such places assemble as secretly as they could, neither leaving the exercises of Religion for fear, nor by an inconsiderate zeal,Calvin opusc. de vitand. superst. p. 585. hazarding their own lives. And as touching private Christians, if false Bre∣thren or subtile adversaries, shall craftily creep in to spie out their liberty, or pick advantage against them, no Religion bindeth them in that case, to make known the truth that they professe, or to answer directly unto their demands:Mat. 21.24. but they may either keep silence, or stop their mouths some other way. 2. In some cases it is lawfull to speake the truth in generall termes, so as the godly may be instructed, and the adversary take no advantage. Christ taught in Parables: and when the Pharisees and Herodians came unto him,Mat. 22.21. hoping to entrap him with this question, Is it lawfull to give Tribute unto Caesar? he stoppeth their mouths with this reply, Give to Caesar, the things which are Caesars, and to God, the things which are Gods. 3. If the adversaries of Gods truth shall questi∣on us to get advantage out of our words, when they have naught else against us, we may lawfully require legal proceedings. When the High Priest and Elders of the people examine Christ concerning his Doctrine and Disciples, he
appeales to his hearers. Aske them which heard me, what I have said unto them:Joh. 18.20, 21. behold, they know what I said, 4. If the Glory of God, the edification of the Church, and the duties of our particular Vocation will permit, it is lawfull by flight or other meanes (that God shall offer to provide for our safety,1 King. 19.3. Psal. 56.8. Jer. 36.26. Rev. 12.6. against the rage of Persecutours.) So Elias fled from Jesabell, David from the tyranny of Saul. Jeremiah and Baruch were both hid by the Lord, that the King could not slay them. The Woman, that is, the persecuted Church, fled into the Wildernesse, where she hath a place prepared of God. This is the counsell of Christ to his Disciples;Mat. 10.25. When they persecute you in one City, fly into another. If any require more examples: Jacob the Patriarch, fled from the presence of his Brother Esau into Haran,Gen. 27.43. & 31.21. Exo. 2.15. Heb. 11.27. to Laban: and again, from thence to the Land of his Fathers. Moses, after he had slaine the Aegyptian, fled out of Aegypt into the Land of Madian, where he lived forty years: And this was no rash flight, but a work of faith: though the second departure of Moses out of Aegypt, when he led forth the Israelites with a mighty hand, may seeme to be intended of the Apostle. badiah the Governour of Ahabs house, hid a hundred men of the Lords Prophets, by fifty in a Cave, and fed them with Bread and Water, when Jesabell would have destroyed them.1 King. 18.13. Joh. 10.39. Luk. 4.30. In the New Testament, our Saviour Christ being in danger, withdrew himselfe, and that sundry times, till the houre of his passion was come. Paul, when the Jews took councell together to kill him,Act. 9.25. 2 Cor. 11.32, 33. Psal. 29.30. Act. 8.. was le down by the Brethren in a Basket, through a Wall in Damascus. And when the Grecians went about to slay him, he was brought by the Brethren to Cesarea, and sent to Tarsus. By this it appeareth, (that it is both lawfull and expedient for Christians to fly in the time of persecution:) But how farre, and in what cases it is lawfull for the Ministers of the Gospel, we shall consider hereafter. 5. In persecution it is not unfit to seeke the benefit of Law, privi∣ledge,Act 22.25. and appeales. When Paul was bound with thongs to be scourged; clai∣ming the priviledge of a Roman, he escapeth the whip. And being to answer for himselfe before Festus, knowing with whom he had to deale, he pleads not Divi∣nity,Act. 25.8. but Law; Neither against the Law of Moses, neither against the Temple, nor yet against Caesar, have I offended any thing at all. And perceiving the ma∣lice of the Jews against him,Act 25.10, 11. he refused to be judged before Festus at Jerusalem, and appealed to Caesar. 6. A sixth point of Wisdome is, to conforme in things honest,Act. 21.22, 23, 24. expedient, and indifferent for nature and use. Thus Paul by the advice of James submits himselfe to the legal purifying. Some say this was Pauls in∣firmity, and therefore cursed with insequent troubles. But this is no so: for had it been a fault,Act. 24.8. questionlesse he would have bewailed it in all his defences: whereas he doth rather glory in it. 7. If the adversaries of the truth dissent a∣mong themselves, it is a point of wisdome to set them together, one against the other, by testifying our agreement with the one side, in the truth. When Paul perceived that the one part of the Councell,Act. 23.6. & 20.5, 6. before which he was convented, were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the Councell, Men and Brethren, I am a Pharisee, the Sonne of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection of the dead, I am called in question. In like manner, we may lawfully witnesse our consent with others in the substantiall points of Faith, from whom we dissent in matters of an inferiour nature, that we might procure the more fa∣vour from them.Act. 26.27. 8. Paul answering for himselfe before Agrippa, tels him that none of the things which he spake, were hidden from him, that he believed the Prophets. This his practise is for our imitation, how we should insinuate our selves into the hearts of our adversaries, to winne credit to our cause, and fa∣vour to our Person.Isa. 53.7. Mat. 26.63 & 27.12. Act 26 15. Lastly, in their carriage and conversation, the afflicted Saints of God must be innocent, harmelesse, inoffensive and meeke. Christ himselfe was, as a Sheep dumb before the Shearer. When Festus charged Paul with madnesse, his reply is no more but this; I am not mad, O Noble
Festus: but speake forth the words of truth and sobernesse. If they be tried with reproaches, disgraces, imprisonment, or perill of life, they must not fill the world with cries and clamours, but flie to the Lord with sighes and groanes: lay open their cares before him, and commit their cause unto him in quietnesse. But some Cautions are to be marked. First, In all these, men must not seeke themselves, but the Lord. I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evill As Serpents save their head,Rom. 16.19. so must we save and keep that faithfull thing committed unto us. Our Saviour Christ counselling his Disciples,2 Tim. 1.14. When they are persecuted in one City, to fly into another: he would not have them sit idle, but preach the Gospel in other places.Mat. 10.23. For verily (saith he) I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel, till the Sonne of Man be come. When our Saviour left Judaea, he preached in Galilee. And Paul sought not ease, but preached more, seeking the good of the Church. The second, No policy is lawfull, that doth tend to the prejudice of the truth, or any part thereof. I can do nothing against the truth, but for it.2 Cor. 13.8. To betray the truth or any parcell thereof, is perfidiousnesse, not true Wisdome. The third Caution, We must be ready when God calleth unto it, constantly and boldly to avouch every part of his truth. The fearfull to professe that,Apoc. 21.8. whereof God hath perswaded their hearts, shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone. Whosoever shall deny Christ before men,Mat. 10.33. Mar. 8.38. him will he deny before his Father which is in Heaven. Rom. 10.10. With the heart man be∣lieveth unto righteousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. The Apostle Paul behaved himselfe prudently in all his troubles, but never de∣nied his profession, when he had opportunity to make it known.Act. 24.14. This I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresie, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and Prophets. When Christ knew that the houre appointed of the Father was come, he free∣ly yeelded himselfe to death:Joh. 18.4. and Paul would not be kept backe with the teares of the faithfull,Act. 21.12. when he understood that his bands should make to the furthe∣rance of the Gospel. Q. May not a man bodily present himselfe at the unlawfull rights and services of Idolaters to save his life, when he doth in heart hate nd de∣test it? A. No: the servant of God should suffer death, rather then commit Idolatry. Fly from Idolatry. The Law and the Prophets, the Old and New Testament, are full of Edicts, Commandements, Laws, Admonitions, and Rebukes, whereby strange worship is forbidden. Daniels fellowes chose ra∣ther to be cast into the Furnace,Dan. 3.18. then to worship the Image set up by a most mighty King. Machabea the Mother, with her Children, would rather be martyred, then eate of Swines flesh against the Law of God. There be infinite Martyrs reckoned up, who most constantly suffered death, because they would not forsake their professed Religion, having alwaies before their eyes Mat. 10.28. Feare ye not them, which can kill the bodie. What is then to be done, when they are thrust upon us? We ought to reprove them,Eph. 5.11. and with great liber∣ty (when need requireth) to reprehend them. What though it be dangerous, and we may come to lose our goods, dignities, and lives? None of us hath upon this condition received Christianity, that his life, goods, and dignities, should remaine safe unto himselfe. Yea, Christ hath by expresse words testified unto every one of us; Except you renounce all that ye have,Mat. 10.37. & 16.24. and take up your Crosse, and follow me, ye cannot be my Disciples. 2. Outward actions be a certain shew of confession: And as it is not lawfull for the tongue to disagree with the heart, in profession of faith and religion: so whatsoever is outwardly done in Divine Ceremonies, ought to agree with the same Profession. That is no perfect and true Faith, which breaketh not out into actions agreeable unto it:
nor that pure and kindly zeal, which sheweth not it selfe in the detestation of all false waies and vaine inventions.Vera pietas v¦ram confessio∣nem parit. Rom. 10.10. Luk 9.26. 4. As the inward worshiping of God, is found to be that, whereby we rightly and reverently judge of him; so the outward worshiping of him, is that, wherein we honour him aright, and as he hath prescribed. And Idolatry likewise, is of two sorts: for one is, whereby in our heart we faine by evill opinion, such a God as we list our selves: another is, whereby we transferre the outward worship, not onely un∣to creatures and Idols,Calvin opusc. de vitand. sup. pag. 586. 1 Cor. 6. but also we pollute the same, with our own lies and in∣ventions. 5. Grant that we retaine in our heart the right opinion: yet the body is abandoned to Idols, and to the Devell, which ought not to be. For Paul sheweth, That our bodies are the members of Christ, which are not to be given un∣to an Harlot. Paul wrote this touching fornication: But the Prophets in the meane time teach us, That Idolatry is the foulest fornication of all other: for Jeremy, Ezekiel, and other holy Prophets, so inveigh against the Jews and their Church, as they resemble the same to an Harlot, which under every greene Tree (hath laid open her selfe unto Idols and prophane worshippings.) 6. He that made and redeemed the whole man, is not content with the halfe of him: neither will he have his creature parted with the Devill. To me (saith he) to me alone shall every knee bow.1 Cor. 6.20. Esa. 45.23. Rom. 14.11. Eph 2.10. 1 King. 19.18. And this is sufficiently declared in the Lords answer to Elias the Prophet: I have left unto me seven thousand persons, which have not bowed their knee unto Baal: He said not, which have rightly judged in their hearts, and which have believed uprightly in their mindes: but contrariwise, mentioneth a signe of outward worshiping; namely, of bowing the knee. The Corinthians might have excused their doing unto Paul thus: Why art thou so vehement against us. We our selves know that an Idoll is nothing, we in our hearts keep the right opinion. There∣with let God be content; it is lawfull for us in the meane time with the body and outward presence, to serve our own commodity. But the soul without the body,Rom. 1.1, 2. is no perfect Sacrifice, as the body without the soul, is no acceptable service. 7. Another mans sin is imputed to no man: but whilest we are present at Idolatrous service, this blame is ascribed and rightly impute unto us, in that we communicate with another mans ungodlinesse. Do ye not know (saith the Apostle) that they which eate of the Sacrifice,1 Cor. 10.18. are made also partakers of the Altar? What say I then? that the Image is any thing? Nay, but this I say, that the things, which the Gentiles offer, they offer un∣to Devils. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils. Ye can∣not not be partakers of the Table of the Lord, and of the table of Devils, So as, al∣though the corruption of the Sacrifices be not imputed to the Communicants; yet the communicating it selfe, from which they ought to have kept themselves, maketh them blame-worthy. And unlesse the matter were so, why would not the holy Martyrs communicate with the rights of the Ethnicks? Wherefore did Paul so rebuke the Corinthians? But it is not absolutly forbidden to godly men, that they should not be present in Churches, while prophane and execra∣ble rights be exercised.1 King. 18.17. For Elias was present, when the false Prophets did sacrifice unto their Baal, but yet, as one that mocked them, and that boldly. Were not the fellowes of Daniel present in the Field, (having now obtained high Offices and dignities,Dan. 3.3.) when the golden Image of the King was with great pompe erected? Present, no doubt, they were, but they worshipped it not. It is greatly to be weighed, with what minde, with what countenance, with what ge∣sture, and with what words, a man is present where horrible Idolatry is committd. There was present a man of God,1 King. 13.1. Act. 17.23. Calvin opusc. Epist. 1. pag. 560. at the service Jeroboam, when the King him∣selfe offered Incense to the golden Calves: but he being sent from God, came thither, and reproved, and detested that which was done; adding those threat∣nings which the Lord commanded him to speake. Paul also entred into the
Temple of the gods at Athens; certainly, not to the intent he would allow of the Idolatrous rights: but because he might thereby, pick out an argument and occasion of confuting Idolatry. Valentinianus also led Julian even unto the Temple: but there he gave a blow unto the Prelate of the Temple, who sprinkled his Gown with unpure water, for the purifying of him, after the Eth∣nicks manner. Q. A man may bring himself into great danger, and the Church of God in those places into great straights, unlesse we shew some countenance to Idoll service. A. This doth every godly man see, and (which is more to be reckoned of) it is not hidden from God himselfe, who foresaw all these things, and fore∣shewed that they would come to passe: but would not therefore suffer his Laws to be changed. So as the nature and force of troubles and dangers, is not such, as they can abrogate the Laws of God: Those do abide,Martyr com. p. 2. c. 4. sect. 35. and everlastingly shall abide: and therefore let us not covet to have them new made for our dangers and calamities. Let us commit the end unto him, unto whom the Church belongeth: he no doubt,Gen. 22.8. will very well and in good time provide for his Spouse. Christ said to Peter, when he called him, and he prolonged, and demanded, What should become of John: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. We be taught therefore to follow the Word of God, whithersoever it call us; and let us commit the care of other things (which seeme to hinder us) to him that calleth us. Furthermore, this is not to be over passed, that that Doctrine oftentimes is more worth, and doth more edifie, which is sealed by flying away, and by death, then that which is onely set forth by words. Silent sufferings of faithfull Ministers for the truth, prove oftentimes as profitable to Gods people, to confirme them in it: as elo∣quent Sermons of the truth, to informe them of it. Let us not be afraid, though one of us fall or flie: but let us hope, that God in his place will raise up many more. But if we continue, and that our dissembling endure long;Calvin opusc. Epist. 1. pag. 548. the light of the Truth, and fire of Charity, which is kindled in our hearts, will by little and little be extinguished. Q. May not a Christian forbeare the doing of some things not necessary, to save his life. A. In those things which are substantiall, or nearly joyned to them, we must give place to no man: In things not necessary, but onely convenient, which may be omitted upon occasion, we must give place to the ignorance, and infirmity of others, for edification: But to malice we must not give place, least what be yeelded to it, it possesse to destruction. Wherefore the malicious neglected, we must contend for edification, even with our own danger and perill. And when the omission of a thing not necessary, doth carry a shew of denying that truth, for which we are bound to contend, we must rather adventure any danger, then forego the same.Dan. 6.10. When Daniel knew that the King of Persia made a De∣cree, that no man should aske any Petition of any god or man, for thirty daies, save of the King He went into his house, and his windows being open in his Chamber towards Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees, three times a day, and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime. And it was ex∣pedient for Daniel thus to do, otherwise he had sinned against God, nature, the true Religion of the Jews, himselfe, and publique liberty. For the Decree was most wicked, to which a godly minde should not assent, no not in shew. Q. How should a man fit and prepare himselfe to walke after this manner? A. 1. He must rightly informe himselfe in the knowledge of the truth. For all exhortations which are made to us patiently, and constantly to suffer any thing for the Name of Christ, and the cause of his Gospel, will have no great
force and authority with us, unlesse the equity, and truth, and dignity of that cause for which we undertake the combate, be well and throughly understood. For when we are in such a combate and danger, that life is in jeopardy, we must be well assured of the cause for which we undergo that danger. 2. We must renounce the world,Mat. 16.24. Heb. 13.13. 1 Thes. 3.3. Luk. 11.49. & 21.12 and the things thereof. If any man (saith Christ) will come after me, let him deny himselfe, and take up his Crosse and follow me: If we addict our selves to the pleasures, profits, or honours of this life, we can never stand couragiously in the cause of God. 3. We must nourish in our breasts, an holy zeal of Gods glory, and pure Religion, that the testification, exercise, and furtherance of it, be dearer to us then life it selfe. To live, and to be ignorant of the causes of living, is contrary to nature. But Religion teacheth, that our whole life is so to be referred to the glory of God,Psal. 69.9. that he might be our glory. The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up. 4. We must learne to live by Faith, and com∣mit the cause of God unto his wise disposition, who is able to do above all that we can thinke, and will make that tend to the furtherance of the Gospel, which to our reason makes for the utter ruine, and subversion of it. Thus Abraham offered his Son Isaac in sacrifice, being assured that God would give him again, though he knew not how.Psal. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he will sustaine thee. 5. If we finde our selves weake and feeble, we must acknowledge our infirmity, and cry un∣to God to be strengthened in the inner man. God is the giver of all grace and power, therefore in the sence of our unworthinesse, we must have recourse unto him for supply. 6. Being informed of the truth, we must not admit or entertaine any cogitations to the contrary; for such deliberation is a turning aside, which may occasion further wandering from the Path of Gods Com∣mandements. If we permit that to our selves, that declining from the Word of God, we will hear our selves, we are in danger to runne into no small in∣conveniences. The best course for our own ease and safety, is, to trusse up our thoughts, and neither to give them place nor audience, when once we un∣derstand the good pleasure of God, speaking in his Word. Q. What considerations are there, which might move Christians willingly to suf∣fer persecution for Christs sake? A. It is a great glory to suffer for the Name of Christ. Although our sense can apprehend nothing but infamy and reproach, yet indeed they are proper, and notable Ensignes and Ornaments of heavenly Nobility.Act. 5.41. 1 Pet. 4.12, 13. For what are we, that we should be witnesses of Gods truth, and Patrons, as it were to defend and maintaine his cause? Behold we are miserable men, as it were the abject wormes of the Earth: yet God will have his truth to be defended of us; which Honour is so great, that it seemes not to pertaine to the Angels themselves, which are in Heaven. And thus the Martyrs of Christ, have esteemed their sufferings to be Crowns. A French Souldier for his zealous profession of re∣formed Religion, adjudged with others to the fire, having this grace bestowed upon him, that he should go to the Stake Gentleman-like, without a With, de∣manded the reason, why he might not be permitted to weare such a Chaine as his fellows did,Thuan. Hist. lib. 11. Anno. 1553. Rom. 6.8. 1 Pet. 4.14. Mat. 5.10, 11. esteeming this rebuke of Christ more glorious then the Ensignes of St Michaels Order. 2. Patient suffering for the Name of Christ, is the way to the Crown of life. They that suffer with Christ, shall reigne with him. What labor, pains, or sorrow, will men refuse to purchase some uncertaine fading honour? And shall we thinke much to adventure our life in the cause of Christ, that we might inherit eternall glory with him. 3. All the times of our life and death are in the hands of God, who will keep us by his power, that not one haire of our head can be pulled away,Dan. 3.26. & 6.16. Act. 12.17. Psal. 116.15. Esa 26.21. without his pleasure. In whose hands soever we be tossed to and fro, the Lord still takes care for us, that we shall not perish. And if he suffer Tyrants to kill the body, yet doth not our life cease to be deare unto him. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. And that we might
be more certainly assured, that God will never leave us in the hands of our ene∣mies, let us know, that if we suffer for the Gospel, it is as if Christ himselfe,Zech. 2.8 Act. 9.4. were in the same affliction. Wherefore let us set down with our selves, that Jesus Christ must forget himselfe, if he should have no thought or care of us, when for his cause and Glory, we are held in Prison, or in perill of life. 4. In all those afflictions, God will so sustaine us by his Spirit, that whatsoever our enemies do, they shall not prevaile or get the upper-hand. In persecutions, there are two things which seeme intolerable to the flesh, infamy and paine, or torment of body: In both which the Lord hath promised Divine assistance, that we shall overcome reproach, and bitternesse of death. 5. For our sinnes we have deserved more grievous torments then any, that by the malice of men can be inflicted. If God be pleased to spare us therein, and to change our sufferings, that whereas we might justly be confounded as evill doers, we should be tried onely as witnesses of his truth,Heb. 11.34, 35, 36, 37. have we not great cause to be thankfull and couragious? 6. The examples of holy Martyrs, who have laid down their lives for the testimony of Jesus, and cheerfully endured the most bitter vexations that hell could invent, are an encouragement to us that shall be called to tread in their steps. Lastly, Christ our Saviour hath endured most bitter things for us, should not we then be ready to lay down our lives for his sake? Should we not esteeme it our great happinesse, that we are made conformable unto him? Q. What Rules of Wisdome are to be observed for our carriage towards all men in generall. A. It is a point of wisdome, rightly to distinguish between men,1 Cor. 6.6. Jud. 22. . and not promiscuously to respect all alike. There is a great difference between an Israelite and an Aegyptian, between a Jew and a Samaritan; and we must observe the difference wherein the Lord goes before us, who though he be patient to all, yet he is specially good unto Israel, even the upright of heart.Gal. 6. Prov. 26.24, 25. If this be not ob∣served, we can never truly performe the duties we owe to our neighbours, or our selves. But this judgement reacheth not to a mans finall estate, but to the present onely: for we may not judge beyond our eyes, nor yet against them. A wise Physician, will know the state of his Patient, before he Minister unto him. 2. Although we must make account to live amongst all, yet our care must be to sort with the best. Lightnesse of familiarity is indiscretion. Here the rule holdeth well, to try before we trust: yea a wise Christian, must not com∣mit himselfe to every one that seemeth good. For much hypocrisie lieth at the roote of mens hearts: Satan hath taught many to transforme themselves, and make Religion and good words, a cloake for their own ends. Never did the Devill more hurt to Christianity, then by false Brethren, who were sent in to spie their liberty. How many have been deceived, and brought into danger thereby? He that eateth bread with me, hath lift up his heele against me. 3. In our converse with all men, we must keep a determination, either to do good un∣to others, or receive good from others; and to that end, must observe our sea∣sons and opportunities. The lips of the righteous feed many.Prov. 10.21. Prov. 14.33. Prov. 10.13. The heart of the wise possesseth knowledge, and he draweth it out as occasion requireth. 4. In what company soever a man comes, his care must be (that his life and conversa∣tion be inoffenssive,) a visible confutation of all ungodlinesse. Dainels piety, confuted Idolatry, and Lot was a real reproofe of Sodome. A Christians light must alwais shine in the darkenesse of this world, and against it.1 Cor. 10.23. Give no offence to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God. Q, What Rules of Wisdome are to be noted for our carriage towards the Godly? A. 1. We must not onely walke inoffensively towards them, but also embrace a fruitfull fellowship and society with them in the Gospel. Thus, they that are
strong ought to beare the infirmities of the weake, and receive them for edification, not to doubtfull disputations.Rom. 15.1. & 14.1. If we finde a good man stand in need of inward com∣fort, we must helpe to raise him up. Christ was sent to speake a word of com∣fort to the weary, and every Christian hath received of his anointing. When David was in deep distresse, his faithfull Friend Jonathan comforted him in the Lord his God.1 Sam. 23.16. If a Godly man be fallen through any infirmity, they that be spiritually minded, must labour to restore him with the spirit of meeknesse. And all Christians of what condition soever,Gal. 6.1. must consider one another, and provok unto good works. 2. In dealing with weak, wounded, and fallen afflicted Christians, we must be circumspect of the time, place, and manner of doing, making choice of such arguments as be fit in respect of the condition, for all persons are not wrought upon by the same meanes, and what may do good to one, may be hurtfull to another. And that Potion which one way administred, may prove pernicious, being another way applyed, may be benificiall 3. In the use of good company, beware of giving any occasion of scandall, or offence to any; leave no ill smell behinde thee; avoid the note of pride, conceit, forward∣nesse,1 Joh. 2.10. or stifnesse in thine own sense. Q. What Rules of Wisdome are to be observed for our carriage towards them that be without, and scorners. A. 1. All Christians must avoid all known evils and offences, by which evill men might be occasioned to abide out of the Church,Col. 4.5. or reproach the holy pro∣fession of the Gospel; And on the contrary, they must so walke in all faithfull∣nesse,Tit. 2.10. 1 Thes. 4.11, 12. 1 Tim. 6.1. Phil. 2.15, 16. 1 et. 2.12. 1 Tim. 5.14. meeknesse, harmlessnesse, that they might adorne the truth, and winne the enemies of it. Thou shalt not put a stumbling black before. Give no occa∣sion to the adversary to speak evill. David prayeth, that none might be ashamed be∣cause of him. 2. We must skilfully apply our selves to winne them, making use of all opportunities, and speaking to them with all reverence, deliberation, compassion, instance. 3. In lawfull things we must use all circumspection that we offend not in regard of circumstances, as the time, company, or manner of doing: for all lawfull things are not fit at all times, in all assemblies, and all man∣ners. Indiscretion herein doth much harme. 4. In things indifferent we must not give offence to them that be without,Quae necessaria sunt factu, nl∣lius offendiculi timore sunt omit∣tenda, charitati subijcienda est nostra ilbertas, & sub fidei puri∣tate subfidere vicissim caritas ipsa debet. Mat. 7.6. Calvin instut. l. 3. cap. 19. sect. 13. so long as there remaines hope to do them good: But in necessary duties which God requireth, their offence is not to be regarded. If they be offended for well-doing, we must not passe for it. 5. If we have to deale with ungodly men, let us be wary that we expose not the word of God to contempt and derision. Cast not Pearles before Swine. 6. The end of admonition and rebuke, is the doing of good unto the party sinning: If therefore we perceive men to be furiously bent to do evill, it is wisdome to for∣beare them till the heate be past, or else to deale with them by gentle entreaties. A Wedge must be fastened in knotty Timber with soft blows. Rebuke doth but provoke and exasperate them that be set on wickednesse. 7. If we know men to be so farre naught, as they scorne goodnesse, good men, and good things, we must avoid their company so much as we may. For what comfort can a god∣ly man take in such company, where all good and godly communication must either be banished or derided? There is no hope of doing good, there is danger of taking harme. 8. If we be by occasion beset, or cast into the company of prophane, brutish and scornfull persons, then seeke to stop evill by timely and wise discourse touching the judgements of God, the lawfull affaires of this life, or by other savory communication. For where Religion will not be admitted, these things may take place, and do good to the preventing of much wicked∣nesse. 9. If thou seest no opportunity of good, so soone as thou maist depart from them.Prov. 14.7. Depart from the foolish man when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge. And beware of falling into the like company againe. 10. If men be grown to this height of sinne, that they scorne admonition, we must leave
them to their filthinesse and the righteous judgment of God. Let him that is filthy, be filthy still. Rebuke not a scorner least he hate thee.Rev. 2.11. Prov. 9 7. Job. 9.39.41. Q. What Rules of Wisdome are to be observed in our carriage towards them that are enimies to our persons? A. 1. If ungodly men do purpose evill against us, it must be our wisdome to prevent their plots and traines, and to free our selves from trouble and danger, so near as we can. How wisely did Jacob prevent the fury of his Brother Esau? the Scribes and Pharisees watched whether Christ would heale on the Sabboth day, or no, to finde accusation against him; our Saviour for all this omitted not to do good, but in doing it by his question unto them (cut off so farre as might be the matter of their malice by clearing the lawfulnesse of the fact:) Giving us to un∣derstand, that as the wicked watch to traduce us, so must we watch to cut off oc∣casions of entrapping; stoutly preparing withall to beare whatsoever the Lord measureth out by them. 2. Our Saviour would have us wisely decline their fury; not without just cause provoking them. It is no wisdome to provoke an evill man: It is no good discretion to stirre up a Lyon, to take a Bear by the tooth, or a mad Dog by the eares. For they desire nothing more then occasion of con∣tention, or matter to stirre up their corruption by. So Hezekiah commanded his servants not to answer Rabshakeh one word. 3. Joyne with the simplicity of the Dove, the wisdome of the Serpent. Nothing more vexeth and vanquish∣eth an adversary then innocency: no better breast-plate then righteousnesse. But with harmelessnesse and honesty there must go circumspection and vigilancy, that we neither advantage the adversary, nor disadvantage our selves in their presence or absence. A good cause requires discreet managing. 4. If evill men have done us harme, and wrongfully molested us, we must pitty them, possesse our souls in patience, and still shew an undaunted constancy and resolution for the truth,1 Pet. 3.14, 15. and all good waies. If ye suffer for righteousness, blessed are ye: but fear not, nei∣ther be troubled, but sanctifie the Lord in your hearts, and be ready alwaies to give an answer to every man that asketh a reason of your hope. Q. What Rules of Wisdome are to be observed for our carriage in the daies of com∣mon tryall or calamity? A. 1.Pro. 22.3. & 27.12. A wise man seeth the Plague coming by the light of reason and the il∣lumination of the Word. 2. He hideth himselfe in time before the tempests beate upon him. As Noah entred into the Arke; the Church fled into the Wil∣derness: Joseph provided aforehand against the seven years Famine that should come upon the World. Q. How may the excellency and profit of Wisdome appeare? A. 1. Wisdome is the principall thing. Happy is the man that findeth wisdome,Prov 4 6. Prov. 3.13, 14. & 8.19. & 16.16. and the man that getteth understanding. For the Merchandize of it is better then the Merchandize of silver, and the gaine thereof then fine gold: She is more precious then rubies, and all the things that thou canst desire, are not to be compared unto her. It is not like to dead stuffe, or wares which will lie upon the Chap-mans hand without vent or utterance, but it is a Merchandize that is vendible, and as good as ready money. Nay, it is preferred before the most precious Treasures, and such, as are had in greatest estimation. 2. Wisdome preserveth the heart from corruption, the life from the practice of sin, the person from shame, reproach, plagues and punishments. It induceth and maketh able to do that which is good,Prov. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. Prov. 1.3. Prov. 4.6. Prov. 8.20. Eccl. 10.2. Prov. 16.23. Prov. 15.2. Neh. 2 3. and circumspect and cautious to shun that which is evill. When thou hast sought and found wisdome, the Lord bestowing it upon thee, then thou shalt both know and judiciously exercise justice, and all good courses of righteousness and Religion. Then shall counsell preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, and deliver thee from every evill path. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee, love her, and she shall keep thee. I cause to walke in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgement. 3. It directeth a man what to do, and what to leave undone:
where to go, and where to stand still: where to speak, and when to be silent: and what way to go in the whole course of his Vocation.Ezra. 8.22. Psal. 19.11. 1 Sam. 18.5. By the Law of God is his Servant made circumspect. Every prudent man dealeth with knowledge. Thus it is noted of David a most religious man, that he dealt wisely. 4. It refresheth the heart with sweet delight and joyfulness,Prov. 3.17. & 24.13.14. Jer. 3.10. establisheth the conscience with peace and tranquillity. Her waies are waies of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. 5 A wise man shall not faile of safety abroad, or at home, waking or sleeping, in the day or in the night.Prov. 3.23, 24. Thou shalt walke in the way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble: When thou liest down thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.Prov. 3.16. 6. Length of daies is in the right hand of wisdome, and in her left hand riches and honour. 7. Wisdome is an Ornament to a mans person and actions.Eccl. 9.17. A man is that in reputation and esteeme, that he is in wisdome and understanding. Discretion is the luster of our actions. Wisdome makes a mans face to shine,Eccl 8.1. Prov. 1.9. & 4.9. & 3.22 Prov. 20.18. Prov. 19 2. Prov. 29.20. She is an Ornament of grace to the head, a Chaine to the neck; that beautifieth more then costly Raiment, Pearles, or precious stones. 8. Every thought is established by counsell; The things that men would finish with good and comfortable successe, they must begin with advice and deliberation. The ig∣norant, rash, and unadvised, do oft fall short of their purposes, are fickle and incon∣stant, and many times meet with ill successe in the good things they take in hand. He that is carried with passion doth often stumble: onely the wel-advised doth walke prosperously. Q What Motives should stirre men up to seek Wisdome? Pro. 16.16.A. 1. How much better is it to get wisdome, then gold? and to get understan∣ding, rather to be chosen then silver? Therefore doth the Lord command us to grow familiarly acquainted with it:Prov. 7.4. Say unto wisdome, Thou art my Sister, and call understanding thy Kinswoman.Prov. 15.14. & 7.18. 2. The heart of him that hath understanding seek∣eth knowledge, and laboureth diligently for increase of that holy wisdome where∣with he is already endued. He that is acquainted with the state of his own soul, and discerneth how needfull and precious and fruitfull understanding is,Prov. 18.5. will not content himself to have wisdome in his eares, or head, or lips, but layeth it up in his heart, and seeketh to increase his store, adding daily thereunto, by hearkening as much as he may, to all sound and wholesome instructions. 3. Spirituall under∣standing of Gods holy will is most delightfull. My Son eate thou Hony because it is good,Prov. 24.13.14. and the Hony-combe, because it is sweet to thy palate or taste. So shall the knowledge of wisdome be to thy soul, when thou haste found it, there shall be a reward, and thine expectation shall not be cut off. Hony and other food, though most de∣licious, is earthly, and the delight that it yeeldeth is but sensuall: but this is heavenly, and so is the consolation that it worketh. A beast or a wicked man may feed on the best corporall food, and feele as much sweetnesse as the worthiest Christian: but Gods own people and servants have a peculiar right, and taste a spirituall sweetnesse in heavenly wisdome. There may be in Hony and other bodi∣ly delights, an hurtfull excesse to the annoyance of those that surfet of them: but in heavenly wisdome, with the unspeakable joy that floweth from it, there can be no exceeding, but alway and continually the more the better. The pleasure that is taken in meates or drinkes is momentaine, and for present use; when it is once digested in the stomack the taste is gone: but the sweetnesse of heavenly wisdome is perpetuall, both in acquisition and use in this present life, and more aboundant∣ly in the life to come. 4. Much folly, indiscretion, rashnesse, and ignorance doth remaine in the best: therefore we must endeavour more and more to be enriched with this heavenly Treasure. To which end we must receive the words of wise∣dome with all readinesse,Prov. 2.1.2. Psal. 119.97, 98. Prov. 9.8, 9. Joh. 1.6, hide the Commandements within our hearts, meditate upon the Law with diligence, patiently beare the word of admonition, carefully observe the manner of Gods proceedings, delight in the company of the wise, pray continually, purge the heart of vanity, and heartily love wisdome.
CHAP. III. Of the second Property of a godly life, viz. Exactnesse, Accuratnesse or Circumspection. What is thereby signified. What things are required in an exquisite life. What the especiall furtherances of this exquisitenesse are. Sundry Reasons to shew the necessity of an accurate or circumspect course, with divers necessary helps for the attaining thereof. Q. WHat is the second Property of a godly life? A. It must be exact, accurate, or circumspect.Eph. 5.15. Penitissima ad∣hibita conside∣ratione. Beza in l. Syrus utitur o∣cabulo  quod curiosam diligentiam cum anxia sollicitudine conjunctam significant. Chem. har. cap. 1. Luk 1.3. Summa diligentia aliquid facere. Mat. 2.7, 8. Beza in Luk 1. Act. 22.3. sec. Act. 18.25, 26. Act. 23 20. & 24.22. & 26.5. 1 Thes 5.2. Num. 23.10. sept. Vise Dunaei. prelect. in Lysiam. pag. 37. The course of Christianity is an exquisite course, and strict walking. Thus much the word used by the Apostle in the place above-cited, doth import, as appeareth by other places where it is found, It seemed good to me (saith Luke) when I had accu∣rately searched all things. So Herod enquired diligently of the wise men, and charged them to search exquisitly and most diligently for the Babe. And Paul professeth he was brought up according to the most exact manner of the Law. Q. In what other Phrases is this circumspect course commended? A. It is implied in the Phrases of walking before God, living honestly,Gen. 17.1. Heb. 13.18. Col. 1.10.11. and walking worthy the Lord in all pleasing. Q. What things are required in an exquisite life? A. It must be exact and considerate,Deut. 2.27. Deut. 5.32. Prov. 4.27. 2 Chro. 34.2. Esa. 30 21. Deut. 28.14. according to the true and perfect line of direction, the Word of God in every thing great and small, so that a man goes to the utmost of them, and to all the Rules that he prescribes. A circumspect Christian ordereth his waies according to the truth, avoiding all extremities, not turning aside either to the right hand or to the left. Satan cares not so he can conquer us, whether it be by curiosity, or by care∣lesnesse: whether he can keep us out of the Church, or cast us out by our own conceits: whether he can keep us so cold, as no good thing greatly affects us; or whether he can make us boile over with unbridled zeal, that be∣cause we cannot have all the good we would,Psal. 119.9. we will refuse a great deale of good we might have. But a prudent man will have recourse to the Word of life, and frame his courses according to that Rule. His Prayer is,Psal. 119.10. With my whole heart have I sought thee, O Lord, oh suffer me not to erre from thy Commande∣ments. Willingly he would not tread one haire breadth out of the way, or runne into any sinne be it never so small or profitable in the esteeme of the world. 2. It must be full, in all pleasing, and fruits of holinesse and justice:Deut. 5.32. Col. 1.10. Numb. 14 24. & 32.11, 12. Deut. 1.36. Josh. 14.8, 9.14 It must go to the utmost of every command. A circumspect man looks round about him, and so ordereth his businesse, as one hinder not another, but all may go forward; and so saveth one commodity, as another be not lost or lie in hazard. So a circumspect Christian casteth his occasions, as, seeing every Christian duty is enjoyned him, he hath respect to Gods Commande∣ments, and that in the extremity thereof. Duties of piety shall not justle out duties of civility: nor civill duties eate out duties of piety: but as one hand helpes another, so one duty shall prove fit for another, one calling for∣ward another. He fears as, the committing of the least sinne, so the neglect
of any duty of piety or mercy that God requireth. He loathes to do the work of God by half chare:2 Pet. 1.5.6, 7. yea, he looks to the thriving of all his graces. He will walke very humbly before God, but so as he maintaine his joy in God. His moderation shall not dampe his zeal:Christ is said to work grace for grace. Joh. 1.16. the meaning is, for every grace in him∣self, he hath stamped a∣nother in us; as the Seale gives print for print in the Wax, Chara∣cter for Chara∣cter: and as the Father to the Son, Limb for Limb, and member for member: so Christ to his Saints. He works grace for grace, that is, as he him∣self hath the whole frame of grace in his own heart, so all that are borne of him, have the I∣mage of God perfectively in them, though not in degree. D. Prest. see Exact wak. Act. 18.25. 2 Pet. 1.5. Phil. 2 12. Eph. 5.15, 16. Heb. 12.15. An Action cannot be good except all be good in it. Rom. 12 2. Joh. 13.17. Phil. 1.9.10. 1 Chro. 22.12. Psal 119.105 his zeal shall not out-runne his knowledge. His providence shall not lessen his faith, nor his faith destroy his providence: He will use the meanes that God offereth, but rest in the Lord. Peace fitteth him for trouble, and adversity prepares him to live in peace. His love with mens persons brings him not into love with their sinnes; and his hatred of their sinnes, impeacheth not his love of their persons. He sheweth mercy without folly, and executeth justice without cruelty. He re∣verenceth men of place and gifts, but will not be drawn to sinne by their example or counsell, for feare of their displeasure, or to winne their favour. He keepes his heart in an holy temper and disposition to obey the Lords call in every thing, and to do whatsoever he requireth, and that in the highest degree he is able, to the least jot. All his graces runne in a circle, move, strengthen, and quicken each other. His soule is fixed upon the Lord, and ever moveth as he goeth before it. Thus he is busie in maintaining his heart in good plight, exercising all his graces, all of them being of great use, and flowing from the same spirit, and conscionably cherishing all buds, and blossomes of obedience, that spring from those severall graces. 3. Exquisit∣nesse imports diligence to redeeme, seeke, observe and take opportunities of doing good. Walke circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the daies are evill. A circumspect man watcheth all occasions for his own good and advantage, and if they be offered, slips them not: So a circum∣spect Christian looks round about him, and thinkes it not sufficient to take occasions of grace and wel-doing, being offered, but will seeke them; yea, redeeme them with double diligence. The thrifty husband, Merchant or Trades∣man, is not so carefull to have his stock employed for increase, as the wise and wary Christian is to employ what grace he hath received to the glory of God, the good of others, and his own spirituall furtherance and advantage. He is grieved if at any time he overlooke his opportunity, and by losse is made wise, more narrowly to consider and observe the seasons, that offer them∣selves for the doing or getting of good. There is no time, state, condition, or company, but some way or other a discreet and wary dealer in the course of Christianity will improve it to his own behoofe, and work profit out of it for the good of his own soul. 4. Exactnesse reacheth to the manner of doing, as well as to the thing it selfe to be done. A circumspect Christian consider∣eth all circumstances that belong to a good work, as time, place, order and manner of doing, together with the inward affection and disposition of the soul, and is carefull that all may be right. 5. Exactnesse must be constant at all times. He that walkes by halves or by fits is not exact. Q. What are the speciall furtherances of this exquisitnesse? A. 1. A sound knowledge of the right way, which is as the light, guiding to set every foot safely. For let a man be never so circumspect and wary, if he be in the night, without light, and without a guide, he can never walke securely and safe. The Word is the Lanthorn, and the Commande∣ment is the light. In the darkenesse of this world, the Word of God is as a light illuminating our eyes, and shewing the true way wherein we ought to walke, that we turne not aside into by-pathes, or dash upon the rocks of humane error.Pro. 2.10, 11. When wisdome enters into the soul, and knowledge delighteth the soul, then shall counsell: Ʋnderstanding shall keep thee; to deliver thee from  the way of the evill man.A man cannot be a Practici∣oner in any profession ex∣cept he know it: much lesse in the pro∣fession of Christianity. 2. A diligent watch and care to prevent sloath and keepe from all extremities. We are apt to nap in our businesse, or step into extremities, on the right hand or on the left: Either to neglect good, or
to cast away the good with the evill, and refuse them both; either to deale sleightly in the work of God, or to make conscience where we should not. We are all generally of a very dull and drowsie disposition, by reason of that lumpish flesh of ours; by meanes whereof it cometh to passe that we are oft sleeping and slumbering, be we never so carefull and diligent: yea, in danger oft, after we have been awaked out of this drowsie and deadly sleep, to fall eftsoone back againe into the same, if we keepe not a constant watch over our selves and our souls. And as men newly awakened by some suddain fright, do runne up and down they know not whither: so it is with us, being rouzed from security, we are ready to turne aside into divers by-paths untill we re∣turne to our former sluggishnesse. For it is much easier to passe from one con∣trary extreme to another, then to stand fast in the straight way that leadeth unto life. Such as travell in slippery paths, or waies troublesome to be found, are carefull to look to their feet, observe their markes and turnings: so must it be with him, that will travell safely through the slippery and dangerous way of this worlds Wildernesse. 3. A due and carefull examination of our  affections to the things we go about, and of our severall actions flowing from them, least we be otherwise unawares overtaken with sinne in them. Ponder (saith Solomon) the paths of thy feet,Prov. 4.26. that thy waies may all be ordered aright. And again, A prudent man will not runne on head, but will consider his steps. And if he have regard to his courses,Prov. 14.15. Gal. 6.4. Nec te quasi∣veris extra. ers. Satyr. 1. he cannot be regardlesse of his heart, which is the Fountaine of all actions good and evill. Let every man prove himself, and try his work, before he set upon it, that he may have good assurance of the lawfulnesse of it, both in it selfe, and in regard of cir∣cumstances, and manner of doing. A bad affection may marre a good work, but a good affection cannot justifie an evill action: therefore both the heart and act must be brought into the light, and examined by it. To this duty the Apostle seemeth to have an eye, when he prayeth for the Philippians;Phil. 1.10. that they might try things that differ, and that they might be sincere, such whose hearts and workes would endure the light of the Sunne. The counsell is good here, Looke first and then leape: see the ground be firme, and then tread upon it safely. 4. An holy jealousie and suspicion, lest  the heart be deceived through the deceitfulnesse of sinne. The most simple-hearted Christian is a most wary man, suspecting his heart, least it should be drawn aside. For he knoweth sinne lies in ambush to beguile: The world is full of allurements, and his heart is ready to listen unto their cunning insinuations, which maketh him to look to his waies with more then double diligence. As he that is very circumspect for the world, is most suspicious of himselfe, least he be over-seen, and of others, least they over-reach and beguile him: so one that is most circumspect for heaven, doth suspect himselfe at all times, and in all occasions overlooke his heart, least it should start aside, and turne out of the way. This godly jealousie of our selves and feare of our infirmity, will make us carefull to eschew all occasions of sinne, and whatsoever by meanes of our weakenesse may become matter of evill unto us. For as those that know themselves to be of a weake stomack, ready to take check at such meates as many other ordinarily, are wont to digest well enough, are very chary of their diet, and carefull to forbeare, not such meates onely as are simply un∣wholesome, but even such also as they suspect or suppose to be of hard digestion, and will not in that regard so well accord with their weake∣nesse: So the man that is suspicious of himselfe, and jealous of his own corruption, will be carefull to walke warily, and diligently to avoid (not those things alone that he seeth and knoweth to be simply evill, and in that regard prejudiciall to all in generall,) but even those things also
that, though indifferent, and in themselves otherwise not unwarrantable, such as may be done by some sometime without hurt or offence, yet that in regard of the strength of his corruption, his naturall disposition, the weakenesse of grace in him, and his pronenesse to slip and to be o∣vertaken in them, may in that regard prove dangerous and prejudiciall to him in particular, howsoever others might without danger deale with them. Againe, this holy jealousie makes us fly from all appearance of evill, as from a Serpent. Narrow over-looking is the best meanes to keep the sloathfull Servant from idlenesse: The jealous eye of the Husband war∣neth the Wife to shame and avoide all shews of unfaithfulnesse. And this is the effect of godly selfe-jealousie in respect of sinne, and whatsoever carries any semblance of it. Further, this jealousie of our own weak∣nesse not make us the more carefull, to use diligently all good meanes, whereby we may be supported and strengthened against all occasions which we cannot avoide. For the more conscious men are to themselves of their own wants, the more diligent are they wont to be in resorting to those by whom their wants may be supplied: and the more suspicious we are of our own infirmity and weakenesse, the more carefull will we be daily and hourely to repaire unto him,2 Tim. 4.17. 2 Cor. 12.9.10. who alone is able to confirme and strengthen us, yea, who is able so to enable us notwithstanding our weak∣nesse, that his power and might shall appeare in us amiddest our feeble∣nesse, and our very infirmity shall make much for his glory. And surely in this kinde, it is more behovefull for a man to be somewhat too fearefull and heedy, then to be a little too confident and fool-hardy: to take notice of his own weaknesse, that he may become strong, then while he thinketh himselfe strong in his own conceit,Prov. 28.24. to prove weake. Blessed is the man that feareth alwaies. 5. A serious consideration of Gods continuall presence about us and with us, wheresoever we are, and whatsoever we are about.Psal. 16.8. Psal. 119.168. I have set the Lord alwaies before mine eyes, (saith David:) for he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not fall. And surely it would be a notable meanes to preserve us from stepping aside: if we could at all times remember, That the eye of the Lord doth in every place behold the evill and the good. It is the argument that Solomon useth to the incontinent person, to withdraw him from his loose and licentious courses;Prov. 5.20.21. Why shouldest thou delight (saith he) in a strange Woman, or embrace a strangers bosome? since the waies of a man are be∣fore the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his pathes. Yea, not his waies alone, but the secret motions of his minde, and the inward in∣tentions of his heart,Heb. 4.12. Psal. 139.2.3 Prov. 15.11. they are all naked and broken up, as the inwards of a Beast that is cut up and quartered, to him that we, have to deale with. And it is the Argument that Elihu useth to disswade and de∣terre men from wicked practises;Job. 34.21.22. Gods eyes are upon the waies of man; and he eyeth every step he taketh. And there is no darknesse, nor deadly shade, that can shaddow wicked workers from his sight. This was that kept David in compasse:Psal. 19.168. I have kept (saith he) thy Precepts and thy Testimonies: for all my waies are in thy sight. As all Gods Laws in his sight,Psal. 19.6. & 18.22. so all his waies in Gods sight: Gods Laws in his sight by dutifull regard; his waies in Gods sight, through his all-seeing presence, whereby like a well-drawn Picture, that eyeth each one in the roome, he eyeth in that manner each one in the world, and all the waies of each one, as if his eye were upon none but them. 6. A sixth furtherance of this holy exactnesse is, to be oft sifting and and examining our selves, veiwing and surveying our hearts and our lives,Prov. 4.26. taking account of our selves how we watch and how we walke, how the cause standeth between us
and God. Stand in awe, and sinne not: examine your hearts on your beds, and be still. And else-where David saith of himselfe, Psal. 119.59.Psal. 4.4. I considered my waies, and turned my feet againe to thy Testimonies. The last is, To make a covenant with his eyes,Prov. 4.25. Psal. 119. that they behold not vanity. Q. What Reasons are there to shew the necessity of this exact and circumspect course? A. It is the Commandement of God, that we should walke before him,Indulgence in the least known sinne, or neg∣lect of the least known duty, when men will not forsake it, it makes a breach between God and them: as amongst friends, a small thing wheein neither will yeeld, may cause a sepera∣tion. Psal. 39.1. Zeph. 2.1. Vis. Jun. rov. 25.26. If a man would be un∣spotted of the world, he must be exact in all things. Jam. 1. ult. for if he faile but a little the world will blaze his name all over. 1 Thes. 4.12. 1 et. 3.12.3. 1 Cor. 10.32. It is the Rule of wisdome that com∣mands us to walke exactly, and he is the wisest man that comes nearest the Rules of wise∣dome: as he is the best writer that comes nearest his Copy. Joh 11.8.9. 1 Chro. 22.13 2 Ch. 24.20. 1 Reg. 8.23. 1 Thes. 5.4.5. Si aliorum excu∣tere tenebras fi∣deles debent ful∣gore suo, quan∣to iu ca∣cuire ipsi de∣bent in proo vita institut. according to all the Statutes and Ordinances that he hath given in Covenant to be observed by us: And we for our parts, have undertaken to serve him in holinesse and righteousnesse all the daies of our life, and without stint or limitation, to go to the utmost in every command: And if in one thing we obey because God commandeth, and he hath promised it, why not in this also? 2. We must all appeare before the Throne of God, to give an account of those things that we have done in the flesh, be they good or evill. At the day of judgement men must give an account of every idle word, and roving thought, much more of every unwarrantable action; have we not cause then to looke heedfully to our waies? Are we not to passe a strict and straight judgement, wherein every secret shall be made open, and in which it shall be rewarded? And shall the Devill de∣lude us, or the wicked world make us believe, we need not be so straight-laced, as to say with David, I will looke to my waies? If the Lord ponder all our paths, ought not we to ponder and sift them them againe and againe? 3. The wicked amongst whom we live are ready to take all advantages, and watch for our haltings, both to harden themselves, and reproach through us the holy and pure Religion of God. For if they can scorne and deride the servants of God for wel-doing, and religious actions; how would they triumph and glory in the falls of any of Gods Worthies? Hence was the exhortation of the Apostle, Col. 4.5. Walke wisely towards them that are without And Phil. 2.14, 15. Do all things without murmu∣rings, and disputings: That ye may be blamelesse, and harmelesse, the Sonnes of God, without rebuke, in the middest of a crooked and perverse Nation, a∣mong whom ye shine as lights in the world. 4. The way to Heaven is full of snares, crosses, and dangers, by reason of our enemies: and therefore requires all our diligence, either to avoide them, or wisely to step over them. We can be very wary in the dangerous waies of this world, to take direction or company, and Armour, and the day light to further us: And why not in this way to Heaven? Besides, it is a narrow way, and on high: all which makes it the more perilous to decline from it. How circumspect had he need to be, that walkes upon an high narrow Rocke, or sailes betwixt two dangerous Gulfes? where it is as perillous to slip, as easie to turne aside, and both at hand, if more then common heed be not taken. 5. This strict course of life is the onely safe and prosperous way. Psal. 119.6. Then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy Commandememts. Then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfill the Statutes and Judgements, which the Lord charged Moses with concerning Israel. And the Reason is evident, Levit. 26.2, 12. For God walketh in the middest of them that keepe his Commandements, and do them, and keepeth Covenant of mercy with them, that love him and walke in his Statutes. It is now time for us to cast off the workes of darknesse, igno∣rance and lust, and to put on the Armour of life, Rom. 13.12. For the night is farre spent, and the day is at hand: and our salvation is nearer then when we believed. Though men in the night take rest, and sleep un∣apparelled, not passing for uncomelinesse: yet in the day they go out to
labour, and have care of civill decency: and Christians, whose night is past, who live in the peepe and breake of the day, must settle themselves as is be∣seeming for the day. Againe, such who are now nearer the fruit and end of their faith and love, such must be more diligent in the works of them: for the end of every thing is of such force, that the nearer we come to it, we do with more courage and diligence ply the meanes which do bring unto it. 7. In the way of obedience there is much comfort and joy; yea, the pleasures of a Crown are not comparable unto it,Psal. 138.5. Jer. 6.16. for the Commande∣ments lead unto rest, and he that walketh in them, shall finde peace unto his soul.This is the onely excel∣lency of a Christian. Is it not the best glass that shews the smallest spots: the brightest light, that shews the least moates: the finest flesh, that is sensile of the least pricking: and the conscience sensible of the least sin or falling, is the perfection of Christianity. 8. Sinne is the disturber of conscience; the onely make-bate that sets a man at odds with God, at contention with himselfe. From whence are inward frettings, disquietnesse, vexation, and discontenment; but from our lusts? From whence are griefes, sorrows, feares, terrours, and troubles; but from conscience of sinne? Look what force any allurement or inordinate passion hath to draw us into sinne, of such power is that sinne unrepen∣ted of, to dazle the eye of faith, and to hinder the sight of Gods free love and mercy towards us. 9. The dreadfull relation that the faithfull stand in to God, to Christ, to the Holy Ghost, to the Saints; doth binde them to walke honourably, excellently, with all circumspection, keeping them∣selves pure from the pollutions of the flesh, and evill customes of the world. For they are the Sonnes of God, who is holy; the Members of Christ, who is pure and undefiled; the Temple of the Holy Ghost, who is the Sanctifier of the elect, and fellow Citizens of the Saints, who are called unto holinesse. Q. How should a man stirre up himselfe to this circumspection? A. First, He must bewaile his former ignorance, rashnesse, sloath, un∣advisednesse, shame himselfe for it, and make it hatefull. How have I erred from thy Commmandements, neglected wisdome, and followed the corrupt lusts of my own heart, passing by thy holy Precepts, as a strange thing. Before men, I have been carefull to carry my selfe warily, that I might not incurre disgrace, advantage mine adversaries, and bring trouble upon my own head. But O Lord, I have not regarded thy presence, I have been negligent in thy service, wherein all diligence and circumspection is too little. Many times I have been drawn away with the pleasures and profits of this world, oft distempered with passions,, not seldome hindered with sluggishnesse, that I have altogether served Satan, or wholly left thy work undone. And if at any time I have gone about what thou requirest, how slightly have I done it, with what remissenesse of heart, dulnesse of spirit, as if I had gone about some dead taske, to which I was not obliged by any duty, in which no profit could be reaped, no pleasure taken. If my Childe or servent should returne such duty, tender such service to me, that am a worme, and no man, could I take it well? If I speake, and they stand still; if I admonish once or twice, and they shew no respect, how am I moved to displeasure? how do I take on as grievously wronged? O Lord, I am ashamed, that I should offer that hard measure unto thy holinesse, that I a base silly creature, would not receive at the hands of another. Secondly, He must quicken himselfe to more diligence and heedfulnesse for the time to come. O my soul, thou hast too long been in security, been indulgent to thy corrupt affections, and foolishly pursued earthly vanities with double diligence, whilest the practice of Piety and Justice hath been cleane forgotten, and almost buried in oblivion. Now therefore awake from sleep, shake off sloath, consider the season, and with speciall labour redeeme the opportunities that through carelesnesse have overslipped thee. The darkenesse is past, and the light is risen, ad∣dresse
thy selfe to the work of the day. Behold, the Lord calleth thee to labour, to make haste to runne the race of his commandements, why sit∣test thou idle, and knittest delaies? The work it selfe is easie, pleasant, and honourable; the recompence of reward unspeakable and glorious. To be industrious in petty matters, exact in trifles, and carelesse or slacke in this of the greatest worth, is the most egregious folly. Looke upon the men of this world, how do they observe their Marts, Faires, Tearmes; what lets and impediments do they breake through for that purpose? By their wisdome and forwardnesse be thou incited to shew more circumspe∣ction in matters of singular importance. It is the Lord thy Creatour, thy Saviour, thy Gloryfier that demands thy service: he that made thee of Nothing, hath bought thee with a Price, will Crown thee with immorta∣lity; he it is that calleth upon thee to serve him with intention. The work is his, the advantage thine own. The worthinnesse, soveraignty, and exceeding love of the Commander, the dignity of the Work, the ex∣cellency and greatnesse of the reward: all these do challenge of thee, the most exquisite care, paines, and diligence, that can possibly be imagined.Rectus is est qui se non intorquet aut inflectit, nec ut loquuntur, ser∣vi foro & tem∣pori sed Deo & conscientiae: qua uquam inte∣rim nihil vetet ∣um qui servit Deo & conscientiae, servire fere & tempori, quan∣do id fit sine detremento gloriâ Dei & conscientiae. O my soul, all that thou hast, yea, ten thousand times more then thou canst repay, thou owest to the Lord: and what canst thou render lesse for shame, then a ready cheerfull willingnesse to do him faithfull service in all things, all the daies of thy life? Thirdly, He must fly unto God by Prayer, intrearing him to work our hearts to this holy circumspection at all times. O my God, I am fully purposed by thy grace, to cleave unto thy Testimonies for ever, and exactly to runne the race of thy Com∣mandments: keepe (I pray thee) this resolution hot and lively in my breast, and direct my feet in thy pathes, that I tread not aside, stum∣ble not in the way. Of my selfe I have no power to stand, or to pre∣serve any sparkle of thy Spirit glowing in my heart; I beseech thee, that hast put this motion into my minde, confirme and establish me therein, unto the end. CHAP. IV. Of the third Property of a godly life, viz. Uprightnesse. What things are comprehended under it. What conformity of the heart, to the will of God implies. Reasons to perswade thereunto. The effect or tokens of Uprightnesse; with the meanes for the attaining thereof. Q. WHat is a third Property of a godly life? A. It must be upright or straight,Two words translated up∣rightnesse.  and  It comes of a Verbe that signifies to go straight, Prov. 15.1. 1 Sam. 6.12. Upright is a Title given to God, Eph. 26 7. Psal. 2.15. Eccl. 12.10.11. Psal. 19.12.8. Psal. 5.8. Psal. 119.137. Eno. 15.26. Deut. 6.18. Psal. 33.1. Prov. 29.10. Psal. 107.7. Descret. p. prima. Dist. 3. Lavat. in Job hom. 2. cap 1. p. 1. 1 Joh. 3.22. Joh. 8.29. Rom. 12.1. 1 Thes. 4.1. Deut. 6.18. Exo. 15.26.  Mic. 7.2. Iob. 33 3  Numb. 23.13.10.  Reg. 3.6. for the word of the Lord is uprightnesse, his Judgments are right or straight; the man that walketh in them, is right or upright. A straight way is shortest betwixt the bounds or points: The word of God, leading directly to Heaven is right or straight; and they that walke according unto it, are said to walke uprightly. And here it may be noted, that to do what is right in the sight of the Lord, Exo. 15.26. and what is pleasing in his sight, are in substance one and the same, and so it is translated by the Seventy, To prepare his heart to seek God, 2 Chro. 9.3. & 17.6. & 12.25. & 13.18. & 21.9. So Judg. 14.3, 7. 1 King. 9.12. 2 Chro. 30.4. Jer. 18.4. Dan. 4.24. Numb. 23.20. Job, 1.38. & 2.3. Job was an upright man.
Q. What things are comprehended under uprightnesse? Psal. 7.10. Psal. 11.2. Psal. 119.7. Psal. 32.11. & 36 10. & 64.10. & 94.15. & 125.4. Psal. 25.8. Borrhaus in Job. 1. Prov. 14.2. & 15.21.  Prov. 29.27. Psal. 37.14 Isa. 33.14, 15. Isa. 26.7. Prov. 15.21. Psal. 94 15 The upright shall follow after it. Psal 7.37. Jam. 1.8. Prov. 21.8. Psal. 125.4, 5. Prov. 2.13.15. & 14.11.A. 1. An holy conformity of heart and soul to the will and pleasure of God. It is said of David, Psal. 109.7. He walked with God in uprightnesse of heart. God saveth the upright in heart. The ungodly shoot privily at the up∣right in heart. And so we reade, Shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. Good and upright is the Lord, his will the most certaine rule of equity and rectitude: and then are our hearts upright, when they stand in an holy confor∣mity to the good pleasure of God. 2. A conversation or course of life agree∣able to the word, in that Vocation, or Calling wherein the Lord hath placed us. He that walketh in his uprightnesse feareth the Lord He that is upright in the way, is abomination to the wicked. He that speaketh  uprightly, shall dwell with the everlasting burning. This is expressed by the phrase of going aright. Gal. 2.14. Heb. 12.13. Prov. 4.26. 3. An universall and constant cleaving to the Lord, notwithstanding all occurrences that might divert or turne us out of the way. An upright heart, called a fixed or established heart, is opposed to a double minde, which is unstable and inconstant: to a crooked heart that steppeth aside from the holy Commandement. 1 Cor. 15.58. Col. 1.23. Q. What is implied in the conformity of heart to the will of God? 1 Chro. 29.17.  Deut 9.5. . 1 Tim. 5.21. Psal. 1 9.28. Cant 1.4. r cteititudibu diligunt t, i. a more forti & vehementi, qui caret salebrias pravitatibus, ut R. Solomon Explicat. Bux. Lexic. Verb. Deut. 12.28.  Act. 21. Ezra. 7.8, 9, 10. A right end never hath a crooked rule leading unto it. He that hath a right end, will go by a straight rule. sal. 24.4. For this cause Israel was called Jeshur Deu. 32.15. & 33.5.26. Isa. 44.2. because this was the thing, which is required in every true Israelite.A. 1. An holy disposition of minde, will and affection, bending themselves to the good pleasure of God, approving, affecting, exercising readily what∣soever he requireth. 2. A godly fervency of heart, which maketh that in choosing and embracing good things, it be equally more slacke or strong, as the goodness of the thing shall be greater or lesser. Thus an upright heart doth bend his force and strength more to performe duties of holiness to God, then to dis∣charge duties towards men. 3. An upright minde, in all his purposes and actions, doth aime directly at the right end, by and just approved meanes. His eye is set stedfastly upon the marke, and will not be removed from it. The discription of an upright man, may be taken out of the Psalmest in other words; He hath cleane hands, and a pure heart, and hath not lift up his soul unto vanity. Q What Reasons may be alledged to perswade to uprightnesse? Pov 11.20. 1 Chro. 2.17 Prov. 15 8.  Psal 97.11. Psal. 32.11. Psal. 64.10. & 112.4. The end of the upright is peace. P al. 37.37 Job. 8.6, 7. Psal. 35.23, 24. Psal 17.7.3. His counte∣nance doth be∣hold the up∣right, Ps. 11.7.A. 1. God that trieth the hearts, hath pleasure in uprightnesse, and grati∣ously tendereth the service that cometh from a willing minde, uprightnesse is chiefly required, most highly esteemed, principally commended in the Saints. The Offerings of a straight heart are free and voluntary, which shall finde wished acceptance and respect. 2. Light is sowen for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. They shall reape it, though for a time they be in affliction. Comfort and joy is reserved after trouble, though it be hidden for the present, as Seed in the ground, which will spring and ripen. Nay, the upright are called upon to rejoyce in all conditions, it being a comely thing in them, to set forth the high acts of God, and sing of his praise. 3. God will not cast off the up∣right, nor leave his soul in adversity. If thou wert pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of the righteous prosperous. He will make it known that he doth regard thee: and though thy beginning be small, yet thy latter end shall greatly increase. 4. The Word of the Lord doth alwaies good to them that walke uprightly. The instructions will sinke into the heart, and the promises cheere and revive it. 5. The integrity of the upright
shall guide and preserve them, that is, shall procure good direction from the Lord, both for his service, and their own happinesse,Mic. 2.7. Recte viventi∣bus omnia bo denunciam Dr. The upright shall dwell in the land, Prov. 2.21. Psal. 25.2. Prov. 11.3. The secret of the Lord is with the up∣right, Prov. 3.32. Prov. 2.7. Psal. 125.4. 1 Sam. 12.23. Psal. 26.11. & 27.11. with Esa. 40.4. Esa. 33.14.15, 16. and make them tractable to follow the same. Contrary to this is the condition of the perverse and crooked, who are not led with uprightnesse, but carried headlong with lusts, and therefore misled by the same to their undoing. For thus standeth the opposition, the integrity of the upright shall guide them in the way, and so preserve them: but the frowardnesse of the wicked will keepe them from the way, and so destroy them. 6. They may boldly pray, and the Lord will hear them. Psal. 25.21. Let integrity and uprightnesse preserve me, for I hope in thy Word. 7. The Lord will be the Shield and defence of the upright in this life, and their Crown and Glory in the life to come. Psal. 7.10. God saveth the upright in heart. 8. The path of uprightnesse, is even, plaine, straight, good, and leadeth the next and shortest way to Heaven that may be, therefore the Saints pray, Let thy good spirit bring me into the Land of uprightnesse, Psal. 45.7. 9. He that is upright in the way shall dwell with the eternall burning, and not be consumed, By an unblameable life we cannot merit Heaven: but the just and faithfull may expect, and shall obtaine by grace, the free promises of God. The Lord will admonish such with feares, as give themselves to all manner of sinne and wickednesse: but as for them that love and follow uprightnesse he a∣grees with them well enough. The upright shall dwell in his presence Psal. 140.15. In the Mountaine of his holinesse. Psal. 15.2. He that walketh uprightly shall never be moved. The Lord stiles himselfe a consuming fire, least his Majesty and Power should be contemned: yet whosoever he be that draw near unto him, with a true desire to please him, he shall feele by the effects, that there is nothing more sweet and amiable then his presence. 10. Another Reason may be taken from the miserable condition of them that be crooked and perverse: for their sinnes are uncovered, their persons hated, their hope shall perish, and their end be most accursed. 11. The blessing of God is extended to the Genera∣tion of the upright, and their Posterity. The Tabernacle of the upright shall flourish, Prov. 14.11. Psal. 112.2. Q. What are the effects or tokens of uprightnesse? A. They are many, amongst which, these are some speciall. 1.Universality. An heavenly disposition of heart, whereby we are affected to love all good, and hate all evill according to the nature and degree thereof, and to have respect universally,Prov. 16.7. 1 Reg. 9.4. & 8 61. Mat. 23 23, 24 Psal. 110.6. , 101.128. 2 King 23.25. 1 Chro. 29.17. Job. 23.10. & 27.10. Psal. 7.10, 11. Job. 3.23. Psal. 78.36, 37 Psal. 119.112.117. not equally to every Commandement. An honest heart mainly desires to please God in matters of justice and judgment, and then to be faithfull in every circumstance, pinne, hoofe and naile. The upright-mans assurance and resolu∣tion is this; Then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy Com∣mandements. 2. Hatred of sinne more in our selves, then in others, and love of good in others, as in our selves. Home-bread sinne is most hatefull, because most hurtfull to the soul, pernicious to our state, dishonourable to God: but good is lovely in all men, because it proceeds from God; and whose heart is right with God, he cannot but rejoyce to see his Name glorified by whom∣soever. 3. Delight in the the most High at all time, in all conditions, pro∣sperity and adversity, evill report, and good report, making God the stay of our souls when trouble oppresseth, fearing before him in prosperity, and perfor∣ming the vowes which we made in adversity. It is a double and crooked heart that starts aside, and varieth in obedience according to outward conditions, that goeth forward or backward, on this side and on that, as occasion requireth: the upright is resolved of his way, and doth breake through all lets and barres whatsoever may be cast before him in his journey. A wicked man hardneth his face: but as for the upright he directeth his way. Prov. 21.29. As the ungodly is obstinate in evill: so is the upright constant in piety, and will not be removed from it. 4. Thankefulnesse for mercies received.Psal. 33.1. An honest and good minde
is no lesse carefull to returne praise for graces and good things received, then to begge the supply of what is wanting. This is the study of the faithfull, in which they most diligently apply themselves, to set forth the goodnesse, Power,To be upright is to stand as it were in Gods presence, as one of the words doth signifie. 2 Cor. 13.7. Isa. 57 2. Prov. 8.9. Isa. 26.10. & 30.10. & 59.14. 2 Sam. 15.3. Amos 3.10. 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. As Job saith, I will approve my waies in his sight. Job. 13.15, 16. Psa. 16.8. Riches, and Mercy of the Lord vouchsafed unto them. 5. Respect of Gods approbation more then of the applause of men, resting contented that we are allowed of him, though disesteemed in the world. A good heart regardeth not much what men think or say, so God be well pleased. I passe little to be judged of mans judgement, yea, I judge not my selfe. As we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speake, not as pleasing men, but God, who trieth our hearts. Let the world fawne or frowne, speake faire or revile, be quiet or persecute, all is one; a faithfull man will go forward in his good course, neither starting aside, nor turning backeAnd therefore is in some measure alike in all places. Psal. 19.168. & 18.22. 2 Cor. 12.19. 2 Cor. 2.17. 2 Cor. 4.2. 2 Cor. 7.12. Job 31.1. Prov. 16.17. Psal. 141.4, 5. Prov. 15.19.. For the heart that is well directed seeketh Heaven and not earth; the favour of God, not the faire countenance of men; rest in the world to come, not peace in this vale of misery: and thus minding his home prepared in Heaven, he goeth on his race, not regarding how little his service is esteemed by earthly men. 6. An honest and upright Christian is carefull to shunne all appearances, occasions and provocations unto sinne, willing to suffer admonition and re∣buke, and constant in the use of all meanes of grace that he might grow therein, 7. To the upright, who are diligent, the hardest things are easie. Q. How should we labour for uprightnesse? Prov. 15.21. Mat. 16.6.12. Prov. 15.21.A. 1. The minde must be truly informed with the knowledge of the truth. Right affections require sound judgement and true understanding. Corrupt Doctrine is as sowre leaven, that doth infect the whole lumpe. If the under∣standing that should governe the inferiour powers of the soul, be perverted with errour, the affections must necessarily move out of order, and runne amisse. He can never shoot straight that takes his aime contrary. 2. Thorny cares, vaine pleasures, sinfull delights must be stocked and digged out of the heart, weeds will grow of themselves, good Corne requires tillage. Per∣versenesse will increase of it selfe, but uprightnesse will not prosper if the heart be not ploughed up.Jer. 4.4. 3. The word of truth, which is that immortall Seed, whereby we are begotten, and transformed into the Image of God, must be effectually received, kindly planted, and soundly rooted in the heart and conscience. The Word is a word of uprightnesse or rectitude; and the heart seasoned and regulated by it, must needs be right in the sight of God. Therefore to conscionable hearing the Word of God, religious me∣ditation must be joyned, that what is learned might be well digested, and we changed into the similitude of it. 4. The word of God truly embraced, doth enflame the heart with an ardent desire to walke with God in all duties of holinesse and righteousnesse.2 Cor. 5.13. 5. Society and fellowship with the faithfull is a signe of uprightnesse, and a meanes of continuance, and increase there∣in. For he that setteth his heart upon Heaven, will be carefull to draw on and encourage his Companion in the same way.Prov. 29.10. Coales laid together do kindle each other, and preserve heate the longer: so it is with the faithfull linked together in holy Communion. Q. How should a man stirre up himselfe to labour after upright∣nesse? A. First, he must finde out, lament, and shame himselfe for the stub∣bornesse of his heart, and perversnesse of his waies. Ah, the frowardnesse of my heart; how crooked have my waies been in the sight of the Lord?
I have regarded vanity, and turned aside from the holy Commandement; doted upon transitory pleasures and profits, undervaluing, neglecting the true Treasure. The streame of mine affections have runne full saile to that which is little worth, worthy to be trampled under-foot: but ebbe to that which they should covet and affect above measure. If the mem∣bers of my body were crooked and deformed; my mouth, face, eyes drawn awry or squint; if one part did swell, another wither and pine away, I should esteeme it an heavy crosse: But te lamenesse, distemper, crooked∣nesse of the soul is much more dangerous and evill, as in it selfe it is more excellent then the body. If in a journey I chance to strike out of the way, or fetch compasse about, when I might have gone a shorter cut, how am I grieved at it, and bewaile my ignorance that I knew not, or negli∣gence, that I enquired not the right way? But in the course of Christi∣anity I have not spared to turne aside and step out of the right path, though to my great hindrance and losse: By pleasures, lusts, passions I have been led up and down I know not whither; for feare or favour I have been drawn into by-pathes, to the great prejudice of inward peace. Oh, how long have I erred from thy Commandements? Secondly, we must stirre up our selves to walke more warily and uprightly before God. I have too long wandered and gone astray like a lost Sheepe, but now I will keepe the Testimonies of my God.Psal. 19.8. For the Commandements of God are right, leading the straight way to life, that life which deserves the Name of life, even eternall life. The Traveller aimes the next way to his journeys end: No wise man will step one foot willingly out of the way to Heaven. If our limbes be crooked, we omit nothing that art or exer∣cise can do to set them straight: and shall not I take care to rectifie my soul, and bring it into right order? Let the wicked walke after their own inventions, and trample the Law of God under-feet,Psal. 119.126, 127. the more I esteeme it to be right, and will be carefull to conforme my heart and waies ac∣cording to the prescription. Thirdly, As all resolutions must be grounded upon Gods grace, so we must fly unto God by earnest Prayer to be e∣stablished and enabled thereunto. O Lord I know there is no other rule of life, then thy Word, in which thou hast declared thy will,Psal. 119.80. and I am fully purposed to be guided thereby: I pray thee keepe me by thy Spirit, that I decline not from it into errour or sinne. Order my steps by thy Word, that no iniquity have dominion over me. Greft thy Law in my heart,Psal. 119.133. Psal. 37.31. 1 Reg. 8.58. that my feet may not slide. It is thy free promise, that thou wilt leade thy people in the way that they should choose, make good thy Covenant unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy feare.
CHAP. V. The fourth Property of a godly life, viz. Integrity or Perfection; What is thereby signified. Thirteen Reasons to perswade thereunto. The effects or tokens of Integrity, with the meanes how it is to be attain∣ed, and preserved. Q. VVHat is the fourth Property of a godly life? trans∣lated  1 Reg. 8.6 15. & 11.4. & 1.3.14. 2 King. 20.3. 1 Chro. 28.9. 2 Chro. 18.17.  Isa. 38.3.11. Deut. 18.13. Gen. 17.1. Psal. 15.2. & 37.37. & 119.1.  1 Reg. 8.61. Cant. 5.2. Jos. 24.14. Cant. 4.2. Sept.  Psal. 15.2. & 8.24.31.33. & 19.14.A. It must be intire or perfect. Let your heart be perfect with the Lord your God, to walke in his Statutes, and to keep his Commandments. Deut. 32.4. Est integritas respectu partium integralium, & respectu functionum & facultatum. Q. Is any Christians life absolutely perfect? Psal. 18.30. Mat. 5.48. Psal. 19.7. Eph. 4.13. Heb. 12.23. Heb. 5.11. & 6.1. Phil. 3 15. 1 Cor. 14.20.  vocan∣tur Christiani quod omnium vera vertutum semina sint ipsis a spiritu infita; quamvis n∣dum ad o leve∣runt Beza in, Ma. Gen. 6.9. Job. 1.1. 2 King. 20.3.  1 King. 15.14  2 Chro. 5.17.  1 Chro. 29.9. & 16.9. & 19.9. & 25.20. Eccl. 7.22. Jam 3.2. 1 Joh. 1.8.  Prov. 11.20. Job. 9.20, 21, 22. & 8.20.25.18.1.3. & 2.21.22. Psal. 18.23.A. The word perfect signifies 1. That which is without spot, blemish or defect; and thus God and his Law are said to be perfect. 2. They are said to be perfect, who have profited more in the knowledge of Christ crucified, and the race of Piety, then others: And this is a comparative perfection, in respect of those Babes and young Christians, that are newly entered into the Schoole of Christ. 3. He is perfect in the phrase of Scripture, whose heart is intire and whole with God, though they be stained with some imperfections. Thus Noah, Joh, Hezekiah, Asa are perfect. But this is not meant of perfection in mea∣sure or degrees, as being without all sinne, but when men by the grace of God, keep themselves in the undefiled way, and sinne hath not dominion over them. Psal. 19.13. Then shall I be perfect, that is, without blot. The perfect man is opposed to the perverse, froward, and restlesse wicked, and to him that turneth hither and thither. Prov. 28.6. If I say I am perfect, mine own mouth shall prove me perverse. Psal. 18.23. I was also perfect before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. Jacob is said to be a perfect man, or innocent, plaine, simple, unfained, Gen. 25.27. without rebuke. Sin that hath been conveyed unto us, hath an integrity it. Psal. 19.89. Josh. 24.14. Deut. 18.3.  1 King. 8.61. 2 King. 20.3.  2 Chro. 15.14. Psal. 119.30, 3. C ro. 12.33. 2 Cor. 13 11. with 38. an intire is oppo∣sed to a double heart. oppouiturlli quod mancum & mutilaum est sicnt de victi∣mis ita usure patur. Iam. 1.4. Jer. 3.10. 1 King. 2.4. Psal. 9.1. 2 King. 23.3.25. Deut. 26.16. & 10.12. & 30.1. 1 Sam. 12.24. Ioel 2 12. Ier. 29.13. Psal. 119.69. Psal. 26 1. & 7.8. Psal. 101.6. Psal. 119 1. Iob. 4.6. Ma. 5.48. Partialis, maca & mutila erat pharisaeorum dilectio, ergo Cogno. Chem. har. 151. & 1 Tim. 3.2. Apoc. 14.5. Phil 1.4. 2 Cor. 16.11. Levit. in Job. c. 1. hom. 2. p. 2. 2 King. 10.31. 1 King. 15.3.  2 Chro. 25.2. & 26.4. & 27.2. 1 King. 14.3 &. 15.3. 1 King. 11.4. 2 Sam. 15, 11. 1 Reg. 22, 34.Q What things are implied in this integrity or perfection? A. 1. Integrity implies a throughout holinesse, an heart wholly and inse∣parably cleaving unto the Law of God in all things. 1 Thes. 5.23. When all the Powers of the soul are sanctified to every holy duty, and have a spirituall continuity amongst themselves, that they all incline and move to all duties of piety and justice, then is the heart perfect. The body is intire when all parts are so knit together, that each is preserved: the soul is intire, when all the parts of piety and righteousnesse are riveted together in it, and in the whole. Thus to serve God in integrity of heart, and with the whole heart is one and the same for substance. Secondly, It noteth intirenesse of conversation according to the Law of God, in every place, state and condition of life. Blessed are the perfect in the way, that is, who live intirely in this life, and in conversation are unblemi∣shed. And they that walke thus in their integrity, are said to be holy, harme∣lesse, unblameable, without fault, unblemished, perfect, well set in joynt. But
on the contrary, the wicked double-minded, such as in rest externall work of Pie∣ty, or depart from the Commandement of God, are said not to cleave unto the Lord with perfect hearts, or all their hearts. As it is not of Abijan, that his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God; and of Amaziah, Ʋzziah, Jo∣tham, they did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with per∣fect hearts: yet, of Solomon, that when he was old, his wives turned away his heart after other gods, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord, as was the heart of David his Father. 3. It notes ingenuity, singlenesse, or simplicity. Q. What Reasons may perswade to integrity or perfection?Gen. 17.1. Animalia nas∣cuntur  Att. 1. de hist. Ani. cap. 8. A woman may love many as friends, but one as an Hus∣band. If God he wholly ours, we must be wholly his. And if we joyne ought with God, or take in ought with him, we do not, we can∣not cleave to him alone when there are objects upon which the heart is set, divided. The intire shall dwell in the Lords Sanctuary. Psal. 15.1. Conjuga amor natura sua ejus∣modiest ut non nisi unius esse possit We cannot serve God, un∣lesse we serve him intirely. He cannot be our Master, if we have any other Master, Rom. 6.0. Mat. 6.24. Rev. .2. A. It is required of us in the Covenant of grace; Walke before me, and be per∣fect. The most Holy God will never marry himselfe to a spirituall Adulteresse, that doth affect any other more or besides him. Men of divided hearts can have no fellowship or communion with God. 2. Integrity is the qualification of a sub∣ject capable of remission of sins and eternall blessednesse through grace. Bles∣sed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth no sinne; and in whose spirit there is no guile. 3. God will passe by the imperfections which he espieth in the best service of his Children, when once he seeth their hearts to be intire and perfect towards him. Hypocrisie drowneth many excellent graces, and causeth God to take no notice of them: But sincerity is so well pleasing to his Majesty, that if it be not shaken, he will not see many other infirmities. This is the challenge against the Church of Sardis; I have not found thy works perfect before God. David had many imperfections, and through infirmity did often sin against the Law: but he is not accused to break the whole Law in any thing, save in the matter of Ʋriah. The Holy Ghost hath noted sundry defect in Asa: but addeth this of him by way of conclusion, yet his heart was perfect towards the Lord all his daies. Con∣trarily in Jehu, after a large description of many excellent things, it is observed; But Jehu regarded not to walke in the Law of the Lord with all his heart: And so his service in destroying Ahabs house, was reckoned murther. Hezekiah is bold to pray in behalfe of them that came unprepared to the Passover: 2 Chro. 30.15.19. The good Lord be mercifull to him that prepareth his whole heart to seek the Lord God, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary. An Husband will beare with many aberrations in the behaviour of his Wife so long as he is perswaded of the intirenesse of her heart towards him: so dealeth the Lord with them that feare before him with all their hearts. 4. The perfect shall not be confounded: Let my heart be intire in thy Statutes, that I be not ashamed. For God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he take the wicked by the hand. He may seeme to neglect, he doth forget them that follow after holinesse; he is thought to favour, he doth abhorre the workers of wicked∣nesse and sinne. 5. The eyes of the Lord runne to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himselfe strong in the behalfe of them, whose heart a perfect towards him. Howsoever they may be weake in themselves, in him they shall be victo∣rious; his power shall be perfited in their weakenesse. For as it is in the Psalme, With the perfect, thou wilt shew thy selfe perfect: thou wilt not faile him in his need. This is the nature of God, that he frameth himselfe to the dispositions of men, good to the good, hard to the stubborne, intire to the perfect that waite upon him. The Lord knoweth the daies of the perfect, and their inheritance shall
be forever:God heares them tha pray with their whole heart. Jer. 29.1, 13. Is found of them that seek him which their whole heart. 1 King. 15.5. Psal. 119.2. 1 King. 15.14. 2 King. 10.31. Hos. 1.4. 2 Chro. 30.15.19. A Christian can never be perfect in de∣gree, if he be not perfect in parts or intire. What is de∣fective in the parts, cannot be made up by any growth. Eph. 4.13. Job, 8.20.  Psal. 37.18, 19. 2 Chro. 16.9. Psal. 18.25.  Psal. 37.18 Prov. 28.18. He that walk∣eth in his inte∣grity is safe. Prov. 13.6. & 1.5, 6. Psal. 25.21. Let integrity and upright∣ness preserve me. He that walk∣eth in his inte∣grity walketh surely. Prov. 10.9, 29. Prov. 11.20. Psal 147.11. Psal. 5.12. Prov. 16.7. Deut. 33.11. Isa. 62.4. Prov. 28.6 & 19.1. See Ju. & Trem. in Prov. 2.6. Cartw. ibid. Psal. 84.11. that is, he seeth to what evils they lie open, what helpe they need, and ordereth all events to their speciall good. 6. Righteousnesse keepeth him that is intire in the way, but wickedness overthroweth the sinner. Integrity and righte∣ousness is a guard, that doth continually keep watch and ward: It doth not onely leade men to a good way, and tell them what is their duty, and fit to be performed, but maketh the way passable for them, and them prosperous in it. 7. They that are of a froward heart, are abhomination to the Lord: but such as are intire in their way, are his delight. All that are resolute and wilfull in any sinfull course, though with never so great mirth and laughter, are abhorred of the Lord for the present, which he will make known by his judgements upon them in due time: but they that are intire in their heart and way, (as the other are froward in heart and behaviour) are greatly beloved of God now, and shall more fully see, and feele, and enjoy the comfort and happinesse of his favour, in time to come. 8. Integrity joyned with poverty, is to be preferred before riches separated from it. Better is the poore that walketh in his integrity, then he that is perverse in his waies, turning aside now on this side, now on that, though he be rich. 9. The Lord God will withold no good thing from them that walke in integrity: for he is both their Sunne and Shield, he will give grace and glory. As the Sunne doth illustrate, cherish and quicken all things with its heate and light: so doth the Lord visit the upright, and refresh them by his Spirit: yea, and as with a Shield, protect them from all evill. 10. Integrity addes to the glory of our good actions, even such as are but of the lower sort. There is not the meanest duty whatsoever, which integrity will not set a faire glosse upon, that in some re∣spects it shall be matchable even to workes farre greater in their own nature. A poor labouring man that lives by his hands, having performed holy obedience to God therein with an intire heart, may have as much comfort on his death-bed, as the best Minister or Magistrate, whose service it selfe is farre more honour∣able; yea, if his integrity be greater, his comfort also shall be greater. For God regards not so much the matter, as the forme of obedience, not so much the thing done, as the affection wherewith we do it. Wise men regard more the minde of the giver, then the value of the gift. When we give our hearts wholly and intirely first to God, then is our service how small soever, very acceptable to his Majesty. It is not the greatnesse or multitude of those good workes which we have done, but the good disposition of an honest and intire heart in the doing of them, that doth bring comfort, as the internall qualifica∣tion of that faith which makes a sound plea for mercy before the Throne of Grace. The Psalmist pronounceth them blessed, that walke in the undefiled way. He makes no choice of the way, he doth not say, Blessed are they that are up∣right in the way of the Ministery or the Magistracy, but speaking indifferently of any way allowable by the Word, be it never so simple or meane, he saith, Blessed are the undefiled in the way, whatsoever it be, be it to be the scourer of Channels, or drudge in a Kitchin. An halting heart dasheth the acceptance of the most glorious worke: an intire heart addeth weight to the basest service The Widowes Mite was little in worth, had not her good heart raised its price. In value it came farre short of the superfluities that the rich men cast into the Treasure: but her heart was better, and so her gift greater then theirs. When He∣zekiah had received the sentence of death, what was his comfort? even this, the conscience of his integrity. O Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. This was his refuge. Though those good works he had done were in regard of his Calling of the highest note, the restoring of the true worship of God, the purging of the defiled Temple and Priest-hood: yet he doth not comfort himselfe in those so worthy works, but in the perfection of his heart; knowing well, that the worke it self, though never so glorious, is of no esteeme, if the heart be rotten, perverse, or hal∣ting.
11. An heart well compact and knit fast together in the Lord (as is the intire) is valiant and couragious in all dangers, trials, temptations.Prov. 10 29. It is not put out of countenance with slanderous tongues, nor shaken with feare of troubles. He that walketh in integrity, walketh boldly.Prov. 10.9. Though mine adversary should write a Book against me, would I not take it upon my shoulder, and binde it as a Crown unto me, saith Job? The hypocrite in peace and security may seeme strong and valourous; but let God by some afliction dragge him out as it were by the eares from his lurking hole, and convent him before his Tribunall, and thou shalt not see any thing more abject and heartlesse. Then is that of the Prophet verified, Esa. 33.14, 15. The sinners of Sion are afraid, a feare is come among the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with the everlasting burning? But the intire heart, even in this case, holds out confident and couragious. And no marvell: for every man that walketh in his integrity hath the priviledge of a treble guard, the guard of Gods protection, of the good Angels, and of a good Conscience, for his defence against all adversary power.Prov. 28.18. Psal. 7.8. Who so walketh intirely shall he sa∣ved; but he that is perverse in his waies, (that is, one thing in heart and thought, another in conversation, or that fashioneth himselfe to all occasions) shall fall at once, suddenly and before they be aware. Marke the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace, Psal. 37.37. For the Lord shall help and deliver him; he shall deliver him from the wicked, and save him because he trusteth in him, Psal 37.40. The Lord will defend the perfect, and he hath given his Angels charge over them, to beare them in their hands,Psal. 91.11 and keep them in their waies: in which respect they may say with the Prophet, How many so∣ever rise up against us, they be more and stronger that be with us, then they that rise up against us. Moreover they are blessed of God with a good conscience, which is as a strong Castle, against which no batteries of the Enemy can pre∣vaile; as a valiant Champion, who will not be daunted with any proud on-set of the adversary, which he knoweth to be weake and of no strength. As there is nothing more base, or sooner abashed then a corrupt conscience, destitute of integrity: so nothing more bold and hardy then a good and perfect conscience. David in the middest of all his reproaches had the face to professe the name Of God, before Kings and Princes,Psal. 119 23. whithout ever being blanked at their pre∣sence. And shall a man so guarded, regard the enmity of any: feare the threatenings of any, though never so mighty? be dismayed at any hard con∣dition that he is fallen into for the present? No, he will not be afraid for any evill tidings, for his heart is fixed and trusteth in the Lord. 12. An intire heart is a Channell or Barke in which the graces of the spirit are contained, and faith doth swimme above all stormes and tempests. But a minde void of integrity, is full of slifters or chinckes, that if the most holy liquor of Piety be offered, it is powred in and out together, and at once. If the worke of grace be imperfect in parts, let it grow up never so fast, it can never be perfect or in∣tire. If the Plant be imperfect, it will never be a perfect Tree. An heart un∣sanctified or that makes a major part against it selfe, cannot truly serve God. This is the nature of integrity, that by it the soul is intire in it selfe, and hath a spirituall continuity, which may be shadowed forth by the similitude of things corporall: and therefore so long as integrity is preserved, the heart is apt to continue and keepe safe the graces of the spirit; if it be cracked grace would be lost, should not God make up the breaches of it. A soul destitute of Piety is starke dead; an heart without integrity is next to death or destruction, as a Ship full of holes, or a body unloosed or dissolved. 13. The upright shall remaine in the land for ever, and leave their inheritance unto their Children. Prov. 2.21. Who so causeth the righteous to go astray in an evill way,Prov. 28.10. Prov. 20.. he shall fall himselfe into his own pit: but the upright shall have good things in possession,
and their Children after them are blessed. Q. What are the effects or tokens of integrity? A. 1. A setled, well-advised and deliberate desire, resolution, will and en∣deavour to be informed what is good and acceptable in the sight of God,Act. 11.23. and to direct his waies at all times, and in all places according to the rule of righteous∣nesse. The just man walketh in his integrity, Prov. 20.7. It is the commendation of David, that he did that which was right in the fight of God, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the daies of his life, 1 King 15.5. An intire heart is not divided, halting, or double, making a major part against it selfe: but is fully resolved upon mature deliberation, which produceth constant practice,2 Chro. 6.14. Psal. 119.34. to cleave unto the Lord, and walke as in his presence. The fruites of which resolution are these. First, There is no sinne though never so deare, precious, or profitable, which a perfect Christian will not willingly see and judge in himselfe. I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sinne, Psal. 38.18. Secondly, It workes a dislike of sinne in all, even in those that are most neare and deare unto us.1 King. 15.13, 14. Thirdly, With this is joyned a continuall care to preserve himselfe innocent from all sinne, specially his particular, and formerly beloved transgressions. I was perfect before him, and I kept my selfe from mine iniqui∣ty.2 Sam. 22.24. Fourthly, In all conditions he will looke to himselfe, that he be not carried away, with unbridled passions. They that are intire, are said to have fulfilled after the Lord, that is fully or intirely to have followed him In regard of seve∣rall estates men are subject to be transported with divers affections;Num. 14 24. & 32.11, 12. Deut. 1.36. Josh. 14.8, 9, 14. Prov. 21.29. as with pride, pleasure, security in prosperity; impatience, discontent in adversity. Where∣fore the intire Christian doth ever look to his heart, that it be not distempered with these things. I will walke (saith David) in the undefiled way, Oh when wilt thou come unto me! Fiftly, If the heart be intire with God, it will admit his Word for direction in all things. Thy Testimonies are my delight, and my Counsellours, Psal. 119.2. That is, they governe my minde and heart, of them I take advice.Gen. 20.5, 6. Psal. 8 2. 2 Sam. 22.23. Prov. 19 1. Amos 5 10. Jam. 1.27. Luk. 1.6. Psal. 119.1, 3. An intire eart is prepa∣red and ready to serve God. 2 Cho. 29.34. Job 2.9, 10. 2 Joh. 8.2. 2 Chro. 28.9. Herein Abimelech failed, when he tooke Sarah from her Hus∣band. The Psalmist saith of himselfe, All his Judgements were before me: and I did not put away his Statutes from me Sixthly, The perfect man putteth away froward and perverse speeches. The poor that walketh in his inregrity, is opposed to him that is perverse in his lips, that speaketh froward things. Seventhly, His care is to keep himself unspotted of the world, doing that which is honest, pure, praise-worthy in the sight of God and man. This note the Prophet David giveth; for having said, Blessed are the undefiled in the way, he teacheth us to discerne them by this effect, Surely they do no iniquity. Eighthly, He will re∣ceive evill at the hands of God thankefully, as well as good, and blesse his Name when he crosseth his desires, and taketh from him what he delights in, as he doth when he granteth the desire of his heart in outward blessings. There is nothing so deare, but he will part with it for Christ, nor so hard, but he can be content to suffer for his sake Mar. 10.21. Mat. 19.21. Tenthly, He presseth hard towards the marke he aimes at, an higher degree of holinesse, 2 Cor. 7.1. Phil. 3.13, 14, 15. Lastly, He that walketh in his integrity will deale conscionably at home and a∣broad, in all duties of his generall and particular Vocation towards all men. I will walke in the middest of mine house, in the integrity of my heart. I will set no evill thing before mine eyes. Q. By what meanes is this integrity to be attained and preserved? A. Integrity is the gift of God, infused into the heart by the Holy Ghost, but we may not in this respect neglect the meanes which he hath ordained for the at∣tainment and preservation of it. God, and none but he, did place David in the Hill Sion, and gave Gideon victory over the Midianites, as they both well knew and firmely believed: but their belief hereof did not emasculate their mindes, or i their hands from using such strength and valour as they had. 1. Care must
be had to furnish the minde with affectionate knowledge of God in Christ Jesus. And thou Solomon my Sonne, know thou the God of thy Fathers,1 Chro. 28.9. and serve him with a perfect heart. The knowledge of God begets in us a similitude of God: When we come to understand what he is to us, we are made to him what he requireth. As sound knowledge entreth, it stampeth the Image of God upon the heart: for it assimilates the minde to the object seene and discerned. 2. All holy meanes must be used to incorporate the word into the heart, that it may sea∣son every affection, and beare mild universall sovereignty over us. For when the heart is transformed throughout into the nature of the Word, and every power of soul is brought into subjection by an unfained, sovereigne, wel-rooted faith, it is intire in parts, though imperfect in degrees. Herein all diligence and paines must be taken, by preparation, hearing, meditation, and observation of all unexpected occasions of griefe, sorrow, feare, joy or such like, to bring the Word into the affections, that it may sweeten their disposition, and governe their motion. 3. In all endeavours we must include Prayer to God in the Name of Christ as a chiefe associate: for God ordinarily lets in sanctifying grace at the same gate, at which honest hearty Prayers go out. 4. The fourth meanes is for a man alwaies to possesse his heart with the apprehension of Gods presence, and so to keep it in his feare continually, to walke with God as being in his eye, and seeing him that is invisible. This remembrance of Gods all-seeing presence will make men study to approve themselves before God in all their courses, and to sticke unto him with their whole hearts. Could the eye of a jealous Husband prie into every privy corner of his Wives heart, she would be afraid to hide any strange lover in her secret affection. If but a man, nay, if but a Childe could looke into our hearts, we durst not deale doubly and deceitfully? What? God sees us, and shall we durst to dally with him? shall I give him part of my heart, and reserve another part for the world, for plea∣sure, for sinne? How should not God finde this out? for he searcheth the heart and reines, and understandeth the secret cogitations of every soul. 5. The fifth meanes is diligently to review all workes of obedience, and our affections in the doing of them; and to observe what discomfort and trouble followes the mai∣med and defective performance of good duties. And withall, when we take our selves, in an holy indignation to take revenge of our selves, judgeing and con∣demning our selves before God. The very thinking of the after-reckonings we must come to, when we have done our worke, will make us take heed how we do it: The remembrance of the losse and punishment that he shall sustaine, whose workes are not perfect before the Lord, will stirre up respect to every Commandement. For who is there that useth for all his actions, at the daies end to call himself to a severe examination, as the hard Master doth his Servants, that must not needs, in the very middest of his actions reason thus with himself? Anon all this which now I do, must very narrowly be looked over, if the reason why I do it, my affections in doing, and the work it selfe be maimed, halt, or suffer defect in the parts thereof, I shall smart for it; O the wrings and se∣cret pinches which mine own guilty heart will give me; yea, the sentence which by my own Covenant, I am tied to passe upon my selfe, in case my heart be partiall to the Lord, and my work deformed? If my work be not perfect, shall I not loose all my labour, and be rejected with it? Lastly, it is good to meditate seriously upon the joyes of Heaven, and the rich recompence of re∣ward that is reserved for them, that cleave unto God with their whole heart. If the happinesse of the Saints hereafter do rightly affect, and be soundly be∣lieved, a man will be contented to part with all that he hath to purchase that Treasure. Whatsoever he hath laid next his heart, he will abandon it with de∣testation, rather then deprive himselfe of that eternall Inheritance, which God hath prepared.
Q. How should a Christian stirre up himself to strive after perfection more and more? A. First, He must shame himselfe for his halting, and make it odious. Ah, the division of my heart, the maimednesse of my service is so apparent, that I cannot conceale from my conscience. I have lodged sinne, vanity, pleasure, the world in the closet of my heart, which should have been kept intirely for the Lord. My purposes for good are weak, my resolutions variable; oft-times by occurences and occasions I have been drawn aside. In the performance of good duties I have served mine own corrupt affection, and doing what is right, not done it with a perfect heart. Mine affection to good hath been partiall, base, defor∣med: In greatest matters I have been remisse, precise in lesser; zealous in one, carelesse in another; ready to runne according to inclination, not looking to the direction of thy truth. I have been forward to hear, not so carefull to medi∣tate and make thy Word mine own; eager and fiery against grosse prophannesse, not so vigilant to bridle rash anger, and bosterous passions. My love to thy Children is neither pure nor universall; I am apt to admire some, disesteeme others, according as they carry themselves towards me, and fit me in my humour. If he be a cursed deceiver, that having a Male in his Flock, doth offer that which is halt and lame to the Lord: how justly might I be confunded who have wickedly departed from my God, and set mine affections upon things of naught? Will an Husband accept of divided love in his Wife? Will a Prince re∣gard that which is lame, blind, or sicke for a Present from his Subjects? O Lord, I have dealt exceeding foolishly in tendering such spotted service unto thy High∣ness. Secondly, He must resolve to keep himself more intirely to the Comman∣dements of God for the time to come. I have wickedly departed from my God, but now I will returne,Psal. 119.69.67. 1 King 8.48. and keep his Commandements with my whole heart. What can I tender unto his Majesty lesse then my self? How can I for shame intreate his favour, unlesse I cleave unto him with a perfect heart? Can I be so impudent as to desire God to love me, and give me leave to love sinne which he abhorreth? Can I looke to be married unto him in mercy, truth, and compassion, if my heart do not affect him above all, and other things in and through him alone? The Lord is a great King; his service must be without spot or blemish. His eye searcheth the heart, and perfectly understandeth the secret motions afarre off; and he will give to every one according to his waies, and as he knoweth his heart. Men of place look to have their pleasure,1 Kng. 8.39. done in all things by such as attend up∣on them: and shall I presume to call my selfe a servant of the living Lord, when I do his pleasure in part onely. My obedience cannot be perfect in degree so long as I live here, but through the grace of God it shall be universall, and I will strive towards perfection.Psal. 119.68. Lord, I have covenanted to sticke unto thy Testimo∣nies, and by thy grace I will keep them all the daies of my life. Thirdly, He must fly unto the Lord by hearty Prayer. Psal. 51.10. Create in me, O God, a cleane heart, renew a right constant spirit within me. Psal.. 8.58. Establish me with thy grace, that I never fall from mine integrity Psal. 119.8. I will keep thy Satutes, O forsake me not utterly.
CHAP. VI. The fifth Property of a godly life, viz. Truth and Faithfulnesse. What thereby is implied, opened in sundry Particulars. Divers Reasons to shew the necessity and use thereof. The meanes by which it may be attain∣ed and strengthened. The effects or evidences of Truth or Sound∣nesse; with sundry helpes both for the finding out and preventing un∣soundnesse or guile of spirit. Q. VVHat is the fift Property of a godly life?Esa. 38.3. Josh. 24.14. 2 King. 20.3. Joh. 1.47. Deut. 32.20. Esa. 26.2. Psal. 12.1. & 31.23. Psal. 101.6. Prov. 20.6. 1 Reg 3.6. 1 Reg. 2.4. 2 Pet. 1.12. Psal. 44.17. Psal. 51 6. Veritas est vita ingenua, & omnis fraudis expers. Eph. 4.15. 1 Sam. 12.24. Phil. 1.18. The word signifying in tienesse, is translated sim∣plicity, 2 Sam. 15.11. & Eph. 4.24. A. It must be true and faithfull; Lord remember, how I have walked before thee in truth. Truth is translated , Isa. 39.8. Sept. Sic men∣sura vera Thargumistis, quae Hebraeis justa, &  justitiam facere. This is it which our Saviour commended in Nathanael, Behold a true Israelite in whom is no guile. The wicked are said to be a froward Generation, Children in whom is no faith: but the righteous Nation that keepeth the truth, are called faithfull. It is observed of David, that he walked before God in truth, in righteousnesse, and uprightnesse of heart. And these three go ever together in the subject, though the things in themselves be distinct and different. Q. What is implied in Truth and Faithfulnesse? A. 1. Knowledge and judgement is presupposed. Truth of judgment goeth be∣fore truth of heart. 2. Truth implies soundnesse or solidity in grace, opposite to those superficiall or shallow-planted graces, which may be found in the tem∣porary Christian, enduring but for a time. This is truth in the reines or inward parts, which seasoneth the heart throughout, and makes it true: whereas the heart of the temporary Christian is false and unsound, because his graces are sleightly rooted, though true for substance. 3. It implies sincerity or godly simplicity without fraude, craft, guile, or dissimulation, where the inside and outside are one, the heart and mouth are equall and do consent. Holinesse of truth, is true or sincere holinesse. To walke in the truth, is to walke sincerely, or in godly simplicity; To do the truth, is to deale sincerely without fraud: for truth is ingenuous, voide of simulation. And in this signification some under∣stand that of the Apostle; Love rejoyceth in the truth, that is,Joh. 3.5. 1 Joh. 1.6. Joh. 3.21. Eph. 4.15. Visc Prov. 21.3. & facere judi∣cem Heb. Esa. 44.26. Sept. verum faciens, id est, ratum firmum. 1 Cor. 13.6. Dius. Praeter. in hunc loc. Eph 4.25. Joh. 1.17. Joh. 4.23, 24. Ea. 61 8. & 10.20. & 16.5. Jer. 26.5. & 28.9. & 32.41. Prov. 29.14. Rom. 6.7. Rom. 1 9. love sincerely or in truth, rejoyceth with them that rejoyce. Truth is opposed to lying and falshood, as also to Legal rites, Figures and shadows: in which senses it may be applied to this purpose, as not in a plaine simplicity opposite to lying and empty shewes. And thus to obey from the heart, and to serve God in spirit, is to serve God in truth or sincerity without dissimulation. If any will purpose to shew this in some things, yet not resolve to shew it in all, even this is the man, who is farre from sincerity. 4. It notes a pure or cleare-shining innocency in all things, free from the mixture of Leaven in Manners or Doctrine. The Apostle Peter writeth to the dispersed Jews, to stirre up their pure mindes; what is that but mindes furnished and seasoned with an holy perspicuity of truth. There∣fore Paul prayeth for the Philippians, that they might abound in knowledge, and in all judgment, that they might be able to discerne things that differ, that they might be sincere. The word used by the Apostles in both places, signifieth proper∣ly something tried by the light of the Sunne. And it is a Metaphor (as some suppose) taken from the custome of the Eagle, whose manner is (if we may believe those that write the naturall Story) to bring her young out of the Nest before they be full fledge, and to hold them forth against the full sight of the Sunne; the sight whereof those of them that can with open eye endure, she
retaineth and bringeth up as her own; the rest that cannot brooke it, and winke at it, she rejecteth and casteth off as a barstardly Brood. Others think it rather taken from the usuall practice of Chapmen in the view and choice of their wares. A wise wary Chapman that hath to do with a deceitfull Mer∣chant, Draper, or other, one that keepeth his wares in obscure places, where the defects of them cannot so easily be discerned, or hath false lights that may helpe to give a counterfeit glosse to them, he will take no ware of him upon his word, but will first diligently view it, tosse it and turne it, to and fro, over and over, try how it is in the middest as well as at both ends, bring it forth into the light, hold up his Cloath against the Sunne, see if he can espie any defect or default in it; he knoweth he may easily else be over-reached. The like must be our practice,2 Cor. 2.17. in all matters of faith and manners: And this is to walke in the truth, when we have our conversation honest, and hold the truth of Doctrine purely,2 Cor. 1.12. The sincerity of God, that is, godly since∣rity 1 Cor. 5.8. Psal. 78.8. Psal. 78.37. as may endure the triall of the light. Thus the Apostle joyneth since∣rity and truth together, as one and the same, or as the speciall and generall, sincerity being a branch of truth. 5. It imports firmenesse and constancy in every holy duty of our generall or personall calling, of piety or righteousnesse. A faithfull Spirit is steadfast with God: the ground of declining is lack of truth. Their heart was not with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. If the heart be not true, what shew soever a man makes, yet he is but like an Apple rotten at the coare, or as an House built upon the sand, the one of which though it be beautifull will soone putrifie, the other though it be fairely set, yet will quickly fall? A man may have many worthy gifts, yet if he want sincerity, upon a suddain may be taken from him,Mat. 13.12. Luk. 18.18. both that which he hath, and that which he seemes to have; and his end be as the Figge-Trees, which making onely a shew with Leaves having no Fruit, (being cursed) lost even those also, and withered away by degrees, being good for nothing but the fire. But grace powred into an honest and sound heart, will abide for ever: the course of a true Christian is permanent and continueth to the end. Q. Judas and many others that have fallen away were men worthily endowed, be∣yond many Christians that be true and sound-hearted. A. We must distinguish sound, wel-rooted and constant grace, received in∣to a true heart, from fained or temporary. The wicked have streames of graces often, but they have not the Fountaine of grace in them, they have not lively communion with Christ,Eph. 3.17. as the godly have, and therefore their graces wither. It is a true living faith that maketh Christ to dwell in the heart, and this is the cause why our grace lasteth. Though we finde ebbs (by daily experience,) and this water to runne exceeding low: yet having the Well-head in us, and re∣newing our faith on him the quickening Spirit, Rivers do afresh runne out of our Bellies, and the current of grace as high as before. The Temporizer though he have a Streame of grace, yet wanting the Fountaine to feed it, it must needs dry away; as those Streames or Ponds which have no Spring nor head of Water to maintaine them, cannot continue. Again, the wicked have many graces true for substance, but not truly planted, and therefore their hearts are never sound. For they receive the grace they have, retaining their interest in the world, and the pleasures and profits thereof, or some notorious sinne, or course in lesser evils, wherein they never seriously, deliberatly, constantly purpose reformation; Evermore some inferiour good is laid closer to the heart, and hath deeper rooting therein, then the word of promise; and this maketh grace it cannot be held with them. For as a stomack ill affected with choler, though never so whole∣some meates be received into it, yet it cannot hold them, but is provoked to cast: so where there is this obstruction of the soul, the wilfull love of any sin∣full course, or subordination of grace to boisterous, distempered, earthly passions, whatsoever grace is received into the heart, it will not let it rest, but
maketh the soul cast it up upon all occasions. Q. What Reasons may shew the necessity and use of this truth? A. 1. Sincerity is the girdle whereby all other graces are tied close unto us: So the Apostle in the discription of the spirituall Armour, calls it,Eph 6.14. the Girdle of truth. And therefore here also is true of all men, that we say of Children in the Proverb, ungirt, unblest. This Girdle hath these Uses. First, it doth adorne us: For this was the use of the studded Belt, which the Souldiers did weare to hide the gaping joynts of their Armour, which would have been unseemly: and nothing doth more adorne a soul or beautifie our actions, and raise admira∣tion in them, then uprightnesse; as our Saviour commending Nathanael, gave this speech of him; Behold a true Israelite in whom there is no guile. Secondly,Joh. 1.47. A Girdle doth tie other cloathes about us, which otherwise the winds would blow abroad, and would hang but loose upon us: so this Girdle of truth doth containe and hold together all other graces, wherewith the soul is arrayed; and without truth to keep them together, in time all of them are blown away with the winde of temptation. That grace which was not knit together with honesty of heart, came to nothing in the end, as appeares in the Parable. The body when the soul is once gone, may not long stay above ground; it must needs be buried: So the Hypocrites graces wanting sincerity, which is the very soule and life of all grace, they are but a stinking carrion, and what should an odious ugly carkass do, but be thrown into the Pit? An unsound Horse that hath some secret fault, may carry as good a shew as the soundest, and at the first for a mile or two, will travell as freshly and cheerfully as any, but at length he tires and gives over. So it is with an unsound Christian, notwithstanding all his faire beginnings and hopefull entrances, he continueth not. Thirdly,Cingulum pro robore, Isa. 2.10. in lumbis sedes virium ac roboris & cingulo lumbi cinguntur D Ds. l. 4. c. 10. Esa. 22.21. Ier. 1.17. 2 King. 4.29. & 9.1. Iob 38.3. & 40.7. Isa. 11.5. 1 King. 18 46. Exo. 12.11 Luk. 2.37. & 17.8. Ioh. 13.4. Act. 12.8. Luk. 2.35. Pet. 1.13. He that is ac∣customed to go girded, is never well without it: He is not at ease, untill it be put on. Luk. 19.17. Ioh. 1.47.50. A Girdle trussing up the Loynes of a man moderatly, doth strengthen a man. I will strengthen him with thy Girdle. Whence is the exhortation so often used, of girding up the loynes, Prov. 31.17. So this grace addeth great strength to the inner-man, as we may see in Job; who when God seemed, and men did fight against him, when Heaven and Earth seemed to conspire against him, yet this did stick by him; Ʋntill I die, I will never take away mine innocency from my selfe, Job 27.5. Fourthly, In the Easterne Countries where they were accustomed to weare long Garments down to the ancles, they used to gird them close unto their body, when they had any Journey, Combate or Labour in hand, least they should be an impediment unto them: and so to have the Loynes girt, is to be fitted and prepared for any Ser∣vice, Travell, or Conflict. Thus the Christian that is girded with truth, is in readinesse for any good duty, and to encounter with any adversary power that shall withstand him in the course of godlinesse. 2. Truth of heart is blessed of God with increase of grace. This it is which maketh the little Portion of grace to thrive in the hands of Gods Children. Their faithfulnesse in a little, brings them to be Owners of a greater deale, and to be Rulers over much. This brought such a plentifull blessing upon the small beginnings of Nathanael, to whom Christ, because of his truth in the inward affections, promised an en∣larged measure of enlightning, and that he should see greater things. This brought such a comfortable increase upon the dimme knowledge of the Eu∣nuch and Cornelius; they worshipped God in truth of heart, according to the measure of understanding which they had received: in them the Promise was accomplished, To him that hath shall be given, and he shall have in abundance: They were led further into that great Mystery of godlinesse, an Evangelist be∣ing sent of God to the one, and both an Angel, and an Apostle to the other. 3. Sincerity is strengthened of God to be a meanes of comfort to a mans soul in his greatest distresses. When Hezekiah was arrested with the sentence of death by the mouth of the Prophet; here was his comfort, and that which embold∣ned him to looke death in the face with more courage; O Lord, thou knowest,
or remember now (for herein I dare appeale to thy Majesty) that I have walked before thee in truth. He had done many worthy things in the abolishment of Idolatry, and in the restitution of the true worship of God, but in none of these simply took he content, but in the sincerity of his affection in performing them. So Paul in the middest of all his sorrows, yet this is his rejoycing, not simply that he had preached, that he had planted Churches, wrought Miracles, con∣verted sinners, made Sathan to fall down from Heaven like lightining; but that in simplicity and godly sincerity, he had his conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. This puts a kinde of Heroicall spirit and Lyon-like boldnesse into the Children of God in the greatest Trials.2 Chro. 30.18, 19, 20. Cl. 3.22. Eph. 6.5, 8. Rom. 12.8. Hereupon Paul was resolute, not to passe for mans judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3. 4. The service of a sound Christian is very accep∣table to his Majesty, be it to outward shew never so meane and simple. If ser∣vants be obedient to their Masters in singlenesse of heart, they shall receive their reward of the Lord. The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him in truth, Psal. 14.5. He will hear their Prayers, answer their desires, guard and protect their persons.Deut 4.7. Iam. 4.7. Not the most eloquent Prayer, and best set forth in words; but the supplication that is breathed from an honest and true heart, findes best accepta∣tion As in the naturall body, the case of the sound finger is safer then of the blindish eye: so in the Family of God, it is better to be a faithfull Door-keeper, and so to be sure to hold our place, then to be an unfaithfull Steward, and to be thrust out for untrusty dealing. Many actions, otherwise fervent enough, for want of this sincerity are but froth: and cause them who have long pleased them∣selves therein, at length to cry out of their doings, and to say they were but hypocrisy. 5. A faithfull man shall abound in blessings; that is, he that dealeth uprightly and soundly with men, and is not willing to deceive any in word or deed, carrying himselfe sincerely toward God, as he liveth honestly amongst his Neighbours, and that not onely in one matter, but in all; and is therefore in the Originall Text called a man of faithfulnesse, shall abound in blessings of all sorts, with plenty so farre as is expedient, with good estimation, with kinde friends, with spirituall graces, &c. 6. The more sincerity, the more affinity with God. Truth is one speciall branch of that Image of God, according to which man was made. God is the God of truth, Psal. 31.5. Christ is truth, Joh. 14.6. The Spirit of truth, Joh. 14.12. The greater measure of truth in our inward parts, the more are we (to speak with the Apostle) changed into that Image: for God himselfe is truth. Q. By what meanes may this truth be attained and strengthened? A. 1. The general meanes is constant and conscionable dependance upon the preaching of the Word, Desire the sincere milke of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.1. He calls the Word sincere milke:Ioh 14.6. a milke without deceit: it is in it selfe truth, ha∣ving the God of truth for the Authour, Christ Jesus the truth for the Witness, the Spirit of truth for the Composer of it; and then it workes truth in the hearts of them that hear it. It is mighty to the purging out of that Leaven of fraud which is within us; Joh. 17.17. Sanctifie them with thy truth, thy Word is truth: there is the meanes. This is it which begets faith, and faith is that which puri∣fieth the heart, Rom. 10.17. How came the Romanes to that heartinesse and since∣rity of obedience, which Paul commends so much; was it not by that forme of holy Doctrine which was delivered them:Rom. 6.17. or as we read it sometimes, unto which they were delivered: wherein the truth preached is compared unto a mould, into which they were cast: and by which they were transposed into a new forme, en∣abled to walke sincerely, and without halting before the Lord? Then again it is truly said, that the heart can never be sincere, till it be humbled and broken, and brought to the abasement and deniall of it selfe:Ier. 23.29. and what meanes hath God ordained so effectuall as his Word, to worke this humiliation of spirit? Is not this the hammer which breaketh the stone? Is not this that which pricketh the
heart, and maketh it to meet: and sometimes wringeth teares from the eyes of those that hear it? Besides,Act. 2.37. 2 King. 22.19. what hope that ever any mans disease of a false heart should be cured, untill he be brought to the sight of it? Who seekes for health till he know himselfe to be diseased? And shall ever any man be brought to the understanding of his defect in this, untill he hath been made to see it by the Word? Further, what health is to the body, that truth is to the soul. Now bodily health ariseth from the seed, is preserved by sound and good diet. But the sincere Word of God, is that immortall seed whereby we are begotten, and that spirituall food whereby we are nourished. 2 A second meanes is to possesse our hearts with this, and to have it ever in our thoughts, that in all things, e∣specially in matters of Religion, we have to do with God, and are ever in his sight and presence. In our common daily duties to labour this: to performe them with our heart, as in the sight of God, to his glory, is a ready way to get this grace of truth deeply rooted. It is the very maine ground of all hypo∣crisie, that this one thing is not duely thought on. Men forget him that sees in secret, and whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and therewith peirceth further then the outward face; and hereupon they are apt to imagine, that when they have carried the matter smoothly and fairely before men, all his well. The world either applaudes them, or not accuseth them, and hereupon they flatter themselves, as if all were well. Let us then remember this, if we would be true and sincere in our hearts; The waies of man are before the eyes of God,Prov. 5 21. and he pondereth all his paths. This kept the Church and people of God of old in their sincerity, and preserved them from dealing falsly concerning his Cove∣nant: they thought with themselves, If we do thus and thus,Psal. 44.17.21. shall not God search it out? for he knoweth the secrets of the heart: and this consideration moved Paul to faithfulnesse in his ministery; We make not Merchandize of the Word, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speake we in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17. See what things go together: doing a matter in sincerity, and doing it, as in the sight of God. 3. It is good to call our selves to a fre∣quent reckoning touching our carriages, binding our selves to an examination of them. He that hath a servant of whose fidelity he hath some doubt, and whom he desires if it might be to reclaime, both for the good of the party, and for his own particular also, that he may be usefull to him, he will not let him runne on too long before he call him to an account; he considereth that to be the next way to make him secure and carelesse. If he expect ever and anon to be reckoned with, it will cause him so much the more carefully to look unto his businesse: It is so in this case; The word of God telleth thee, that thou hast within thee a false, a cousening, a deceitfull heart; a heart that will beguile thee, to thine ut∣ter ruine; it is ever ready to practise with Sathan, the professed enemy of thy soul, to work mischief against thee: wouldst thou reforme this heart, that it might become usefull and serviceable for thee in the great and important business of salvation, be sure to call it often to an account? It will be good to reckon with it once a day, to see what hath passed it, to examine what thoughts have been framed in it, what purposes, what intents, what acts have been done, as effects and fruits of those inward purposes: surely this tying of thy selfe to such an often survey and looking backe upon thy heart, will keep it in so much the more awe; and when it is once accustomed to the sweetnesse which will be felt, when it can give account of care, and of obedience, and to the smart and punishing which followeth the remembrance of failing in holy duties, it cannot but be kept in so much the better tune. 4. A fourth meanes is by considering the blessednesse of sincerity, and the woefull curse that belongeth to the con∣trary. Blessed is the man whose heart is faithfull; it is the delight of God: But he detesteth nothing so as hypocrisie, and abhorreth those duties that are not done unto him in soundnesse.
Q. What are the effects or evidences of this truth and soundnesse? A. 1. A sound heart being well informed of the truth of God, doth hearti∣ly resigne it selfe to be guided and directed by the Lord in all things.Phil. 1.10. As it is noted of Ezra, Ezra 7.10. That he prepared his heart to seeke the Law of the Lord,2 Chro. 30.19. and to do it, and to teach in Israel Statutes and Judgements. And from this generall spring these Particulars. First, Truth breedeth an hatred of all false and corrupt Opinions in Doctrine, Psal. 119.128. I hate every false way. Psal.1 King. 18.21. 119.113. I hate vaine thoughts or inventions, but thy Law do I love. Se∣condly, It hath in detestation all false and devised worship; which is nothing but vaine and lying pompe, and empty shews. Hos. 11.12. Ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit. Thirdly, It worketh an universall hatred of all sinne: that is, of secret sinnes, as well as of open sins, of lesser sinnes, as well as of greater evils; of such sinnes as have some speciall enticement, by some particularity of content or profit, as well as of those which afford neither. A true heart hath a constant purpose, in no one thing, willingly to sinne against God: but rather doth endeavour to the utmost in every good way of Gods Commandements. And as it stands resolved against all sinne in generall, both simply considered, and in respect of all occurences, whereby he might be allured or compelled thereunto:Psal. 141.4. so he is in speciall, against the sinne to which he findes himselfe most inclined, or wherewith he hath at any time been overtaken. 4. It is joyned with a readinesse of minde to ac∣knowledge and lay open every sinne as soone as it is known to be sinne, and to that end a gladnesse to have the conscience ransacked and ripped up, that that which is sinne may be found out. David spake it out of experience, when he pronounced the man blessed, in whose spirit there is no guile, Psal 32.2. Now this was a branch of that spirituall guile, that he once thought to helpe himself in evill doing, by holding of his tongue; as who would say, he would forget it and passe it over: but he never was well, till he was delivered of that false trick, and fell to the acknowledging of his sinne, without hiding his iniquity: he never had comfort, till he had confest against himselfe his wickednesse. This he writes for a patterne, and therefore gives his Psalme a Title accordingly, [To give in∣struction] This experience taught David to intreate the Lord to pry into him, as fearing himselfe, that he should deale somewhat over-favourably with him∣selfe: Psal. 139 23, 24. Try me, O Lord, and know mine heart: prove me, and know my thoughts,Psal. 141.5. and consider if there be any way of wickednesse in me: and let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit: and let him reprove me. When a man loves not those things, which tend to the discovery of his heart and life, and to the finding out of his secret evils, as reprehensions, whether publique or private, or serious and earnest confession of sinne before God, it is a signe of a false heart. 5. Truth dealeth not onely against this or that branch of corrup∣tion, which shooteth out to our disgrace or trouble, but against the root it self. As in Paul we see, the Law of evill, which did dwell within him, was his prin∣cipall matter of conflict. It zealously contendeth for the maintenance of Gods pure worship and service. Hos. 11.12. Judah ruleth with the Lord, and is faith∣full with the holy One. In all service the true Christian strives to approve his heart unto God,1 Cor 14.15. Rom. 6.17. Eph 5.19. 2 Cor 2.17. Phil. 2.15, 16. Eph. .6, 7. Cl. 3 22.23. Tit. 2 10. Dan 6.4. Rom. 12 7. and to performe them as in his presence, to the glory of his Name, He prayeth with the Spirit, obeyeth from the heart, heares with reverence, and doth all things with life and power. 8. In all conditions or estates of life, in all dealings secret or open, publique or private, at home or abroad, he will carry himselfe as becomes the Gospel, and study to be harmelesse, unblameable, and without rebuke before God and man. Thus a Christian servant will shew all diligence in his Masters labour, as well absent as present, froward as courteous; and all faithfulnesse in things committed to his charge, even to the least pinne, though he might do otherwise with secrecy and security from men; and that wil∣lingly
of conscience, not for hope of credit or gaine. And not so onely, but he will reverence his Master, and in heart be that to him, which he seemeth to be in carriage, and that behinde his backe, which he is before his face.1 Chro. 12.33. A Christian man will be simple, plaine and just in all his dealing, inoffensive in matters of Religion, loving and courteous in all his behaviour;Act. 2.46. and what he would seeme to be towards others in their presence, that he is inwardly, and in their absence. 9 True grace is permanent, and true Christians are constant in their course, not shrinking in temptation, nor starting aside like a broken bow. An hypo∣crite is wavering in respect of occurences, halting and divided in respect of ob∣jects, in subjection to inordinate passions, powerlesse in the performance of holy duties, wise to hide and cover sinne, glorious in empty shadowes of Reli∣gion, apt for advantage to swallow lesser sins without straining, slippery in earthly dealings, aiming at wrong ends in the profession of the truth, indul∣gent to his beloved and darling sinne, desirous to seeme religious, though he much neglect the power of godlinesse. But the true Christian is unlike him in all these respects; He is sound and constant, a Master of his affections, a bungler to colour or guild over sinne, desirous to be good, and in every thing answer∣able to that Profession that he maketh; faithfull in his place, plaine in his deal∣ings, innocent and harmelesse, as becomes the Child of God; the same man at home and abroad, within and without, openly and in secret, in thought and discourse. Q. Do not the godly oftentimes in the performance of good duties, looke more at man then at God, and propound indirect meanes when they should eye his glo∣ry onely? A. They do through frailty and weaknesse. But we must distinguish of hypo∣crisie, as of other sinnes: for as sinne is reigning, or not; so is hypocrisie. Now there may be this, not reigning hypocrisie in the hearts and consciences of Gods people, David when he said, Psal. 32.2. Blessed is he in whose spirit there is no guile, did take himselfe tardy in this evill: and Bradford, with other of those most holy Martyrs, do much seek pardon of hypocrisie and carnall Gospelling: but no sinne that raigneth not, must discourage us. And if we have an unfeigned purpose against it, if we grieve for it, if we seeke for strength a∣gainst it, it reigneth not. Sathan opposeth sincerity by persecutions, opprobries and reproaches: as of pride, hypocrisie, dissimulation, specially when God afflicteth, Job 2.6, 9. But the more Sathan opposeth the truth, the more should we be in love with it: for Sathan would not load it with disgraces, if it were not excellent. Q. Doth not the Devill labour to foist in this leaven of hypocrisie in our daily course, that thus by little and little, he may pick this good seed of righteousnesse out of our hearts? A. The practice of Sathan is apparent, and our care must be to disap∣point him. Here our ressistance is to hold us to our own, and pray to God to rebuke him. Q. How shall we be able to ferret out the guile of our spirit? A. First, Consider how carelesse we are of the spirituall action, in those things we performe: as in Prayer, hearing the Word, receving the Sacraments. To the spirituall performance of these duties, is required preparation, and heavenly disposition of soul, befitting such actions, and the Majesty of God with whom we have to deale. As in confession of sinne, there is required grief, shame, meeknesse; in supplication, reverence and devotion. But who doth not slightly passe over these duties? which is no better then the wiping the outside of the dish, not looking to that within. 2. Marke, that in ressistance of sin, we are more sorry and deale against this or that branch of corruption, which ap∣peareth to our disgrace, then against the body of death it selfe: Against one sin
to which we are not inclind, more then to another to which we are disposed. 3. Marke the course of our affections, and we shall see how unsound we are to∣wards God and our Brethren. If a thing touch our selves, our blood will quick∣ly be in our nailes: If a man do know this or that amisse by us, it is grievious, the shame of it much upbraides us: But things that offend God, and which we know, he seeth amisse in us, we can let these passe nothing affected; a signe our love to him is not so sound; our fear of him, and desire of praise with him, not so unfaigned. We should be ashamed to be found often in the same fault be∣fore men: we commit and confesse the same sinnes daily before God, and are not confounded in our selves. If we speak an hasty word in the presence of some re∣verent man, that might be to our disgrace, our thoughts trouble us; but the of∣fence against God is lightly passed over. We are circumspect to avoide the breach of penall Lawes, not so carefull to prevent transgression against God. We con∣fesse sin before God, and seeme to aggravate it: but being questioned of men, we turne the faire side outward, and make the best of it. If we live in peace and credit, we think others should not repine: but we shall finde secret grudgings at the prosperity of others. We rejoyce at that which should occasion grief; we grieve at what is matter of joy. Lastly, let us observe how frequently our acti∣ons are corrupted. In leaving sinne many times, we leave it not because we hate it as sinne, but it hath often broken out to our reproach: our friends perswade to relinquish it, it will be for our credit and advantage. We confesse our own sins, not desiring to give glory unto God, and gaine a testimony of a sound heart: but because worldly wisdome doth tell us, It is best to tell our own tale, or it were double folly to make dainty of that all the world knoweth: It will not be for our credit to lessen our fault when it is fully known; we shall lose the estimation of good men, if we seek to hide, excuse or make light of our offences. Our pro∣mises of amendment, when we have been overtaken with sin to our disgrace, have not proceeded from due consideration, nor had due execution accordingly. In the profession of religion we have oft aimed at sinister ends, as praise of men, gaine, or the like. Thus in taking up good duties, as orders in our Family, we often look not so much at the conscience of Gods Commandement, as at this; The eyes of men are upon us, all the world will cry shame, if such things be neglected altoge∣ther. Our performance of private duties is far more dull, superficiall and slight, that the which is done in the sight of others. The presence of men doth oft restraine from many hasty sinfull speeches, and unwarantable actions, which we take liber∣ty to speak and do before the face of the most High, and are not ashamed: Our rebukes are carnall, rather because our mindes are crossed, then that God is dis∣honoured. Our obedience is partiall, this we do, another thing no lesse materiall we passe over without regard. Yea, and we meane well many times, and are fer∣vent in a good thing, without sinister respects; and that partly for the Commande∣ment of God, but not onely, nor resolutely for that: but more for other considera∣tions then that. Therefore in such cases and trials, we are found to be others, if we examine it, then we would. We beare with faults in him that is serviceable to our humour: against another that is not so pleasing in our eye, we are hot and fiery. Sometime we undertake to deale for some that speak to us, but do it without any hearty well-wishing to him; sometime not sticking to say to your friend, I must speak to you for fashion, but do as you please. We visit sick ones, but not stir∣ring up our bowels of mercy; we speak a great many Phrases of course, our con∣science telling us it is otherwise. We make a semblance of reverence, but how far it is from the heart, this may testifie; that we can (absent from the parties) use their names proverbially, break jests on them, admit sinister suspcions. We can speak faire to mens faces, when war is in the heart: and when we hate the person, take on as if we sought the disgrace of his sin onely. So in fruites of love, we can do this party good sometime, but it is to keep another under, who else would
sprout forth so far, that his shade would dimme our lights: as I will do for such a one, they know good behaviours, they will do their homage, such a one will thanke me for it, I am sure it will not be given cleane away; he is able to do me a good turne again, &c. Q What must we do after we have found out this unsoundnesse? A. First, We must take up our selves for halting, and bewaile it with shame, and sorrow. For thoug there may be some reliques of hypocrisie in a good man, yet the nature of halting is, it will go quite out of the way if it be not healed. Heb. 12.13. And make straight steps unto your feet, least that which is halting be tur∣ned out of the way. Ah, how far am I from that truth which God requires in the in∣ward parts? What a deale of wicked fraud and deceit is even heaped and piled up within me? What rottennesse doth lodge still in my breast? What am I, but a shop of lies and vanities? Easier it is a great deale to know the number of my haires, then of the cunning motions and affections of my heart. Oh, the blinde corners, the secret turnings and windings, the close lurking holes that are therein. Upon examination I have found a world of falsnesse in my soule, more then ever I imagined. My cogitations are vaine, my affections unsound, my aimes indirect, my course of life palpably grosse in dissimulation before God, and towards men. If some loathsome disease had infected my body, I should be grieved and ashamed at it: and shall I not mourne for the unsoundnesse of my heart? If I stood convicted before men for some notorious cousener or decei∣ver, I could not but take it grievously: But many times I have played fast, and loose in the presence of the All-seeing God, pretending his service, when I have done mine own will, offering him the body, when the heart hath been let loose after vanity. Secondly, We must stirre up our selves to be more sound and sincere before the Lord. Deceit and falshood is the Image of Sathan, who abode not in the truth: most unmeet to be borne in any degree, by him that is the Sonne of God. The Commandement is, Be ye holy, for I am holy. Be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. Hereby may we assure our hearts that we are the Children of God, if we be true as he is true. Truth is the Image of God, stamped upon the hearts of them, whom the Lord hath called forth to be his peculiar People. What health and soundnesse is to the bo∣dy, that is sincerity to the soul: a grace of singular excellency, and excellent use, pleasing to God, and profitable to man. Wise men delight in sound and faithfull friends: the Lord takes pleasure in them that be true-hearted to his glory. A sound body is fit for labour: a true heart is ready prepared for any service that God requires. The way is not tedious to men, they halt not in it, but through weaknesse and imperfection: O my soul, the way of life would be most pleasant and delihtfull, crosses easie to be borne, the comforts of grace most admirable and sweet, were it not that corrupt humours causing distempers, do still breed within thee. Earthly desires, vaine delights, unruly lusts and passions, are great impediments to the quick and easie dispatch of our Christian pilgrimage: Sincerity is the girdle of the minde to trusse up these, strengthen our souls, and tie the heart to the work commanded. We buy Girdles for the body, and if costly ones, we keep them carefully: I will seek to Heaven for this Girdle of grace, for it is woven there, no Shop can serve me with it, but that onely. Thirdly, We must seek unto God by ear∣nest and hearty Prayer: for every good and perfect gift cometh from above, Psal. 17.1. Lord, thou that delightest in the simple and trute-hearted, that cleave unfainedly unto thy Testimonies: I pray thee create in me a true heart and simple spirit, that without guile I may stick unto thy Statutes, and do what is acceptable in thy sight. Naturally I am full of falshood and guile, which I can by no meanes shake off or deny of my selfe: I come unto thee the God of truth, that at first didst create me after thy Image, make me every day more and more
like unto thy self in true holinesse and righteousnesse. Lastly, By faith we must hold Jesus Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, for the increase of this sincerity. Christ is the Fountaine of grace, of whose fulnesse we partake, and grace for grace. Whither should the thirsty runne, but to the Fountaine? Then shall I be true indeed, when the Giver of Truth dwelleth in my heart. Lord strengthen and confirme my faith, that being knit unto Christ more and more, I may be stored with his Fulnesse. CHAP. VII. The Sixth Property of a godly life, viz. Righteousnesse. Of the Sig∣nification of the Word Righteous; And how the godly (in a Go∣spell sense) may be said to be Righteous. What things Righteous∣nesse implies; and wherein the Nature of it consists. Sundry Reasons to perswade us to labour after it. Encouragements to con∣tinue in a Righteous course notwithstanding all opposition. Lastly, The Evidences or Tokens of true Righteousnesse, with the meanes to be used for the strengthining and preserving thereof. Gen. 6.9. Luk. 2.25. Mat. 23.35. Mat. 9 13. & 23.28. Luk. 18.9. Mat. 1.8. Psal. 24.5. & 33.5. 1 Sam. 12 7. Psal. 103.6, 17 Dan. 9.16. 2 Cor. 9.9, 10. Act 3.14. & 7.52. Mat. 27.19.4.24.Q. WHat is the sixth Property of a godly life? A. It must be just and righteous. Noah, Simeon, Abel, are said to be just, and righteous men. Q. What doth the Word righteous signifie? A. 1. They that seeme just, but are not purged from their iniquity, are cal∣led righteous: because they are such in their own conceits. 2. Just is taken for good, bountifull, or mercifull; one that is ready to bestow favour or compassion: in which sense it is many times said that God is righteous. 3. It imports one that is perfect and holy, free from all spot and staine of sin. So Christ is called the Just One. 4. He is said to be just, that is true and faithfull in his dealings be∣twixt man and man, one that respects equity and right in his Calling: in which sense true and sincere speeches are called righteous or just. 5. A man that is regenerated by the Spirit, justified by faith, and that exerciseth himselfe in the practice of righteous and holy things, specially in the duties of mercy and justice betwixt man and man, is ordinarily said to be just or righteous.Act. 22.14. Luk 23.50. Prov. 16.13. Luk. 1.6. Apoc. 22.11. Mat. 13.17. & 23.29. & 10.41. Mar 6.20. Tit. 1.8. 1 King 8.46. Job. 2.4. Rom 3.23. Joh. 3.6. 1 Thes. 5.23. Gal. 5.17. Psal. 143.2. 1 Joh. 1.8. Act. 3.39. Rom. 5.11. Esa. 56.1. Rom. 1.16, 17. 2 Cor. 5.21. Phil. 3.9. Joh. 1.13.Q. There is none righteous, no not one. A. There is none righteous of himselfe, by nature; for all have sinned, all are conceived in sinne; and that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. Again, there is none perfectly righteous in respect of grace infused, or obedience pro∣ceeding from it: for we know but in part, our sanctification is imperfect in de∣gree. But the godly are righteous by imputation, being justified by faith, and acquitted from the guilt and punishment of sinne, which righteousnesse is cal∣led the righteousnesse of God, and the righteousnesse which is of. God by faith. And they are righteous also by Regeneration, Sanctification, and Workes of holinesse: But this righteousnesse is onely in part, begun here, increasing daily by degrees, to be perfected in Heaven. The Elect are borne anew of the im∣mortall Seed, have put off the old man, are renewed in the spirit of thir minde,
are dead unto sinne: but their renovation is not perfect in degrees, the reliques of the old man do still abide in them, sinne hath received his deaths wound, but is not utterly abolished. Therefore it may truly be affirmed,Job 9.20. that they are both righteous and unrighteous, in respect of righteousnesse which is called inherent: unrighteous in themselves, righteous in Christ;1 Cor. 6.11. unrighteous by na∣ture, renewed by grace; unrighteous by the workes of nature,1 Joh. 3.8.9. Ex. 28.38. righteous by the acts of righteousnesse; unrighteous in respect of the remainders of sinne, righteous in respect of the truth of holinesse. The workes that proceed from the flesh, abiding in them are filthy;Job 14.4. but they that proceed from the Spirit are acceptable,Phil. 4.18, 19. being perfumed with the sweet Odours of Christs Sacrifice. Q. How can the godly be said to be righteous any more then the temporary Chri∣stian, if his righteousnesse be imperfect? A. The intire nature of righteousnesse is to be found in them in respect of parts, essentiall and integrall, if we may so speake: but the full perfection of parts is wanting. As a Childe in the Mothers Wombe, hath all the parts of man, but not the perfection of stature, wit, &c. Q. What things doth righteousnesse imply? A. 1. It presupposeth a sovereigne and unfained faith,Esa. 26.2. Heb. 11.6. without which it is impossible to please God. But this justice hath in common with truth, integri∣ty, and uprightnesse: for faith is the root of them all. 2. It implies the reno∣vation of our nature according to the Image of God, in true righteousnesse,Eph. 4.24. which is part of the divine quality begun in us: for no man can be righteous be∣fore he be renewed into righteousnesse by the holy spirit. 3.Act. 24.16. Heb. 13.18. Psal. 119.3. Isa. 1.16, 17. It notes a delibe∣rate, constant, and well-advised purpose and determination to do that which is just and equall in the sight of God, notwithstanding all allurements and tempta∣tions to the contrary. Deut. 5 29. Oh, that there were in my people such an heart, to feare me alwaies. Thus, Paul and Barnabas exhorted the Antiochians with purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord. 4. It comprehends a constant, and a continuall practice of all good according as the Lord affords opportunity and meanes which must be alwaies, and with respect to all Gods Commandements.1 Reg. 8.32. Act. 10.35. Rom. 6.13, 14. Heb. 11.33. 1 Joh. 2.29. Psal. 112.3, 9. Luk. 1.6. Deut. 16.20. Psal. 15.2. Psal. 7.9, 1. 1 Joh. 3.8. He that doth righteousnesse, is righteous. Here the worke done is called righteousnesse, to wit, of course, conversation, or worke. Riches and plenteousnesse shall be in his house, and his righteousnesse endureth for ever, Psal. 112.3, 9. Zachary and Elizabeth were both just before God, and walked in all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep Judge∣ment, and he that doth righteousnesse at all times, Psal. 106.3. Justices, Justice shalt thou follow; that is, all manner of Justice, and nothing but Justice exactly, care∣fully, and continually shalt thou follow. He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousnesse. And it shall be our righteousnesse,Deut. 6.25. Vid. Jun. Dial. in Deut. 6.25. if we observe to do all these Commandements before the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us. 5. In re∣spect of our daily weaknesse, which doth dint, and bruise this breast-plate, there must be sorrow and humble confession of sinne, with seeking pardon: this doth beate it forth againe, and underline it, that it is as serviceable to us as ever. For∣give us (we say) daily our trespasses, for our righteousnesse is rather in unfai∣ned purpose, then exact performance, rather in confession of imperfection, then in any perfection we can attaine. Q. Doth the nature of this righteousnesse stand in practice? A. No: But in conformity of heart, joyned with a sound, deliberate, well-rooted purpose to do whatsoever the Lord hath commanded. For a man true∣ly converted at his last gaspe, is just and righteous, though for lacke of oppor∣tunity he never do good work. But this purpose is such as must be produced into act, as the Lord shall offer ability and meanes. And of this will it is true, that the Lord accepteth it for the deed: but as for those wishes or slight pur∣poses
which never come to performance, not for want of meanes, but through sicklenesse and change of will,Deut. 5.29. they are of no esteeme with God. Q. Is not continuance in well-doing the cause, why our righteousnesse is true? A. True righteousnesse is constant, but truth doth make it constant, not con∣stancy true.Mat. 13.22, 23. Grace doth endure because it is true; It is not true because it doth abide. Q What Reasons may perswade us to labour after righteousnesse? A. 1. Righteousnesse is a Christian Garment, that doth adorne more then Gold or Silver;Joh. 29.13, 43. Isa. 59.17. Eph. 6.14. Esa. 59.17. yea, it is a Breast-plate to defend the heart and vitall part, a∣gainst all the temptations and assaults of Sathan. When the Devill doth tempt us to sinne, if the breast be covered with a firme constant resolution and bent of will to shunne, dislike and abhorre whatsoever is evill and unjust, but to approve follow, delight in, and practice whatsoever things are honest, pure, of good report; then his suggestions will fall down like Paper-shot, and shall not peirce us. Gen. 39.10. How can I do this great wickednesse, and so sinne against God? And he who looketh to be preserved in manifold temptations to sinne, and to keep in obedience to all kinde of duties, both towards God and men, had need to have no lesse then this firmenesse and determinate purpose of a Christian heart. How can any man walke innocent or harmelesse among his neighbours, though others should walke so towards him, except he had armed himselfe with this co∣gitation, to do no man any wrong? and not onely so, but to do no other iniqui∣ty or evill, which might offend any, or wound his own soul? How many waies shall a Christian that truly hateth sinne, be carried into sinne against God and his neighbour, if he indent not from time to time afresh with his heart against all unrighteousnesse and parts of unholy life? And therefore St Pauls teaching the Corinthians, how they should be prepared for the Encounter, doth among the rest, commend unto them the Armour of righteousnesse, 2 Cor. 6.7. both on the right hand, and on the left, that is, in prosperity and adversity, that so they should give no occasion of offence in any thng, but in all things approve them∣selves as the Servants of God.Mat. 5.16. 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.16.10. If we be derided for our Profession, we may cloath our selves with righteous and innocent dealing, as with a Garment, and weare it as an Ornament. If challenged as hypocrites, the righteousnesse of our course doth manifest the soundnesse of our faith, and approve it pure as Gold tried in the Furnace. When men shall load us with prejudicate Opinions, con∣demning us without cause of misbehaviour or indirect dealing in our Place or Office: this will beare it off, I know nothing by my selfe, I care not for mans judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3. As touching me, I care very little to be judged by you. When the Devill telleth us, Thou art not elected, thou hast no faith, thou art not sanctified.1 Joh. 2.29. All doth come before the Tribunall of righteousnesse, this con∣firmeth to us our election, and actuall separation from the world. 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore Brethren, give rather diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. This assureth us that our faith is unfained, our sinnes forgiven, and we sancti∣fied. 1 Joh. 3.7, 8. He that doth righteousnesse, is righteous. If we walke in the light, as he is in the light, then have we fellowship with the Father, and the blood of Jesus cleanseth us from all sinne.1 Joh. 1 6, 7. He is made good in some measure, that doth good in any true measure The Fruite discovers the quality and sap of the Tree.Job. 11.18, 19. 2. Righteousnesse is the foundation of good courage and holy security.Prov. 28.1. Job 5 22. Psal 3.5, 6. The righteous are bold as a Lyon, notwithstanding all the malice, might, and craft of wicked men, which set themselves against them; neither can any other accidents or occurrences dismay or daunt them; for they are perswa∣ded of the verity of Gods Promises, with the sufficiency of his Power, and have a sure apprehension both of his presence and goodnesse. He will not be afraid of evill tidings, his heart is fixed and believeth in the Lord: he will not
fear untill he see his desire upon his enemies. 3. None can be safe here, or sa∣ved hereafter, but the righteous Nation. The righteous shall inherite the Land;Psal. 37.29. Psal. 118.20. Psa. 15.2. Esa. 26 2. Psal. 1.6. the righteous shall dwell in the holy Hill of the Lord. The Lord knoweth, re∣gardeth, favoureth, takes care of the righteous. Our Saviour saith plainly, Except your righteousnesse, shall exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the Kingdome of Heaven, Mat. 5.21. Righteous∣nesse delivereth from death, and all miseries of this life.Prov. 11.4. & 10.2. rov. 12.28. & 11.19. Life is in the way of righteousnesse, and in that path-way, there is no death. The meaning is, that they which are righteous men, justified by the obedience of Christ, sanctified by his Spirit, and obedient to his will in working that which is agreeable to his Word, are in a state of life everlasting. The life of grace they have in possession already; the life of Glory is assured unto them by the Promise of God, where∣of he hath given them an earnest and pawne, in that he hath raised them from the death of sinne, to the life of righteousnesse: for whosoever hath the one, can never faile of the other. And therefore it is said, that there is no death in that path. They are delivered from the first death, which hath power over all sinfull men in this world: and they shall never come into the second, which is the portion of reprobates in the world to come. At the day of Judgment on∣ly the righteous shall be acquitted, and received into Glory,Mat. 13 43. & 25 37 46. Luk. 14 14. Prov. 10.3. & 13.29. Prov. 11 6. & 15.6. as the righteous are assured of Peace and Glory in the Life to come, so be they of safety, peace and comfort in this life, if it be for their good. The Lord will not famish the soul of the Just. Good men are not unprovided of food, because they are unfurnished of wealth. The righteousnesse of the Just delivereth them out of dangers, out of troubles, out of feares, out of temptations, from destruction; yet not by strength of its own, but by the power of God: not according to their wor∣thinesse in way of desert, but according to his goodnesse in way of reward: not extended to all men that doe good workes, but restrained to just men whose works are good Righteousnesse doth keep the perfect in the way; that is,Prov. 13.6. Psal. 37.25, 26 & 34.9. 0. Gods favour, grace, and goodnesse, for and by righteousnesse doth protect the Just; yea, righteousnesse it self is as a guard to provide and defend them from ap∣proaching dangers. If the righteous fall seven times, he shall rise againe, Prov. 24.16. The Lord upholdeth the Just, Psal. 37.15. If he come into many troubles, and that very oft, by the gracious hand of God he shall be delivered out of them all. It is a similitude from Chrildren led of their Parents, who through weaknesse do sometimes stumble and fall to the ground, but be neither hurt with the fall, nor helplesse that they should not be taken up againe. God is ever at the right hand of the just to save and deliver them. He is in the Generation of the Just. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous fly unto it, Prov. 18.10.Esa. 3.10. Psal. 34.19. Job 5.19. Psal. 73.23. Psal. 16.8. Psal. 14.5. Prov. 14.34. Deut. 28.12, 13. Righte∣ousnesse is the way to honour and promotion in this life, as well as of Glory in the world to come. Righteousnesse exalteth a Nation. The Phrase of speech is emphaticall, for by a Prosopopie hands are ascribed to justice, whereby a Nation is exalted and set on high. As if it had been said, although no man should favour that Nation, yet justice which it exerciseth, will not suffer it, to lie neglected. To the righteous good shall be repaid, Prov 13.21. In the house of the righteous is much Treasure, Prov. 15.6. 4. The way of the Just is full of comfort.Job. 36.7. sal. 33 1.32.11. For the Just man is as day, which shining in the morning, is by degrees carried forward to perfection. The beginning of comfort is like the dawning of the day, the proceeding as a fiery Sun-shine morning, the fulnesse and perfection, which is perpetuall and without declining, is like a Noon-tide, or the midst of a Sum∣mers day. The righteous shall sing and rejoice. 5.Prov. 10.24. Psal. 34.5.7. & 97.12. Psal. 33.1. Prov. 15.24. 1 Pet. 3.14. The service of the Just is acceptable to the Lord; he regardeth their Prayers, fulfilleth their desires for good, and is delighted with their thanksgivings. The eyes of the Lord are over the the righteous; and his eares are open unto their cry. It becomes the just to sing praises. The Lord heareth the Prayers of the righteous. 6. The Just are blessed
in their sufferings and temptations, for the Lord corrects them in love to open their eares,Job 36.8, 9. 1 Pet. 4.14. Psal. 37.32, 33 Prov. 12.13. Prov. 11.8. Psal. 34.19. Prov. 10.25, 30. and bring them to the acknowledgement of their iniquity. His Spirit is present with them to teach and instruct what use is to be made of the chastisement; to support and comfort them under it: And in due time he will deliver and bring them to honour. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivereth them out of all. 7. The righteous is an everlasting founda∣tion; their blessedness hath a setled safety, as a foundation that cannot be shaken: yea, they are not onely unmoveable themselves, but the very stay of the world. The roote of the righteous shall not be moved.Isa. .23. Prov. 2.3. Zach. 12.3. Job 4.7. Psal. 37.25, 26 Prov. 11.21. Psal. 102.28. Psal. 89.28, 29 Prov. 12.7. & 20.7. They be assaulted, but cannot be thrown down. In their own person they are stable, but much more in their Posterity. The Seed of the righteous shall be delivered. The Children of thy Servant shall continue. 8 A just man is of great price and worth. Prov. 12.26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbour. More excellent in nobility of Stocke, in Inheritance, in Ornaments and Diet; He is better beloved and graced of God, and more esteemed of godly wise men, and hath that in him, which ma∣keth him more commendable then any other that is unrighteous and sinfull. The fruit of the righteous is as a Tree of Life, Prov. 11.30. The Holy Ghost com∣pareth him not to every Tree of the Garden, but to the most excellent: to note, that as he is very plentifull in bringing forth Fruit, so his Fruit is exceeding profitable to them that receive it; but most of all to himselfe. And if we look into the comparison, we shall finde the Fruites of a righteous man, in excellency farre to exceed the Fruit of the Tree of Life. As the Life of Grace is more excellent then the life of nature; so is the Fruit of Righteousnesse, to the ma∣teriall fruit of that Tree. That Tree had power to preserve man persisting in holinesse, from death: but the just man by exhortation, counsell and instruction, may be a meanes to winne them to God, who are dead in sinne. The Fruit of the Tree of Life did profit others, not it selfe: But the Fruit of the righteous is so beneficiall to others, that it is most profitable to himselfe: All the bles∣sing of his goodnesse doth returne into his own bosome. Fruites plucked from the Tree of Life for the use of man, did make, that the more were taken away, the fewer did remaine: But the righteous man doth the more abound with the graces of the Spirit, and the Fruites of holinesse, the more good he doth to o∣thers. 9. The hope of the hypocrite shall be cut off: but the patient expecta∣tion of the righteous shall be gladnesse: for God will give them the desire of their souls, and fulfill their hope, Prov. 10.28. The righteous hath hope in his death, Prov. 14.32.10. Manifold blessings of all sorts, shall rest upon the head of the righteous. That is, all kinde of happinesse, every good gift that is fit for them,Psal. 58.11. Psal. 72.7. Psal. 92.12. Prov. 11.28. Prov. 10 7. Psal. 112.6. Psal. 37 6. Isa. 57 1, 2. 2 Pet. 2 5, 7. Psal. 37.34. Eze 44.20. Amos 5.15. Zeph. 2.3. Prov. 11.18 To him that loveth r ghte∣ousness. Prov. 15.9. & 21.21. Esa. 51.. shall be upon the head of the righteous, upon the soul and body of every faithfull man. The righteous shall flourish like the Palme Tree: he shall grow like a Cedar of Lebanon. They shall flourish and abound in blessings here, and their memoriall shall be blessed when they are departed out of this life. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgement as the noon-day. 11. The righteous shall be saved in the evill day. God spared not the Old World, but saved Noah the eighth Person, a Preacher of righteousness, and delivered Just Lot, when he overthrew the Cities of the Plaine. When the Lord is so displeased with the wicked, that he will not hear the Prayers of his people for them; yet by their righteousnes they shall deliver their own souls. Q. Is it sufficient that a man be righteous, may he rest therein? A. No, but he must proceed in righteousness. Rev. 22.11. Let him that is righteous be righteous still. And not this onely, but he must pursue and follow after righteousness with utmost endeavour. The Lord loveth him that followeth after righteousness: Who is not cold, or slow, or unstable in doing of good? but with might and maine striveth constantly to obtaine the habit and increase
of goodness. The Word signifieth earnestly to pursue, being a Metaphor taken from the eagerness of wild Beasts, or ravenous Fowles, or of any kinde of crea∣tures that live by the spoile of others, which will runne or fly, both fast and farre, rather then be disappointed of their Prey. True it is, that all are not of equall graces, not any one at all times equally affected to that which is just and good: but none must leave off endeavour to seeke it. Every man is to make it his gaine,1 Tim. 6.11. 2 Tim. 2.22. Phil. 4.8. and to abandon all the impediments which would stay him from it. Follow righteousness, faith, love, &c. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, &c. think on these things. Q. God is mercifull, Christ died for sinners, and will not lose what he hath bought so deare; Why should a man then betake himselfe to such care of his life? A. God is mercifull to them that fear him,Psal. 103.13, 17. Deut. 29.19, 20. Mat. 9.13. but as for them that blesse them∣selves in sinne, the Lord will not be mercifull unto them. Christ came to call the sick soule and burdened sinner to repentance, not to foster the secure sinner, in his secure course. Luk. 1.74, 75. Christ hath redeemed us out of the hands of our enemies, that we might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the daies of our life. Christ redeemeth those whom he sanctifieth to be a peculiar People unto him, zealous of good works. Who gave himselfe for us, that he might, redeeme us to be a peculiar People, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. The benefits of Christs death are inseparable, as his person is indivisible: he that is justified from sinne by his blood, is sanctified against sinne by his Spirit. Again, the Spirit of of God teacheth us to reason after a contrary manner: There is forgiveness with the Lord, that he might be feared. Ye are bought with a price,Psal. 130.4. 1 Cor. 6.20. Rom 12.1. therefore glorifie God in soul and body. I beseech you through the tender mercies of God, offer up your soules and bodies, as a reasonable Sacrifice unto God. Q. Though it were requisite we should have all righteousness,Mat. 3.17. yet so much adoe as some make, is needless; a generall profession and honest carriage is sufficient. God spareth us, as a Father spareth his Children. A. God is exceeding gracious, and takes in good part the willing, though weak, service of his Children. But we must have sound righteousness,1 Cor. 6.9. and en∣deavour of perfection, though we still come short of what is required. We are not saved for righteousness, but we cannot be saved without it.Mat. 5.20. Tit. 2.12, 13. If your righteousness exceed not the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. Though Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet a remnant onely shall be saved. Not all that say Lord, Lord,Rom. 9.27. Mat. 7.21. 1 Pet. 1.17. Heb 12.14. 2 Cor. 6.17. shall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. Be ye holy, for I am holy. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the uncleane thing, and I will receive you Q. If we enter the practice of righteousness, will not the Devill break us off by distractions, difficulties, discomforts, and make us yeeld our Weapon as weary? A. He will do his endeavour: But here the power of Christ, the Authour and finisher of faith, the beginner and perfecter of his own good Work, doth carry us on: and the Seed of God is of such force, that it will not let us fall to sinning. Secondly, The conscience of Gods Commandement on one hand, and the comfort of his acceptance on the other side, do encourage us: so that this assault is frustrate. Q. Righteousness is much opposed by Sathan and his Instruments, let us there∣fore hear what encouragments we have to continue in that course. A. 1. The Wealth of the sinner is laid up for the Just: The wicked may heape up Silver as the dust, and prepare Raiment as the clay:Prov. 13.22. Job. 27.16, 17 but the Just shall put it on, and the Just shall divide the Silver. Ungodly men toyle to bring in wealth for them that fear before God: they are Labourers, the other Land-lords of
what they possesse. 2. There shall no evill happen to the Just. God in his good providence will prevent the occasions of sinne,Prov. 1.21. Exo. 13.18. 1 Reg. 4.12, 13. 2 Reg. 22.20. that they runne not into it and save them from those evils that overtake the wicked. Afflictions and cor∣rections may come upon the righteous, but no revenging curse tending to de∣struction, as if they were abjects. Wholesome Medicines (such as crosses are to the godly) are not wont to be ministred in hatred, and with purpose to kill, but in mercy and love for recovery of health, and conservation of life. The just man walketh in his uprightness: thou most upright dost weigh the path of the Just, Esa. 26.7. Prov. 14.19. God will satisfie the soul of the Just in the time of drought, Esa 58.11. 3. The wicked shall bow before the righteous, Herod reverenced John the Baptist; Moses was honoured of the Aegyptians; Joseph, his Brethren were glad to bow before him. Psal. 112.9 His horne shall be exal∣ted with honour. Good men shall not onely be greater then the evill, and had in reputation of them: but the ungodly shall be driven to seek unto them for helpe and favour: as suiters use to waite at the Gates of a great Personage, till either he come forth, or they be let in and admitted into his presence. This abjection of the wicked, and advancement of the godly, is not generall to all in this life, notwithstanding it often befalleth many; but at the day of the Lord, every sinfull wretch shall be taken down with miserable debasement, and every faithfull Christian shall be exalted to a glorious Dignity, when the one sort shall stand at the Barr and be arraigned; the other sit, as it were at the Bench, with Jesus Christ,Psal. 49.14. Prov. 15.6. Prov. 15.16. Psal. 37.16. Prov. 16.8. and be made their Judges. The upright shall hve dominion over them in the morning. 4. In the revenues of the wicked is trouble, but the con∣dition of the Just is very comfortable, have they little or much. A little that a righteous man hath, is better then the riches of many wicked. 5. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings: great Personages will affect such as speak with truth, wisdome and faithfulnesse.Prov. 21.21. 6. He that followeth after righteousness and mercy, findeth life, righteousness, and honour. Length of daies, equall dealing from men,Prov. 15 9. Psal. 1.7. Prov. 16.31. favour from God, and eternall glory both in Heaven and Earth, is the Portion, that God vouchsafeth to them that walke in righteousness before him. 7. A righteous person is a joy and comfort to all his friends. The Father of the righteous shall greatly rejoyce, Prov. 23.24. 8. We have many examples of holy men for our encouragement;Gen. 39.10. & 50.15. 1 Sam. 24.17. Dan. 3.16, 17. as Joseph, David, Daniel, Hezekiah, Za∣chary, Elizabeth, and many others. But we have Paul by Precept and Practice, teaching this point: Whatsoever things are just, &c. think on these things, Phil. 4.8. And we may see, First, How his conscience did not accuse him for time present; As touching me, I passe little to be judged of you, 1 Cor. 4.3. How he endeavour∣ed to keep it so for the time to come; And herein I endeavour alwaies to have a cleare conscience towards God and man, Act. 24.16. And that he was not without his exercise of repentance. Rom. 7. Oh miserable man that I am, &c. Q. It falleth out oftentimes, that we have a very good desire to do that which we know doth please God; but we finde no strength to performe. And the Apostle him∣self maketh the same complaint, where he saith, To will is present with me, but I finde no way to accomplish that which I desire. A. A fervent desire to overcome evill, and to do that is known to be good, without faith in the grace of God to be strengthened and inabled thereunto, is not availeable to a godly life. For this it is that overcometh all lets in the world, and no other thing, Even faith in the grace of Christ, 1 Joh. 5.4. whereby we rest upon him for strength to master our corruptions, and power of grace to live Christianly. True it is, Paul himselfe did not finde grace fully and perfectly to overcome the rebellion of the old man, that is, his corrupt nature: to the end, that he might alwaies have a marke of his unworthiness, and sin remaining in him, and thereby remember, that it was of onely mercy that he was pardoned, and the grace of God that kept him from falling away; that he might be abased in
himselfe, and kept humble under so great grace received, and finde sweetness from time to time in the forgivenesse of his sinnes. But though he was not per∣fect here, as an Angell, yet was he not carried of his lusts into gross iniquity: He was troubled with the rebellion and resistance of good that he found in the flesh: but Gods grace was sufficient to keep him, that he fell not into that depth that he might otherwise easily have done. And we likewise through the same grace in our measure, may look with good cheere to be delivered from the yeel∣ding to our wicked lusts, which most dangerously incumber us: we being resol∣ved, that our heavenly Father (for the tender care he hath over us) is alwaies looking down from Heaven,2 Chro. 16.9. and beholding who is upright-hearted towards him (how weak soever in his own sense and perswasion that he may shew himselfe strong towards him, and thereby supply his weakness. And thus the desire to keep a godly course being soundly planted in us, and the same proceeding from a lively faith, who doubteth but that we may have strength to do such outward duties as are required, though weakly, yet soundly and in truth of heart: to endeavour at least (which God will accept) though we do not alway pre∣vaile over such strong corruptions, as oftentimes for want of such grace doe master us. Q Sathan by aggravating our imperfections, will offer to wring from us the Te∣stimony of a good conscience, in this wise. Gods eye is too pure to behold any evill: But thy best deeds have been sprinckled with filthiness, thy own conscience hath condemned thee in them, God is greater then thy conscience, &c. How is this to be answered? A. The answer is by getting a sound knowledge, how farre we are to stand up∣on the holiness of our purposes or courses; of which, marke these things. First, We do not account of it as able to abide the triall of justice, or to stand for our full righteousness before God. Therefore the things objected may dismay a Pa∣pist, they cannot dismay us. 2. We place the strength of our righteosness in these things. First, That it is the qualification of faith whereby we receive re∣mission of sinnes, or of the subject capable of forgiveness. For every faith doth not justifie before God, but that which is lively in operation, conjoyned with an affection of Piety. 2. That it doth testify of our true faith: for a work soundly good in any measure, doth argue an heart good in some measure; for you cannot have a Figge of a Thistle. Now an heart truly good in any measure, doth argue a true and well-rooted faith; for that onely can purifie the heart. 3. In this that we know they are pleasing unto our God: not that they can en∣dure the triall of his justice in themselves, but because faith in Christ doth cover their imperfections: and therefore are justly accepted through grace, when the defect is covered; they being not so much ours, as the work of the spirit,Col. 1.11. the wants set aside. Q What are the Evidences or Tokens of true Righteousness? A. First, The heart of the righteous is a rich treasure or store-house, wherein the Law of God is safely laid up. They that know righteousness, are a people in whose heart is the Law. The Law of God is in the heart of the righteous,Isa. 51.7. Deut. 6.6. Prov. 3.3. & 7.3. Psal. 37.31. Prov. 6.21. Prov. 10 20. rov. 12.5. & 11.23. and therein he doth exercise himself day and night. And when Solomon saith, The heart of the wicked is little worth; by the contrary he would have us to understand, that the heart of the righteous is very pretious. Secondly, The thoughts, devi∣ces, counsels of the righteous are right, and their desires only good. Godly men are not altogether void of thoughts that are not right and allowable: sometimes Satan casteth in matter to turn them out of the right course: sometimes their own flesh will play its part, and stirre up desire of commodity, and praise, and plea∣sures, and such like in them: but these are as the muddiness that may be for a time in a good fountain that is troubled: these they allow not, these they resist, and judg in themselves. The main stream of their desires, the course and current of
their heart is to godliness and goodness, though sometimes corruption of nature and tempestuous temptations of Satan do violently drive their thoughts another way. For as corruption of nature reigning in the unregenerate doth send forth evil thoughts, as fruits resembling the quality and disposition of the heart whence they spring; so doth an heart renued by grace frame and devise holy things, as the most immediate fruit of that infused sappe of grace.Prov. 10.20. Prov. 10.11. Isa. 50.4. and 57.18, 19. Thirdly, The tongue of the just is as choice silver, and the mouth of the righteous man a well of life. It doth al∣wayes flow with wholesome words, which do strengthen and refresh the life of the soul. It is meat to the sound, medicine to the sick, a soveraign cordiall to them that be weary and ready to faint.Prov. 10.31. Psal. 37.30. The mouth of the righteous will be fruitfull in wisdome, and his tongue talketh of judgment. A righteous man will be carefull of his tongue, not only that there be no mixture or filthiness and leudness in his words; but to avoid all superfluous and idle babling, and so to open his mouth with holy wisdome.Prov. 15.28. Fourthly, The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: he meditateth what to speak, that he may produce such matter as is most whole∣some and profitable, both in respect of the thing it self, and the circumstances of time, place and persons. A just man will utter nothing hastily, out of passion, blind love, hatred, anger, or other distemper: but he will bridle his tongue by reason,Col. 4.6. Prov 13.5. and look warily to whatsoever doth fall from him. Let your speech be poudred with salt. Fiftly, The righteous man hateth lying or a false matter, even all declining or aberration from the truth, either in word or deed. He doth not only abstain from every false way, but he doth abhorre it in himself and others. Ye that love the Lord,Psal. 97.10. Prov. 29.7. Esa. 26.7. hate evil. Sixthly, The just man walketh constantly in his integrity; that is, without dissimulation he addresseth himself firmly with invin∣cible durance to do whatsoever he knoweth to be good and holy. He walks not at randome, being blindly led with a good intent: but carrieth the light of the Word before him, and doth what it approveth: He is not fickle and incon∣stant, off and on, but walketh forward in the way of obedience without start∣ing aside.Prov. 21.15. Isa. 64.5. Seventhly, It is joy to the just to doe judgment. The righteous man taketh great delight and pleasure to deal righteously with God, and justly with men, and to be upright in all his actions. For the services of Christians are not enforced by compulsion, but performed with love; and whatsoever love doth, it doth it chearfully and gladly.Psal. 119.47. Psa. 119.16, 24. I will delight my self in thy Commandements, which I have loved. Thy testimonies are my delight. Again, Hope hath a great hand in the works of the righteous, and that doth with all comfort and gladness wait for a reward, accounting all good works which are done in earth, to be cer∣tain treasures laid up in Heaven, so that well-doers in the Kingdom of grace, have joy mixed with their righteousness, and in the Kingdom of glory are assu∣red they shall have joy according to their righteousness. A good man hath his greatest comfort in well-doing, it is more pleasant to him than meat and drink. Our Saviour thus testifieth of himself;Joh. 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work: unto whose example every just man doth labour in his measure to conform himself. Howbeit this joy is either more or less, accor∣ding to the degree of their grace; the best feel most, those which have less faith do that which is good with less delight: all do obey God with some gladness, but none with perfection of gladness, because there is not perfection of mortifi∣cation.Prov. 29.7. Eighthly, The righteous considereth the cause of the poor; that is, doth in∣form himself by the best means he can of the state and equity thereof, and know∣ing it, doth approve of it; and himself allowing thereof, doth labour that right may accordingly be yeelded unto it. Hereof Job proposeth himself for an ex∣ample, saying; I was the eyes to the blind, and I was the feet to the lame: I was a Father to the poor, and when I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently. I brake also the jawes of the unrighteous man, and plucked the prey out of his teeth. Ninethly,rov. 29.10. The bloud-thirsty hate the upright, but the just seek his soul: that is,
the godly and kind-hearted people care greatly to maintain and defend his life; and heartily desire fellowship and communion with him. As Obadiah did the Prophets, whom he hid from the violent and cruel hand of Achab and Jesabell: and Abedmeleck in speaking to the King in the behalf of Jeremie, that he should not be afamished in the prison.Joh. 9.35, 36. 2 Tim. 1.16, 17. Mat. 10.41. When our Saviour heard that the blind man was cast out of the Synagogue, he came unto him: and Onesimus sought out Paul diligently when he was in prison at Rome. Tenthly, The righteous do re∣joyce in the works of God, his judgments upon the wicked, and his mercies to∣wards the poor and needy that put their trust in him. The righteous see it,Psal. 107.43. Job 22.19. sal. 140.14. & 6.8. Rom. 6.13.18. and are glad. Eleventhly, The just will not forget to give praise unto the Lord. Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy Name. Twelfthly, The Just do yeeld themselves as servants to righteousness, and give the members of their body, as weapons of justice to do the pleasure of God. Lastly, The righteous do grieve and mourn for the daily transgressions of the ungodly amongst whom they live. Righteous Lot in seeing and hearing, vexed his soul from day to day,2 Pet. 2.6, 7. Psal. 116.136. with the unlawfull deeds of the Sodomites. Rivers of waters runne down mine eyes; because they keep not thy Law. Q. How is this Righteousness to be strengthened and preserved? A. We shall strongly hold this righteousness, if we exercise these things: 1. Labour to give obedience of faith in the least things: for there must be pre∣ciseness in keeping Gods Commandements, and we must count nothing little that he commandeth.Prov. 7.2. Solomon will have us keep his precepts as the sight or apple of the eye. The eye is a most noble member, both in use and price, most tender and diligently to be kept; but the black or sight, (which is the light or eye of the eye, by whose force and vertue the whole body is directed,) is the most excel∣lent part of the eye, most tender, and to be heeded with double diligence. Hence when the Lord would significantly declare what favour and love he beareth to his children; he saith, He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye.Zech 2.8. Deut. 32.10. Psal. 17.8. So David prayeth, Keep me as the apple of the eye: that is, with that care where∣with men use to keep the black of their eye, which is most respective and heed∣full. Wherefore Solomon advising to observe the Commandements as the sight of the eye, doth intimate, that nothing, no not the least is to be admitted, which is contrary to the Law of God: for there is nothing so light or small, which doth not hurt or offend the sight. Moreover, many little sinnes are equivalent to one great. A ship may be laden with small sands; and many drops of rain will cause great brooks to rise. Yea, a small sinne fostered and cherished with indulgence, is more dangerous then a notorious offence, into which a man slippeth once through infirmity. It doth secretly poison the soul, harden the heart, grieve the spirit, and wound conscience. Nor is this all, but little sinnes lived in will make way to greater. Men grow from stealing pinnes to points, from points to pounds. Sinnes are sociable, and linked in confederacie, the lesser creep in at window, to open the door that greater may enter. And every sinne of it self being harboured in the soil of corrupt nature, is thriving, if let alone it will mainly increase. 2. We must renew daily a sorrow for our ordinary and smal∣ler offences: for though it be the weakness of the stomack that is able to bear with nothing that is offensive to it, yet it is a blessed frame of soul, when it can∣not digest the least sinne, but is ready to turn at it. 3. We must think what secure and comfortable courses we have, while we keep this purpose and practise of a good conscience; and what a bitterness it is, when we have our consciences accu∣sing for any more grievous swerving; the best is, when it cometh home by weep- in cross; but how wofull is the state of the soul, till repentance be given. For as a stomack surcharged, which hath neither vent upward nor downward, so is a soul clogged with guilt, but wanting repentance. 4. Cleave unto Christ by a lively faith still more and more, for he is the fountain of grace, and the firmer
our faith is in him, the more do we partake of his holiness for our sanctification. Q. What use may be made hereof? A. We must learn our duty, not to runne on at adventure, but look to our heart and wayes herein: we are all Priests of God, we must not go without this breast-plate enameled with Ʋrim and Thummim. Wherefore let us look that our consciences speak with us, let us renew our purposes every day, strike sure covenants with God; take up the blessed exercise of broken hearts, bewaile our daily wants: for we should not let a thought which is awry, no not a dreame which savoureth corruption, passe without a censure. Job rather sanctified his houshold on suspition and jealousie, then neglected matters already apparently evil. 2. This doth rebuke such, who content themselves with externall righteous∣ness, or none at all, Some there are that be good Church-men, honest, righteous, peaceable, just dealing men; but because they lay not a good foundation of faith in Jesus Christ, and of repentance from dead works; because they care not for the spirit and power of godliness; therefore brown paper shall as well keep out musket shot, as this will help them, when the devil shall let fly his murdring bullets. Many have no righteousness at all, their consciences being able to ac∣cuse them, that they have lived in profaneness, contempt of Gods Ordinances, pride, wrath, covetousness, pleasures: their purposes have been to walk after their own hearts lusts, doing that which is good in their own eyes. Instead of sorrow never to be repented of, they can tell you, they were at such a place, where they were frolick, had entertainment with sports, passed the time in merriments. CHAP. VIII. The seaventh property of a Godly life, viz. Willingness and Chearfull∣ness. What therein is implied. Reasons to shew the necessity thereof. Signes or Evidences of a willing spirit. The Author thereof. The Means by which this Willingness and Chearfullness is to be preserved, and dullness and unwillingness removed. Sponte facient quaecun{que} sci∣entis, & non coacti. Art. Rhet. 1.10. 2 Cor 9.7. Psal. 119 08. 1 Chro. 28 9. Heo 13.18. Psal. 10.3. Jud. 5.2, 9. Pal. 47 9. Ez a 2.68. & 3.5. Nh. 11 2. 2 Cor. 8.11, 12 Eza 7 5, 6. Exod. 25.2. & 35.21. Deut. 16.0. 2 Chro. 29.31. 1 Chro. 29 3, 9, 14. Nehem. 1.11. sal. 119.47. & 111.2. Isa. 62.4. 2 Chro. 17.6.Q. WHat is the seaventh Property of a Godly life? A. It must be willing and chearfull. No man can be good un∣willingly, though the thing he doth be good and commendable. God loveth a chearfull giver. Accept, I beseech thee [saith David] the free-will or voluntary offerings of my mouth. And thou Solomon my sonne, know thou the God of thy fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and willing minde. Q. What is implied in this willingness? A. First, An holy bent of will, affectionately following and lifting up it self to whatsoever God requires. Thy people are voluntaries, saith the Psalmist; that is, they most freely, willingly and liberally present themselves and their services unto thee. Thus the children of Israel were to bring offerings willingly for the mat∣ter of the Tabernacle: and David with his Princes offered willingly for the matter of the Temple; that is, with a free heart set to forward the work for the service of God. So Nehemiah prayeth, O Lord, I beseech thee, let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy Name: that is, whose will is inclined and firmly set to walk in obedience before thee. And this seems to be that which elsewhere is called, the lifting up of the heart in the wayes of God. And this perpetuall disposition to the practise of godliness is alwayes required, not ever the practise of this or that particular duty.
The Laws that enjoyne any actuall duty, doe bind us ad semper velle, but not ad semper agere: we are tied to iterate and resume them when need is, but not to continue the acts themselves without intermission. Secondly,Prov. 6.21. Esa. 55.2. Esa. 58.13. Psal. 40.8. Psal. 2.12. 1 Chro. 29.9. sal. 37.4. Psal. 119.35. Psal. 119 14, 24. Job 27.10. Deut. 28.47. Psal. 54 6. Psal. 57.7. Rom. 1.15. Gen. 22.3. Mat. 4.19, 20, 2, 22. Act. 21.13. 2 Chro. 17.16. Neh. 4.6. 2 Chro. 22.29 Ti. 3.1. It notes delight and joy in the performance and exercise of all holy duties. If thou call the Sabbath a delight. I delight to doe thy will, O my God. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandements, for therein do I delight. And so we read, Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfullness and gladness of heart. Again, I will freely sacrifice unto thee. Thirdly, A willing minde will readily embrace all opportuni∣ties to put in practise what is commanded, and set upon it at the first call. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that are at Rome also. What wrought this in the Apostle; but care to wait for a fit season that he might come unto them by the will of God? Abraham being commanded to offer Isaac in sacrifice, riseth early to set forward towards the mount whereon he was to slay him. James and John being called of Christ, straightway left their father, their nets and ship, and followed him. Paul standing ready, not only to be bound, but also to die for the Lord Jesus, would not be perswaded from going to Jerusalem, though he knew that bands and imprisonment did abide him there. So we read of Amasiah the sonne of Zichri, that he willingly offered himself to the Lord, that is, with a most cheerfull and prompt minde he offered himself to fight the battels of God. Thus if the heart be to obedience, or be given to the work of obedience, an opportunity is gladly welcomed. Paul termes it, readiness to every good work. For this makes one towards God, as a true hearted friend is to him whom he intirely affecteth: an occasion is accep∣table, whereby he may shew him kindness. This was in the Macedonians, whom in that particular Paul commends to the Corinthians for imitation, whenas even in extream poverty there was found in them a richness of liberality, a willingness even beyond their power, and a pressing upon the Apostle with great instance,2 Cor. 8.2, 3, 4. to receive that which they had raised for the necessity of the Saints. Q. What reasons may shew the necessity of this willingness? A. 1. God requires the heart, and will respect nothing that is done, what shew soever it makes, if that be not given unto him. A free disposition is so necessary, that nothing can please God if that be wanting A Magistrate in his place, whatsoever he shall doe, is of no account with God,Jer. 9.3. 1 Cor. 9.17. 1 Pet. 5.2. if he may be accused like those of whom Jeremie complained, to have no courage for the truth. A Minister in preaching shall have no reward, unless he do it willingly: If he do it more by constraint, then of a ready mind, the Lord doth not regard his course. In giving, it is the cheerfull giver whom God loves. In hearing, it is the swift hearer whom he takes notice of. This is the giving a mans self to God,2 Cor. 9.7. Jam. 1.19. Rom. 6 13. 2 Cor 8.5. spoken of by the Apostle. Man looks to no more then the outward act, neither can he; but God who trieth the heart and reins, observes with what spirit and affection every thing is done, and measures the action accordingly. 2. To be freely, willingly and cheerfully disposed in the wayes of holy obedience towards God, is a speciall blessing, with all earnestness to be desired.Psal. 51.12. This was the very thing which David craved, Establish me with thy free spirit. His desire must be a rule to ours, and his suing for it, is a sufficient proof that it is excellent. He knew he could not stand without the Lords sustaining; and assurance to be upheld by God he could not have, unless he found in himself such a kind of liberall and ingenuous spirit. For where duties are not done freely, they can never be performed con∣stantly. If the will be not set upon the duty taken in hand, a small thing will unsetle and turn us by. It is impossible to continue, if a setled purpose of obeying be wanting in us. 3.Isa. 64.5. The Lord meeteth them that with joy apply themselves to work righteousness; that is, he favoureth and respecteth them, will be ready to help and succour them. 4. Amongst men free kindness is twice acceptable: for the mind doubleth the value of the gift. It pleaseth the master that his servant is
willing and cheerfull about his business; he cannot endure to see him sullen, lumpish and dead-hearted. The will is more respected of God then the work; and the heart then the labour of the hand. The traveller delighteth in a free Horse, which needs not the spur. The Tutors love is to the diligent willing Scholar, who is ready to his book before he be called or compelled. God loveth them that offer themselves heartily unto his service,2 Cor. 8.5. and stand ever prepared to goe when he sendeth,Isa. 6.8. to come when he calleth. I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will goe for us? Then I said, here am I, send me.Act. 21.13. Drus. Praeter. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 2 p. 60. Cant. 1.4. sal. 119 32. What do ye mean to weep and to break my heart? for I am ready (firmly or stedfastly prepared,) not only to be bound, but also to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus. 5. This is the voice of the Spouse; Draw me, we will runne after thee: I will runne the way of thy Commandements, when thou shalt enlarge my heart. These sentences declare, with what alacrity and open-heartedness the servants of God give themselves unto the obedience of his Law, when their heart is enlarg∣ed with wisdome, comfort and love. And that they might yeeld more free and ready obedience, their continuall prayer is, that God will enable and establish them by his free Spirit still more and more. Their desire is fervent, but strength faileth to do what they desire; whence proceed most earnest requests to be set at liberty. 6. Willingness makes the work of obedience easie and delightsome. Nothing is tedious to a loving minde. The free heart swalloweth many difficulties with little adoe. They which affect heartily, long after, and delight to goe up to the house of God;Psal. 84.5, 6 Vise Tremel. & Jun. 1 hunc l Herisbach ibid. Calvin in Psal. 84.7. that make God their stay, and study to compose their wayes according to his precepts, who are said to have the wayes of God in their hearts: they will not think much to passe through dry and thirsty places, or to endure vehement storms and tempests, that they might come unto God. They that be hearty and stout worshippers of God, will goe forward not only through soft, pleasant and delightfull wayes, but parching desarts, and rough, sharp, craggie places, that they might appear before God. Yea, they will rather digge pits, or make cisterns with great labour, then the driness of the region should hinder their journey. No difficulties, no obstacles can hinder them, but they will come cheerfully through the thirsty desarts to celebrate the holy assemblies. The holy Ghost witnesseth,Act. 20.23, 24. That bonds and afflictions abide me in every City, But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy. Q. What are the Signs or Evidences of Willingness? A. 1. Our praying unto God for such a spirit, out of the sensibleness of our naturall slavery and bondage unto sinne. When a man is aware of the forward∣ness of his nature unto evil, and of the strong bent thereof unto sinne, and feels that of himself he hath no heart to the things which God commands, his very stomack (in a manner) is against them; and so accordingly begs earnestly of God,Psal 119.32, 40. that he would, as David saith, enlarge his heart, and quicken him in his righteousness, this is a good evidence, that at the least God is beginning in him the work of a free and liberall spirit. For God prepares his people to that good, which he means to bestow on them, by stirring up in them a sensibleness of the necessity of it, and a fervency and desire of truth to enjoy it. Certainly; a free spirit is, as it were, a breeding in a man, when he begins to be displeased with the proneness of his disposition unto evil, and is discontented with himself that good duties are such a burden to him, and so thereupon prayeth God to turn him about quite, that holy services may be as pleasing unto him, as by the bent of nature evil is;Rom. 6.18. that he may become, as Paul saith, the servant of righteousness; and may be as cheerfull at the command thereof, as the servants of the Centurion were at his appointment, whose beck they obeyed without delay. 2. A free spirit is discerned by an easiness to be perswaded to good duties. To a willing minde there is no need of many arguments. The making it to appear that the
business is necessary and good, such as God requires, approves, and will be much pleased with, if it be done according to his will, is a sufficient motive. How easily was Paul perswaded at Antioch, to deal unto the people present, the Gospel of God? the Rulers of the Synagogue sent to him and Barnabas, to request them if they had any word of exhortation to deliver it: the text saith, Then Paul stood up, &c.Act. 13.15, 16. 1 Thes. 2.8. This was an evidence of that which in this business he calleth his good-will: so farre was he from looking to be pressed with multiplicity of arguments, or from needing to be wrought upon by importunity, that he was rather glad of the occasion. It is an evil sign when there must be so much urging before a man can be brought to an inclination towards that which ought to be done. A word is enough to a cheerfull spirit. An Horse of mettall is more quickened with the sound of a wand, than a dull jade with many smitings of the spurres I would not perswade to rashness, I know it is possible for a man to be overhasty, and zeal not guided by knowledge may soon out-carry. Let every man be sure first, that the matter is good and necessary; and when that is once made plain to a mans conscience in the sight of God, if yet there be much adoe to work him unto practice, it is a sign of an illiberall and servile spirit. It is a dull jade that will go no longer than the spurre is in his side. 3. A man shall judg of himself in this point, by his going on in a good way, even when he is not egged on by ordinary outward provocations; nay when perhaps, in stead of them he meets with discouragements. As for example; suppose a good duty, to which a man is not bound by any humane Law, nor urged by any over-ruling authority, nor pressed by the perswasions of such as have interest in him, nor invited by the hope of any profits or praise, or approbation with the world; nay, it may be these things are against him herein, Law seems to inhibit, autho∣rity gives no countenance, friends, instead of perswading, labour to withdraw, there is like to be some prejudice to profit, there is possibility of being exercised with reproach, and of losing esteem and reputation amongst men; here is a time for a free spirit to shew it self. He that in this case is so in love with the duty, and so desirous to approve himself unto God, that he holds on constantly, having no egging on, but variety of withdrawments, him will I terme a free spirited man. 4. The ingenuous or free person, deviseth ingenuous things, and in ingenuous things doth he insist or persevere.Isa. 32.8. Their thoughts and cogitations doe resemble the temper of the heart; as streams do the quality of the fountain whence they spring. And not only so, but they have the same will and affections to godliness, they continue constant in their good course, and grow more and more. It is an easie matter to counterfeit the free person for a time; many also think they have quit themselves well, when they have gone a little way, specially if they suffer any disgrace for weldoing; but they grow fainthearted by and by, and change their mindes: whereas on the contrary true willingness is not an hours bird, as we say, but growes on to perfection. Those that are indued there∣with, persevere therein constantly; their freeness is not by fits and starts; nei∣ther are they like a seething pot, that is now ready to boyl over, and by and by stands as still as a stone. Q. Hath man this Freedom or Willingness unto good of himself? A. The regenerate have a freedome to do that which is acceptable unto God: but they must never forget that they obtained not this freedome by their own me∣rits, but by the benefit of God. For he fashioned them anew, and instead of stony hearts, hath put into them an heart of flesh. Q. Is this Liberty or Willingness of the Saints perfect in this life? A. By the power of the Holy Ghost the corruption of the will and affecti∣ons is broken and made feeble, that it is not able to hinder the making of a right choice; but it is not quite taken away. And forasmuch as this lust, so long as we live here, cannot utterly be consumed; therefore it comes to passe, that this
liberty which is given unto the godly, to do things which may please God, is not perfect and absole, but weak and maimed. Q. By what Meanes is this Willingness to be preserved and upholden? A. First, Labour to humble and shame thy self for dullness and sloth in the service of God, considering thy former readiness to serve sinne and Satan. O my soul, why art thou so backward to doe what thy God and Saviour doth re∣require of thee? Why seems his work tedious and irksome? Thou hast not ser∣ved sinne, nor obeyed the lusts of the flesh in this manner? Thou hast drunken in the puddle waters of iniquity with great pleasure and delight; thou hast wil∣lingly followed the inticements of Satan; to do wickedly hath liked thee well. What love hast thou borne to pastime, pleasure, the vanities of this life? What time hast thou wasted about them? What contentment hast thou taken in them? how earnest hast thou been in pursuit of them? What? is the slavery of sinne better then the liberty of grace? Hadst thou rather be the droyl of Satan, then the free-man of Jesus Christ? It is enough and too much that heretofore thou hast lived to the lusts of the flesh, and to have wrought evil in the sight of God, for the time that remaines give thy selfe to the will of God, and that with so much the more willingness, by how much thou hast turned aside after folly. Secondly, Consider what great things the Lord hath done for thee, and how he hath magnified his mercy towards thee.1 Sam. 12.24. Kindness enflames love, and provokes to willing submission. How hath the Lord respected thee above all thou couldst desire, or art able to comprehend? He formed thee in the wombe; hath fed, cloathed, defended thee ever since thou wast born. He gave his Sonne to die for thy redemption, and in him is pleased to take thee for his adop∣ted sonne. Seeing God hath thus honoured thee with his favours above all thou canst conceive; shouldst not thou be carefull to honour him with thy willing obedience? What good thou enjoyest is all of his free grace; and what is more equall, then that thou imploy thy strength, thoughts, and all the power thou art enriched withall,Mat. 11.30. 1 Joh. 5.3. to his glory? Thirdly, the yoke of Christ is easie; his Commandements are not grievous. In the Word nothing is commanded, but what is pleasant and delightsome. The service which God requireth is libe∣rall, not slavish. Did we truly bethinke our selves what is matter of delight, we should finde greater joy in nothing then in obedience. Again, faith work∣eth by love, which maketh heavy things to seeme light and sweet. Feare causeth the most easie burden to feel grievous and unsupportable: but nothing is hard to a willing minde. Furthermore, when we set upon the performance of any holy duty, the Lord is present to assist and strengthen us by his blessed Spirit in the doing of it.2 Thes. 3.5. 1 Thes. 3.13. The Lord will direct our hearts into the love of God. That labour which is tedious to the weak and sickly, is no way grievous to the strong and lusty. The work of God is a weariness to the unregenerate, that are led by their lusts: but to the regenerate, in whose heart the Law is engraven, who is continually supported and guided by the Spirit, it is meate and drink to finish the work whereunto he is called. True it is, the faithfull shall feel the flesh rebelling against the Spirit: but by the power of faith in Christ they shall overcome the world, and be more then Conquerours. Lastly, The comfort of well-doing is so great, as may animate and encourage therein. For he that exerciseth himself in the Law of God, hath the witness of a good conscience to plead for him against all accusations, to cheere him in all conditions. Fourthly, Remember thou art in Gods presence, his eye is upon all thy waies. Ps. 119.167, 168. My soul (saith David) hath kept thy Testimonies, and I love them exceedingly; one reason he gives thereof; for all my waies are before thee. Thus he exhorteth Solomon his Sonne to serve the God of his Father with a willing minde, for the Lord trieth the heart and reines. With what readiness will men doe Offices of kindness to their Neighbours, whilest present in their sight, what∣soever
they think or speak of it behind their backes. Thou canst not goe heavily, uncheerfully about the works of God, but he doth espie it. With this Meditation quicken thy self, to do what thou dost with all thy power. Fifthly, Call to minde the rich and ample Promises that God who is true and faithfull, hath made unto them that walke before him with all their hearts. Eye hath not seene, eare hath not heard, it is not possible for the heart to con∣ceive what God hath prepared for them that love him. Who would not runne speedily and with good courage to winne such an excellent prize? Sixthly, Earnest Prayer is the preserver of willingness: for after we are effectually drawn and changed by the spirit of grace, we still need a second and third, yea perpetuall favour from God, that even to the last gaspe, at all times, in every moment the faithfull soul should cry, Draw me. They that seeme most obedient are so refractary, and the swiftest are so sluggish, that if God doe not continually hale them forward, they will sit still or goe back∣ward. Q. Do not the godly finde much dulnesse and backwardness in themselves? A. They finde much untowardnesse in themselves at all times: for the cor∣ruption which they carry about with them is a continuall clogge that presseth down, that they cannot runne speedily the race that is set before them. But at some times thy feele more unwillingness and inability to do good then at another. For the Lord to let us see what we are in our selves, doth sometimes leave us to our selves, and withdraw the effectuall operation of his Spirit, and then we, as things that can move no longer then they are moved of another, do presently grow stiffe, or fall away. For remedy of this heartlesness we must consider the causes of it: for in the most it proceeds from security, earthlymin∣dedness, conceit of selfe-sufficiency, delight in sinne, slight performance of ho∣ly duties, a course in lesser sinne, or some fall into grosser evill: And then it must be amended by serious humiliation, hearty repentance, and fervent Prayer;Psal. 51.12. as the Prophet perceiving that sinne had gotten a great power upon him, and that his affections were so secretly ensnared with it, that he had no such plea∣sure, he took no such felicity in the performance of holy services, as he was wont: they were irksome and burdensome unto him, he went on in a kinde of dull, and heavy, and unlusty manner with them, as one weary of this untoward and sluggish disposition which he had cast himselfe into by grievous forgetfulness: he bewayleth his offence with much bitterness, and prayeth for a more free kinde of mettall to be wrought into him, that he might finde himself cheerfull, and glad, and of a lively spirit, in the doing of the things which God commands. But in some it springeth from excessive sorrow, abjectnesse of minde, deep fears, length of temptation that hath wasted the spirits: In these it is remedied by a due consideration of Gods free love and mercy towards them, and holy courage and resolution to waite upon his gracious Promises. Limmes benummed with cold are quickened with heate: a dejected spirit is cheered with good words. If sor∣row oppresse, courage and joy will revive and strengthen.
CHAP. IX. The eighth Property of a godly life, viz. Purity and Cleanness. What therein is implied. Reasons to incite and move us to labour after Purity. The Authour of it. The Meanes by which it is wrought. How the Saints may be said to be pure, and yet not deserve the Name of Ca∣tharisti. Signes or Evidences of Purity, with the Meanes by which it is to be preserved and encreased. Psal. 18.26. Joh. 15.3.Q. WHat is the eighth Property of a godly life? A. It must be pure and cleane. With the pure thou wilt shew thy selfe pure, and with the froward thou wilt shew thy selfe froward. God is Light, and Purity, and Perfection it self, an unclean person he cannot delight in. God himselfe sheweth what he requires in this behalf: Separate your selves from the uncleane thing, and I will receive you, 1 Cor. 6.17. Q What is implied in this Purity and Cleanness? A. Pure signifieth as much as fine, neat, and unspotted, and doth proper∣ly agree to clear water or glass, to Gold, Silver, and other pure Mettals, or Vessels made of the same. It agrees also to precious Stones which are transpa∣rent, or to polished Marble. And it is applied to men and women who live honestly without blame, and keep themselves unspotted of the world. Thus it is said in the Song of Solomon, Cant 6.9. My Dove, my undefiled is but one: she is the onely one of her Mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. It notes two things. First, An heart cleansed from the filthiness of sinne and double∣mindedness. Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5.8. Purge your hearts ye wave∣ring minded, Jam. 4.8. This is called a new heart, and a new spirit, Ezek. 18.31. True it is, that there remaines corruption in the best that dwell in these houses of clay, but it is subdued, it is not delighted in, it is not cherished, it doth not prevaile: the soul and spirit is sanctified by grace, though but in part. And this is most necessary, For the heart of man is the fountain of all his actions; thereout cometh life, Prov. 4.23. All working derives its beginning thence. Now in reason the Fountain must be sweet, before the waters can be wholesome: the Tree good, before the Fruit savoury: There must be first a renewed heart, be∣fore there can be a reformed life.Psal. 73.12. Secondly, It implies a conversation or course of life unspotted, unblameable, or without offence. Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord,Jam. 1.27. Pal. 24.3 4. or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart. Cleanse your hands ye sinners. According to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me:Jam. 4.. Psal. 18.20. That is, according to the works of holiness that I have done. And so in Job, Job 17.9. He that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. The Fruit doth necessarily resemble the quality of the sap: the conversation is squared according to the internall disposition of the soul.2 Sam. 22.25. And so we finde in Scripture, the innocent opposed to the hypocrite. Job 17.8. The innnocent shall stirre up himself against the hypocrite. Q. What Reasons may incite and move us to labour after Purity? A. 1. The favour of God in this life, the comfortable Vision of God in the life to come, belongs onely to the clean and pure. No uncleane thing can en∣ter into the New Jerusalem. Psal. 73.1. God is good to Israel: And who be they which are the Israel of God, Even the pure in heart? There is the marke. Who shall ascend into the Mountaine of the Lord, that is, who shall be a true member of Gods Church on earth, and remaine and dwell for ever with him in Heaven? He makes answer, Even he that hath innocent hands, and a clean heart, Psal. 24.3, 4.
Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5.8. They shall behold his loving countenance here reconciled to them in Christ, and enjoy hereafter that presence of his, in which is fulness of joy for evermore. 2. David a King, a Souldier, a wise Gover∣nour, and godly man, doth earnestly begge the grace of a pure heart. His pray∣ing for it, argueth he knew it to be a matter of no small worth: his present case had made him to see the excellency of it now more then ever; and by his example we are bound both to esteeme it, and to labour for it: If it were Da∣vids duty to endeavour it, why should we think him to be bound in this, more then we our selves are? 3. Hereby onely a man becometh capable of Gods graces, who powereth not his gracious liquors into fusty or filthy Vessels. But if any man purge himself he shall be a Vessell unto honour, sanctified and meet for the Lord, and prepared unto every good work, 2 Tim. 2.21 4. No service is pleasing to God, but what proceedeth from a pure heart. The end of the Com∣mandement is love out of a pure heart, 1 Tim. 1.5. I thanke God, saith Paul, whom I serve from my Fathers with a pure conscience, 2 Tim. 1.3. Hence are these Exhortations, 1 Tim. 3.9 Hold fast the mistery of faith in pure conscience. 1 Pet. 1.22. See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently. Such onely are fit to approach the Throne of grace in Prayer, that can lift up pure hands without wrath and wavering, 1 Tim. 2.8. And so offer that cleane Offering prophecied of to be lifted up in every place, Mal. 1.11. The Exhortations are, Let us draw nigh the Throne of grace with true hearts, in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evill conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water; Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you, Heb. 10.22. Cleanse your hearts ye sin∣ners, and purge your hands ye wavering minded, Jam. 4.18. The Promise is, Zeph. 3.9. I will turne to the people a pure Language, that they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. The Title of Christians is, That they call upon the Lord out of a pure heart, 2 Tim. 2.22. But as for the wicked,Mat. 23.25. Their thoughts are abhomination unto the Lord, Prov. 15.26. 5. All Pro∣mises of God are made good onely to such as be purged from their iniquity. Let their trials be what they will, let their Names never so much be had in re∣proach, let their persons be never so meane, the Lord respecteth them that are of an holy conversation: there is no difference betwixt Jew and Gentile,Act. 15.9. rich and poor with God, so the heart be purified. 6. This course is the note of a true Believer, who as in other things, so herein is made conformable unto Christ, in purging himself as he is pure, 1 Joh. 3.3. The scope of the place is to shew what is the study and endeavour of all the true adopted Sonnes of God, namely, that knowing themselves subject to sinne, they labour to cleanse their selves daily from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to grow up unto full holiness,Hag. 14, 15. Tit. 1.15. Rom. 14.2. 1 Cor. 6.4. & 10.23. pro∣pounding Christ before them as a patterne of imitation. 7. To the pure all things are pure, that is, all things indifferent are free now to be used of them in good conscience, by means of their Christian liberty. Q. Hath man this purity of himself? A. This purity is not in us by nature and of our selves, but is made ours by grace; it is wholly the work of God, even a kinde of creation,Psal. 51.10. which is Gods peculiar. Whereupon a regenerate man is termed a new Creature, Gods work∣manship: It is the God of peace which sanctifieth.2 Cor. 5.17. Eph. 2.10. 1 Thes. 5.23. Ezek. 11.19. & 36.26. Job. 14.4. He assumeth it to him to put a new spirit within the bowels. It is unpossible that mans heart being natu∣rally such a sinke as it is, should cleanse it selfe. Out of his filthiness, how can there come any such cleaness. Indeed we are willed Ezek. 18.31. To make a new heart, and a new spirit: But such places do rather shew what a man should do, then what he can do; and tend to the making of him sensible of his own unable∣ness; which when he hath found upon triall, he may be moved to seek to him, who worketh both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. Q. What are the meanes by which purity is wrought?
A. The Spirit of God is the immediate Authour of this spirituall cleansing, by whose powerfull operation the Word is made effectuall to this purpose: so Paul, you were thus and thus polluted, whith those abhominable and filthy sinnes; but now ye are washed, and sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. This Spirit working with the Word, and by the Word,Act. 15 9. begets faith; and faith hath a speciall gift to purify the heart. But the spirit worketh by meanes, and the principall of them is the Word of truth. Joh. 17.17. Sanctifie them by thy truth, thy Word is truth. The Commandement of God is said to be pure, and the Religion grounded thereon is cleane: not on∣ly in respect of it self in it self,Psal. 19.7, 8. as being without mixture of any the least fals∣hood or corruption, but in regard of the efficacy thereof; it makes cleane, it causeth to be pure. The Word is the Instrument of Sanctification, but afflictions through the blessing of God are made occasions of holiness to the Elect people of God. What the fire is to dross, that are afflictions to the bad humours which breed about the heart. And many of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, Dan. 11.35. & 12.10. Q If purity be the gift of God, may not man altogether cease to look after it, till God be pleased to give it? A. Not so: but as God gives it by meanes, so must he seek it in the conscio∣nable use of those meanes which God hath appointed; as by earnest Prayer, di∣ligent attendance upon the Ministery of the Word, serious meditation, sorrow for sinne, and the practice of good works: But of this hereafter. Q. But how can any persons be called pure, seeing the Lord findeth no purity in the Angels themselves;Job 4.8. Prov. 20 9. Cujus participa∣tione justi sunt, ejus c mparati∣one nec justi sunt. Aug. Con. Prisc. & origenist. ca. 10. Vis. Amic. Coll. Joc. rm & Franc. Jun. pg. 15. & 20. Hos. Confes. tom. 2. cap. 13. and the faithfull do finde and acknowledge themselves to be miserable and wretched sinners? A. That place of Job denieth not purity to the Angels simply, but only com∣paring theirs with Gods, it is as a little streame, yea, a drop to the Ocean, which is nothing in comparison. And for the Saints of God, as long as they live in this world, they are able to discover more dross then Gold in themselves, and therefore do freely confess themselves to be most vile, and worthy to be abhor∣red: nevertheless, the Lord is pleased to call and esteeme them pure, not of the greater, but of the better part; not by that Legal purity which is perfect in all degrees, but that sound and true (called Evangelicall) purity which bringeth all the parts forward towards those degrees. Nay more, Christ himself calleth his Love all fair, and saith, there is no spot in her, yea, as pure as the Sunne, as fair as the Moon, Cant. 6.9. Now if any think it unreasonable to ascribe both purity and impurity to the same soul, he may answer himself by the words of our Saviour to his Disciples, Joh. 13.10 Ye are all clean but Judas; When in the same place he sheweth they had need to have their feet washed. Now the servants of God are said to be pure. First, Because the Spirit of regeneration hath washed every part, although in part onely, and the conversation of the godly is clean, though not in that degree it ought. Secondly, The Lord doth graciously remit the sinnes of every Believer, which they do heartily lament, and in Christ ac∣counts them pure, not imputing the least spot unto them. Thirdly, The purity begun in them shall be made perfect and absolute, as though they had never been defiled: and in respect of what is begun they are said to be without spot, the Scripture speaking of what is in doing as if it were already perfected. So the body of sinne is said to be crucified with Christ,Rom. 6.6. that sinne might be destroyed; and Believers to be dead unto sinne, when sinne hath onely received his deadly wound. Q. Is not this sufficient to give occasion to wicked men to brand sincere Christians with the odious name of Puritans, or to indite them of blasphemy or schisme at least, as having opinion of their own purity? A. Christians are pure, but not Puritans: they affect, they deserve no such
reproachfull name to be fastened upon them. They are and ought to be pure, else would they not be the people of Christ, members of his body: for he doth sanctifie and purge his Church with the washing of water by the Word, Eph 5.26. He purifieth unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. But this their purity is neither their own, nor so in their own account; but onely in regard of Gods washing of their Robes in the blood of the Lamb, and of his gracious acceptance of them so washed as pure and clean. All sound Christians do from the heart detest and abhorre the hatefull schisme of the Catharists, in English Puritans: but since it is grown to be a Nick-name, in scorne and con∣tempt cast upon them, that desire to approve their waies unto God, I will briefly shew three things concerning this matter. First, Who the old Catharists or Puri∣tans were, and what they held. Secondly, Upon whom that scornefull name was cast afterwards. Thirdly, Who be the true Puritans, the successors of those vile Hereticks. The first Ring-leader or broacher of that Heresie, was Novatus an African by birth, the Presbyter under Cyprian at Carthage, who flying out of Africk was created Presbyter under Cornelius Bishop of Rome in the daies of Decius the Emperour. This man aspiring to the Bishoprick of Carthage and Rome, and missing of his hope, began to sow dissentions and troubles, and to spread his pestilent Opinions first in Africk and then in Rome. For whereas Cy∣prian and Cornelius held, that such as had fallen from the faith in the times of Per∣secution (partly through fear of cruell torments, partly through the perswa∣sive allurements of the Tormentors, but chiefly through their own weakness and infirmity) were upon true repentance to be received into the bosome and Com∣munion of the Church; Novatus wickedly opposed them,Eus. lib. 6. cap. 35. and defended that such had commited a sinne unto death, and therefore should not again be received, but for ever wholly debarred from re-entry into the Church. After strife be∣tween them, Novatus at length made a schisme, and seperated himself from the Church, and through obstinacy fell into Heresie. Novatianus a Romane, and the Scholar of Novatus, joyned himself unto his Master, whose deadly poyson he sought to disperse farre and wide This schisme thus made, about the year of Christ Two hundred fifty foure, presenty took root and spred further, as things of this nature are apt to do, like stinking weeds that grow faster then wholesome Herbs. For the effecting hereof Novatus used very wicked and fraudulent meanes,Platina in vitae Cornel. Cornel. Bishop of Rome. Eus. lib. 6. c. 35. both by drawing honour upon himself, as also by drawing followers after him. For whereas first he had protested with fearfull Oathes that he never desired a Bishop∣rick, yet by crafty and forged traines he inticed three Bishops out of a corner of Italy, plaine and simple men (as the History reporteth) to come unto him; who being enclosed with leud persons, and themselves somewhat tipsy, were con∣strained to lay their hands on him, and make him Bishop. And least his sect should be destitute of Episcopall Authority, he with three others Bishops, pri∣vily ordained Novatianus Bishop in Italy, and Nicostratus, one of his part and faction, Bishop in Africa. He used also a most impious prank, to draw the com∣mon people to him: for when he was to administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to them, before he would deliver it into their hands,Eusebius in Greek calleth it Bread, which Christophorson in his transla∣tion leaveth out, least they should be forced to ac∣knowledge that Bread re∣maineth in the Sacrament. Cap. Epist. lib. 1. epist 5. & lib. 4. cap. 2. Socrat. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 38. gr. & 30. Lat. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 19. he would make them swear that they would not forsake him, to joyne to Cornelius. By these sleights, the corruption of mans nature being apt to catch up errour, he did en∣large his heresie; and that the rather, because it consented with the Orthodox truth in many Articles of faith and profession, especially of the Trinity. There∣fore the Novatians suffered persecution of the Arians and Macedonians; as they in like manner having made agreement with the Orthodox, did banish the Ari∣ans, if at any time they could. And in common persecution raised against the Orthodox and Novatians, both by the followers of Arius: such good will and kindness grew betwixt them, that a league, reconciliation and agreement had been made, if the envy of some few, or rather the providence of God had not hindred,
least they being received into the bosome of the Church, should weaken the truth of sound Doctrine with their Opinions. This poyson of Novatus (as was said) spread farre and near through the Christian world, insomuch as divers Bishops were infected therewith: as those Novatian Bishops that met in Councell at Pazum, an obscure Village, about the keeping of Easter after the manner of the Jews,Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 25. Niceph lib. 8. cap 20. Gab. Prteel. haeres. 7. Socrat. lib 7. cap. 1. Socrat. ib. 5. cp. 10. contrary to the Decree of the Nicene Councell, Angelius also Bishop of Constantinople, Asclepiades, and Acasius, who by the Emperour Constantine his command, appeared at the Councell at Nice, whom the Emperour, both wittily and sharpely reprehended, saying, Provide thee a Ladder Acasius, and climb up to Heaven alone. Nor were these onely tainted with the schisme of Novatus and his unwholesome Doctrine, but of the common people farre more: For in Rome it self they flourished till the daies of Celestine and long after, that they openly professed their schisme in Constantinople and Ephesus, two chief Cities of the Easterne Empire. This heresie continued very long, so that it flo∣rished under Arcadius the Emperour, that is an Hundred forty eight years after its birth.Euseb lib. 6. cap. 35. Theor. lib. 3. Haer Fab. Rffi, lib. 1. cap. 6. Isior. lib. 8. Frutiationem Novationorum. The followers of this sect were first called Novatians, as they are de∣nominated of their first Father, but the name of Catharists was after given un∣to them, [or rather challenged by themselves,] under Stephen Bishop of Rome, and Gallus, and Volusianus Emperours, about the year after the suffe∣ring of Christ, Two hundred twenty three. Although these words are confoun∣ded in the Catalogue of Heresies, as appeares by Eusebius, the Nicene Coun∣cell, and others: yet they are distinguished by Isidore and others, who call the Catharists or Puritans the shoots of the Novatians. It behoveth all Christians to study purity and holiness, but these Sectaries did arrogantly challenge that name unto themselves, and under that Vizard did hide much wickedness both in life and Doctrine. They which properly and of the Learned are called Cathari, were afterwards of the Barbarous and unskilfull Writers called Gazari: For so in a constitution of Frederick the second Emperour, which is taken out of the Councels, they are called, as in the same age the Devill is called Zabulus. And by the same unskilfulness of the Greek Tongue they are named Catharaei.Decretal l. 5. ti de Haeret. at de Haer. cap 38. But this is to be understood of he Wallen∣ses or por men of Lyons. O∣thers call them Patrini or Patarini, as it appeares in the Councell of Lateran, which was celebrated under Alexander the Third, and the Decretals out of it. This schisme occasioned by the receiving of them that had fallen to Idolatry in the times of persecution, into the bosome of the Church upon their repentance, stayed not there; but the followers of it falling from one thing to another, (as they which begin to fall from the truth, fall amaine) ranne into divers detestable Opinions. First they held a state of perfection in this life, and that the life of a Just man is to be made up without sinne, spot or wrinkle, or else that the Church could not be made up of them: and boasted of themselves that they were pure and gloried in their merits; and this seems to be the principall reason why they they intitled themselves Catharists. Secondly, They deny repentance to them that after Baptisme do deny the faith, through infirmity or fear of persecution. Thirdly,Aug. de Haer. cap 8. Sorat. li. 5 cap. 21. Amongst the Manichees also some we e cal∣led Catharists Aug. de aer. 46. Alons Cast. Cont. Haeres. lib 4. tit De¦retal. lib. 5. in de haeret. They condemne second marriages, and after Baptisme detest them as Adultery it self. But in this they did not all agree. Fourthly, They re-baptize those that after Baptisme do slip or publiquely offend: for they acknowledge no other meane to reconcile men to God, in the Church, but Baptisme. This was the birth and growth of this schisme, these were the pestiferous Opinions where∣with they corrupted the purity of Faith. But when this heresie of the Catha∣rists was odious to all men, and that deservedly, the latter age to bring the Go∣spel and true Religion of Christ into contempt, did brand men truly Christian, and found in the faith, with the infamous name of Catharist or Puritan. Thus the Waldenses or poor-men of Lyons, that withstood the Antichristian pride and Doctrine of that Man of sinne, are branded with the names of Manichees and Catharists, as if they had boasted of their purity, or called from hell the blas∣phemies
of the Puritans:Guido Carmel in Sum. de haer. Cathar. Trthem. Hirsaugien. An. 63. Ecbert. adver. Cathar. Ser. 1. Vile ussor. de Cha. Eccl. Success. cap. 8. sect. 17. &c. Ʋsser. de Success. Eccl. ca. 10. sect. 14.15, 16. riedo. lib. 4. de Eccl. dog. & Scrip. cap. 5. part 1. Vise Jacks. on the Creed. lib 2 sect 3. cap. 3. pag. 89. Rainold de ol. lib. 1. cap. 5 sect. 31. Whereas they were free from all such Opinions and monstrous conceits, these things being maliciously devised against them, to bring them into hatred and contempt. In like manner the sound Professours of true and Evangelicall Doctrine, are spitefully traduced as Puritans, by the friends of Antichrist and shavlings of Rome. And amongst our selves such Ministers and other Christian men and women as have embraced the Gospel, and endeavour to follow the same, with all their souls, and in simplicity and humbleness of minde have been desirous to draw near unto God, are very uncharitably and unjustly called by that odious and hereticall name of Puritan. The cause, originall and order, whereby these reproachfull termes were given to godly men amongst us, was this; When in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, the Go∣spel was published, and Preachers ordained to teach the people: many people within a while feeling some taste of the heavenly comfort, began to delight in hearing Sermons, singing Psalmes, reading Scriptures, and godly Books And therewithall did refraine prophane and unprofitable customes, and sometime they admonished their neighbours, if they did swear, and exhorted them to go with them to the Sermon. The greater sort of the people being old Barrels which could hold no new liquor, addicted partly to popery and partly to licentiousness, having many of them no other god but their belly, would deride and scoffe at them, and called them holy Brethren and holy Sisters. The urging and enforcing of subscription upon the Ministers to the three severall Ariticles, and of conformity to certaine rites and ceremonies, caused no small division and trouble in the Church, the one side suing for reformation, and to be eased of such burdens, and the other urging very straightly the former things, as punishing such as would not be conformable: This caused a cloud of writing, and mens affections waxing hot and drawing to the worse, it was a very common name to all these Ministers to be called Puritans. At this time in the Universities you might see a plaine division, one sort called Youths, and the other sort which took not such liberty, were called Precisians. And thus it is grown both in the University and in the Countrey, Town and City, that who so feareth an Oath, or is an or∣dinary resorter to Sermons, earnest against excess, riot, popery, or any disorder,Sander. de Vis. Mon. Eccl. l. 5. c. 4. Concertatio Eccl Cathal. in Angl Contr. Cal∣vi ap & puritanos. Joh Rainold de Iol. ep ad sem. Aug. sect. 5. he is called a Puritan. This odious name was first brought up by the Papists, of purpose to make our Religion odious, as if it were dissolved and divided into, I know not what sects and schismes: but now it serveth for a colour in every Pa∣pists and Atheists mouth to raile at Religion and honesty underneath the name of puritanisme. But how unjustly and uncharitably such as fear God are branded with this Nick-name, is evident to the conscience of every man that will understand. For they did never arrogate any such thing to themselves, as to be thought purer then other men: but alwaies they have acknowledged themselves to be great and grievous sinners, as well as other men: accounting their own righteousness to be as a stained cloth: and rejoycing of no other pureness, but that which is by the blood of Christ, when for his sake our sinnes are forgiven, and through faith in him our souls are purified. Q. The seekers of reformation hold that the Church may be perfect in this life; which was the error of the Catharists. A. They never held any absolute and compleat perfection in respect of inter∣nall vertue or holiness of works proceeding from it; which was the error of the Pelagians and Catharists: but that the Church might be perfect for the outward constitution of Discipline in points essentiall. It cannot be unknown but in Moses and the Apostles times, there was a persect patterne of outward Government of the Churches, both given of the Lord and received of the Churches; neither can there any part of the outward Government of the Church be assigned, which draweth any impossibility with it. If it be said, that there were faults committed a∣gainst those perfect patterns, that is not to the purpose. For the faults of parti∣cular
persons do no more overthrow the perfection of the Government, which was required: then the faults of the Officers in our Church against the Laws thereof, are to be imputed to the Laws themselves whereby the Government standeth. As for the examples of the Churches of Galatia and Corinth: that disorder which the Apostle chargeth them with, being sliding back and falling a∣way from that estate wherein they were first of all set by the Apostle, argueth that there was a time, when the contrary of those disorders had place in those Churches. Q. Who then are the proper successours of the Novatians or Catha∣rists? A. Thieves that have stripped true men by the high-way, to make the more clean escape, runne away and cry stop Thief, when they themselves are the men that have done the robbery: so the Papists cry out against us, that we are Hereticks, Schismaticks, Puritans, and what not? And all to decline that oppro∣brious style which they deserve, and without open wrong cannot be taken from them. The Papist is the right Puritan. Their head the Pope will be called most holy, whereas they are most impure and ungodly. He styles himself the Ser∣vant of Servants, when he exalteth himself above all that is called God. The Pa∣pist is the genuine Puritan, in that he holdeth his Church to be pure, not having spot or wrinkle,Decr. par. 1. dist. 21. cap. 3. or any such thing; and himself to be the onely Catholique, and they that joyne not with him to be Hereticks, though he be fallen from the Do∣ctrine of the Apostles. The Papists are the true followers and Scholars of the Catharists, in that they hold that Original sinne doth not at all remaine in those that are baptised,Concil. Sess. 5. & 6. Bell. de Eccl. Mil. lib. 4. & de Just. lib. 4. cap. 10. &c. but that it is wholly taken away, and all that whatsoever, which hath the consideration of sinne; they think they can perfectly keep the Law, and live without sinne; that they have an inherent righteousness which they keep as a pure and immaculate Robe, to the obtaining of salvation. They trust in their merits, and boast of their righteousness, as deserving Justification and life eternall. They affirme that they have among them devout and holy men (whom they call religious) Monkes, Fryars, Nunnes, Jesuits, and Seminaries, who in their religious order live (as they say) a Seraphicall and Angelicall life, and being Virgins void of all secular affairs, as pure and chast Votaries, in con∣templation serving God day and night,Rhem. Test. in hunc. 10.42. & in 2 Cor. 8.14. are able to merit not onely for themselves, but also for others: and of the superabundancy of their works of Supererogation they may communicate to others, and the Pope by indulgence may apply their merits for the relief of others out of Purgatory, and such like. The Catharists condemned second marriages: herein the Papists go beyond them, altogether denying marriage to their Priests first and last, as that for such reasons as make that state too impure for their Priests to live in. By all this it is manifest, that the Papists are the naturall heires of the Catharists, and deservedly should have this name put upon them, which reproachfully they cast upon o∣thers. Q. How unjustly soever that reproachfull name be cast upon them that fear God, yet sure we are they shall be scorned, derided, Nick-named in this world: what Encouragements can they have then to go forward in this course? A. The Encouragments are many. First, In regard of Gods account and estimation of such as shall choose such clean paths to walke in: What need a man care if all men condemn him, so God justifie, and approve of him and his waies? Secondly, If thou be pure and upright, surely God will awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous, Job 8.6. Thirdly, Many and precious Promises are made to the pure in heart, whereby we should be moved to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holi∣ness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1, 2. Lastly, We should be provoked to a greater
care of holiness, seeing the Lord hath not been niggardly in affording us meanes above many, by the which we might be cleansed. He hath given us his Word plentifully, whereby faith might be wrought in us to the purifying of our hearts. He hath sent out his chastisments and afflictions in such grievous manner, as our Fathers never saw the like, by which, as by rubbing, and beating, and wringing, many might be purified and made white, Dan. 12.10. Moreover, he hath sent out his Sonne, whose blood through the eternall Spirit offered without spot by himself unto God, purgeth our consciences from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. He hath shed abroad his Spirit plentifully to renew us, by whose blessed dewes we might be sprinkled as with pure water. Q What are the Evidences of this Purity? A. 1. A sincere and hearty desire of inward cleanness, both to have it, and to increase in it. It is a sure rule in Religion and Divinity, that the desire of any grace, is a pledge of the beginnings thereof; because God workes that in us, which he will bestow upon us, by moving our hearts and souls to long after it, and to become earnest suiters unto him for it. Then again, when a man soundly desires inward cleanness, and that his soul may be purged from corrupti∣on; it is a token that he feels corruption to be in him, that he is weary of it, that he abhorres it, that it is irkesome to him: and none of those things can be sound without speciall grace. No Swine takes more delight to wallow in the mire, then every man naturally doth in the filth of sinne. Therefore nature is changed, and grace is begun, when cleanness is heartily loved, and an encreasing in it is desired unfainedly. 2.Jam. 1.27. A pure Christian is carefull to keep himself un∣spotted of the world. He walketh in the world as a cleanly neat man doth in a dirty Street, warily and with choosing his steps, and with gathering up his cloathes: so he is loth to be stained and blotted with the gross evils of the Times; he considereth his waies, and maketh straight steps to his feet, and is still in fear, and looking up unto God to beg of him to order his goings, and is curious to avoid even the least spot; this is an excellent sign. Such an one may now and then be sprinkled; as the person I spake of, notwithstanding all his care, can∣not but receive some spot, either by his own or some others trampling, or by the rudeness and touch of some not so carefull as himself; but it grieves him when it so falls out, and he is ashamed of it, he will not be at rest, untill he hath rubbed and wiped it out by repentance. 3. The thoughts of the pure are right, and their words acceptable. The thoughts of the wicked, their desires, affections,Prov. 15.26. & 14.22. purposes and imaginations are abomination unto the Lord: but godly men, whose hearts are purified by faith, have pleasant thoughts and words, such as are just and acceptable in the sight of God, and good and profitable for the use of men. 4. The work of the pure is right and constant.Prov. 21.8. The wicked are variable, carried up and down with lusts, changing according to the times and occasions that they meet withall; serving God so as may best suite with their honour, pleasure, or preferment: but the pure are constant not obstinate; steadfast in what is just and honest, but not stubborn in any course or opi∣nion unwarrantable. Q. By what Meanes is this Purity to be preserved and increased? A. 1. The Word of the Lord is pure, and so farre as it is engraffed it doth make clean.Psal. 119.9. By what meanes should a young man redress his way or make clean his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy Word. 2. The constant and conscionable practice of repentance doth increase purity. Wash you, make you clean, Isa. 1.16. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, purge your hearts ye wavering minded, Jam. 4.8. Godly sorrow and shame for sinne, is as mundifying water, to eate away the corruption of the heart. As soares by continuall wiping and washing are made clean, so is the soul by true daily sorrow and contrition stir∣red
up by faith in Jesus Christ. 3. The exercise of holiness and vertue brings for∣ward purity. Ye have purifyed your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22 Works of light expell the deeds of darkness: and the lively actions of piety and love,Col. 3.5, 22. increase the inward cleanness of the heart and conscience. As the committing of sinne doth corrupt and defile the soul with filthiness: so doth the exercise of vertue and godliness expell corruption, and subject the inner man to the regiment of grace. CHAP. X. The ninth Property of a godly life, viz. Humility and Meekness. What things are therein employed. Reasons to perswade us to la∣bour after Humility. The Effects or Evidences thereof, with the Course to be taken for the obtaining and preserving an humble Spirit. Q. WHat is the ninth Property of a godly life? Zeph. 2.3. 2 Chro. 12.7. Mic. 6.8. Eph. 4.2. Col. 3 12.A. It must be humble and meek. Seek the Lord, all ye meek of the Earth, who have wrought his judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness. What doth the Lord require of thee, but to walke humbly with thy God? These are not particular vertues which sometime onely may have use, but such fruits of the spirit as necessarily are required in all actions: so that at no time, humble∣ness of minde, or meekness of spirit may be wanting. Although there be many goodly gifts in man, yet if he have not these, they shall lose their credit and beauty amongst those that behold them, and withhold their commodity from him who wanteth them. Humility is like a Purveyor that takes up all the graces of the spirit that are to be had; And though he sit lowest in the Schoole, yet he is the best Scholar and learnes most Lessons. Q. What things are implied in this Humility? A. First, Spirituall poverty, wherein out of conscience of our emptiness and inability to guide, direct, support, and set forward our selves in the way of godliness, we continually seek unto God for comfort, and strength to pro∣ceed therein, in whom is all fulness and sufficiency. Spiritual poverty is a free and willing acknowledgment of our indebtedness and dependency on Gods grace for grace. Mat. 5.4 Blessed are the poor in spirit; that is, he who being poor and needy in his own conceit,Luk 9.48. doth fly unto God to be enriched with his grace. But the humble and meek are poor in spirit, as it is manifest by that of Solomon: Better is it to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, then to divide the spoile with the proud, Prov. 16.19. And that of the Psalmist, Psal. 9.18. Psal. 72.2.4 12, 13. He shall spare the poor and the needy, and save the souls of the needy. And herewith all is joyned a renouncing of all self-sufficiency,2 Cor. 3.5. 1 Cor. 4.7. and confidence in our strength and vertue, as if by them we were able to do any thing. Humility teaches a man to set a true estimate upon himself, and rate himself as God rates him. Secondly, It implies such a disposition, whereby we are apt to submit our selves to the good will of God, and to receive and execute his Commandement. For it resignes our reason as not worth obeying, and our own will as not worth following. Here are we as in the presence of God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God, Act. 10.33. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.6. Thirdly, It notes a quiet and calme subjection to the pleasure of God, in what condition or state soever he is pleased to set us, with what crosses or a∣fflictions
soever he is pleased to exercise us, waiting upon him by faith, till he send deliverance in due time. An humble man is never without a cooler of his fiery passions. He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it upon him, Lam. 3.28, 29. He putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope, Psal. 39.9. Job. 1.21. & 39.37. I quieted my soul as a childe that is weaned of his Mother.Psal. 131.1, 2. 2 Sam. 15.25, 26. That is, I freely resigned my self to the will of God, and kept my heart even, that it did not incline too much on either side. Thus Job, Job 1.21, 22. blessed God in his affliction, when he had lost his Substance, Cattle, Servants and Chil∣dren. Fourthly, As an humble man denies himself, so doth he freely acknowledge that all good things that are in him, or that are done by him, do come not from any worth or ability in him, but from the free undeserved goodness of God, and so carrieth himself as if his prosperity being changed into adversity, he should presently feele misery and sorrow. True humility is to give all glory unto God, and none to our selves. To ascribe nothing to our own power, Deut. 8.17. Nothing to our own merit, Deut. 9.5. Esa. 40.6. Psal. 30.2, 3. 1 Pet 1.24. 1 Chro. 29.12, 13, 14. Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thy hand is power and might, and in thy hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name.Submissio cum silentio, ad judi∣cia Dei. Psal. 39.5. 1 Sam. 3.18. Joh. 1.21. & 39.37. Sancta admira∣tio viarum Dei, quae sunt imper∣vestigabiles. Job 42.3. Rom. 11.33.34. But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. Job 3.26 I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet. Fifthly, An humble heart hath all boasting of his own righteousness before God in great detestation, and presents it self as miserable and wretched before the Throne of grace, intreating to be accepted of meer grace in and through Jesus Christ. The Pharisee may boast thus with himself, God I thank thee, that I am not as other men, Luk. 18.11, 13. But the poor Publican will pray, God be mercifull to me a sinner, Rom. 4.2. Abraham hath not whereof to boast before God; He hath not that perfect exact righteousness which the Law requireth. Sixthly,Psal. 13.1. Eph. 5.21. Gal. 5.13. Rom. 13.4. Phil. 2.3. Humility comprehends an inclination, whereby we are prompt and ready to subject our selves to all men as our places require, and love exacteth; to shew our selves humane and gentle to our inferiours. 1 Pet. 5.5. Likewise, ye younger, submit your selves unto the elder, ye all of you be subject one to another. Q. What Reasons may perswade to labour after humility? A. 1. The Lord will arise for the defence of the humble poor,Psal. 12.5. & 9.18. Psal 68.10. Esa. 11.4.  Job. 22.29 and set him at liberty, even firme, constant and durable, from him that puffeth at him. Therefore the godly pray in faith; Forget not the Congregation of the poor for ever, Psal. 74 19. When God shall arise to Judgment, he will save the meek of the earth, Psal 76.9. 2. The Lord lifteth up the meek, Psal 147.6. They may be con∣temned and trampled upon by men, they shall be protected, defended, raised up and honoured by the Lord. He will beautifie the meek with salvation, Psal. 149.4. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God,1 Pet. 5 6. Jam. 4.10.  Prov. 15.33. & 18.12.  Prov. 29.23. Prov. 22.4. Luk. 14.10. 1 Sam. 25.41, 42. Luk. 5.8, 9, 10 Luk. 18.14. that he may exalt you in due time. Humility is the way to honour and true advancement, not through their seeking, but by the blessing of God, who casteth it upon them when they are cast down at his feet. The opinion of men is, that if a man be lowly and meek, and will not put forth himself, he shall never be had in reputation, come to any preferment, he shall be despised and troden under feet: but the wisdome which is from above assureth, that the direct way to climb safely, is to lay the foundation in humility. Abigail thought her self scarce worthy to be a Servant to wash the feet of the Servants of King David, when she became his Wife. And as for that true and heavenly honour which is vouchsafed to the Saints in the world to come, who knoweth not that humility is the direct way that leadeth there∣unto? Of Christ it is said, Phil. 2.8, 9 That he first humbled himself to the death of the Crosse, and was after highly exalted to glory; Now if we would reigne with him, we must be like-minded unto him. Except ye be converted, and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.3, 4. 1 Cor. 14.20. 3. The most high and excellent who inhabiteth eternity, hath promised to dwell with the humble and contrite spirit, Isa. 57.15. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3.  Psal. 138.6. 2 Sam. 6.22. Psal. 136.23. to revive the spirit of the humble. The lowly heart is a glorious Palace and Habitation, which is continually enlightned with the beames of his love, favour, and grace. The Lord is high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly. To this man will I look, even to him, that is poor and of a contrite spirit, Job 66.2. 4. God will hear the cries of the humble, and bend his ear unto their Prayers. Lord thou hast heard the desire of the humble, Psal. 9.12. Thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear, Psal. 10.17 That is, thou dost not neglect their Prayers, or pass by them with a deafe ear, but diligently attend unto them as in a serious matter. 5. The meek shall eat and be satisfied, Psal 22.27. Yea, they shall dwell in the Land, and be fed assuredly, Psal. 37.11. Which is ever spiritually fulfilled, they shall be fed at the Banquet of the Gospel, and their souls satisfied with inward consolation, as with fatness and mar∣row; also when this life is ended they shall be received into everlasting glory; and as for the things of this life, they shall have for contentation and salvation, though not for abundance. 6. God will look unto them, Esa. 66.2. Give them grace, 1 Pet. 5.4. Lift them up, Jam 4.7, 8. Enrich them with all blessings, Prov. 22.4. & 29.23. God will make the meek to tread in judgment, and will learn the meek his way, Psal. 25.9. That is, he will guide them to walke judiciously, as is right and fit, to judge rightly of all crosses and afflictions that do befall them, that they are not signes of wrath, but fruits of love: yea, he will not only be∣gin his instruction, but continue it all the daies of their life, dealing with them according to their strength and ability. 7. God gives grace to the humble, en∣riching their hearts with the infallible pledges of his favour, and refreshing them with the living Waters of the Spirit, which maketh them fruitfull Trees of righteousness, bearing much fruit to the glory of God and their own comfort. An humble heart is a well ordered Garden, of rich soile, plentifully watered and stored with variety of all delightfully flowers and profitable herbes. Humility is a grace, that is the keeper of graces, yea, it is an increaser of them. So a Christians chief way of aspiring is by humility. On the other side, if grace be followed by pride, pride lessens that wherein it seeks to fasten her roots: for grace will lessen as pride increaseth. 8. The lowly in heart are excellent in wise∣dome, which doth bring glory. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? let him shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of Wisdom, Jam 3.13. 9. Good works without humility are nought worth. For excellent works with loftiness of minde, do not lift up, but oppress and over∣whelme. He that gathereth vertues without humility, is like the man that car∣rieth dust in the wind. In a Christian life humility is the first, second and third thing; it must goe before, accompany and follow all our actions. Humiliation hath this priviledge, that he that is thus made low cannot fall, for there is nothing lower then the earth. Q. What are the Effects and Evidences of Humility? A. 1. An humble heart is apprehensive of Gods Majesty and his own vileness, when he is to appeare before the Throne of grace, he layeth aside all conceit of worth. Thus Abraham abaseth himself to the dust in his presence, Gen. 18.27, 30. Let not my Lord be angry, and I will speak, who am but dust and ashes.Eccl 5.1, 2, 3. 4, 5. 2 Sam. 6.22. 2. In all things it seeketh the glory of God, though with its proper disgrace. Ye men of Israel, why marvell ye at this? or why looke ye so earnestly upon us, as though by our own power and holiness we had made this man to walke? Act. 3.12. Pride challengeth all glory to himself, being grieved that others should be preferred: but the lowly mind is well contented with any dis∣paragement, that may redound to the glory of God, Ye your selves beare me witness, that I said, I am not of Christ, but that I am sent before
him, Joh. 3.28. The friend of the Bridegroom rejoyceth greatly because of the Bridegroomes voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled. 3. True humility teach∣eth to worship God purely according to his appointment and the di∣rection of his Word. It may carry a shew of humbleness of mind, it is gross presumption, for a man of himself to attempt any thing in the matter of Gods worship. It is a thing beyond his reach to prescribe how the most high will be served. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshiping of Angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puft up by his fleshly mind, Col. 2.18. 4. The humble are ever thankfull and forward to sing the praises of God: for they esteeme themselves less then the least of his mercies, 1 Chro. 29.13, 14, 15. They shall praise the Lord that seek him, Psal. 22 26. Thy Sants shall bless thee, they shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talke of thy power, Psal. 145.10. 5.An hunger starved begger, give of the coursest, or but a little, Oh, it is good Master. A lowly man composeth and fitteth his mind according to the Word of God, which he admitteth as his only counsellor He will attempt nothing without direction from the truth; In afflictions he quieteth his heart, and will not fret or murmur against the Lord, nor use unlawfull meanes for his deliverance. He will not meddle with other mens matters, but keep himself within the limits of his proper Calling. He will not in confidence of his wisdome or strength, thrust himself into the pra∣ctice of things too high for him: but in humility waite till the Lord shall call him forth. Lord my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high for me, Psal. 131.1. 6. Proud men deride judgement, and cast off the Commandements, either stubbornly resist∣ing, or slighty regarding what the Lord hath spoken: but the humble with fear and trembing submit themselves to the universall obedience of Gods Law. Hear, and obey, be not proud, for the Lord hath spoken. 7.Iam. 1.21. Ier. 13.15. Psal. 9.12. The humble are much in supplications. He that hath no confidence, findes no conceited ful∣ness in himself, will seek abroad for supply of his wants. When we understand that of our selves we can resist no temptation, endure no cross patiently, do no good duty, promise no good success to our labours, use no mercy well without Gods continuall aide, support and blessing; how earnest shall we be to seek helpe from on high? Surely he will ply the seate of mercy both early and late, that feels this spirituall emptiness in himself. 8. If the heart be humble it is easily wrought to remorse for sinne: but pride knoweth not to confess, Luk. 18.11. But if the heart be humble it will quickly bleed at the remembrance of what hath been or is amisse, and fall to free and hearty confession. Thus it is noted of Josiah,2 Chro. 32.26. That his heart was tender, and he humbled himself before God, when he heard his word against Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chro. 34.27. 9. Pride causeth re∣pining at the good credit and advancement of others, specially our equals: but the humble rejoyce at their Brethrens welfare. The humble shall hear it, and be glad, Psal. 34.2. 10. The humble do all things without reason∣ing or murmuring, esteeming others better then themselves. In speech they talke not of high matters and proud things, Phil. 4.11. 11. The humble do highly prize or esteeme the favour of God, Psal. 119.74 12. An humbled begger will stay your leasure: So the poor in spirit have learned to submit and waite till it pleaseth God to look down. Q. What course should be taken for the Obtaining and Preservation of this Humility? A. First, Acquaint thy self with the want of this grace, and the excel∣lent beauty of it, the benefit it bringeth, the promises made unto it. Most see not that they are proud, few how deeply it hath infected them: ma∣ny have humility in contempt, as if it were a disgrace, not an Ornament;
there is not one of many hundreds that doth truely possess the comforts of it. These are the reasons why it lieth contemned, and is not looked after. Thy height of pride may be discerned, by inordinate swelling, boisterous passions that move within thee, by discontent, carnall anger, self-con∣ceitedness, secret grudgings at the prosperity of others, and bold attempting of lawfull affaires without asking leave and seeking help of God. Thy scantness in humility, by dulness in prayer, remissness in praises, spirituall fulness, that takes away appetite after heavenly things, and makes the exercises of Re∣ligion unsavoury; that hinders digestion of the word by hearty meditation, and causeth a secure going on from day to day as if we needed not greatly the assistance of God. When the stomack is clogged with meate, men come to their meales as though they regarded it not, they feele not the want of it: So fareth it with the soul when it is surcharged with spirituall fullness; men come to prayer, hear the Word, read the Scriptures, but as if their necessity did not require them. If we try our selves by these things, we shall easily perceive how farre short we come in this duty of humility. The excellency of humility is this, that it is the Basis of other vertues,1 Pet. 5.6. the precious Garment of a Christian, that doth more adorn him then Pearles or precious Stones. As for the comfort of it, God will dwell with the humble, they shall walke in sweet Communion with him; he will enrich them with his graces, and they shall beare much and good fruit. The lowly are freed from those boisterous lusts, distracting cares, and un∣bridled passions that torment and vex the heart, more then any crosses or cruell enemies. Who would not stirre up himself to get the possession of a grace so necessary, so excellent, so comfortable in every respect? Second∣ly, By faith look up to Christ, and walke with him, who is meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29. & 21.5. Friends that converse much together, do much resemble each other in manners, speeches, behaviour. If we walke in the Sunne we shall be died with its hue: If we commune much with Christ, we shall grow like unto him. Earnest and often cogitations imprint the Image of the object upon the heart. Christ the Sonne of God became poor, that he might enrich us; he humbled himself to the death, that we might be advanced unto glory: he endured hunger, reproach, poverty, and dispitefull usage contentedly. His whole life was a life of sorrowes, yet did he never repine or complain. Look upon his suffe∣rings, he was falsly accused, buffeted, spit upon, whipped, condemned and nailed to the Cross: yet he opened not his mouth. His example is a perfect Samplar of humility, whereunto we should compose our selves. Christ is our Captaine, followers must imitate there Guide and Leader. Christ suffered for us what our sinnes deserved: and if he did patiently beare the punishment of our transgressions, for his sake it becomes us to endure whatsoever it shall please God to lay upon us. Thirdly, Remem∣ber thou standest in need of a Saviour. What art thou in thy self, but the Vassall of Sathan, accursed by the sentence of the Law, subject to eternall wrath? It is of grace through Christ that thou art delivered from everlasting confusion. If a man have held up his hand at the Barr, and been acquitted onely by the favour of the Judge, say we not, he hath no cause to be proud? We must condemne our selves before we can be received to mercy, what cause have we then to be humble? Can we e∣steeme our selves miserable and wretched, worthy to be cast into Hell, and yet be self-conceited of our selves? Fourthly, Learne that whatsoever thou art it is of grace. He hath no reason to be lifted up in himself that lives on the Almes-basket. What hast thou which thou hast not received?
And if thou hast received it, why dost thou boast?1 Cor. 4.7, 8. Faith excludes boa∣sting in the matter of Justification, because it receiveth remission of free grace: and by the same reason, he cannot be proud of any grace, gift,Rom. 3, 27.28 advance∣ment, that doth acknowledge it to be given of meer and undeserved fa∣vour. Humility comes by the knowledge of our selves what we are, and what we ought to be. Most men have learned to speak the Language of Canaan, and to profess that whatsoever good thing he possesseth is given of free mercy without any merit: but if the heart be puffed up with health, strength, skill, honour, wisedome, or conceit of holiness, it is really infected with that leaven of popery that it is bestowed of merit or worthiness. Fifthly, Call to remembrance the admirable Royalties and Prerogatives that God of his rich mercy hath vouchsafed unto thee. The Prophet was abased in himself at the consideration of Gods bounty to man in the state of innocency, in that he made him Ruler over all earth∣ly Creatures: but God hath raised us from the depth of misery to the top of Dignity; as our sinne abounded, his mercy hath superabounded. Who is not astonished at this mercy of God, that he should give us his Sonne, pardon our sinnes, adopt us to be his Sonnes, and intitle us to that inheritance reserved for his Saints in light? Lord, what is man that thou dost so regard him, or the Sonne of man that thou visitest him? I am abased at the very thought of thy love that passeth all knowledge, and the rich effects thereof that cannot be comprehended. I will never glory in my self, nor lift up my heart against thee: for I am less then the least of thy mercies. Sixthly, Acquaint thy self with the Lord,1 Pet. 5.6. and consider his incompre∣sible greatness. Ignorance of God, joyned with measuring of our selves by our selves, or others, is the breeder and nurse of loftiness and pride: for we never come to know our selves, what we are, how vile, feeble and wretched, till we know the Lord.Isa. 40.14. Job. 4.18. The world in comparison of him is as the small dust of the Balance; The Angels are not pure in his sight: Much less any of them that dwell in houses of clay, whose founda∣tion is the dust, which are crushed before the moth. The more we look up to him, the lower shall we be abased in our selves, as having no∣thing wherein we should be compared. Seventhly, Make use of all chastisements; for the Lord sendeth afflictions to open the ear,Iob. 33.17. and to hide the pride from man. CHAP. XI. The tenth Property of a godly life, viz. Dilligence, or Constancy. What things are therein employed. Reasons to shew the necessity thereof: The advantage and benefit of Dilligence and Constancy. The danger of sloth and inconstancy, together with the course to be ta∣ken for the remedy thereof. Q. WHat is the last Property of a godly life?Deut. 4.9. Heb. 12.15. Prov. 27.17. Deu. 11.22. 2 et. 1.5. Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.10. Iam. 1.25. A. It must be dilligent and constant. Let the fear of the Lord be in thy heart continually, or all the day long: which implieth a dilligent care to please him in all things, with constancy and continuance. Give all dilligence to joyne with your Faith Vertue. He that looketh into the perfect Law of liber∣ty, and abideth therein, shall be blessed. If ye continue in my Word, then are ye
my Disciples indeed, Joh. 8.3. Be steadfast and unmoveable, alwaies abounding in the work of the Lord,Col. 1.23. 1 Cor. 15.58. For the life of a Believer is a continu∣all proceeding in godliness, a setled course in repentance, a constant walking with God;Labou is Ver∣tues Progress. and not an idle and uncertain stumbling upon some good actions, whiles a great part of his life is neglected, and not looked after. The Lords service is not like the disordered attendance of many unreformed Gentlemen, who look for nothing of their Servants but to waite at dinner and on hors∣back, giving them leave at other times to runne whither they will: but it may be resembled to a well-governed family, where all are appointed their Office and place, in one thing after another to be well occupied, and kept from idleness;Luk. 17.7. so that the end of one work is the beginning of another; and yet all without toyle and tediousness. For so hath God provided, that his Servants may be merry at their work,Deut. 12.7. Mat. 11 30. Deut. 12.8. yea, whatsoever they shall put their hand unto: and the more duties they do (redeeming the time from idleness and unprofitable∣ness) the merrier. Q What things are implied herein? A. 1. It notes a watchfull and constant care to nourish all good desires and holy endeavours, after they be once planted in us. Dilligence is the Daughter of Prudence, and in doing any thing maketh us prevent all incident hinderances to that we would effect. Thus we take Physick cum custodia, we will not go into the ayr, nor do ought, nor use diet which should be a let to the working of it.Heb. 12.14. 2. It imports care and readiness to take all occasions and opportunities of doing good, and shunning evil; not onely that which is grosly evil, but com∣mon idleness and unprofitableness,Eph. 5.15, 16. Rom. 16.19. & 12.11. that so they might bring forth much fruit in their season. Dilligence is a Task-master or Surveyor to other vertues in their works: it doth see to this that every circumstance be done to the full as is fitting for the purpose which we intend; it is never absent from us in doing any thing, which our judgement duely esteemeth, and our will is well affected unto: it will not let slip an occasion that offers it self, or can be redeemed with labour or fore∣sight.1 Tim. 5.10. Josh. 22.5. 3. Dilligence hath respect to every good work. If a Master give many things in charge to his Servant, he thinks it not well that one be done and the rest neglected. 4. It requires a continuall proceeding and going forward from one good duty to another, and that while life doth last, without weariness, wa∣vering,Job 23.11, 12. slackness, or starting aside in respect of discouragement, lets, &c. It is none of the meanest Rules for the maintenance of our souls health, to keep alwaies an appetite to some new duty,Mat. 24.13. when we have performed the old. He that abideth to the end, he shall be saved. 5. It is requisite not onely that we keep our hearts and lives in the same good estate, whereunto by dilligence we have already brought them: but also wax more fruitfull, and have our hearts more enlarged, that we may finish our course with joy,Rev. 2.9. and our latter daies be better then our former. Jer. 48.10. Josh 22.5. Nomen cordis pro ipsa mente atque intelligen∣tia, vel volunta∣te hominis posi∣tam est: animae vero, pro eâ ani mi parte, qua corporis pertur∣bationibus con∣citari imprimis solet. Mas. in Josh. 22.5.Q. What Reasons may shew the necessity of this Dilligence and Con∣stancy? A. 1. No duty is well performed without them. Cursed is he that doth the work of the Lord negligently. 2. Christianity is a Trade, wherein men go from one work to another, and use great dilligence if they look to thrive. Nay, the work of a Christian is great, and of divers sorts, that he hath no time to be careless or remiss without extream loss and hinderance. He hath many sinnes to weed out, and labour against, and therefore is not heedlesly to marre all his work in an houre, that he hath well followed sundry daies. He hath also many duties to look unto, towards God, his neighbour, and himselfe: wherein it shall be found requisite for him to be carefull, after the doing of one, to go to another: and not to admit any thing against the peace of his conscience, no not in his recreations, nor in his weightiest worldly dealings, feastings, company, &c.
but to see the Ʋnity of the Spirit kept in the band of Peace. 3. By nature we are dull and backward to whatsoever is good, apt and forward to all kinde of evil: therefore if we would have grace to get up and grow, we must strive with ut∣most endeavour. Be not slothfull, but strive through faith and patience to inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.12. He who doth row against the streame, must ply his Oare, or he will go down the streame: so it is here, we must hold hard, and stand fast, for we go against the streame of corrupt nature, so farre as we go in grace. 4. In what business should a man be dilligent, if not in the work of God? Wherein will a man be constant, if not in the pursuit of his own salva∣tion? I forget the things that are behind, and reach forth unto those things that are before; I press towards the marke, Phil. 3.13, 14. 5. The Lord will not accept of such as slipt aside, and follow him by starts:Num. 32.11. Iosh. 14.8. Numb. 4.24. his servants must wholly cleave un∣to him; as Caleb saith of himself, That he wholly followed the Lord God; that is, he did not onely live holily and godly in private, but did also procure the glory of God and the salvation of his Brethren, by what meanes he could, even to the last act of life; and faithfully, attentively, with courage, diligence, and constancy did execute the charge that God laid upon him. Nor doth any course though cheerfully undertaken deserve commendation, if either by idleness, or carnall fear or levity, we stand before we come to the marke. 6. All found Christians have taken Davids Oath. I have sworne, and will performe it,Psal. 119.106. Psal. 119.33. that I will keep thy righteous Judgments: How long? even unto the end; all and every day of our life. And without this resolution it is in vaine once to think of en∣tring into Covenant with the Lord: for this he requireth of his people, that they shall stick unto his Commandements for ever.Deut. 11.1. & 19.9. Psal. 1.9.4. Deut. 28.1. Thou shalt keep all these Com∣mandements to do them, which I command thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk even in his waies. Q. What are the benefits of Dilligence and constancy? A. This dilligence and constancy, in whatsoever they be used, they bring great things to pass, whether it be in any Trade, or in the searching out of things ob∣scure and hard to be found out, even where onely the light of reason is followed: and who doubteth then, but that in holy duties wherein men are guided by the Spirit of God, most excellent effects are brought forth by them? First, Here∣by we weane our selves, our hearts and minds from much draffe and worldly lusts, which would, if they might finde lodging in the soul, much annoy us: and are much more readily disposed unto duty, then such as will not embrace them; who being contented with any uncertain and deceiveable perswasion of Gods fa∣vour, and refusing to be holden within such narrow bounds and straights of this holy and Christian counsell, break out oftentimes to their trouble, danger, and discredit, when the other are quiet and merry. Labour is irkesome to such as runne after pleasure: easie to them that follow it with constancy. Secondly, The hand of the dilligent makes rich, and the soul of the industrious shall be satisfied with the fruit of his labours. Surely he that goeth forward by dilligence and con∣stancy in the course of piety, he shall grow plentifully in grace, and be reple∣nished with abundant consolation. The success of worldly travels are sub∣ject to casualty and hazard: but we have the firme Promise of God,2 Pet. 1.8, 9, 10. which never failes: use what thou hast received, and thou shalt have in abundance. Thirdly, The fruit of such a course is both an happy end here, as it is written; Marke the end of the upright and just, for the end of that man is peace;Psal. 37.37. 2 Tim. 4.8. Prov. 23.18. and hap∣piness for ever after; as Paul saith, I have fought a good fight, I have finish∣ed my course, and kept the faith: from henceforth is laid no for me the Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me onely, but to all that love his ap∣pearing. Q. What is the danger of sloth and inconstancy?
A. They that do not dilligently and constantly buckle themselves to one good work or another, shall never finde that sweet fruit of their lives which otherwise they might and should: but by their negligence and inconstancy shall by little and little plunge themselves into such deep unsetledness, out of which it will not be easie for them to recover. Joynts often removed out of their places, are seldome setled, ever painefull. To them that love liberty to the flesh, the yoke of Christ is very tedious, as constant labour is to him that delighteth in roving or ranging up and down. Besides, he seldome thrives that shifteth to many Trades, stickes to none; that travelleth many Countries, planteth not himself in any. An inconstant and fickle Christian never groweth to any pitch or sub∣stance in grace, but doth ever remaine bare and needy. The sluggard, and so the inconstant shifter, shall be clothed with rags. Lastly, As Gamesters pay dear for their pastimes many times, so doth the negligent Christian for his stolen liber∣ty. He that in feeding respecteth more the delight of his Palate, then the con∣tinuance of his health, must look to feele the knawings, gripes and pangs of sickness: so fareth it with them, that to satisfie their lusts, neglect the peace of a good conscience. The pleasure of carnall liberty is recompensed with loss of inward peace, which is not easily regained in a long time. Q What course must be taken to remedy sloth and inconstancy? A. First, We must finde our selves guilty. The Traveller will not return, till he see himself out of the way. Amendment presupposeth sight of what is amiss. There needs not much paines to prove us faulty, if we shall but con∣sider what liberty we have given to our thoughts, how indulgent we have been to our lusts, what opportunities we have omitted, how we have fallen from our good purposes, how dull we are to good, superficiall to holy dutyes, and vaine in our speeches. What daies have we wasted in idleness? How oft do we let loose our hearts to range up and down in vanities, after we have spent some part of the morning or afternoon in reading the Scripture, Prayer or such like good exercise? Secondly, the heart must be wrought to shame and sorrow for our idleness and inconstancy. How can I think of my sloth and fickleness in Gods service, and not be ashamed? If my Servant have loitered his day over, and not done my work, he blusheth, and is afraid to come before me: and shall I not change countenance, and be moved, that I have been so unpro∣fitable in the works of God? If I neglect opportunities for earthly affairs, I am disquieted in my self, and condemne my oversight: and shall I not grieve, that I have let pass the gracious seasons of doing good to my soul? O the un∣thankfulness whereof I stand guilty before God: how could I answer it, if he should call me to account! Or how should I confess it to begge pardon with∣out grief and sorrow! Ah, poor soul, what comfort can I take in my vaine thoughts, foolish delights, slight performance of good duties, and carnal case that I so much affected! It hath robbed my soul of grace, my heart of comfort, my life of sweetness: and nothing is left of all that vanity, but remorse and shame. Lord I am confounded in my self, to think of my great reckonings, and what slender account I can give unto thee! Thirdly, We must quicken our selves to more dilli∣gence and constancy. Princes require exact dilligence in their followers; if they send upon a message, they look it should be done with expedition to the full, and an answer returned at the time appointed: how attent, industrious, and con∣stant should I be in the service of the great King and Lord of Hosts! Our affection to God should be most intire, our bond to him is strongest, his work is most honourable, his pay incomparably the greatest: all which do call for all possible dilligence at our hands. The Pismire gathers in Summer; the covetous seeks wealth early and late; the ambitious hunteth for honour with all his might; the naturall man regardeth the things that pertaine to this life na∣turall:
and shall I not follow after the true Riches, Honour, and Life, that ex∣ceeds the rest beyond comparison, with the swiftest speed and motion untill I do possesse it? To be carefull of things temporall, careless of things eternall, what greater madness? To prevent earthly danger with the hazard of the true Treasure, what more extreme folly? To please men with dilligence, and to displease God through remisness, is to be penny wise and Pound foolish. It is enough and too much that I have negligently husbanded my time and stock of grace, as though nothing had been sufficient for the world, every thing too much for Heaven: for the time to come I will set upon a wiser course, and with all constant assiduity address my selfe to do the will of God in all things. Fourthly, we must fly to God by hearty Prayer, entreating him to confirme and stablish this purpose in us for evermore. Lord my resoluti∣on to walke in thy Laws, is wholly grounded upon thy assistance, without which I can neither think, will, nor do any thing that is truly good and ac∣ceptable in thy sight. Give me, I pray thee, an heart to keep thy Com∣mandements alwaies. Thou art the God of Peace, subdue mine affections that rebell against thy Spirit, and sanctifie me throughout, that I may wholly yeeld my selfe to thy good pleasure all the daies of my life. CHAP. XII. Of the Titles that are given to them that believe in Christ. They are called Saints. Mercifull Ones. Excellent or Precious. True or Faithfull. Elect and Chosen. The Priviledges of the Elect, with the Signes of Election. Q. WHat Titles are given to them that believe in Christ, and walk be∣fore God according to his Commandements? A. They are called Saints or holy Ones. To the Saints that are on earth,Psal. 16.2. Apoc. 13.7. 1 Cor. 14.33. Rom. 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.2. Eph 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. Rom. 16.15. 2 Cor. 13.13. Phil. 4.21, 22. all my delight is in them. Thus almost in every Epistle the faithfull are called Saints. To the Saints that are at Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi; the Saints salute you, &c. Q. Were all that professed Religion in Rome or Ephesus, Saints by Cal∣ling? A. A Saint is inwardly a Saint, or by outward Profession: Now Paul was not ignorant, that there were bad Fish as well as good, chaffe as well as Wheate in this visible Church; nevertheless he doth well call them Saints: First, Be∣cause they were all so by outward Professon of Doctrine and Participation of the Sacraments; yea, by temporary faith and conformity, for ought we know. For, look how a civill vertuous man doth not like to have in his house uncivill rake-shames: so the most holy God will not allow any in his Family, open∣ly unholy. Like Master, like man, at least in outward conformity. Secondly, There were many Saints in Corinth; and the better part, not the bigger giveth the denomination. Wine and water is called Wine, Gold and Silver Oare un∣fined, is called Gold and Silver, though yet must dross be intermedled with it. Q. Is this Title of Saints given onely to them that believe in Christ, either in Truth or Profession? A. God is often called in Scripture the Saint, or Holy One of Israel, and the King of the Saints. Holiness is ascribed unto God in the Word,Hos. 11.12. Isa. 5.19, 24. both by
Angels and men,Psal. 71.22. & 78.41..89.18. Rev. 15.3. Esa. 6.3. Rev. 4.8. Psal. 99.3.5. 1 Joh. 1.5. Jam. 1.13. Luk. 20.8. Joh. 17.17. Jude v. 1. Isa. 5.16. 1 Sam. 2.2. Psal. 145.21. Psal. 97.12. Esa. 30.12, 13. Psal. 22.3. Mar. 1.24. Rev. 3.7. Isa. 54.5. Luk. 4.1. Mat. 3.11. Act. 1.5. Psal. 106.16. Deut. 33.2. with Act. 7.53. Iude v. 24. Iob 15.15. Deut. 33.3. 1 Cor. 1.2. Eph. 6.18. Heb. 3.1. 1 Thes. 5.27. Mat. 27.52. Dan. 7.18.21, 22, 25. Rom. 1.7. 1 Pet. 2.9. in two respcts. First, Because he in himself is sanctity and purity it self; and it is impossible that in him should be any evil, sinne, or uncleanness. He is light, and darkness in him there is not any. Secondly, Be∣cause he is the only Author and Effecter of all holiness and sanctimony in whom∣soever; sanctifying us his people, and advancing us hereby above all Nations which he hath made; this being one of his principall blessings. So that none is holy as the Lord; he is a holy God sanctified in Justice; and let all flesh bless the Name of his holiness for ever and ever. He is called the Holy One of Israel, be∣cause in speciall manner he made himself known unto them, whom he separated from all Nations of the earth, to be a peculiar people to himself, who were to beare his Name and do him service; and to whom he shewed himself most boun∣tifull, in speciall manner, prosecuting them daily with his favours. Jesus Christ, as he is God manifested in the flesh, is the Saint of God, the Holy One, and the True, even the Holy One of Israel: being himself full of the Holy Ghost, wherewith he baptiseth his Church whereof he is the Mediatour. The High Priest in the Law, as a Type of Christ, is called the Saint of the Lord. The Elect and blessed Angels are also Saints, having sanctity by creation continued and confir∣med unto them for ever. All men and women called to the faith of God, are Saints by Calling and Separation from the world, being sanctifyed by Christ Jesus; and one with another are holy Brethren. Of these, some are Saints de∣parted this life, and sleeping in the Lord: other some are on earth, and whiles they here live (nowithstanding their many infirmities and afflictions) are Saints of the most High, a holy Nation. Q. Let us hear further how it may be proved that there be Saints on Earth? Psal. 37.28. Psal. 50.5. Psal. 132.9.16. Eph. 3.8. Rom. 12.13. & 15.25. Eph. 4.12. Rom. 16.2. 1 Cor 16.15. Psal. 34.9. Rev. 13.10. & 14.12. 2 Cor. 9.1.A. The Scriptures are most plain and plentifull. The Lord forsaketh not his Saints; Gather my Saints together unto me; those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. Let thy Saints shout for joy. Paul calleth himself the least of all Saints And Christ gave Ministers to his Church, for the gathering together of the Saints. So we read, Fear the Lord ye his Saints, &c. Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints. Q. What things go to this that we be Saints? Deut. 26.19. Apoc. 14.12. & 11.18. & 7.15. Eph. 5.3. Col. 1.22. 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 Pet. 2.9. Col. 3.12.A. Three things: First, The purifying of the heart. Secondly, The Pro∣fession outward of holiness. Thirdly, Holy conversation. The Saints keep the Commandements of God, and the faith of Jesus; they serve God night and day in his Temple. Fornication and uncleanness, let it not once be named amongst you, as becometh Saints. As he that hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. Q. How are we made Saints? A. By faith in Jesus Christ. First, Faith purifieth the heart. For as a coun∣terpoyson coming in,Act. 15.9. the poyson that is weaker is expelled, and as the Sunne rising, the darkness of the night is driven away and vanisheth: so Christ the Sonne of righteousness, by faith rising in our hearts, the ignorance and lusts of ignorance are dispersed and fly before him. Secondly, Faith begetteth pro∣fession of holiness.2 Cor. 4.13. Rom. 10.10. Having the same Spirit of faith, we cannot but speak, saith the Apostle: and believing with the heart, and confessing with the mouth, go to∣gether.
Thirdly, Holy conversation springeth from faith.Eph. 4.20, 21, 22. If you have learned Christ as the truth is in him, you have so learned him as to put off the old man, and to put on the new. Faith worketh by love, even as a Tree,Gal. 5.6. hath both his leafe and fruit; and as if a Tree should be changed from one kinde to another, the leaves and fruit should likewise be changed; as if a Peare-Tree should be made an Apple-Tree, it would have leaves and fruits agreeing to the change made in it: so man by faith having his heart purified, made a Tree of righteousness, he hath his leaves and fruit; leaves of profession, fruit of action. So again, man as a new Tree set into and growing out of Christ, beareth a new fruit; he converseth in ho∣liness and newness of life. Q. What Reasons be there to shew the happy condition of the poor despised Saints in this world? A. 1. God is the King of Saints, their Protectour, and defence against all their adversaries. They are in his hand, power and guidance, under his care, protection and custody. He will be for a shadow to them in the day time from the heat,Apoc. 15.3. Deut. 33.3. Esa. 4.6. and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storme and from raine. And by this we learne that the state of the Saints is safe and blessed, for no adverse power can hurt, whom God will helpe. None can take them out of his hand. 2.Joh. 10.29. Deut. 33.3. Mal. 3.17. Deut. 7.6. & 14.2. 1 Pet. 29. They are the beloved Ones of the Lord, his choice Jewes of price, dearer unto him then all the world besides. They are his peculiar Treasure, or people of pecu∣liar Possession; his own proper good which he loveth, and keepeth in store for himself, and for speciall use. Princes Favourites can want no wealth, honour, or preferment: but much more blessed are they that be in high esteeme with God. 3. The Lords Portion is his people,Deut. 32.9. Psal. 142.5. Jer. 10.16. Rom. 8.27. and he is the Portion of his people. He hath divided them unto himself, and hath freely given him∣self unto them. Thou art my Portion in the Land of the living. 4 The Spirit maketh intercession for the Saints: that is, it teacheth them with sighes and groanes to lay open their cares unto God, who is acquainted with the voice of his Spirit, and will not deny the requests which he enableth us to put up according to his will. 5. They are fellow Citizens of the new Jerusalem,Eph. 2.19. Col. 1.12. of the houshould of God, Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven. Christ is the great Heire of all things: the Saints are co-Heires with Christ. A Christians Tenure is the fairest, firmest, and most sure: for though his life be changeable, and his daies on earth must have an end, yet his Inheritance endures for ever. When Daniel had described the greatness and glory of the Princes, Poten∣tates and mighty States in the four Monarchies,Dan. 7.27. at last he comes to speak of a Kingdom, which is the greatest under the whole Heaven; and that is the King∣dom of the Saints of the most High So glorious is the state of the poor despised Servants of God in the Kingdom of grace. And if there be such suing on earth, to become Free-men of great Cities, especially to live in the Courts of great Princes, how great is the felicity of every Saint, who is no more now a forreiner or stranger, but a free Denizon of the New Jerusalem. 6. In that great, and last, and terrible day, Christ will be glorified and made marvellous in his Saints;2 Thes. 1.10. that is, he shall glorifie them with that glory, wherewith he as man is glorified. For their glory, is his glory, and he is glorified in his Saints, as by glorifying them he doth manifest his grace, power and goodness to the whole world. 7.1 Cor. 6.2. The Saints shall judge the world; they shall as Benchers sitting with Christ, applaud his most righteons Judgment on wicked ones, who have not believed, nor obeyed the Gospel. 8. The Saints shall save the Island. Hos. 11.9. I will not make thee as Admah, &c. for there be many Saints in the midst of thee. Q The Saints of God are much afflicted, hated, disgraced, yea smitten of God and humbled. A. 1. Though Gods stroakes seem to be stroakes of War, yet Gods words are words of Peace: the Word and Spirit of God, are sure Fountains
of rest and peace, to the heart and conscience of Gods afflicted people. 2. The Saints may be in want, but they are never forsaken or left utterly destitute. The Lord throweth them down with one hand, and raiseth them with the other. Their necessities are but fatherly chastisements, orbitter Potions to purge cor∣ruption, or sharpe trials to prove their strength, that their peace and comfort might be the more excellent in the latter end. 3. If the men of this world hate and persecute the Saints,Psal. 10.18. &. 18.27. & 23.4. & 28.7. Psal. 34.17. & 40.17. God will maintain their cause, and be their refuge: but as for their enemies, He will cover them with shame, and trample them under feet. The spitefull enemies of sincerity shall never escape Gods hands: but the Saints shall finde succour from him in due season. Q. What Signes or Evidences are laid down in Scripture, by which the Saints may be discerned? Deut. 33.3, 4.A. 1. The Saints are humbled at the feet of the most High, to receive the words of his mouth; which they receive and possesse as a thing of worth and excellency.Psal. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as an Heritage for ever: for they are the joy of my heart. 2. They stand in awe of God continually. Fear the Lord ye his Saints:Psal. 34.9. for there is no want to them that fear him. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints;Psal. 89.7. and to be had in reverence of them that are round about him. 3. The Lord is the Portion of his Saints; though they have hopes or possession of great things in the earth,Psal. 16.5. Jer. 51.19. yet Gods favour is that they most prize, and spirituall things are to them the fairest part of their Inheritance. 4. In extream afflictions the Saints faint not, cease not to seek unto God by hearty prayer, runne not unto wicked and ungodly meanes to help themselves: but patiently commit themselves unto him in wel-doing, and hope in mercy. 5. The faith of the Saints is confirmed by afflictions, and the expe∣rience of Gods dealing towards them. Therefore they be not dismaied, though they meet with manifold trials, but follow after the Lord with more dilligence, stk faster unto him, and cleave unto his Testimonies. 6. It is the constant study of the Saints to keep themselves from the pollutions and defilements of the world, as they be a people separated from the world to the service of God. 7. The Saints of God do heartily love and affect each other, be they in outward estates never so different. True Christian sanctity, next to God and our own souls, makes us affect those that are sanctified, who express in their life the vertues of our heavenly Father, by whom we are called from darkness to light. Hence it is that the Saints, the houshold of faith, the Brethren, are commended as persons whom we must affect and do good to before all other. Thus David loved, All my delight is in the Saints; Thus Paul, We love none according to the flesh. Every Creature loveth and liketh to be with those who are united with it in the Commu∣nication of the same nature; So sanctified Christians cannot but love and like to be most with them, who have received the like Divine nature, in which them∣selves are partakers;Eph. 1.15. Col. 1.4. yea, thy love all Christian Saints, not such who have other parts pleasing and contentfull: but they love every one in whom they can see the Image of God shining. For it cannot be but that love which truely loveth one person as he is holy, should love every one, so farre forth as he is ho∣ly. And from this love issueth willingness to minister to the necessities of the poor Brethren. Yet, though we are to esteeme and inwardly affect men, as we see them holy, we are not bound to shew them the outward effects of our love answerably. The nearer persons are tied to us in naturall and civill Bands, the more must our providence be for them, and love shewed them in outward things, unless their foolish lewdness dispriviledge them this way; for then the Proverb taketh place, A wise Servant may be preferred before a foolish Childe. 8. It is the priviledge of the Saints that they have part in each others Prayers: and it is their duty and practice to pray for one another.Eph. 6.1. Praying alwaies with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perse∣verance,
and supplication for all Saints? Q. What use may be made of this point? A. 1. This lets us see the fearfull estate of many amongst us, who like as they tell of Halifax Nuts, which are all shels, no kernels; so these professe them∣selves Saints, but their ignorance, their idle courses, their riots, their blasphe∣mies, proclaime that there is nothing within which belongeth to Saints. Nay, many will not stick to professe they are none of the holy Brotherhood, to jest at such as indeavour to holiness; saying, that young Saints prove old Devils. It is a wonder that such hellish Owles dare fly in the Sun-shine of so Christian a Proffession as is made amongst us. Such Believers, who are mockers of Saints, who will not be accounted Saint-holy, and such who are not changed into new creatures, walking in newness of life, they may well fear that their belief is not true, such as doth unite them with Christ. For whosoever is a true Believer, is a Saint, whosoever is by faith in Christ, is a new creature. 2. Hence we see the vanity of the Papists, in tansferring and appropriating this Name of Saints, to those whom the Pope hath put in his Kalendar, and to whom he hath adjudged Divine Honours, Holi-daies, Invocation, Candles, Church, &c. These Saints were not heard of in St Pauls time. A man may be in Hell, who hath all such things performed about him. For the Pope doth con∣tinually erre in taking that upon him which was never in his power, viz. to cano∣nize Saints in that manner; and in the particular object he doth grossly mistake, setting notorious and publique Homicides, Traitours, Murderers of Princes, Incendiaries, and gross Ideots in the Catalogue of Saints. Saints are Triumphant or Militant; Triumphant, such who now walk by sight, enjoy∣ing the presence of God; Angels, Spirits of the righteous departed, who have now rested from all the labours of their Militant condition. Militant, who walk by Faith in holy profession and conversation, holding Christ their Head, by whose power apprehended by Faith, they are kept to salvation. 3. This may strengthen us against temptations from our imperfections, the Lord doth reckon of us, and hold us as Saints: He that by Faith hath put on the Sunne of righteousness, is more clear and bright, then if he were arrayed with the Beames of the Sun. Again, though we have sinnes too many, yet the better part giveth the Name. Corne-fields we see have weeds, yet we call them Corn-fields, not Fields of weeds: so here, yea grace, though it seem over that sinne sheweth to be, yet it will in time overcome it; as Carloe is much higher then the Barly, yet the Barly getteth up and killeth it: The Spirit that is in us from Christ, is stronger then the spirit of the world. Q If the Name of Saints be Common to all Belivers, how seemeth it to be ap∣propriated to the Apostles and Evangelists in the Titles of those holy Books which they penned? A. This Title or Epithet, though it be both common and ancient, yet questi∣tionless was not annexed by any of these Writers, as not agreeable to true Christian discretion and modesty: yea perhaps it was also, if not injurious, yet likely to prove offensive to all other Believers, that a Title common to all and every Christian, should be made proper to some few, though principall Members of the Church. You will object (it may be) that these Writers stile themselves Apostles; as if they desired to have their Dignity and Office known to all men. True it is, that they do so indeed in their Epistles. But neither did that Name belong to all the Faithfull, or to any, but some certain men: and it was necessary for the authorizing of their Writings. How then? Do I condemne the Title, or the first Authours, or continuers and users of it? Nothing less. For I gladly acknowledge both that the Apostles and Evangelists had especiall interest in that Name, and that there could be no danger of scandall, seeing it was not taken by themselves, but given to them as an honour, by the consent as it were, and
with the liking of all true Christians; whose purpose it was, not to make them Mediatours of intercession betwixt God and men upon earth; but to shew the reverent opinion they had conceived and did hold of such worthy and holy men.Chesed pro de∣decore penitur. Prov. 14.34. pietas nationum Prov. 14.34. quia omnis illorum pietas in idola est. Q. What other Titles are given to Believers? A. They are called This Title is given to God himself. Jer. 3.2. Joh. 2.8. To the Church Act. 13.35, 36. To Aaron, Deut. 33.8. To all the faithfull, Isa. 57.1. Psal. 4.3. Deut. 33.8. Psal. 31.23. Psal. 12.1.  Mic. 7.2.  Psal. 79.2. Psal. 116.15. Mercifull Ones, or the Mercifull Ones of God. Know that the Lord hath wonderfully set apart him that is Mercifull for himself. Love the Lord all ye his Mercifull Ones. The Mercifull man ceaseth; the Mercifull or godly man is perished out of the earth. The flesh of thy Mercifull Ones have they given unto the Beasts of the Field. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Mercifull Ones. Q. What things are implied hereby? A. 1. It notes one that God of his free, undeserved benignity, love and mercy doth graciously accept,Psal. 144.. Psal. 30.4. Psal. 59 10, 17. 2 Par. 6.. Psal. 10.10. Psal. 52.9. repute as his Sonne by adoption, and compass with his favours above others. Thou wilt not suffer thy Mercifull One to see corruption; that is, him towards whom thou wilt shew thy self bountifull. So saith the Prophet Esay, Esa. 40.6. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the Field; where that glorious grace which man hath from God, is called mercy, grace or bounty. 2. It signifieth one, that upon the sense of Gods mercy freely vouchsafed to him, doth address himself to the studious practice of piety towards God, and of kindness and mercy to∣wards men, that publiquely and privately he might approve himself unto the Lord, and unto men. For the love of God doth work us to the similitude of it: he cannot but love God and his neighbour, that hath tasted of the Lords free grace and tender compassion. Neh. 13.14. Wipe not out [saith Nehemiah] my kindness that I have done for the House of my God. Hos. 6.6. I desire mercy, and not sacrifice. Psal. 18.25. With the Mercifull thou wilt shew thy self Mercifull; that is, thou wilt bless and do good to them, that love thee and be mercifull towards their Brethren. Q. Let us hear what is the happy estate of them that be thus quali∣fied. A. 1. God is the Defender of the Mercifull; though they be opposed and oppressed,P ov. 2.8. Pal. 18.25. Psal. 37.28. Jer. 7.5.7. they shall not be overthrown. The Lord forsaketh not the godly bountifull, they are preserved for ever. He will keep the feet of his Mer∣cifull Ones, 1 Sam. 2.9. 2. God will give peace and prosperity with all good blessings necessary, unto his Mercifull Ones, that have made Covenant with him. Psal. 85.8. I will hear what the Lord God will speak: for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Mercifull or gracious Saints; that is, he will load them with all blessings, specially with inward peace and comfort of the Holy Ghost. For the Lords words are effectuall; he speakes in wrath to the wicked, when by his fearfull Judgments he maketh it appear that he was angry with them: and he makes peace to his people when he restores tranquillity,Psal. 133.3. Psal. 42.8. & 44.4. subduing or scattering their enemies, and bringing them to con∣fusion. For the commands of God are joyned with effect, power, autho∣rity and speed: he commandeth blessings when in truth he powreth them upon such as call upon his Name. 3. The Lord doth nurture them by afflictions that they will look to themselves, and not provoke him by their
wickedness as heretofore: and he doth look upon them in mercy and send deliverance, that they shall not despaire and sinke under the burden of calamities. He will speak peace to his people, that they may not return again to folly. 4. The Mercifull shall sing for joy of heart.Psal. 132, 9.16. Let thy gracious Saints shout aloud for gladness, they shall be gladsome in glory, with exceeding great joy. Nor is this their joy momentayn, as is the joy of the wicked,Psal. 149.5. which vanisheth as a shadow: but such wherein they constantly rest. 5, This comely honour God giveth to his gracious Saints, even to bind Princes in Chaines,Psal. 149.5. Psal. 4.3. and Nobles in Fet∣ters of Iron; to execute upon them the Judgment written. 6. God hath won∣derfully separated to himself the Mercifull man, and will hear when he crieth. Q What are the proper Fruits or Evidences of those Mercifull Ones? A. 1. They will cry unto the Lord in distress, and with confidence make their supplications unto him. Preserve my soul, for I am one whom thou favo∣rest: O thou my God, save thy servant, that trusteth in thee. 2.Psal. 32.6. Psal. 86.1, 2. The love of God which shineth upon them, doth inflame their hearts to love him intirely. O love the Lord all ye his gracious Saints:Psal. 31.23. for the Lord preserveth the faith∣full; and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer. 3. They bless the Lord with cheerfull hearts, and sing aloud of his praise.sal. 149.1, 9. Psal. 145.10, 11. Psal. 97.12. Thy gracious Saints shall bless thee. They shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talke of thy power, Psal. 30.4.Psal. 97.12. Sing unto the Lord [O ye his Mercifull Ones] and give thanks to the remembrance of his holiness. 4. They are bountifull to the needy, and give liberally. The Mercifull man doeth good to his own soul, Prov. 11.17. In this sentence Solomon describes the practice of the godly, and the benefit of his course: he is inclined to mercy, and fruit returnes into his own bosome. For besides the conscience of well-doing which doth sweetly refresh, liberali∣ty doth open the Fountain of Gods blessings, which doth plentifully water us with store and variety of good things.Eccl. 11.. with Esa. 32.20. The godly poor are the Lords rich soile, which being sowed, the Almes-deeds do return an hundred-fold increase to them by whom they were dressed. Q. What Ʋse is to be made of this Point? A. The world is much deceived in their censure, when they judge the righte∣ous to be utterly lost and forsaken, because they are afflicted for a time. The sonnes of men insult over the Generation of the Just, Psal. 4.2. As if they should never rise when they are once down; yea, as if there were no help for them in God. But the Scripture assureth us, that they are the men of Gods speciall favour, which he hath wonderfully separated to himself,Psal. 4.3. and will compass about with mercy and loving kindness. In all their sufferings the Lord suffers with them. He filles up their prayers, puts their teares into the bottell, numbreth their stripes, preserves their blood, enricheth them with grace, and will bring them to glory. 2. The slander of the ungodly is hence confuted, that condemne such as professe Religion for cruelty, unmercifulness, hard dealing: whereas none but they that have recei∣ved mercy of the Lord, have learned to put on the bowels of mercy and compassion. Q. What other Title is given to them that walke in the fear of God? A. They are called the Excellent or Glorious.Psal. 16.3. 1 Pet. 2.9. Eph. 5.26, 27. Isa. 61.7. In this world they are despised, afflicted, and counted as the off-scouring of all things: but in the Judgment of God, who esteemeth all things according to their worth, they are the onely men of renown upon earth. Q. Why are they said to be Excellent or Glorious? A. They are borne of God, adopted to be his Sonnes,1 Joh. 12.13, Rom. 8.17. Jam. 2.5. and intitled to the Inheritance of Eternall Glory. If Nobility of Birth or greatness of Inheri∣tance procure respect to men upon earth; worthy is every Child of God to
have the preheminence herein. 2. They are arrayed with the comely Robes of Christs righteousness, which makes them bright and splendent in the sight of God. Their food is heavenly Manna, fatness and marrow in the Sanctuary. 3. They beare the Image of God, and be enriched with righteousness and true holiness,Psal. 45.13. Can. 6.10. Jam. 2.. Prov. 3.14, 15. then which graces nothing is more eminent. If men be famous for their gifts, they must be the most glorious, that do most resemble God: for those gifts are the best, that make likest unto our heavenly Father. Prov. 12.26. The righteous is better or more excellent then his neighbour; better belo∣ved and graced of God, more esteemed of godly wise men, and hath that in him which maketh him more commendable then any other that is unrighteous and sinfull. As any person or thing is more holy, it is more honourable. though a man should be able to speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and could move Mountaines,1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. or work Wonders; yet, if destitute of true righte∣ousness, he is in no sort to be compared to them that fear God 4. The acts of the righteous are surpassing valourous,hil. 4.13. Gal 5.21. noble, and praise-worthy. For they deny themselves, overcome their passions, renounce the world, endure hardness with patience, stand fast in the profession of the truth against all oppo∣sition;1 Sam. 24.10.11. set light by the reproach and disgrace of the world, that they might ap∣prove themselves unto God, forgive their enemies, put Satan to flight, and triumph over the powers of darkness. These are true Heroicall Acts exceeding whatsoever hath been undertaken with skill and cost in the daies of peace, or with wisdome and manhood in the time of war. The Heathen man can tell us, He is stronger that conquereth himself, then he that winneth a well-fenced City. The Treasure of the righteous is the Word of God. They dwell in the Church the House of God.Heb. 1.14. sal. 91.11. They have free access to God, Deut 4.6. 5. The holy Angels are appointed to Minister unto, and guard them against all evil; yea, the wick∣ed are made servants to them, so farre as shall be for their good. Strangers shall stand and feed your Flockes, and the Sonnes of the Alients shall be your Plow-men, and your Vine-dressers, Isa 61.5. 6. After this life ended they shall be put in actuall possession of that glory,Co. 3.. 1 Jh. 3.2. 1 Ths 2.12. to which they are of grace adopted. The Crown of Glory which never withereth, shall be set upon their heads, and they shall abide with the Lord for ever in unspeakable blessedness. Q. What Ʋse is to be made hereof? A. 1. The sincere worshipers of God are to be observed with great atten∣tion, that we take speciall care to gather our selves into their society. Which we shall do if we truly repute with our selves what is true Dignity and Excellency, and be not dazled with the pompe of the world. A good man honoureth them that fear the Lord,Psal. 15.4. 2. The judgment of the world is erroneous touching true excellency: For if comparison be made betwixt man and man, he is esteemed the most noble, that is most honourably descended, of the ancientest stock, hath the largest demeanes, is best underpropped with riches, friends, honours. Piety and justice clean cast out,Jam. 2 2.3, 12. Isa. 57.12.20. as not worthy to ascend into the Balance; nay, they are imputed as matters of disgrace and infamy. But the judgment of God is, that Piety is the truest Nobility: the rich in Faith, not the weighty in Purse, are honourable with him.1 Tim. 2.9, 10 Prov. 1.9, 10. Grace is the best gift, good works the richest clothing, that doth most commend. The Just man, though basely borne, meanly clad, many waies afflicted, and had in reproach, is incomparably more excellent then he, that abounding with all heaped store of good things for this present life, is de∣stitute of saving grace.Jer. 5.1. 3. This may comfort the godly against the scorne and contempt that is cast upon them, when the ungodly live in credit and pro∣sperity. What though men despise and tread them under-feet, when they are approved, esteemed, respected of God? The world knoweth not their worth, cannot judg of their happiness; and then no marvell if they judge amisse. Nay, to suffer reproach or loss for Christs sake, is greater honour then all the praise
or applause of the world. Honour is the sharpest spurre to prick men forward to any action, let it force us upon this of seeking to be renewed according to the Image of God, Lev. 19.2. Heb. 11.26. Q. What is a fourth Title given unto them? A. They are called True or Faithfull.Psal. 101.6, Psal. 31.23. Act. 6.15. Apoc. 7.14. Deut. 32.20. Mine eyes shall be upon the Faithfull of the Land. The Lord keepeth the Faithfull. And the wicked are said to be a Na∣tion or people in whom is no faith. Q Why are they called Faithfull? A Because they do soundly, constantly, inseparably adhere to the Lord, and keep their conjugall love, and cleave to the whole word of God,Neh 9.8. Act. 16.1. Esa. 1.21. Psal. 12.1. Eph. 1.1. even to all the Promises and Commandements of the Lord. Herein is required, Firist, Faith uniting to Christ. He cannot be faithfull, that hath not a justifying faith, whereby he is made a lively Member of Christ Jesus. Secondly, Constant and sound adherence to all the Precepts of God, with an upright performance of all holy Promises, which in distress inward or outward were made unto God. And therefore the Israelites are charged not to be faithfull, because they sought God in their affliction,Psal. 78.8.37. but rebelled against him most unthankfully, when the visitation was removed. Thirdly, Sincerity and purity in Gods worship, without the mixture of vaine inventions, or the veile of hypocrisie. And thus Judah is said to be faithfull with God: be∣cause as yet the worship of God was preserved amongst them in the ancient puri∣ty, in which the old Patriarchs and Saints did worship the God of their Fathers,Hos. 11.11. according to his revealed will. Fourthly, Faithfulness is exercised in the conscio∣nable improvement of the Gifts, Graces, and Talents received, to the glory of God, the increase of our Gifts, and the inriching of our souls with true spirituall gaine. And thus he is said to be a good and faithfull Servant,Mat. 25.22, 23. that having received five Talents, hath gained with them five more, &c. Fifthly, It shews it self in dil∣ligence, constancy, and care to promote and further the causes of God, and the Church, with the conscionable discharge of all such duties as belong unto that service Thus Timothy is praised to be faithfull in the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.17. And thus the Apostles or Apostolique men were faithfull, when they could do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Sixthly, Faithfulness implies courage for the truth in the time of persecution and danger, yea for every part of it, great and small. Moses will not leave one horse hoof behind him in Aegypt. Be faithfull un∣to the death, and I will give thee the Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. Seventhly, The faithfull do with all dilligence and singleness of heart, look to the full discharge of the duties of their Calling, in the severall branches of it,Psal. 101.6. Heb. 3 2. Numb. 12.7. 1 Sam. 2.35. & 3.20. Dan. 6.4, 5. 1 Sam. 22.14. whether they be concerning things spirituall or temporall. It is noted of Moses, that he was faithfull in the House of God, delivering to the people Israel all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord without addition or diminution. It was a singular praise in Daniel, that when his enemies sought occasion against him, they could finde none concerning the Kingdom, he was so faithfull and without blame. Eighthly, Faithfulness is seen in the right use and profitable disposing of our riches, and those outward blessings God hath given us He that is faithfull in that which is least,Luk. 16.9, 10, 11. is faithfull also in much: and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If therefore ye have not been faithfull in the unrighteous Mammon, who will com∣mit to your trust the true Treasure? Ninthly, The faithfull are wary in counsell to advise what is right, to speak the truth, to deale plainly, and to walke honestly. A faithfull Witness will not lie. A faithfull man shall abound with blessings.Prov. 14.5. Prov. 28.20. Prov. 13.17. Neh. 13.13. Prov. 20.6. 2 Chro. 34.10.12. 2 King. 22.7. A faithfull man, who can finde? It is noted of the Work-men that had the oversight of the House of the Lord, in the daies of Josiah, that they did the work of the Lord faithfully. Q. What be the Priviledges of the Faithfull? A. 1. God will be faithfull to them in the accomplishment of all his Promises. Esa. 26.2. He will restore perfect Peace to the Nation that keepeth the truth, and
preserve them that be faithfull in his Covenant. 2. The faithfull shall abound in blessings temporall and spirituall.Psal. 31.23. Prov. 28.20. To him that hath shall be given, and he shall have in abundance, Luk. 19.26. The Lord will trust them with the Pearles of his grace, that are carefull to improve them to most advantage; He shall not want a competent stock of spirituall things, that will trade with them dilligently to bring increase. 3. To the faithfull shall be a firme reward. Be faithfull to the death, and I will give thee the Crown of life. What danger would not the godly under∣go willingly, being assured of such a reward? To exchange this present life, for eternall Life, what better Merchandize? Is not this more then a thousand for one? Q. What other Titles are given to them in Scripture? A. They are the Elect and Chosen of God, actually separated and effectually sequestered from the world and worldly courses to the practice and profession of piety and godlinesse.Apoc. 17.14. Col. 3.12. They which are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithfull; As the Elect of God, holy and beloved, put on the bowels of mercies, &c. So John, 2 Joh. 1. writeth to the Elect Lady, and her Children: unless Elect be rather put for Excellent. So Paul, Rom. 16.13. Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord; that is, Excellent or renowned in faith or honesty. Most plain is that of the Apostle, Ye are a chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2.9. And thus may that of our Sa∣viour be understood, Many are called, but few chosen, Mat. 20.16. & 22.14. Q. What are the Priviledges of the Elect? Deut. 10.25. Deut. 26.18, 19. Phil. 3.14. Heb. 3.1. Esa. 56.5. Zeph. 3.19, 20 Psal. 135.4. Jer. 13.11. & 33.9. Esa. 41.8, 9, 11, 12.A. 1. The Lord doth ever avouch them for his peculiar people, to make them high in praise and in honour: He will own them as his portion that he hath taken to himself out of the whole earth. As the girdle cleaveth to the Loynes of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Judah, saith Jehova: that they might he unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory. 2. The Lord will helpe them and comfort them in all strife, he will be a wall of fire round about them, and the glory in midst of them: but the men of their strife shall surely perish, and come to nothing. 3. The Lord hath covenanted to write his Law in their hearts, Deut. 26.18. And to put his fear in the inner man, that they shall not depart from his fear, Jer. 31.33. Which as he hath promised in mercy, he will effect by Operation of his grace. 4. The chosen of the Lord shall be satisfied with the abundant good things of his house, the com∣forts of his grace and presence. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and takest near unto thy self, he shall dwell in thy Courts; we shall be satisfied with the good things of thy Palace, Psal. 65.4. He will use them as friends, he will hear their prayers, and communicate his secrets unto them. Now since this is the state of the godly, let us continually take unto us the words of the Psalmist, Remember me, O Lord, with the favour of thy people, and visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the felicity of thy Chosen, and rejoyce in the joy of thy people, and glory with thine Inheritance, Psal. 106.4.5. Q. But we see it often falleth out in the world, that falshood and deceit have the upper-hand, when the cause of God goeth to the wall, and the godly be overcome of their enemies A. We must needs confess and acknowledge, that those are the most profound waies of God, whose counsels are above our reach: But if we shall go into the Sanctuary of the Lord, there we shall understand the reason of these his wonder∣full works, and be made to know that there is just cause of that his proceeding, both in respect of the godly, and the ungodly, of his people, and of their ene∣mies.Luk. 18.7. There we shall learn, that God is patient and long suffering, who can indure that his cause and the cause of his people should be hindred for a time, and that the ungodly domineer; not that he is mindless of his glory, and the prosperity of his servants: but that his honour might be the more advanced, when once he begins to drive back his enemies, and to lift up the heads of his Children, which
before were dejected and cast down. Hear what the Lord to this end saith by his Prophet; The earth mourneth and languisheth, Lebanon is ashamed and hewen down, Sharon is like a Wilderness, and Basan and Carmell shake off their fruits; now will I rise saith the Lord, [seeing my people are so much confounded, and every man thinketh, they are wholly overthrown] now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self, Esa. 33.9, 10. I have long time holden my peace, saith he;Esa. 42.14. I have been still and refrained my self, now will I cry like a travelling Woman, I will destroy and devoure at once, the enemies of my people. This is Gods purpose when he suffereth his people for a time to be over-run and mastered by their enemies: which if we consider well, we will no longer be abashed thereat, nor stumble at Gods works, though things go never so cross for a time with his people. When we read of the prosperity of Haman that cruell and sworne enemy of Gods people, and under∣stand that he prevailed so farre that all the people of Israel were judged to die, and that he being their greatest and most bitter enemy, had the execution thereof committed to him, would not men conclude, looking upon the outward untoward proceedings, that the Lord had abandoned and forsaken his people Israel; and yet we know in the end, all the circumstances of that business, did make much for the comfort of the godly, and the honour of God; the insolency of the ene∣my, the poor and weak condition of the Israelites appointed to destruction, did turn to the praise of God. So wonderfull is the Lord in his works: whereby it appeareth, that even then when he suffereth the cause of his people in a manner to fall unto the ground, he still holdeth the rudder in his hand, and hath an eye on them, and a care that they shall not altogether be overthrown. Q. What are Signes or Testimonies of this Election? A. 1. They fly the corruptions of the world through lust,2 Pet. 1.4. and compose their lives according to the policy of the New Jerusalem. 2. They are arrayed with the comely Garment of Compassion, Gentleness, Meekness, Love, &c. 3.Col. 3.12, 13. Their study and endeavour is, to joyn to their Knowledge Faith, &c. But it followeth next to speak of the Forme and Parts of a godly life, where these things will come to be handled. The End of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK, Of the Parts of a godly Life. CHAP. I. All Sinne is to be loathed and forsaken; Not for a time onely, but for ever; Not in Judgment and Affection onely, but in Practice also. The Ʋse that the People of God are to make of their slips and failings; and the gaine that they may get thereby. It is not enough onely to abstain from evil, but we must be alwaies ready prepared for the do∣ing of good. Encouragements to the doing of good; with the be∣nefits thereof. And Comforts against all discouragements in the waies of well-doing. Question, WHat are the Parts of a godly Life? Psal. 34.14. & 37.27. Isa. 1.16, 17. Act 26 8. Tit. 2.11, 12. Eph. 4.22, 23, 24. Prov. 3.7. 1 Pet. 3.10, 11. Virtu est, vitium fugere: & sapientia pri∣ma stutitiā ca¦ruisse Hor. lib. Ep. 1. Epist. 1. Psal 97.10. Prov. 1.3.A. They are two: First, Abstinence from all sinne. Secondly, Exercise of all good, with all the powers of the whole man. For a godly life standeth in the right disposition and free imploiment of every faculty of soul and body according to the will of God, turning from sinne, and pursuing that which is good. Q. Is it not sufficient to loath some sinnes, though we love others? A. All ungodliness and not some part or kinde onely, is renounced of him who will soundly profess to live godly: for they who trust in God, and have addressed their heart to walke with him, are out of love and favour with the whole course of iniquity, which was their onely delight and pleasure before. God will not be served with a divided heart, he will have all or none. The Hus∣band requires entire love, and will not accept of parted affection. Nor can a man soundly and in truth loath any sinne, if he love one. Out of indulgence to naturall inclination or corrupt affection, the prodigal person may abhorre covetousness, and the covetous man condemn prodigallity, the furious hate fearfulness, and the fearfull detest rashness: But out of conscience for the Lord, in obedience to his will, no sinne is cast off, where any one is harbou∣red. The Lord hath taught, that we must not lie, slander, swear vainly, defraud or covet, as well as that we must not steale, commit adultery, or defile our hands with blood: and they that are taught of God as the truth is in Jesus, do so judge, and therefore disclaim the one and the other. As pure wa∣ter and filthy cannot come from one Fountain: so neither doth the heart re∣formed send forth good and evil,Jam. 3.. love light and darkness, affect sinne and ho∣liness: for that were to do contraries. Look, as a man in prison or banish∣ment hardly dieted, feedeth greedily on scraps or parings, and thinketh him∣self well, if he may fill his belly with them; but set at liberty and living with his Father and Friends, where he findeth variety and plenty, he cannot fall to his old fare, nor finde sweetness in such unsavory offals: even so it is with him that hath besotted himself with the deceitfull pleasures of sinne, and
is bound with the chaines of Satan, if once he come to see the misery of his present estate, and to have a taste of the liberties and priviledges of a Christi∣an life, he casteth out that former draffe as vomit, and by no meanes will be brought to take pleasure in it any more. And without question, great is the benefit of this change, greater then all the Princes in the world are able to bestow upon us. For this will not suffer us to hunt after variety of sinfull pleasures, but rather with Moses, to renounce them, when we might have our fill of them; and count it a greater happiness to suffer affliction with the godly, then to flourish in wealth and honour with the wicked. This will not suffer us with Cain to hate our Brethren for their good works:1 Joh. 3.12. nor with Saul to be grieved for the reputation and graces of the Servants of God; nor with Ammon to pine away with unlawfull love: nor with Ahab to be sick for the Vineyard of our neighbour; nor with Haman to fret at the advance∣ment of our enemies.Eccl. 7.3. hil. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.3. This will not suffer the remembrance of death to be bitter unto us, but rather make us desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Q. Is it sufficient to forsake all sinne for a time, or in a good moode onely? A. No: but we must renounce and strive against all sinne,1 Cor. 5.8. and that with great advisedness. To cast off sinne for a time, in a good mood, by con∣straint, for company sake, for fear of shame and punishment, or hope of profit or worldly preferment, is little worth: such as of conscience renounce sinne, they do in all earnestness,Phil. 4.24. Esa. 30.22. Neh. 0.29. Hos. 14 8. sal 106.3. Dut. 19 9. Jer. 31.19. Psal. 119 31, 32. upon sober deliberation cast it away as a ragged Garment, they be at utter defiance with it, and abjure it for ever: saying with Ephraim, What have I to do with Idols; [which yet before had been his glory,] I am ashamed and blush, because I beare the reproach of my youth. But this purpose and resolution is not builded upon their own strength, as though they had ability to performe such a weighty Vow: but after due consideration, what cause they have so to do, how infinitly they are bound to God to discharge it, by faith they relie upon him for grace to be made fit and able to do what they have promised. Q. Doth it suffice that we disallow sinne in Judgment, or hate it in affection? A. No; but we must forego it in practice also. We must inwardly detest it, and outwardly abstaine from it. It is the profession of David,Psal. 19.104.101.128. vers. Prov 14.16. & 16.17. Psal. 119.3. I hate every false way, I have refrained my feet from every false way. The wise man fear∣eth and departeth from evill. It is the note of a righteous man, He will do none iniquity. Indeed it must be granted, that power to depart from sinne with willingness, is not obtained without much striving, and that it will cost many prayers to weaken corruption, and to hold rebellion under, with much sighing and sorrowing, to see what unlikelihoods there are of subduing such unruly passions, through our manifold weaknesses. But what then? Is it much, if so great a work require our watching thereto and dilligence, when God is pleased that it be bestowed that way, and without it no common work will go forward? Or is that any just cause of discouragement to us, to take paines for great profit, when we are sure of it before we go about it? Q. Do Gods servants alwaies prevaile in striving against evil, and obtaine that which they seek thereby? A. As God often helpeth them, that they do overcome; so they are oft overcome themselves of their affections, against which they strive. Which slips or defects they neither passe over lightly without regard, nor be dis∣maied at and dejected above measure. They are taught, that they stand by grace, not by their own goodness, and live by faith, not by feeling, though
that be a comfortable thing: therefore they cast not away their hope, though corruption prevaile for a time. But on the other side they consider, that their sinne displeaseth God, which raiseth godly sorrow, and draweth them to take better view of their own frailty, ignorance, and negligence, and confess the same to God, and take shame to themselves. Thus the godly are neither careless of their course, nor dismaied at their foiles; they cast not away their confidence, nor give place to security: but be incouraged to hope for par∣don, and made circumspect to look to their waies with more diligence for the time to come. Q. Do Gods Children then gaine by their falls? A. Through the mercy of God they gaine very much. For First, Such slips are very necessary to pull down our pride, and to give us experience of our own frailty, idleness, vanity, as also of Gods gracious working in us, and tender love over us, which otherwise we should not have had. Secondly, By this meanes, that which through ignorance and weakness of faith, they feared would have separated them from God, doth fasten them more nearly to him, and the sorrow which they conceive for a time, is turned into sound rejoycing. The malice of Satan in this case, may fitly be compared to the malice of a cer∣tain Souldier mentioned in Stories, who thrusting his enemy into the Body, with full purpose to have killed him, did thereby lance the Ulcer which no Physician was able to cure, and let out the corruption, that would have cost him his life. Q. Is it enough to abstaine from evill? Amos 5.15. Psal. 1.1, 2. Isa. 59.4. Jer. 5.28. Ma. 3.18. Eccl. 9.2. Exod 5.3. 1 Cor. 11.29.30. Num. 9.13. Luk. 23.30. 1 Sam. 15.8.11.26. Exo. 4.24, 25. Luc. 16.19, 20, 21. Ma. 25.40.41 Jam. 1.27. Tit. 2.11, 2. Esa. 1.16. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Job 2.2, 8. Luk. 1 5. Act 10.2, 3. Judg. 5.23. & .5. Deut. 27.26. Gl 3.10. Esa. 61.3. Psa. 80.8, 14. sal. 52 8. Jam. 3.12. Jer. 2.21. a. 5.1. a 91.13, 14.A. No: but we must stand prepared and readily disposed to do good as op∣portunity is offered. As well the omission of necessary duties, as the commission of evils and enormities, may make a man stand guilty of sinne in Gods sight, and bring Gods wrath down upon persons and people. Not serving of God, and not sacrificing is a sinne, as well as prophane service: yea, not sacrificing, as well as the prophanation of a Sacrament or Sacrifice, may bring pestilence upon a people. He that observeth not the Passover in his due time, or that humbleth not his soul at the solemn time of Fast, that soul shall be cut off from among his People. It was the not slaying of Agag, that lost Saul his Crown; and the not circumcising of Moses his first borne, that had like to have cost Moses his life. And not the robbing onely, but the not relieving and com∣passionating of the poor, was the rich man his ruine, and shall be sufficient matter to condemn many at the last day. It is not the omission of evil onely, but the practice of Piety, Charity, Justice and Equity that God requireth of thee. We are taught of God, to deny ungodliness, and to live soberly: We are exhorted, to forsake sinne, and to embrace holiness; to lay aside maliciousness and sinne, and as new borne Babes, to desire the sincere milke of the Word. When a good man is described, usually the Scripture saith of him; He escheweth evil, and feareth the Lord. Not onely they that take part with the enemies of God, but such as come not to helpe the Lord against the Mighty, are subject to the curse of Meroz. For there are affirmative as well as negative Precepts: yea, as every affirmative includeth a negative, so every negative hath an affirma∣tive infolded in it: and there is a curse imposed as a Penalty, as well on the breach of the one, as on the breach of the other: and the one is as well bro∣ken by the omission of that that therein is enjoyned, as the other by the pra∣ctice of that that therein is inhibited. Again, Christian men are in the Word of God compared unto Trees: and those not such as by nature and kinde are unfruitfull, and beare no Fruit, or bad Fruit; but such as by nature are fruitfull, and beare good, sweet, ripe Fruit, as Vines, Olives, Figgs, generous or Noble Vines, Olives planted in a fat Soyle, and such like. Now in such Trees, barrennss or unfruitfulness alone, is cause sufficient to set them apart for
fewell. And therefore not the wild Vine onely, that beares sower Grapes, or the empty Vine that beares Fruit to it self, but the barren Vine,Esa. 5.4. Hos. 10.1. Ezek. 15.2, 3, 4. Luk. 13 6, 7. Mat. 3.10. & 7.19. Heb. 6.7, 8. and the fruitless Fig-Tree, and every Tree that either beareth not, or beareth not good Fruit, is adjudged to the Fire. Moreover, Christians are the Lords Husban∣dry, which he continually watereth and dresseth with his Word and Spirit, of whom he expecteth good Fruit meet for him, by whom they are husbanded. What man would be at cost and paines to manure, till and sow barren ground, that yeelded no increase? The earth that bringeth not forth good Fruit is rejected, and nigh unto cursing. Barrenness alone is cause sufficient, why the ground should be cast forth and laid wast of the Husband-man: and better acceptance we cannot expect of God, if we continue barren and voide of Fruit. To these may be added, that the Faithfull are Branches of Christ, the true and living Vine:Joh. 15.1, 2. But every Branch that beareth not Fruit in him, is cut off and cast away. Will any man suffer a fruitless Tree to grow in his Orchard, and trouble the ground?Joh. 15.3, 5. Sure we are, the Branches that abide in Christ must bring forth increase of Fruit. The Trees that are planted upon the Bankes of the Rivers of Life, do bring forth new Fruit in their Moneths, never consuming Fruites,Ezek. 47.12. Apoc. 22.1, 2. Psal. 1.3. Jer. 17.8. even twelve manner of Fruites, twelve times a year. Lastly, Not to do well is to do evil, not to relieve is to kill, not to give is to rob. This is evident by the speech of our Saviour to the Scribes and Pharisees; Is it lawful to do good on the Sabboth daies, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill?Mar. 3.4. However men may conceive that he is a good man that doth no evil; it is most certainly and undoubtedly true on the other side, that he is an evil man that doth no good, and he that doth not good, doth evil. Wherefore let us be exhorted and incited to a diligent practice of those good duties that God requireth of us; and not content our selves with a bare forbearance of evil, but to apply our selves to a carefull and conscionable performance of all such religious Offices, as our callings either generall or spe∣ciall, publique or private exact of us. For would any of us endure idleness or slothfulness in our servants, though never so honest or innocent otherwise? But we are Gods servants, and no more will he endure the like in us, then we would in them. And therefore not onely the riotous and wastfull Steward,Luk. 16.1, 2. Mat. 25, 30. that imbezled his Masters goods, but the idle and thriftless Servant also, that imployed not his Masters money, shall be bound hand and foot, and cast out into utter darkness to his everlasting destruction. Q. What Encouragements have we to do good? A. The Benefits of fruitfulness are so many strong Motives hereunto. First, it brings speciall glory to God. Herein is my Father glorified,Ioh 15.. Ioh. 15.8. Col. 1.6. that ye beare much Fruit. Secondly, It is a sure testimony that we are the Disciples of Christ, and have soundly received the Word which bringeth forth Fruit in them that be∣lieve. Thirdly, It is the ground work of true prosperity.Psal. 1.3. Ier. 17.8. Ioh. 15.16. The Tree that beareth Fruit in his season, shall ever prosper. Fourthly, He that is fruitfull in good works, is sure to speed well when he hath any suite to God. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth Fruit, and that your Fruit should remaine: that whatsoever ye shall aske of the Father in my Name, he may give it you. Fifthly, The fruit∣full shall be enriched with Gods graces, and the comforts of the Spirit. The Earth that yeeldeth Herbes and Fruites meet for him by whom it is husbanded, receiveth blessing of God. The Branch that beareth Fruit shall be purged,Ioh. 15.2. Ier. 17.10. 1 Cor. 15.58. Heb. 6.10. that it may bring forth more Fruit. Sixthly, Good works are better riches then all all earthly treasures: for they shall be rewarded in Heaven. God will give to every man according to the Fruit of his waies. Q. But the godly that endeavour to do good works, expose themselves to many dangers, disgraces, and sorrows in this world? A. If they seem to lie open to tribulations, reproaches and griefes amongst
men, they have God to be their buckler and defence, their rock and salvation, their glory, Psal. 3.3. & 28.2. Tsinnach is a Shield or Buck∣ler, broad in the higher part to cover t heart, and in the lower, sharp like a Sword buse the body is lesser, and that it might not hinder run∣ning. Psal. 5.1. Psal. 35.2. Psal. 91 4. Psal. 8 35. Deut. 33.29. sal. 7.10. sal 18.30. Prov. 30 5. sal. 33.20. sal 89 18. Psal. 119.11 Gen 15.1. sal. 59.11. Psal. 89.18. Psa. 84.9. v. 1. Pal. 15.9, 10, 11. Psal. 28.7. Psal. 46.11. Psal. 37 39. Psal. 62.2, 6, 7. Psal. 59.9. Psal. 144.1, 2. Psal. 71.3, 7. & 91.1, 2 Psal. 61.2, 3.4. Psal 46.7. 1 sal. 9.9. & 32.6, 7. Deut. 32.4. Psal. 118.14, 15. Psal. 62.7. Psal. 3.3. Psal. 27.1, 2. Psal. 21.4, 5. and the lifter up of their head. God is a good mans Shield of pro∣tection, his piked Buckler of defence that cannot be pierced, his Shield that. compasseth him about, and covereth him all over, and that for ever. Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous: with favour wilt thou compass him as with a Shield. His truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy helpe! My Buck∣ler is upon God, who saveth the upright in heart. He is a Buckler to all them that trust in him. Our soul waiteth upon the Lord; he is our helpe and our Shield. The Lord is our Shield, and the holy One of Israel is our King. Thou art my hiding place and my Shield: I hope in thy Word. Fear not Abraham, I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great reward. Scatter them by thy power, and bring them down, O Lord, our Shield. The Lord is our defence, or Shield, and the holy One of Israel is our King, in whose favour our horn shall be exalted. Behold, O God our Shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed. For the Lord is a Sunne and Shield; the Lord will give grace and glory. Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their helpe and their Shield. All which places confirme, that God is the Protector of them that put confidence in him, and fly unto him for help. And to the same purpose he is said to be their Defence, their Salvation, their sure Re∣fuge, and high Tower that cannot be approached unto. The God of Jacob is our Refuge. He onely is my Rock and Salvation: he is my Defence or high Place, I shall not greatly be moved. Because of his strength will I waite upon thee: for God is my Defence Blessed be the Lord my strength or Rock, which teacheth my hands to warre, and my fingers to fight. My Goodness, and my Fortress, my high Tower and my Deliverer, my Shield, and he in whom I trust, who subdueth my people under me. The state of the godly is not naked and destitute as men imagine, but well fortified and surely fenced; for the Lord stands betwixt them and all dangers, till he be pierced (which is impossible) they cannot be hurt. As he is the Protection of a good man, so is he their glory, not onely the matter of their glorying, but the maintainer of their credit and reputation, their dignity and worth. In God is my salvation and my glory. For he will honour them that honour him. And is the lifter up of their heads; if they be in heaviness he will restore comfort unto them; if in disgrace, he will exalt them to honour. What should the godly fear, that have such a Protector and Defender, against whom no power of man can prevaile? whose wisdome is unsearchable, power unressistable, and goodness unmeasurable. They walk in safety, and sleep securely, that have God for their Keeper. No evil can reach them that lie under the shadow of the Lords Wings. Q. Is it sufficient that a man do some good works outwardly? 1 Chro. 28.8.A. No: but we must seek and keep the Commandements of God with the whole man, and all powers of soul and body continually. For God is the Former, Preserver, Glorifier of soul and body, and is to be honoured in soul and body, according to their severall faculties, from whence the Operations do arise.
CHAP. II. Of the first Operation of Man, viz. Knowledge or Understanding. What Knowledge is. The end of Spirituall Knowledge. The Sinnes contrary thereunto, that are to be avoided, and the Meanes by which True Knowledge is to be obtained. Question, WHat is the first Operation of man? A. Knowledge or Understanding, wherewith the minde is delighted and perfected.Psal. 100.3. Prov. 2.9. Prov. 7.3, 4. Iob 22.21, 22. Rom. 2.17, 18. Eph. 5.17. Rom. 2.17, 18. Psa. 139 14. Pal. 111 2. Quālibet actio mxime perfici∣tur circa suum prfectissimum objectum. Psal 78, 7. Col 2.1, 2. Col. 1.9, 10, 11. Rom. 15.14. 2 Pet 3.18. Deu. 29.29. 1 King. 3.9. Prov. 27.23. And thus man is to exercise himself in the knowledge of Divine Truths, made known for our direction and comfort. First, The knowledge of God in Christ, his will, and works, is with all care and diligence to be sought after. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee. Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thy heart. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. This knowledge is the perfection of the minde, the ground of confidence, the beginner of sound comfort and refreshing. This Paul prayeth for in behalf of his Colossians, That they may be filled with the knowledge of God, the spirits of their minds being opened to look toward him. Even as our Imge in the glass doth look toward us, from whom it is reflected: so God his Image in us doth make the eyes of our minde view him, the Author of it in us. But men must not curiously prie into needless matters that pertaine not to them, nor search into that which is not revealed. Secret things belong unto God, but things revealed to us and to our Children. Secondly, The knowledge of things be∣longing to our state and vocation is not to be neglected: for hereby we are fitted the better to glorifie God in our standing. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy Flock. Q. What is the end of Knowledge? A. The end of spirituall knowledge is, First, Communion and fellowship with God in Jesus Christ. 1 Joh. 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, de∣clare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellow∣ship is with the Father, and with his Sonne Jesus Christ. Ignorance doth estrange us from God, and knowledge doth acquaint us with him. As the eye becometh one with that which it seeth, and is after a sort in that light it beholdeth: so are we by the Vision of God, which is begun in us, one with him, and in him. Secondly, Practice and obedience, is another end of knowledge. Knowledge is the Usher and Guide of Practice; and Practice the perfection of Knowledge.Keckerin Phys. lib. 4. cap. 4. define intell. 6. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13.17. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandements, 1 Joh 2.3. For Gods scope in giving his Law, was not to make triall of mens wits, who could sharp∣liest conceive; nor of their memories, who could most faithfully retaine;Iob 28.28. nor of their eloquence, who could most neatly discourse; but of their hearts, who would most obediently submit unto them. The Herbs, Plants,Ier. 22.16. Starres were made for use, not meerly for sight, onely to shew a glorious outside Man was not created to know onely, but to work according to Knowledge. Some Sciences, in comparison of others more operative, are tearmed speculative, but there is not one of these, whose speculation tends and ends not in some ope∣ration, by which man is profited, and God is honoured. This is most true of Divinity, the Science of Sciences, whereby we are made wise unto salvation, throughly furnished unto every good work. The Law was given that we might
obey it: the Precepts are best learned, when most circumspectly practised. Practice promotes the glory of God.Ier. 3.15. Deut. 4.1. For admirable gifts of Science, Lear∣ning, and Memory, men may admire thee: but they give God thanks on∣ly for the good they receive from thee. The Sunne it self if it did not shine and give warmth unto the creatures, were the glorious hue of it ten times more then it is, none would half so much bless God for it. The men for whom our heavenly Father is glorified,Mat. 5.16. are such, whose works shine before men, who warmeth the loynes of the poor. Who commends a School-master, whose Scholars can say and understand their Rules, but speak not, write not any good stiles by them? Who praiseth a Captaine, whose Souldiers can skill of Military tearmes and orders, unless their acts and ex∣ploits of warre be suitable? For such men as joyne practice with knowledge, God is blessed of them, and such men shall be blessed of God in their deeds. As the more knowing, without doing, shall procure the more stripes, be∣cause God for them is the more blasphemed: So the more doing, with know∣ing, shall have double honour, because God was doubly honoured in them. Some luscious delight there is in studying good Books, ruminating on good notions, not unlike that which is in tasting and swallowing sweet Meates: but all the benefit is in the strength and nourishment it breedeth after con∣coction, when thoughts breed works, and studies turn into manners. All discourses of faith and hope, are but drie things, in comparison of the acts and practice of them, which are sweet and delicate above the Honey and the Honey-combe. What profits it to know the measure, price, good∣ness of Land, when thou hast nothing in Possession or Title belonging un∣to thee? Liveless knowledge is a very dull commodity, that may be carri∣ed with wearisomeness, cannot be vented with profit. Of all men they are fools, that bend their studies to Divinity, not intending to be doers, as well as Students and Preachers; not much wiser, such as will be Professors of Re∣ligion,Mat. 7.26, 27. and not practitioners. He that heareth the Word and doeth it not [is compared by Christ] to a foolish man, that built his house upon the Sand, which is easily overturned with every blast of winde. As the praise, so the pleasure of vertue consisteth in action. What profiteth wit or other naturall parts, if not used aright? What comfort can the Traveller take in his know∣ledge of the way, if himself go in the clean contrary path? The practice and use of all operative Arts is all in all; in Divinity the chief of all. Search the Scriptures, and see, if any Covenants or Grants be made to knowing, and not all to the practisers of Gods Commandements. Rom. 2.7. To him that doth ill, shall be tribulation and anguish to every soul of Jew and Gentile: to him that doth well shall be honour and peace, upon all the Israel of God. The comfort of practice is great to the doer himself, the profit much to others. A speechless life hath more life in it to winne others, then a liveless speech. Good works are invincible Arguments, the only Miracles of these Times, to confirme Doctrine, and make entrance for it into the heart. An Archer puts not more force into an Arrow he shoots, then the life of the speaker into his speech. The disordered life of the Physician, doth much discredit his Prescriptions of diet; few will care to observe the Rules which he breaks without regard. The most forcible per∣swasion is, As ye see me do, so do ye. The Martyr that answered Bonner, My Lord, I cannot dispute, but I can die for the truth, moved the spectators as much, as many learned discourses. By godliness of life Peter would have Christians winne their Neighbours; and Wives their Husbands, and Servants their Masters. Arguments are dark if good life put not lustre and light into them. Perswasions are weak, if holiness make not entrance for them. Words are but wind, and vanish into the wind, leaving no print or impression, more then a Ship in the Sea, in comparison of actions which men marke and take no∣tice
of. Most men are like Sheep, easier following example, then driven or led by Precepts and Rules.1 Pet. 2.12. & 3.1. In matters of this life we hearken to them that can speak by experience, and have made good proof with happy successe, of that which they counsell or advise. The innocency of the Saints with their patient sufferings of most cruel torments for the truth, forced many to like of and em∣brace that heavenly Religion. Good life and holy conversation addeth weight to admonitions, forceth liking of the truth, convinceth the conscience of the obstinate that will not conforme himself to the good example that is set before him. It is un∣beseeming for a coward to commend fortitude, or the luxurious to praise chastity. The legges of the lame are not equall: so is a Parable in the mouth of fools.Prov. 28.7. Esa. 29.13. The pace of the lame is deformed, so is gracious speech in a foule mouth [or from a prophane heart.Prov. 28.9.] Excellent Communication in the mouth of an ungodly man, is hurtfull both to himself and others. As a thorn standing up in the hand of a drunkard; so is a Parable in the mouthes of fools. Let us therefore affect goodness above cunning: for that is a good signe, and a good help and step to be such an one, especially when this desire breeds Prayer for power to do, know∣ing that without Christ, we can do just nothing. And as helps of Practice, First, acknowledge thine own disability, or rather deadness to every good work, and commend thy self to the work of his grace, for the will and the deed, intreating him not only to regenerate thee, and give thee new principles of motion, but to renew his inspiration upon every new act of thine, that by Christ, or rather Christ in and by thee, may do all things. Pray, as if thou hadst no will; Vow, as if there were no grace; that is, seriously both. Secondly, In the u e of all meanes of Practice, pray and desire thou maist light upon profitable and per∣tinent matter, Books and Sermons. No meanes ordinarily will do thee good, unless thou go with a mind to be bettered by them. Thirdly, In the use of these, attend to thy self as well as to the matter: have one eye and ear fixed on what is said, another on thy self. Lay thy self to the Rule, and say, What is this to me? how do I and that agree? Look thy face in the glass, and take notice what thou art, what thou oughtest to be. Aske thy heart, how do I practice this? How doth this reprove me? What comfort may I take by such promises? How am I to make use of these things in my daily business and occasions of life? When thou art well perswaded to do any thing, resolve throughly to do it; and when resolved, dispatch and execute it speedily. Fourthly, After the Sermon is ended or the Chapter read, meditate upon it till it be made thine own. After reading or hearing, do as men do after dinner; sit a while, concoct it, digest it, and after draw it out into practice. A Doctrine is never well heard, till it be stam∣ped upon the heart, and expressed in life; So do such as learn Musick or Writing, they play over their Lesson, write after their Copy. Fifthly, In all thy talke, discourses and counsels to others, look first to thy self, and labour to possess what thou exhortest, teachest, commendest to the Saints. That wise man is fool, that is not wise for himself. Each man is desirous to reap the fruit of his own wisdome or skill: To counsell another to the Good, that thou regardest not, is most egregious madness. Sixthly, Take daily accounts of thy self, as Masters of their Journey-men and Apprentices. Aske of thy conscience, what good thou hast done? How thou thrivest in grace? What proceedings thou hast made? What thou hast gained by the exercises of Religion? Seventhly, Where thou shalt take thy self tardy in any matter, labour to be affected with it in good earnest, and humble thy self before God for it heartily. Hearty confession is the way to reformation: for sinne will be gone when it cannot rest quietly in the bosome: a grim look will not dash it out of countenance, so it may finde entertainment; but when it is daily drawn forth and accused before the Throne of grace, it will not dare to shew the face. Q. What are the Sinnes contrary to this, that must be shunned?
A. 1. Ignorance of God, his will and waies. How can he serve God with the whole man,Gal. 4.1. Eph. 4.18. 1 Pet. 1.14. whose eyes are not opened to see what God requireth of him? who is not acquainted with his excellency, nor desirous to be informed of his mind and pleasure? This is a sinne to be lamented and amended. If our eyes were sore, blood-shot, (our eyes wherewith we see but one another, creatures like our selves) we would seek out for them, and wash with strong smarting waters, but we would restore them: and shall we not seek to God in Christ, to restore the sight of our spirit, wherewith we may see him, and the things of our peace within the Vaile, even in the Heavens. 2. Dulness; when through sloth, passion and idleness we have made our selves unable to conceive of the truth, which is taught and might be comprehended, if we would stirre up our selves, and keep the heart in order. Perceive ye not yet, neither understand? Have ye your hearts yet hardened, Mar. 8.17, 18. Having eyes; see ye not? and ha∣ving eares, hear ye not? O fools and slow of heart to believe all things that the Prophets have spoken, Luk. 24.25. 3. Negligence, when we let pass what is taught without observation, and regard not what God doth for us in all estates. We are like Infants in a manner new borne: they are kept by the loving Parent from fire and water; they are fed, laid to sleep, made ready, unready, shifted in their shapes, but they know not who doth all this for them: So doth our heavenly Father by us in Christ, but (he knoweth) little understanding have we of him. The Lord readeth us many a Lecture in the Ministery of the Word, and Government of the world: but like Trivant-like Scholars, we have our mindes occupied about other matters, all the while, or as soon as it is done we cast away our Books, and never regard it after. 4. Curiosity, which is a pre∣posterous desire to pry into things not revealed, or to know things needless or not pertaining to us. Secret things belong to God, but things revealed, to us and to our Children,Act. 1.6. 1 Tim. 1.4. Deut. 29.29. When Peter would faine know what should become of John, our Saviour reprehends him thus: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me, Joh. 21.22. 5. Presumption: when men being rashly puffed up of their vaine minde,1 Tim. 1.7. Joh. 7.27. 1 Tim. 6.4. Rev. 3.17. do fondly imagine that they know all things, when they know nothing, as they ought to do. Thou sayest I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. 6. Erroneous and perverse conceits of God,Prov. 1.22. Vis. Merc. in bunc. loc. Clever in Prov. 1.22. his will and waies, are opposed to knowledge. How long ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And ye scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge. 7. Vaine knowledge that swimmes in the braine, and vanisheth in discourse: but is not planted in the heart, appeareth not in practice. My people is foolish, they have not known me, they are foolish Children, and they have none understanding, Jer 4.22. They are wise to do evill, but to do well they have no knowledge, Judg. 2.10. 8. Unwillingness to be acquainted with the know∣ledge of divers things contained in the Word; as of Temperance, Justice, and the last Judgment. Q. By what Meanes is true Knowledge to be obtained? A. First, The impediments which hinder the knowledge of the truth, must be removed: and these are; 1. Inordinate passions, as envy, anger, hatred, &c. for, these corrupt and trouble the eye of reason and faith, that it cannot rightly discerne the object presented. 2. False prejudice, for this is as a coloured specta∣cle, through which whatsoever we behold, appeareth to be of the same co∣lour,2 Tim. 6.4. be it green, red, or the like. 3. Ambition, which makes men think it some track to their credit or reputation, if they give place to the truth, and confess their errour.Jam. 1:19. 4. Love of contention and contradicting others, which causeth men to seek victory more then truth. 5. Fear of losing those good things which we possesse, and bringing upon our selves those evil and dangers which by the vitiousness of men, are wont to follow the profession of the Truth. 6. Per∣tinacy
in defending the opinions which heretofore we have taken up, or received from others. Secondly, The meanes whereby the truth is obtained, must be used with diligence and constancy. And they are, 1. Diligent and attentive reading and hearing of the holy Scriptures, and other good, sound, approved Authours. 2. Earnest imploring of the aide, assistance and helpe of God.Psal. 119.18. Vers. 169. We must take notice of our spirituall blindness, and come unto him who selleth the eye-salve, who hath the Spirit of illumination, who openeth the eyes of the blind; and cry unto him for mercy. 3. Ardent desire and study to learn the truth of others, and to search it out by industry and paines. The instruction of the Teacher, without paines and diligence in the Learner, is not effectu∣all for the gaining of sound knowledge. The preaching of the Word cannot make men skilfull in spirituall things, unless their be added desire to learn those things, which be propounded in the Word of God. These two are par∣tiall causes of knowledge, which must both concurre to the producing of that effect. CHAP. III. Of the Second Operation of Man, viz. Memory. Wherein it consists. Upon what things the Memories of the godly are to be exercised. What it is to remember things after an holy manner, with the Benefits of such a Remembrance. The course to be taken for the obtaining an holy Memory. And what the Sinnes, that are opposite thereunto, which mst be shunned. Question, WHat is a Second Operation of man? A. Memory or remembrance, whereby we keep things known,Nihil prodesse potest homini innatam esse re percipiendae po∣testatem, nifi haberet etiam ejusdem reti∣nendae faculta∣tem. Vis memorativa pendeta virtute formatrice ima∣ginum in men∣te. Bonus & accu∣ratus intellector facit felicem memoratorem. Verbaque prae∣visam rem non invita sequen∣tur. or call to mind what we had forgotten. As in all things the force of conserving doth depend upon the force of getting and laying up: so also in man the force of keeping doth wholly depend of the force of forming and judging that Image, which ought to be conserved: and therefore the memory is never happy, where there hath not gone before a good understanding. If things be not laid up well in the Chest, they can never be kept well in the Chest. He can never have an happy memory, who hath not a good understanding. It is a good part of memory, to understand the matter throughly, distinctly, explicitely; then order causeth that what hath once overslipped, to be easily recalled. Memo∣ry standeth specially in three things; Understanding, Order, Care. In order of nature memory of words, doth depend upon memory of the things: and they do happily remember words, and the propriety which is in severall words, who have obtained the understanding of the things, and by the things do com∣mit the words to memory. The memory of things is conserved and strengthened by the same meanes, or places by which the knowledge of things is obtained: for memory doth answer unto and depend upon the understanding. He that excelleth with a wit explicative and probative, he doth happily call to remem∣brance things forgotten, and that speedily and upon every light occasion. And this is done by the essentiall vertue of order, which by it own nature doth fur∣ther remembrance, as light of it self is visible, and needs not to be enlightened of any other thing. The causes of remembrance of things forgotten; are, First, Diligent disquisition made by the causes, effects, adjuncts, and reasonings from
one thing to another. Secondly, Restauration or recovery of the conceit of the thing formerly understood, which before was lost, or at least obscured. The furtherance of it is consideration of the circumstances, specially of the time past, wherein we know or apprehended such a thing as we desire to call to remem∣brance. Q How are the Memories of the godly to be exercised? Deut. 11.18. & 6.6. Luk. 2.19, 51. De t. 24.1. Heb. 2.1. Deut. 32.7. Psal. 36 1. Pov. 3.1. 1 Thes. 3.6. 1 Cor. 11.2.A. In the holy and safe keeping and recalling of what we know concerning God, his Law, Works and Ordinances; our own sinnes, frailties, wants and infirmities; the distress, misery, and prosperity of Gods Church, and such like, that it be in readiness for use as occasion and opportunity requireth. It shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the Commande∣ments of the Lord, and do them, Numb. 15.3940. Let thy heart retain my words: keep my Commandoments and live. Get Wisdome, get understanding, for get it not, Prov. 4 4, 5. Wise men lay up knowledge, Prov. 10.14. & 2.1. & 7.1. I will not forget thy Word, Psal. 119.16. We will remember thy love more then Wine, Cant. 1.4. I will remember the loving kindness of the Lord, Esa. 63.7. I will re∣member the Works of the Lord: surely I will remember the Wonders of old, Psal. 77.11. Remember this day, in which ye came out of Aegypt, out of the house of bon∣dage, Exo. 13.3. Remember and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the Wilderness, Deut. 9 7. Thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Aegypt, Deut. 16.12. Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way, Deut. 24.9. By the Rivers of Babylon, there we sate down, ye we wept: when we remembred Sion, Psal. 137.1, 5, 6. Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive, Act. 20.35. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, Heb. 13.3. By these and such like passages of holy writ, we learn, what things are specially to be carried in minde of them that intend to live godly. Q. What is it to remember these things after an holy manner? A. 1. To minde them in season when fit occasion and opportunity is offered. 2. So to remember them, as to be affected with them according to the nature of the thing it self, and condition of the time. To remember the Law as to obey it; to remember God, is to trust in him, to walke before him in truth and up∣rightness; to remember his Judgments, is to fear and stand in awe of his High∣ness; To remember Sion in heaviness, is to sorrow with her, and to commend her state unto God. Q. What is the Profit or Benefit of this Remembrance? A. 1. It withdraweth the heart from carnall confidence, be the present aide or strength never so great, and raiseth it in confidence against fears, be the danger in likelihood never so apparent. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses: but we will remember the Name of the Lord, Psal. 20.7. If thou shalt say in thy heart, These Nations are more then I, how can I dispossess them? Thou shalt not be afraid of them, but shalt remember, what the Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Aegypt, Deut. 7.17, 18. 2. The safe keeping of what we know, is the best meanes to increase and grow rich in spirituall understanding. Christ is the onely Alchimist. Men of small gettings grow to great substance by continuall saving, holding together what they have gotten, and adding somewhat to it daily. Should one have never so great takings, if one should filch out his gaine as it came in he should never increase in substance. If men spend as they get, let the Sea of wealth flow in upon them, yet they shall never have but from hand to mouth: So it is with Christians that hear much, lay up nothing, they cannot thrive in grace or knowledge: but who so keepeth what he hath received, and addeth somewhat to his former store, he shall increase abundantly. 3. The remem∣brance of God and his works doth sweetly sustaine and refresh the soul in bit∣ter agonies and inward distresses. I remembred God, and was humbled: I
have considered the daies of old, the years of ancient times.Psal. 77.3, 5, 6. Ver. 10.11. Psal. 143.4, 5. Psal. 119.52. I call to remembrance my Song in the night. I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High. My heart within me is dessolate; I remember the daies of old. 4. Seri∣ous remembrance of God, his Word, and Works; of our sinnes, and the temptations of his Church, is of speciall use to keep the heart in an heaven∣ly tenderness, and holy disposition to free and willing obedience, and fit∣teth the heart to mourne, pray, praise unfainedly. Psal. 119. It causeth de∣parture from iniquity, keepeth in awe of the Commandements of the most High, [and driveth unto God at all times to seek refuge, and rest under the shadow of his wings.] 5. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, to such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his Commandements to do them, Psal. 103.17, 18. Q. What course should be taken to obtain an holy Memory? A. 1. Boisterous passions and ungodly lusts must be subdued and brought into subjection: as anger, fear, immoderate shame, &c. Envy, covetousness, pleasure, &c. for the truth cannot make impression in a distempered heart, no more then the face can cause reflection in troubled waters. Besides, as with a sponge men blot out what they have written in Tables, so doth passion what is en∣graven in the understanding. 2. Things that we would keep sure, must di∣stinctly, soundly, explicitely be understood.Mens distincta melius appre∣hendit, quam confusa. Prompta recor∣datio, a perfectā rerum memo∣randarum in∣tellectione, magná exparte provenit. Methodus ca∣tena memoriae. Good Lessons do easily fall from us, because we leave off to study them before we well conceive the truth: whereas if we would dwell longer in the search of what we slightly appre∣hend, we should the better keep what we have found, and recall it as occa∣sion requireth. 3. He that would faithfully retain what he hath learned, must be instructed in the principles of Religion, that he may be able to re∣ferre what he heareth, observeth, and hath seen, to some head. Order is to Memory, as light to the eye. The Merchant that knowes not where to finde any thing, so long as his Wares lie confused in an heape, can readily shew every thing when they be sorted into their places. Ye are dull of hearing, because ye have need to be taught what are the first principles of Religion, Heb. 5.11, 12. The man that is well catechised, is best able to lay up and keep safe what he hath received. It is not to be thought that by this meanes we can obtain the remembrance of every word in each sentence, but the ge∣nerall sense and substance of matter we shall keep in minde. 4. Sinister co∣gitations and by-thoughts must be forgotten, when we would commit any thing to memory: for forgetfulness is such a beginning of memory, as pri∣vation is of Generation. The minde distracted with vaine cogitations, cannot seriously fasten the stampe or impression of things received upon the reten∣tive faculty. Thou must succinctly gather thy self together, and gird up the loynes of the minde. The face is not seen in running waters: nor can things understood be written in memory, if the powers of imagination be not united close and fixed upon it. Lead is capable of engraven Charectars, because it is firme and solid▪ Quick-silver, because fluid, will not admit them: In like manner an inconstant wandering minde, which is carried into new, strang, divers cogitations, can reape small fruit by what he readeth or hear∣eth. 5. In reading or hearing thou must diligently observe the matter in∣treated of, the ground of the Discourse, the Arguments whereby it is con∣firmed, the Methode in which it is handled, and the Similitudes wherewith it is illustrated. If the Methode be exact and perfect, it doth most availe to the remembrance of the whole: for what went before, will give light to that which followeth; and one thing draw on another. And as for Similitudes, as they convince, affect, and give light, so do they much further Memory by their per∣spicuity, familiarity, and powerfull operation. 6. The chief heads of what we read or hear, must briefly, yet heedfully be runne over, before one thing
have driven out another. But in recalling the principall points already delivered, we must take care, that what is spoken for the present, do not over-slip us. And if we cannot readily call to minde some Head propounded, whiles we are busied in hearing, we must not stand long to discourse about it, but pass forward to some other things, and return again to enquire after it as opportunity is offered. 7. Delight and care is a great stay to memory. Old men remember what they regard. The shortest wit can call to minde where he laid his Gold. I will delight my self in thy Statutes: I will not forget thy words, Psal. 119.16. 8. Work the heart to a lively sense of what we hear, read or apprehend. Whatsoever doth affect with more then or∣dinary joy or sorrow, that is not easily blotted out. Why do men remember their wrongs received, sicknesses felt, travels undertaken, and apparent dangers escaped? because they are sensible of them. The Doctrine that doth affect kindly, will stick fast by us. 9. Take speciall notice of that which thou hast not learned or heard before, think upon it often and seri∣ously: for things before learned and digested, will more easily return into me∣mory upon the hearing or repitition. 10. Experience is a great prop to Memory. We can with much ease call to minde what paine we en∣dured in sickness, what meanes we used for recovery: Once repetition is sufficient to present all this afresh unto the understanding. Get experience of the Word, and finde the truth of it in thy self, so will it easily be borne in remembrance. What is there almost in the whole Book of God, whereof a Christian renewed by grace, may not have experience in himself, if he will take paines to become acquainted with his own soul, and to get possession of the Word? What the Scripture saith of the miserable and sinfull estate of man by nature, he findeth and feeleth in himself: and if we discerne not the work of Grace, enjoy not the comfort of the Promise, temporall and spirituall, all is not as it ought to be. 11. Meditation is the chief help of Memory: for it doth concoct and digest what is heard, that it may be laid up with more safety. The manner of Meditation is (1.) To learn by parts what we would commit to memory; that is, we must call to minde and busie our thoughts upon one part after another, till the whole be runne over; and then repeate the whole in the same order and methode in which it was delivered or set down. (2.) If the minde be fluid and wandering, it is not amisse to use the helpe of a mild, moderate voice, and to learn by heart with a still noise or murmuring, that the memory may be holpen with the double motion of repeating and hear∣ing, and the heart kept from straying and roving up and down. But if the mind be firme and stayed, it is a more expedient way and stronger to imprint notions, to repeate them with silence, in thought without the use of the voice. (3.) If any point or memorable part have over-slipped us, we must by diligent search and enquiry labour to finde it our, calling to mind what went before, what followed after, to what place or Head of Divi∣nity we referred it in hearing, considering what might be spoken in that matter more then we remember to be delivered, what we have read or observed in others. If by this meanes thou canst not recover it, aske of thy companion or familiar friend with whom thou art lincked in society; for by his assistance that may be regained, which of thy self thou canst not finde. (4.) What thou hast learned or observed in the day, that re∣peate at night before thou betake thy self to rest, that what is lightly imprinted in the minde by day thoughts, may be firmely sealed by night cogitations. And it is wonderfull to be spoken, and not easie to be unfol∣ded, what firmeness, the silent resting of the minde upon a matter all night without distraction, doth bring to Memory. (5.) As soon as sleep is shaken
off, and thou hast made thy self ready, before thou settest upon other studies or business, recall to minde in the morning, what thou hast medi∣tated over-night. For it profiteth little to meditate before sleep, unless thou ruminate upon it after sleep. (6.) The fittest time to begin this Meditaion, is immediately after thou hast heard or read what thou de∣sirest to be laid up, before the minde be called from it by other occasi∣ons, or Satan have stolen the Word out of the heart. Good Husbands cover their Seed with the Harrow as soon as they cast it into the ground, least the fowles of Heaven should devoure and pick it up. (7.) Be∣cause a vehement and bent inclination of minde is required in Meditation, which doth much weaken the spirits, we must take heed that we spend not too much time in Meditation, least the edge of the minde be dulled therewith. And because we assigne but little time to Meditation, we must take heed that we lose no moment of that time: but when it is ne∣cessary to meditate, do that willingly, and without tediousness, which is necessary. 12. The minde is to be exercised daily in the learning and recalling some thing that is good and profitable, that by the use and exercise of remembring, Memory might be perfected. For as the strength of body is increased by continuall labour and exercise, but diminished by sloth and intermission of labour: so the vigour of mind is revived by exercise and daily study, by intermission and sloth it is withered and drieth up. And as frequent disputation makes a skilfull Logician, and fre∣quent declaiming a skilfull Oratour: so the frequent practice of committing things to memory, doth make a more prompt memory. For there is nothing that doth more rejoyce in labour and work, nothing that is more easily corrupted, and gathereth rust with rest and idleness, then Memo∣ry. Use makes the Work-man. 13. Read and hear the Word of God with application, and labour to make that thine own; for if we joyn con∣fession, prayer, supplication, intercession and thanksgiving, as occasion is given from those things we hear or read, we shall not onely remem∣ber them better, but we shall edifie our conscience. And if the stamp of the truth be fixed upon our hearts, and appeare in our conversation, it will not be hard to recall it, because looking upon our selves we shall finde it engraven in our breasts, and shining in our practice. 14. Di∣vine aide is to be craved by earnest and continuall prayers, that by his grace he would sanctifie our hearts. For the influences of Divine grace poured of God into our hearts, do much recreate and refresh them. Q What sinnes are opposite to this remembrance which must be shun∣ned? A. First, Forgetfulness of God, his Word, his Workes, our sinnes,Prov. 3.1. Psal. 116.16. Psal. 44.19, 20, 21, 22. and the distresses of his Servants: which ariseth from negligence, securi∣ty, earthly-mindedness, delight in vanity, pride, and such like. Be∣ware that thy heart be not lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the Land of Aegypt, Deut. 8.14. According to their pasture, so were they filled: they were filled, and their heart is exalted: therefore have they forgotten me, Hos. 13.6. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his Benefits! Psal. 103.2. I will not for∣get thy Precepts, for by them thou hast quickened me, Psal. 119.93. Vers. 61. Secondly, Slight remembrance, when we can think and speak of the Word and Works of God, but are not affected with them as is meet. Vanishing knowledge is great ignorance, and dull empty remem∣brance, is gross forgetfulness. God is not remembred, when his Com∣mandements
are not obeyed, when he is not loved, trusted in, feared, worshipped as he hath prescribed.Psal. 50.22. Deut 8.11. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandements. They made a Calfe in Horeb and worshipped the molten Image:Psal. 106.19, 21. & 44.19, 20. Psal. 9.17. Psal. 119 83. Deut. 32.18. They forgat God their Saviour: Who had done great things in Aegypt. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that forget God. I have not forgotten thy Satutes. Of the Rock that begat thee, thou art unmindfull, and hast forgotten God that formed thee. My zeal hath consumed me: because mine enemies have for∣gotten thy Law, Psal. 119.139. Can a maide forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her Attire? yet my people have forgotten me, daies without number, Jer. 2.32. Thus sinnes are forgotten, when we be not humbled; kind∣nesses, when we be not thankfull; former mercies, when by them we learn not more confidence in God. Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your Fathers, and the wickedness of the Kings of Judah, &c.? They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my Law, Jer. 44.9, 10. Remember these (O Jacob and Israel) for thou art my servant, I have formed thee: thou art my servant, O Israel, shew not thy self forgetfull of me, Esa. 44.21. & 57.11. Having eyes, see ye not? and having eares, hear ye not? and do ye not remember? Mar. 8.18. Third∣ly, Unseasonable remembrance, when things are not called to minde till opportunity be past, or when the heart should be set upon other mat∣ters. Fourthly, Exercise of the memory in a sinfull manner, treasuring up vanity and earthly things, neglecting the safe custody of what is wor∣thy to be retained; recalling the thought of sinnes past with delight, and rejoycing in the miseries of the Church. Fifthly, Tumultuary reading or hearing, without Knowledge or Meditation. For, as it availes not to the health of the body to eate much, but to digest well what is eaten: so deliberate reading and meditation is more profitable to the minde, then greedy scambling over much, when little is thought upon. Sixthly, It is a fault to let that slip away, which for a time we kept and did affect, whether it was for comfort, direction or humiliation; for the treasure of the Word should be kept safe continually. I meane it not of the Words and Syllables which are as a Vessel to convey it: but of the pith and sub∣stance which endures for ever.
CHAP. IV. Of the third Operation of Man, viz. Thought or Cogitation. What ti is. Thoughts are not free. The Reason why men think Thoughts to be free, with the danger and mischief of such De∣lusion. The Seate or Subject of Thoughts. Of good Thoughts, what they are, and the Benefit thereof. Of evill Thoughts, what they are, and the danger thereof. Rules to be observed for the governmen of our Thoughts. How the Thoughts of the god∣ly, and unregenerate differ. Of Fathers, Young men, and Babes in Christianity; How each of these have their mindes occupied. The best are not free from evill Cogitations; Reasons why God suffers his Children to be molested therewith. And the course to be taken for the preventing thereof. Question, WHat is the third Operation of man? A. Thought or Cogitation,The Word is generall for every thing that the heart first imagi∣neth, formeth, purposeth. 1 Chro. 28.9. & 29 8. Jer. 49.30. Act. 9.25, 26. Jer. 11.19. Psal. 30.4. & 41.7. Psal. 33 10, 11. Psal. 140.4. Psal. 73.16 & 77.5. & 119 59. & 56.5. Job 35.2. Joh. 4.24. which is a motion whereby man doth weigh or consider with himself the thing understood, or that comes into under∣standing. Sunt cogitationes rerum imagines. Ideo assimulatio est imago in mente, formata ad similitudinem rei cogitatae. Moll. in Esa. 10.7. & 13.14. Q. Are thoughts free, or left to the liberty of man? A. Thoughts come not within the compass of humane justice, being ex∣empted from his knowledge: but they are open to the view of God, and li∣able to his censure. First, God is a Spirit,Prov. 23.26. The Civilian saies, Cogita∣tionis paenam in nostra foro ne∣mo luat. 1 Cor. 6 20. Psal. 139.2. Jer. 17.10. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. Act. 1.24. 1 Chro 29.9. Eccl. 11 9. & 12.14. Rom. 2 16. Deut. 6.5. Luk 10.27. Mar. 12.30. Act. 8.22. and will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, even with the heart, and all the powers thereof. And good reason; for having created and redeemed both soul and body, he is to be glorified both in soul and body. Secondly, God who searcheth the heart, and trieth the reines, and understandeth our secret thoughts long before, he will not onely judge us according to our words and works, but according to our thoughts. Thirdly, The Law of God is spirituall, and reacheth to the very thoughts. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy thought, and with all thy might. Fourthly, The Lord calling them to repentance that have gone astray, doth will them to reforme their thoughts, and crave pardon of them. Put away the evill of your thoughts, Isa. 55.7. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the foreskin of your hearts, Jer. 4.4. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou maist be saved: how long shall thy vaine thoughts lodge with∣in thee? Jer. 4 14. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wa∣vering minded, Jam. 4 8. Fifthly, The Scripture dfferenceth the ungodly from the righteous, more by their thoughts, then by their words and actions. The thoughts of the righteous are right: but the counsels of the wicked are de∣ceit, Prov. 12.5. Others cannot judge of us but by externall works, sayings and doings: but we must pass sentence of our selves according to our inward Cogitations. For they are the fruits, that best shew the sap of the Tree, according to which we may give judgment. If the sap be evill, [as all men
are by nature,] the thoughts are answerable: if we be changed by the power of the Holy Ghost, the cogitations are suitable. Fruits follow the nature of the sap and soile, where bred and nourished: Children resemble their naturall Parents. Sometimes this may faile in the naturall generation, in the spirituall, never: the mind alwaies begetteth conceits like unto it self. Words and actions are open to sight, subject to the punishment of Law; for which cause they are often cunningly forced, disguised, constrained, the heart purposing one thing, the tongue and hand going another way; as one may talk of honesty, liberali∣ty, love, whose heart is set on wickedness, covetousness, malice. Satan can change himself into an Angel of light? so can his Ministers: nothing being more common, then for him, that intends mischief, to pretend friendship. But thoughts are more free, being naturally discerned by him onely that seeth the heart, trieth the reines, and keepeth a Court for the conscience: Who then is afraid of evil imaginations? Onely that man that dreadeth the presence of God, trembleth at his Word, and hath his heart filled with awe of his Majesty. Thoughts are the immediate issues or productions of the mind, a perfect Image and resemblance of the soul, naturally expressing the quality and disposition of it, as Streames do the nature of Fountains whence they flow: but words and actions are more remote, subject to mixture, and cannot give so clear and lively representation of the hidden man. Many millions of thoughts and formes of imaginations are framed continually within, and do spring out of the heart, without mask or fear, reservation or restraint, being exempted by reason of their secrecy from the priviest search that man can make: But words and acti∣ons are obvious to censure, and shadowed with false colours. The soul fashio∣neth thoughts according to her mould and temperature: but externall fruits are coloured according to the Times, Companies with whom we converse, or purposes intended.Luk. 24.38. Jam. 2.4. Gen. 6.5. Luk. 1.51. Hos. 7.15. Prov. 15.26. Esa. 59.7. Psal. 10.2. M. 9.4. . 35.4. Ezek. 38.10. Prov. 24.8. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Sixthly, The godly and ungodly, both are chalenged for their evill thoughts or imaginations. Why do thoughts arise in your hearts? God saw that the wickedness of man was great upon earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evill continually. The thoughts of the wicked are abomination to the Lord. Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; Jesus knowing the thoughts of the Scribes, said, Wherefore think ye evill in your hearts? If all Prophesie, and there come in one that believeth not, or one unlear∣ned; he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest. But if the Word convince of evill thoughts, or command good, they are not free. Seventhly, Man being created of God after his Image, in righteousness and true holiness, doth owe absolute and intire obedience unto his Majesty, in the whole man, and all the powers thereof. He is our supream and absolute Sovereign: and we his Subjects, to do him all spirituall homage. Eighthly, In the state of grace we are renewed in the inner man, in the spirit of our mind, our hearts are purified by faith, and washed with the pure and clean water that issueth out of the Sanctuary. But if the disposition of the soul be changed, and new qualities produced, the thoughts of the heart must not be rotten and corrupt. Ninthly, Thoughts do knit the heart to God, or draw and turn it from him. Good thoughts do much further communion with his Majesty: evill thoughts hale the soul another way. Q. How are men drawn to think that thoughts are free? A. 1. The Laws of men take no hold of them, and most men esteeme things according to ordinary proceedings in Courts of Justice. But Gods sovereignty is not like mans, nor his sight as mans, nor his Law as the Laws of men. He is of absolute sovereignty, he seeth the heart, and by his Law obligeth the thoughts and motions of the soul to good abearance. The men of this world expect heart∣ty love from friends, willing subjection from inferiours, and esteeme kind∣ness according to the good will of the party from whom it proceedeth: no
marvell then if the Lord require subjection in heart and thought. 2. It is not possible to avoid evill thoughts, and we are apt to think nothing amisse that cannot easily be forgone. But if we cannot avoid evill imaginations, the greater is our sinne, bondage, and misery, which we must acknowledge before God with shame and confusion of face. Though we cannot avoid them, we must condemn them, and by all holy and good meanes strive to subdue and overcome them through the power of Jesus Christ. We are the Souldiers of Jesus Christ, and must fight against those fleshly lusts that rebell against the Spi∣rit. Nor is this bootless, though we obtain not perfect victory: for if they be let alone they will quench the Spirit, and wholly over-spred us; but if we mortifie them by the power of grace, they shall not get head, but rather they shall wither by little and little, and be as spurres to drive us to God in prayer and well doing. 3. They come suddenly and unexpectedly sometimes against liking and approbation, and therefore men imagine no reason that account should be given for them. But the suddain rise of evill imaginations argu∣eth the deep corruption of the heart, which is not yet purged as it ought. A∣gain, they are condemned by the Law, because exorbitant and reasonless: and the wise in heart will not faile to be humbled for them, and to seek their removall that they prevaile not to pester and molest the quiet disposition of soul. Is it a light matter that the heart should be taken up with unreasonable imaginati∣ons, when it should be set upon God, and stand prepared with every power to do him service? 4. Thoughts do no body any harme, if the blind conceit of most men may be taken for true sentence But when they are aberrations from the Law of God, tend to the dishonour of his glorious Name, rob him of his glory, are the greatest galls to an holy heart, that would faine intirely so∣lace it self in God, how can we suppose they do no hurt? Besides, they do hurt many waies: for they are the grounds of all evill, the hinderances of much good, and in that respect more especially to be judged and reformed. 5. Gross ignorance of God and his Law, reigneth in the most men, for they conceive of both according to their carnall apprehensions, and judge nothing to be disal∣lowed of the most holy Lord in his righteous Law, but what is cross to their likings and approbations. In the night men discerne not the danger of their way: nor can the ignorant take notice of the hainousness of their wicked ima∣ginations. 6. The reformation of the thoughts, is a work of much labour and tediousness, in comparison of that we need to take about our words and actions, specially if we strive no further then to approve our selves before men. And the better to free our selves from this labourious toyl of keeping imagi∣nations in compass, we flatter our souls as if it were sufficient to look to the right ordering of the outward man; preferring a treacherous and base peace, to a safe and honourable Warre. 7. By nature we are sick of self-love, apt to think well of our selves, not willing to cross our desires in that which is plea∣sing unto them: But this we cannot do, if we look to our thoughts. For their aberration will soon discover to man the loathsome filthiness of his heart, his proneness to evill, and untowardness to good, that he must dote extreamly, if knowing the truth of his naturall estate, he can be in love with himself, or indulgent to his own desires. And this may be some reason, why of self-love we perswade our selves that thought is free, that we might not come to the sight of our nakedness. Q. What is the danger of this Delusion? A. The mischiefs of it are many and great. First, It denieth the govern∣ment of God in the heart and conscience, to whose authority every thought should yeeld subjection. Secondly, It keepeth men ignorant of their naturall estate, that they cannot bewaile their condition, nor earnestly seek unto Je∣sus Christ to be healed and refreshed. Thirdly, It produceth a presumptuous
power to limit and prescribe the Ordinances; that they ought not to search the heart, captivate the thoughts, and bring them into obedience; but that they serve onely as matters of policy, with some to approve and maintain civill honesty and outward holiness, for the attaining of worldly ends. Fourthly, It nourisheth security, hardness of heart, and desperate impenitency: for how can that man labour the amendment of his heart and life, that thinketh no holiness necessary, but onely outward conformity to the Laws? How can he offer up his heart to God, that freely letteth it loose, to wander up and down in every sinfull vanity? Fifthly, God in his just and rightous Judgment, [when he seeth men to be regardless of his present,] doth give them over to the tem∣ptations of Satan, and the sinfull lusts of their own hearts, whereby they are carried to all excess of riot, to commit sinne with greediness. Sixthly, Neglect of our thoughts, is the nurse of pride, presumption, and self-concei¦tedness. He can never know how poor and naked he is by nature, what daily need he hath of continuall assistance from above, how farre he is from perfection, that doth not set upon the mastery of his thoughts. Q. What is the seate or subject of Thoughts? 1 Chro. 28.. Mat. 9 4. Gen. 8.21. Mat 15.19. Esa. 10.7.A. The heart or soul: Thoughts proceed from it, and rebound again upon it, stirring and affecting the heart to the liking or disliking of what is conceived. Thoughts do not onely delight the heart from which they spring, but stir up fur∣ther to like or disallow what is presented. Q How may Thoughts be divided? A. They are good or evill. Q What are good Thoughts? A. They are motions of the sanctified heart, stirred up in us by the Spirit of God, whereby we seasonably and holily weigh and consider with our selves what we know and understand, that we might be affected according as the nature of the thing requireth. The root of holy thoughts, is a sanctified heart: For men gather not Grapes of thornes, nor Figs of thistles, Psal. 14 2. The Tree must be good before the Fruit can be good. If the Vine be not generous, the Grape is not sweet. According to the work of grace in the soul, and the re∣mainders of Gods Image, so are the thoughts of men. In the naturall man there remaineth some reliques of the defaced Image of God, and he may have some thoughts good in themselves, touching morall vertues, and the affaires of this life: In the temporary Believer there is some work of the Spirit, but su∣perficiall, and of an inferiour nature; and according to this work, so are his thoughts touching the affairs of Heaven, slight, inconstant, subordinate. The true Christian is soundly wrought upon by the Spirit of Sanctification, and his thoughts are answerable to the disposition of his soul, solid, substantiall, lively, constant, and pleasing to God. The Author of all good cogitations is the Spirit of God: For we of our selves are not [no not the regenerate] sufficient to think a good thought, but all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. The Spirit enlightens the understanding with the knowledge of the truth, heales and re∣newes the heart, and so kindles in it thoughts and motions to serve God, shunne sinne, and walke in the undefiled way. Q. What is the Benefit of good Thoughts or Cogitations? Psal. 139.23.A. Exceeding great. First, They are notable Evidences of integrity and growth in grace. As our hearts are less pestered with worldly and carnall thoughts, as they are more replenished with heavenly Meditations, so have we gotten a greater hand over corruptions, so have we a more plentifull increase of the grace of God. As good Meditations and Thoughts do more abide with us, are more affected and delighted in, and are more powerfull to enable us to holy actions, so doth the grace of God increase in us. Secondly, They are graci∣ous trials and warrants of Sincerity in all private duties and outward actions.
For it is not so much what we do, as what we mind; what the lips utter, as what the heart indites; not what the eye or ear attends,Psal. 51.6. 1 King. 8.39. as what the thoughts and affections fasten on. The Lord loveth truth in the in∣ward parts, and regards the outward service according to the inward intention. Thirdly, Good thoughts are sensible tokens of present grace, and strong in∣flamers of earnest desires after more grace. Cogitation kindles desire, and as our thoughts, so are our desires of heavenly things. Fourthly, Good thoughts are Messengers of happy reconciliation with God.1 Thes. 5.23. For God sheweth himself to be at peace with us, when he sanctifieth our nature; and every heavenly motion of the heart to what is truly good, is an Embassadour sent from Hea∣ven to assure us of peace concluded, never to be disanulled. Fifthly, Incre∣dible is the comfort of good thoughts.Psal. 139.17. In nothing do we more resemble the purity and simplicity of God, in nothing do we more communicate with him, then in our nimble and pure thoughts. By these, when absent in body, we are present with him; by these, when the body resteth in the night, the soul may solace it self with God. When we want opportunity to hear, read, or pray so∣lemnly, by holy cogitations we may conferre with God. Q. Is it lawfull to think upon our sinnes or transgressions? A. In a seasonable and holy manner it is lawfull to think upon our sinnes past, and present infirmities, that the heart may be stirred up to more ten∣derness, godly sorrow, and detestation of them. But wisdome and cir∣cumspection must be used, lest whilest we endeavour to work the soul to the hatred of evill, it be secretly ensnared and defiled with the delight thereof. Q. What is the issue of good Thoughts? A. They provoke to an actuall and constant approbation and practice of what is pure, honest, praise-worthy, and of good report; they refresh the heart with sweet content, joy and comfort; they raise the soul to a con∣stant and deliberate detestation of all sinne and wickedness more and more. Q. What are evill Thoughts? A. They are motions of the soul arising from nature, suggested by Satan, or occasioned by externall objects, whereby the soul is turned from God in some sort, and stirred to the dislike of good, or the liking of evill. The root of evill cogitations is the corrupt heart, which is sufficient to poyson the whole man with all kinde of wickedness, being naturally as a boyling Sea, or Sepulchre of corruption, steeming and vaporating up continually a world of all wicked and ill-disposed imaginations. Satan spareth not to inject evill motions into the heart, as Oyl into the flame, to make it more vehement and dangerous. And to hurt and annoy, he taketh advantage of our corruption, which is as apt to enter∣tain his suggestions to evill, as tinder is to take fire. But the temptations of Satan could not hurt, were not the heart corrupted, or at least, did it not yeeld and give place to his allurements. Satan is subtile, and knoweth in what ground to sow his seed; he is busie to molest, and vigilant to take all opportunities to do harme: but corruption of heart giveth him the advantage, setteth open the door for him to enter, giveth ear to his perswasions, delighteth in his suggesti∣ons; and man himself is the sole authour of all his misery. Externall objects,Exo. 5.1, 2. Rom. 7.12. Dan. 4.27. Gen. 37.8. 2 Sam. 16.10. see Mart. com. plac. Part. 1. cap. 17. sect. 14. though good in themselves, by reason of our corruption, do occasion evil thoughts: but this evill is not from the object, but from the heart that is cor∣rupted, or willfully turneth aside after evill upon such occasion. Before the fall of man, evill was first suggested by Satan, and they corrupted themselves by lissening and consenting to that temptation, which they might have repelled, but would not: But since the transgression of our first Parents, the heart is poysoned of it self, apt to send forth evill motions, which are increased and in∣flamed
by the injections of Satan, and seconded by the world with all occasions that are therein, all serving as fuel to augment the fire, and as matter to nourish and maintain it, till all be set on fire. Q. What is the danger of evill Thoughts? Prov. 15.26. & 6.18. Mat. 15.18, 19. Mar. 7.21. Psal. 21.11. & 35.4, 20.A. The thoughts of the wicked are an abhomination to the Lord. First, Evill thoughts proceed from a corrupt heart, and argue the Fountain whence they issue to be unclean. Secondly, Evill thoughts are the Seed and Parents of all wickedness; and what justice is it to punish the Children, and let the Mother go free? If common reason do award that the Principall must be punished, at least equall with the Accessary, then must not evill thoughts escape the censure, seeing they are ring-leaders, and fire-brands to all sinnes: for no outward ob∣jects and occasions could hurt, but by the thoughts embracing and affecting them. Nay, if the greater sinne, the greater punishment; then evill thoughts cannot pass free, in that they are often conceived, harboured, delighted in, nourished, cloaked, and so made the greatest sinnes. Thirdly, In cases of Treason, and some other, humane Laws condemn thoughts and purposes of evill, though they break not forth into action, that others may be terrified from imagining and contriving the like against such eminent persons or so near unto us: which reasons do much more condemn the evill of thoughts, being commence against the great God, who infinitly excelleth all earthly sovereignty, and meeteth with evill thoughts to prevent the out-breach of evils. Fourthly, Husbandmen that would rid their grounds of noysome weeds, do not onely cut down the herb or stalke, but pluck up the root, as knowing their labour would else be vaine and to no purpose. If we strive not the stifling of corrupt imaginations, it will profit but little to lop off the buds and blossoms of other sinnes. When the corrupt heart is a Nest or Cave wherein many unclean Birds are hatched, not onely the Birds are to be killed, but the Cage or Nest is to be cleansed, which cannot be done, if we suffer wicked thoughts to lodge quietly, and labour not their re∣movall. What reformation or cleanness is that, to cleanse the outside of the Cup or Platter, and suffer the inside to remain corrupted with rust and filthiness? Fifthly, Amongst mortall men, what King or Prince, though never so Potent, who doth not exact of his subjects an account of pence and half-pence, and not onely of hundreds and thousands: why should we think that God will not re∣ckon with us for our thoughts, as well as for our words and actions? When God made the whole man entire and perfect, not onely in words and actions, but in thoughts; by good right he may exact that innocency, which he bestowed. And when as men punish the evill that falleth under the sense of their eyes or ears; why should not God, who knoweth, seeth, and heareth what the heart speaketh, shew himself a revenger of that hidden wickedness? Sixthly, It is no small offence to suffer the heart or any power thereof to be withdrawn from God,Mat. 15.19. to whom we owe our selves and all that we have: But every wicked thought withdrawes the heart from God, or some power of it. For the power, whereby conceits are framed in the mind, is from God, and should be imploied constantly in obedience to his will, according to his Commandement. Seventhly, Evill thoughts allay the heate of the Spirit, defile the heart, interrupt and disturbe the holy performance of good duties, and the acceptance of them with God. And as good thoughts minister occasion of sweet rejocing and incredible comfort: so on the contrary, evill thoughts do cause much grief and sorrow. To say nothing, that they fill the heart with much restless unquietness, and con∣tinuall torture and vexation. The thoughts of the proud, cholerick, Ambitious, covetous, how do they pierce the bones, eat up the marrow? Eighthly, Evill thoughts concerning God or man, argue want of love to God and man. Why are we apter to follow vanity, then to commune with the Lord, but because these things beare too great sway in the heart? When the fear of men restraineth
from evill speeches, or actions, why doth not the fear of God keep the heart from conceiving or plodding upon idle, vaine, wicked things? but because the heart is desperately wicked, and destitute of the fear of God, at least in great measure. Ninthly, Evill thoughts are arguments of Gods displeasure, specially if reigning and rebellious: for every high thought that exalteth it self against the knowledge of God, must be brought into subjection, before perfect peace can be possessed with God. Q. Are onely thoughts in themselves unlawfull to be esteemed evill? A. No: but vaine, idle and unseasonable imaginations. Excessive thoughts about the affairs of this life; unseasonable thoughts about things of a better life, are not onely without fruit, but unlawfull; As for a man to be thinking upon some point of instruction that he hath heard or learned, in the time of prayer, &c. Q. What Rules are to be observed for the good government of our Thoughts? A. 1. It is good to begin the day with holy thoughts and meditations, not suffe∣ring our selves to be interrupted by any unnecessary occasions. Give God thy first thoughts, that he may hold the chief part in thy heart: and this will sweet∣ly relish the heart, and by estranging it from worldly impediments, fit it,Psal. 108.1. & 139.18. Psal. 57.8. and keep it in preparedness for all good occasions. 2. Discerne wisely between thy thoughts, and avoid all unnecessary imaginations; amongst those that be good lay hold on them that be most fit and necessary, fastening thy thoughts distinctly upon some one thing, and pursuing it untill it be brought to some issue. It is the policy of Satan to seek our hinderance, by drawing our minds from one thing to another, without fruit or benefit; it must be our wisdome to watch against his subtilty, that we be not deceived. 3. Restraine thy thoughts to such particular duties, as are incident to each season and occasion. And herein avoid vaine spe∣culation and curiosity; let it suffice to know things revealed, and keep thy thoughts in obedience to the will of God. 4. Spend thy speciall thoughts in the meditation of Gods nature, properties and works, his grace and love;Psal. 48.9. the death of Christ, the benefits of his passion; the day of death, thine estate in grace, how thou art to walk, what duties God requireth, how thou maist preserve communion and maintain peace with him; Adde unto these, some thoughts of the miseries of the Times, the distresses of the Church, and the coming of Christ unto Judgment. These are matters of speciall importance about which our thoughts should be busied in all earnestness. 5. If thy thoughts concern the world, put them back, keep them from the world, (save onely as much as needs must, for the moderate maintaining of thee and thine,2 Tim 6.9.) lest heavenly thoughts be drowned and hindered. The reason is, because our hearts being earthly, do presently conceive a sweetness in earthly things. Now spirituall wisdome requireth, that we diminish the love of the creature, that we may in∣crease the love of the Creatour. But if they will runne upon the world, then turn the course of them a little, to consider the vanity and misery of the evill world, the painted vizor of the pleasures of it, the uncertainty of life; the de∣ceitfulness of riches, how they be not ours; what evils and incumbrances we have received from the world, what fools they have made us in treasuring on earth, whose home and expectation is in Heaven. 6. If thy thoughts concern thy self, or others thy Brethren, Labour to think better of others then thy self:Phil. 2.3. for thou seeft no such thing in them as in thy self. Yea, the more thou seemest to excell others in gifts, the more humble labour to be. For this purpose, con∣ceive not onely what thou hast received, but what thou wantest, and what good things thou art without: and then with Paul say,Phil. 3.12. thou hast not yet attained to perfection. 7. If thy thoughts concern any sinne, be sure it be to hate and re∣nounce, to bewaile and mourn for it, in thy self or others. For there is a sly∣neass
and subtilty in sinne, which while we think of, it easily gaineth some tickling and consent, which at least hindreth that through-hatred, that we ought to maintain against it. 8. Rectifie thoughts daily by reading the Word of God, and often private prayer. 9. It is good to take occasion in the night, to exer∣cise our thoughts on God, and such occasions as then shall be seasonably offered, breaking our sleep not unwillingly to this end. Q. But wandering, idle, unseasonable, wicked thoughts will still be creeping in∣to the mind, how are we to deale with them? A. We must withdraw our selves as much as may be from worldly vanity, and not give the least way to wandering and foolish thoughts, but strive earnestly to suppress them with all speed. And to this end, 1. We must examine our thoughts whence they come, and whither they go, and what they do in us. By this meanes we shall banish a number of idle and wandering thoughts, which like roving vagrants, being worth nothing, come either to steale something, either time or grace: and so shall we make room for better. Sturdy loiterers will not haunt where strict government is exercised: nor idle thoughts dare fre∣quently to shew their head, where diligent inquisition is made after them. 2. We must humble and aflict our selves for the vanity of our minds, and deceitfulness of our hearts, which minister occasions of such infinite imaginations. Let us consider with our selves, what misery it is to be clogged with such a burden of idle cogitations; much more to stand guilty of taking pleasure and delight there∣in. How is the soul distempered, that can admit of vaine discourses, when she might better be imploied in cogitations about the joyes of Heaven? It ar∣gueth want of wit, or love to sloth, when men stand pidling about strawes and stickes, neglecting business of weight when season serveth. Oh, the folly and vanity that swayeth within me, that can give way to roving thoughts, idle, un∣profitable, good for nothing, when with more benefit and comfort I might im∣ploy my self in the meditation of heavenly things! Thus are we to obey the checks of conscience convincing these thoughts, and to sharpen it that it may censure more, and we be more deeply humbled for them. 3. Strive we to cleanse the heart from vanity and sinne, and to store and enrich it with grace more and more. The best methode to cure the disease is to remove the cause. Sweeten the Fountain, and the waters will not remaine bitter. Specially we must labour against pride, self-sufficiency and covetousness, which minister most com∣mon and dangerous matter of idle, sinfull and wounding thoughts. 4. We must stirre up our selves to delight in God, and in his Word. For where our treasure is,Prov. 6.21, 22. there will our hearts be also. If knowledge be pleasant to the soul, it will lead thee, when thou goest; and keep thee, when thou sleepest; and talke with thee, when thou wakest. Q How are the minds of good Christians usually occupied or taken up? Mt. 13.14.A. The honest and sound-hearted Christian hath sold all that he hath, to buy the Pearle of Price, found in the Gospel; by the Spirit of grace he hath mortified, as all other sinnes, so the beloved sinne of his unregeneracy, to which he yeelded submission in the daies of ignorance: His heart is purged, his delights altered; the world he doth trample under feet, and renounce the sinnes that he followed with greediness.2 Cor. 11.2. Cant. 2.16. He is betrothed unto Christ, as a pure Virgin espoused unto an Husband, and nothing can please so much as communion with him. The streame, heate and intention of all his thoughts do runne after God: His good affections of love,Luk. 10.27. hope, joy, delight, reverence, &c. are improved for the best service of his Majesty, and the good of his people. This is the heavenly temper of his soul, and the Cogitations moulded therein, are such as these. 1. Having upon mature deliberation cast off the delight of all sinnes, he doth with all earnestness ponder and consider the vanity and misery of his
former course, and bethink himself how he may weaken, suppress and keep un∣der, as all other, so especially the sinne of his love, of his inclination, which as he well perceives did most wound his conscience, waste his spirituall estate, defile his soul, and is most likeliy to do him a displeasure, as that which hangeth fast, sueth earnestly, and may easily circumvent. As in a besieged City, look where the greatest breach is made, there the Inhabitants do concurre with greatest strength and resolution to make it up, or ressist the entrance of the enemy: so this wise Souldier of Jesus Christ finding what sinne hath made widest and most dangerous gaps in his conscience, doth omit no good meanes to fortifie himself and make resistance against it, to crucifie, kill, and keep it under for ever. For knowing that he must die, if sinne live in him, he is willing to be the executioner of his best pleasing sinnes, that he might escape himself. In which resolution he is so firmely settled, that no perswasions, allurements, or fair promises of sinne can alter his determination, or cause the delay of his intended purpose. 2. This good soul sets his thoughts upon the Pearle and Treasure which he hath found and bought: upon this one thing necessary, they runne with greatest content and comfort. If any man in deep distress, should finde upon the way some precious Stone, that is of value abundantly sufficient to supply his wants, hardly could he keep his eyes from gazing upon it, or restrain his thoughts from musing upon his good hap, and happy condition: His excess of joy con∣ceived would both command and confine his sight and heart, to that so rare, hopefull, and welcome Object. Shall not we then conclude, that a man illight∣ned to see his spirituall nakedness and misery, with the excellency of all heaven∣ly graces that are to be found in Christ, and enabled by faith, to lay hold up∣on all the Promises of Mercy made in the Gospel? Shall we not conclude [I say] that he will rejoyce in this favour for ever, and spend the most, the dearest, the noblest of his thoughts upon this happiness?Mat. 13.44. The wise man considers the Pearle before he buy it; after consideration he cannot be quiet till he have gotten pos∣session; and possessing it, he is both cheered and refreshed with the worth and beauty of it: so that he is never well but when his cogitations are taken up about it. He meditates often upon the love of God, his long suffering, good∣ness, mercy, and free grace in sparing him so long, calling him so graciously, providing such meanes for his recovery, granting him liberty and encouragment to believe: and not seldome he is rapt up in admiration of his present happiness, having passed and escaped the Gates of Hell. And whiles he is in discourse a∣bout these things, he seemeth to himself to be in some dreame, it being scarce credible (as he supposeth) that such blissfull state hath befallen him. 3. Having tasted the sweetness of Gods favour, he cannot but desire it more and more, and in fuller measure to be refreshed with the comforts of it: Therefore he bends all his consultations to this point, viz. How he may come to more familiar and better acquaintance with God. (But of this in the next Operation of man.) 4. Nor can an honest heart be unmindful of the rich mercies and incomprehensible kindnesses vouchsafed to him a most wretched sinner. He freely acknowledg∣eth himself indebted for infinite blessings, and not being able to recompense the least, in all humility he devoteth himself wholly to the service of God, crying out with the Prophet, What shall I render to the Lord,Psal. 116.12. 2 Sam. 7.18. for all his mer∣cies? O Lord I am less then the least of thy mercies. 5. Inasmuch as the righteous are still clogged with sinne that abideth in them, though sanctified in part; and are but weak, though willing to be better, they do earnestly bethink themselves in what they come short, and how they might subdue their evill lusts, and chase away those vaine, noysome, wicked thoughts, which still arise from the stinking puddle of corruption; and they unfeignedly study and desire that not onely their words and actions might be acceptable, but their thoughts pleasing in the sight of God: which grace they begge by
fervent prayer, and in part obtain. Q. Ʋnregenerate men and temporary Believers do think of good matters some∣times, how then do the Thoughts of the godly differ from theirs? A. When the Child of God dislikes himself most, even then he is farre before the best of the other, who have not their thoughts freely, voluntarily, substan∣tially, in an holy manner, exercised about heavenly things, but about carnall liberty, pleasure, profit, long life, revenge, even such things as their corrupt heart most desires. The generall ground of difference is, that all unregenerate men foster some speciall sinne, or inferiour good in their bosome, about which they spend their principall thoughts:Mat. .21. for where the love is, there the heart is also; the body may, the heart cannot be separated from that which is the principall or onely delight and pleasure. Of the three sorts of ground that received seed, but brought not forth fruit to ripeness, the best was naught: and the hearers resembled by those grounds, were all unsound. By Simon Magus practice, you may judge of his project and the disposition of his heart.Act. 8.19, 20. He believed, and was baptised, but had not renounced the world. Some sweet sinne, matter of pleasure, ease, honour, wealth, earthly felicity and carnall contentment is har∣boured in the soul that hath not escaped the bondage of Satan, which he will not abandon by any meanes: and as sinne is more or less predominant, so do their thoughts more or less runne after it. The notorious sinners and gross hypocrites have their cogitations wholly bent upon evill: for they are purposely resolved in mind to reap in this life what sensuall pleasures soever this world can afford, and not to be debarred from any meanes availeable thereunto. The life of a morall honest man is suitable to his thoughts; he is sober, temperate, just, no brawler, fighter, defrauder, &c. but a despiser of godliness, an hater of zeal and for∣wardness: you may assure your self his note is this, What needs all this adoe in Religion? this Praying, Catechising, running after Sermons? How did our fore-Fathers? they had not so much teaching, yet they lived neighbourly toge∣ther, had all things plenty. I will keep the Commandements, do wrong to no man, follow my business, live as the rest of my neighbours, and my trust is to do as well as the best of them all. Thus for matters of piety, he is no less vile then the former, though he oppose it not so much openly; because he loves mo∣rall honesty and little medling. The temporary, as his heart is seasoned with good∣ness of nature, civill honesty, and generall graces of the Spirit, so are his thoughts more fair, ingenuous, sober, moderate and pious, then any of the former. He watcheth over his thoughts in some sort, as over his words and actions. As he shunneth gross prophaneness in life, so he detesteth it in thought. His heart will rise against suggestions of infamous consequence; as those of Athiesm, contempt of God, cruelty, murther, adultery, and such like. Conscience will not suffer him to cast off all care of holy duties, and practice of Divine worship. He knoweth the necessity of preaching, and can set forth and speak of the misery of them that want the light of Divine truth for their direction. In regard of present imploiments he may gaine some mastery over thoughts of heaviness, or melancholy, over thoughts of rage and revenge, to prosecute his present occa∣sions more cheerfully. Nor is he altogether careless of the thoughts that molest and trouble him in the practice of good duties; as hearing the Word, Prayer, &c. for he hath learned not to rest in the work done, as though bodily exercise were all that is required. Thus farre may this unsound Believer go towards the practice of true piety in his cogitations: But stil his heart is earthly, principally affecting things subject to sense; whereas the heart of a sound Christian is hea∣venly, burning with love to Christ; which causeth maine differences in their thoughts. First, The temporary without check or scruple letteth loose his ima∣ginations to idleness, and vanity, to fruitless rovings, specially to worldliness, earthly-mindedness, or vaine pleasure: for the heart still holds her interest in these
things, and embraceth them with dearest affection. As for the upright man, he hath renounced the world with the affections and lusts, and chosen God to be his Portion, and his thoughts are intended and purposed to the things of a better life. He suffers not his heart to runne after his eye, no not so much as to be delighted with it, to be ensnared with the pleasure of it, but by all meanes he seeks to stifle it at the first rising. Secondly, You must conceive that the tem∣porary Christian, notwithstanding his glorious Profession, hath set up some Idol in his heart, to which he doth service with his best and dearest thoughts, with greatest fervency and continuance; to which Gods honour, word, and worship, the motions of the Spirit, checks of conscience, and admonitions of friends are made subordinate. But the thoughts of Gods Child are chiefly set up∣on that one thing which is necessary, subordinating all other thoughts thereunto. And therefore he useth all holy meanes to nourish holy thoughts, as prayer, hearing, and reading the Word: and avoideth carefully all meanes which may interrupt or divert them, as idleness, ill company, wicked objects, wandering of the senses, discontent. Thirdly, Spirituall affairs, care of salvation, thoughts concerning the sincere worship and service of God, come into the heart of the temporary Believer by accident, and at reversion; their entertainment is so cold and weak, that other matters better welcome justle them out of oores, they never affect the soul deeply to cause a deliberate and well-advised resolution to pursue them above all transitory things that perish with the use. But if the mind fasten upon its beloved object, it dwelleth long upon it without weariness, is much affected with its seeming beauty, excellency, or profit. And though he generally suppress and smother all subordinate thoughts, tending any way to the satisfying of the flesh, yet herein is his deceit, that he intends onely the cur∣bing of some present, for the injoying of the maine Idoll of pleasure or profit which he aimes at, that his thoughts being now restrained in a lesser evill, he may have more liberty to prosecute his darling delight: and so when he hath obtained his desire, then the former watch is discharged. With the regenerate it is much better; for though they cannot set their minds upon spirituall things as they de∣sire and pray, yet they labour to make their heart a gracious receptacle of ho∣liest thoughts, they covenant to entertain the good,2 Chro. 29.18. they watch to prevent evill cogitations, and they are proceeded to a constant resolution to follow after the best things. Fourthly, If the unsound Christian be touched with thoughts of remorse leading to repentance for his earthly-mindedness, voluptuousness, or indulgence to his bosome sinne, he slights the matter over, suffers them to die with the time, and after a space returns afresh to his former course, which in truth he never abandoned. But the true Christian worketh his heart to a serious detestation of former sinnes, and setled purpose never to look to them any more. If Satan by renewing thoughts of it, seek to re-enter, he doth wisely turn his thoughts to prevent re-entry, calling to mind what bitterness it hath cost, what trouble it caused, how mercifull God was in his former deliverance, how un∣thankfull he should shew himself in returning to sinne again, and into what anguish and sorrow he should plunge himself. This is certain, the thoughts revi∣ving former sinnes, breed in him more humility, more fear, more watchfulness against new surprisals; a daily renouncing of himself, and relying upon God for strength and grace to resist the temptation. Q. Let us somewhat more distinctly open and look into this Point, for it is a mat∣ter of great importance. A. More fully to open this matter, it must be remembred that all Christians are not of one stature, age, strength, or growth in godliness.1 Joh. 2.14. Heb. 5.14. Rom. 14.1. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. There be Fa∣thers, Young men, and Babes, Children and new borne; some need milk, others can digest strong meates: Some be weak in knowledge, rude and unsetled in the faith; others of good understanding are subject to carnall passions, and so Babes.
The state of a godly man is not alwaies one and the same; sometimes they are carried into the Mount to behold Christ his glory, at another time they are tossed with waves and winds, as a Ship ready to sink: now they are rapt up with Paul into the Paradise of God, to see things that cannot be uttered, but by and by they are buffeted by the Messenger of Satan. They have their alterations and changes, calmes and stormes, peace and troubles, combats and conquests: all these things must be considered distinctly, that we may see what are the cogitati∣ons of the godly, and about what things the divers sorts or degrees of them have their minds chiefly taken up, and how they are imploied in their severall Tryals. Q. Whom do you call Fathers? A. Fathers are such Christians, who through long experience and much ac∣quaintance with the practice of a godly life, have obtained grace of God to walke more constantly, cheerfully, fruitfully in the pathes of Christianity then others; who through long custome have had their wits exercised to discerne good and evill, and by daily paines and travels have brought their hearts into a good and heavenly temper; who have accustomed their minds to an heavenly course, and by constancy in well-doing have wrought their souls to delight in obedi∣ence as most perfect liberty. These, in comparison of other weak Christi∣ans,Phil 3.15. Phil. 3.12. are termed in Scripture perfect, though they be not come to compleat growth. Q. How are these Christians differenced in their Thoughts from all men unre∣generate? A. First, they have learned to confine their thoughts to a feeling meditation of God, his Word, or Works, the wise managing of the affaires of this life, and the lawfull and right ordering of recreations. They are not flitting off and on, dreaming of earthly felicity and outward peace, nor prophanely busied a∣bout vaine and transitory pleasures, as if they knew no better good things to bring delight. But usually their minds are set upon some one or other of those good instructions, which they have gathered out of the Book of God, and safe∣ly treasured up in their hearts. Their particular discourses, who can reckon up? They spend many thoughts in meditation upon heavenly matters, as the infinite Majesty of God, his everlasting being, power, wisdom, goodness, mercy, long-suffering; his Works of nature and grace, mercy and judgment; how he spareth men that provoke him daily, executeth his wrath upon the wicked, cor∣recteth his Children for their amendment, and pulleth men from their delights by the power of his Word and Spirit, from which sometimes they could not be drawn. Also they have their minds occupied with the consideration of the short∣ness, sinfulness, and misery of this life, the certainty of death, with the uncer∣tainty of the time and manner of it; the blessed estate of the Elect and faithfull, and the cursed estate of the reprobate and unbelievers, both of them beginning in this life, but perfected and continued for ever in the life to come. Again, they are taken up in consideration of their own estate, and the severall parts of their lives, how they might keep on constantly in their way, not being turned aside, what hinderances they shall finde from Satan, the world and the flesh; how they might resist the occasions of evill, defeat the policies of the Devill, and keep on the Armour of a Christian: How they might spend well every part of the day, give to every man his due, carry themselves in all companies and estates, and go through the duties of their calling so as to be furthered thereby in holiness. When God calleth them to the practice of their Vocations, they busie their minds thereupon, as lawfully they may, but they suffer not the world to unsettle or distract them, to withdraw their hearts from the love of God or goodness: so that their worldly businesses being finished, they can freely, con∣tentedly, constantly fix their thoughts upon some mystery of godliness; as
Christ his sufferings, the Covenant of grace, the momentany state of this life, the joys of Heaven, and such like. In a word, they take thought every day they rise, how they may have alwaies a clear conscience towards God and to∣wards men, how they may order well their particular actions throughout the day, that they may make a good account to God at night, and how they may be prepared for the cross to beare it patiently, and profit by it, and so be made fit∣ter and readier to meet the Lord at the last day, and give up a comfortable ac∣count of their Stewardship and Talents to him, from whom they have received them. And no marvell; for God hath promised to enable his Servants thus to do, if they seek it at his hands. The man that binds the Commandements con∣tinually upon his heart, and ties them about his neck,Prov. 6.21.22. shall have them to lead him when he goeth, and to keep him when he sleepeth. David was encumbred with the imploiments of a Kingdom, had many courtly pleasures to draw him aside, and was vexed with manifold indignities that might have distempered his thoughts: but all these could not withhold his intention from the Law of God. Oh!Psal 119.14, 15, 97. Psal. 139 1, 18. how love I thy Law! it is my meditation continually. It is for them that know nothing better then to eat and drink, sport and play, to seek a shut forth to spend the Summer day and Winter night:Psal. 16.7. Such as have been of long acquaintance with the Lord, and merry because they knew themselves to be beloved of him, have bet∣ter pleasures and delights in store. They have laboured much to cleanse the sty of sinne, and empty out that puddle water: they have arrested, condemned, judged their vaine, and idle thoughts, their emptiness and barrenness in good meditations: They set diligent watch before the door of their heart to prevent the return of such unwelcome guests, or to espy them presently, if they make re-entry. For experience hath taught them what an hinderance it is to have their hearts disordered with vanities; how it deads their prayers, slackes their proceedings in godliness, disquieteth the comely frame of the soul which they at∣tained with much paines, and cannot repaire, if once it be unsetled, without great industry and labour. Moreover, they have hoarded up provision and treasure, which they bring forth as occasion is offered. They discerne what is good, and have their hearts at command to follow and affect the direction of sound reason: They have tasted and fed upon the sweetness of Gods Promises, and cannot savour now the white of an egge. Christ is their Welbeloved, their heart is truly fixed upon him, and all their thoughts do feast themselves upon him with dearest, most delightfull apprehensions. Can they that sing,Rev. 22.20. Cant. 1.. & 8.7, 8. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; Can they that pray, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; Set me as a Seale upon thine heart, and as a Signet upon thine arme; Can they that fervently long, and impatiently seek for Christ being absent: can they do less then in spirit to ascend up into Heaven, and by faith and meditation to commune with him whom they cannot see face to face? Nevertheless, we must not think that this worthy Christian is altogether freed from evill, unprofi∣table imaginations. Their thoughts and desires are, not as they would, but in great part vaine, yea oft rebellious, and such as they would not. For their graces are weak, their actions mixed with corruption, and their cogitations sa∣vour of the flesh that abideth in them. The Apostle himself (a man preferred before others, as in calling and sufferings, so in the graces of the Spirit) saith of himself, That the Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him. (But of this in its proper place.) Secondly, These Christians are upright in their spirituall de∣batements of faith or practice concerning matters to believed or done. In all humility they consider what the Lord saith, and submit their wisdom and will to the pleasure of his will. Thy look not aside at hope of credit, pleasure, pre∣ferrment, friendship, greatness or gaine: but aime simply at the knowledge of the truth, the glory of God, and maintenance of every good cause. They think not partially in their own cause; will not be blind in the matter that con∣cerns
their friend; are not transported in passion to surmise evill without ground, but follow judgment, equity and truth. They are not so wedded to their opinions, as willfully to persist therein when they be convinced of errour, nor slavishly addicted to the course of the Times to conform unto them with∣out judgment. They embrace truth for its own sake, and are contented to be smitten, so they be instructed. 3. The state of unregeneration is utterly un∣acquainted with those thoughts of pure joy, heavenly consolation, spirituall ra∣vishment, astonishment unspeakable and glorious, that this Child of God doth feel.Heb. 6.5. The temporary may tast of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the World to come: but this is not comparable to the joy of the godly for measure or continuance. He may sip the waters of comfort, but drinketh not sound∣ly; the living Springs of waters, the Fountain and root of comfort, abide not in him. He is partaker of the Spirit in a sort, but the Spirit of adoption, the inspirer of all sound and endless comfort, dwelleth not in him, as it doth in every true Christian: therefore his joy withereth and drieth up, whereas the joy of the upright is abundant and permanent, flowing still more and more. After some serious renovation of repentance with fresh sighes and grones, or some speciall and set humiliation for sinne, or some generall calamity imminent or lying upon the Church; after some effectuall ferventness in prayer, or an entire gra∣cious sanctification of the Sabbath; upon some strange imputation of fiery tongues, when the innocent heart retyring into it self, findes no cause of such false and cruell imputation, but the defence of Gods truth and profession of ho∣liness; or when the malice of the wicked hath so farre proceeded, as to compass and enclose the poor soul, that it seeth no way to escape; or when it pleaseth God to call forth his Children to beare witness of his truth, and to seale their Profession with loss of goods, liberty, or life: in such like cas how wonderfully and unutterably shall sound-hearted Christians, that have formerly felt the burden of sinne, and passed the pangs of the New-birth, finde themselves to be cleared and refreshed. When they blow up the coales of the Spirit, and by meditation, examination and supplication, conscionably stirre up the gifts that God hath given them; When they weigh and consider afresh the promises that are made to such as confess their sinnes with hatred and shame, and in truth of heart cleave unto the Testimonies of God; do they not sometimes (when much molested with wrongs and injuries from men) feel such a sensible tast of everlasting plea∣sures as passeth understanding, as if they had one foot in heaven already? And no marvell: for an heart seasoned with grace is Heaven it self, God and Christ by his blessed Spirit dwelling in it, whereby it is lifted up above it self in joy and comfort.Psal. 6.1, 8. & 22.1 2, 22, 24. Vers. & 31.10, 11, 21, 2. Vers. Psal. 1. , 2, 3, , 7. What else can be the issues of the Spirit and Comforter? Let Da∣vid speak, a man as deeply dejected as ever any; what Psalme of complaint al∣most doth he make, that ends not in thansgiving? Now he lamenteth as though quite cast out of mind, anon he rejoyceth as having forgotten his afflictions. The parched, thirsty, and tormented soul, that is full of fear and dread, contri∣tion and sorrow for sinne committed, is not farre from this joy indeed, though he be in sense: for the Lord hath promised to ease the laden, refresh the weary, and help the needy. As for the temporary Believer, he may travell in the deepest points of Learning, busie his mind in the weightiest affairs of Kingdoms and States, give some entertainment to the promises of grace, think in a sort upon the happiness of the Saints with joy, cast some glances upon that which is truly and spiritually good: But his consultations are not upright, scarse universall at any time; he frames his cogitationes according to the current of the Times, and follows that opinion which stands best with his particular aimes; and his joy in the Lord is in nature answerable to his affection to the best things, slight and superficiall. 4. The seasonableness of these Christian mens cogitations will make an apparent difference betwixt them and all others that are not led by the
sanctifying Spirit of grace. An exact constitution is discerned by the activity and nimbleness of the senses, their life and vigour to apprehend their objects, their quickness to be offended or sensibly delighted with their antipathy or con∣venience: And the spirituall temper or disposition of soul is evidenced and made apparent by the promptness of the thoughts, apt and ready to apply them∣selves to the states and conditions of times and seasons, according to the diver∣sity of occasions. The best heart is most softened with the dew of grace, most apt to receive the stamp and impression of the Word, most ready to be moved according to the severall occurrences that fall out and happen at home or abroad. Now these strong and wel-experienced Christians have sought by all meanes to bring, and by the mercy of Go have obtained grace to bring their hearts into good plight and order, whereby they are enabled to change and alter their co∣gitations, as doth best suit with occasions. When God calleth to sackcloth and ashes, to weeping and lamentation, then they apply that part of the Word which is meetest to provoke to humiliation and mourning, and fasten their thoughts upon some judgments which may further to penitency. When God promiseth mercy, offers peace, enriches his Church with manifold spirituall blessings; their eyes are open to behold his goodness, and their hearts enlarged in thankfulness. When Religion spreadeth, the godly prosper, the Saints en∣crease, the Gospel hath free passage, and comely order is observed in the Assembly and amongst the Members of the Church, then they are clothed with garments of gladness: but if prophaneness be countenanced, Religion disgraced, godli∣ness decay, the freedome of the Gospel interrupted, good order neglected, and the Saints had in contempt, then they put on the weeds of sorrow, and make lamentation in secret. If God give prosperity, they call for knowledge, seek increase of faith, patience, peace, and comfort; rouse up themselves to watch∣fulness, humility, and care to take the present opportunity, lest when it be to late they repent their folly. If God send adversity, they examine their waies, acknowledge their wretched and miserable condition, call to remembrance the sweet promises of mercy, look to the providence of God, consider that the end of all chastisements are peace to the godly: And thus seeking greater assu∣rance of forgiveness of sinnes, power of grace, peace of conscience, and evi∣dence of eternall happiness, they quietly yeeld themselves in these outward things to the good-will and pleasure of God. The like may be said of other particulars: for God hath given them wisdom to see what advantages are offered for the enriching of his soul, what course is to be taken for the encrease of his spirituall stock, what impediments lie in the way, how they are to be removed, and what meditations are fittest to procure good, and to preserve themselves from the contrary danger. Have the thoughts of a temporary Believer their changes, their severall seasons and successions? surely they alter as his outward condition of life doth: for upon it they are most constantly and contentedly set∣led. As the world doth fawne or frown upon him, so is he moved either with joy or sorrow. Spirituall objects if they touch not his temporalities, make no deep impression in his heart, take not up much room in his thoughts. Let God bless or blast a Kingdom, let the Word runne swiftly or finde great opposition, let sincerity be cast to the wals and prophaneness countenanced, he matters not great∣ly, so he may sleep in a whole skin, and keep his worldly comforts entire. This is that which gives life to his thoughts; if this faile, his thoughts are heavy, dumpish and desperate. Well may he conform and confort with others in words, ge∣stures and actions: but ordinarily his thoughts admit no change, save onely so farre as his private temporall felicity is endangered by publique judgment, or enlarged by showers of mercy and blessings from Heaven, unless the flourishing of Religion cause secret grutching out of fear lest anothers credit should be his disgrace. 5. Great is the wisdom and dexterity that God hath given these Christi∣ans,
both to guard their hearts and governe their thoughts with good success for the attainment of that end they aime at, though not in that measure they would and do desire. Their care is to prevent former evils, and to be quickned in ho∣liness and comfort: which they feel in some measure, comparing their present state with what it was in former times. Experience hath made them wise to make choice of the right way, and to decline the Rocks upon which they dained heretofore. By long travell they have found out where they struck awry, what hath kept them under, how they may lead their lives with more fruit, and make better use of Gods Ordinances. In Arts and Trades men obtain greater skill and ripeness by paines and observation, they bring matters to more perfection, and dispatch their business with more speed and facility: and shall a Christian gaine nothing in godliness by long practice, heedfull observation, and continuall watchfulness? their wisdom and dexterity is apparent in these things. First, By spirituall prudence and holy watchfulness they timely discover and defeate all be policies and stratagems of Satan.2 Cor 2 11. The blowes and soyles received, have made them both skilfull and wary to espie and disapoint the assaults of the enemy, so that they are neither turned out of the way, nor kept under by them as here∣tofore: but on the contrary are much quickned and emboldned to renew their faith, repentance, humiliation, watchfulness, so fearing danger, that they de∣cline it wisely. For God in his unspeakable wisdom confounds Satan in all his enterprises, ordering the works of the Devill to the setting forth of his glory. And this secret the Lord hath revealed unto his Children, whom he enableth to get good by all the assaults of that evill One, that what Satan intends for hin∣drance, that makes them runne more swiftly in the right way. Doth he tempt to pride after humiliation? they look into the imperfection of their best duties, and are more abased: doth he tempt to repine? they are stirred up to love. Temptations to rashness make them moderate; melancholy distractions draw them to sorrow more unfeignedly for their sinnes. Suggestions to remisness kindle zeal, discouragments beget boldness and courage; and in a word every onset provoks to earnest prayer. Secondly, in respect of sinnes past, or present infirmities, they guide their thoughts so, that they are neither plunged into honour, nor defiled with the delightfull and pleasing remembrance of them. A rare and speciall point of prudence. The sinnes of our ignorance and unregeneracy leave such a staine behind them, that after repentance men are apt to defile themselves again in their thoughts, by running over the passages and circumstances of them with pleasure and delight. Yea, whiles men set themselves to muse upon their sins in solitariness, with an intent to work the heart to deeper loathing, and unfeigned humiliation for them; it may come to pass that their hearts may be ensnared with the love and liking of some corruption, which they did desire most of all to abhorre. Happy then is he, who hath obtained that faith and grace to look back upon his sinnes without horrour or defilement, but not without sorrow and detestation. Happy is that Christian, who can pick out such a time to meditate and pray a∣gainst his sinne, that he may be comforted in hope of pardon, provoked afresh to mourn, and have his transgressions in greater hatred. It is no small measure of grace that doth alter and change us, that we should eagerly persue unto death, what we loved better then our lives. Thirdly, They endeavour with good suc∣cess to keep out or keep down those vaine and wandering wishes that come from corruption: for if they be permitted to kindle in their breasts (as they know right well) they will quickly fire the whole house. They have learned that sins, as diseases, grow by continuance, and that in spirituall, as in bodily sicknesses, it is good to prevent the beginnings. They are well acquainted with the deceit∣fulness of their hearts, the malice of Satan, and the circumventions of sinne, which once entred is not easily expelled: All which considerations awaken them, by faith, prayer, meditation, religious emploiments, and all holy meanes, to
beat down the body of sinne. And where they finde themselves more subject to one sinne then to another, it is their especiall care to curb their thoughts con∣cerning it: and where they finde themselves defective in one grace more then another, they think most upon that they want most, labouring to enlarge their hearts in love to all Gods Commandements. Fourthly, They give joyfull and thankful entertainment to the good motions of Gods Spirit, nourishing them with care and diligence that they may fire their hearts, and drie up the unsavoury puddle of corruption by little and little. And whereas it is then best to enlarge the mind in holy thoughts and meditations, when it is freest from hinderance, either abroad or at home: therefore they seek and take the fittest opportunities for contemplation by night or day. And lest that noble power of the soul should be taken up with trifles and vanity, feed upon the earth, or wear and waste it self with barren and lumpish melancholy, they are carefull and provident to gather, digest and treasure up store of good matter and heavenly businesses for the continuall exercise of their minds. Lastly, The speciall wisdom of these worthy Christians in governing their thoughts, appeares in this, that they fit and prepare themselves to undergo all changes without fretting, couragiously to break through all oppositions that be made against their godly course,Job. 3.24, 25. and religiously to carry themselves in all estates and employments, that they be not idle nor unprofitable, much more that they be not stained with the ordinary and common sinnes of the world. In the issue of their thoughts the strong Chri∣stian is differenced from the temporary, (but that comes to be considered in the state of a Christian being in temptation, and is common to him with other Chri∣stians: therefore that shall be deferred to the proper place.) And to shut up this point, let it be observed, that what is spoken of the thoughts of the strong Christian, that in some measure and degree may be applied to others also, though they be not so apparent in them, who have not long had their wits exercised to dis∣cerne good and evill, and obtained grace to lead their life more constantly and setledly in the practice of godliness then others, that have not so known the Lord, and the manner of his dealing with his people. Q. Whom call you Young men in Christianity? A. Such Believers as have felt comfort in Christ, tasted of the good Word of God, and been trained up in godliness, but have not attained that strength of grace and comfort, nor that experience in the Christian combate and waies of peace, that the old and well experienced Souldiers of Jesus Christ have gotten. They are a middle sort of Christians, neither so well setled, nor so well expe∣rienced in the spirituall war fare, nor having so much superiority over their affecti∣ons, as the Fathers, nor yet being so weak, infirme, and unexperienced as the Babes. These men having been nurtured up in the practice of holiness for a sea∣son, and now called to a more serious consideration of their state and waies, are specially busied in fighting against the temptations of Satan, resisting and sub∣duing their unruly lusts, of which nevertheless they are sometimes overcome. This life is full of conflicts, unsetledness, and some discomfort; now the heart is quiet, shortly distempered with inward suggestions and outward occasions. Their continuall work is to make war against their rebellious desires, vaine wishes, and inordinate passions, which making strong head against the power of grace, do put them to no small trouble. The Apostle warneth hereof,1 Joh. 2.14. and shewing with whom they must encounter, encourageth to the combate, not on∣ly telling what a glorious victory it shall be to vanquish such an enemy, but as∣suring them of victory, as if they had gotten it already. And though this life may seem tedious and miserable, yet is it safe and comfortable: the life which is not exercised in this warfare, is a life of great woe and deadly dangers. Q. How are their minds occupied?
A. In watching over their hearts to avoid sinne and the occasions thereof, lest they should be enticed, and so disquieted in their minds, and break out to the offence of their Brethren, and reproach of their profession amongst the bad. They grow wary, weary and ashamed of anger, impatience, frowardness, fretting, sensible desiring of their neighbours goods, &c. which were wont to be common matters with them: but now they pray more often and earnestly against them, and have some fear both alone and in company to be over∣taken by such passions. But though they covenant to look better to their courses, yet are they soon unsetled and distempered with unruly affections; as in prospe∣rity with forgetfulness of their fervent care which they had, in the works of their callings with earthly-mindedness, discontent, and which they much mis∣like in themselves, when they come to the sight of it. In a word, they are much grieved for their sinnes, they heartily purpose and endeavour reformation, they watch against the occasions of sinne, they renew their covenant if they have offended; and yet they are oft foyled. And though they have not the like measure of spirituall strength as the Fathers have, to be exercised so con∣stantly about heavenly things, and to make God their guide so seriously; yet they are much delighted with the good examples of such as go before them and give them light. Though for want of knowledge and experience they cannot proceed in godliness, like to the well-experienced, but are oft kept under, foyled, and turned out of the way; yet they are glad of all meanes publique and pri∣vate, whereby they might be established. In a word, they are encumbred with many vaine, loose and roving imaginations, which unprofitably take up the heart; and they fall into dreames of earthly dignities, outward pompe, long life, riches, preferment, pleasure, vaine wishing of that which others have, misliking that which is their own,Mat. 20.20. &c. as the Disciples admired the glory of the Temple, and foolishly contended amongst themselves which of them should be the greatest: but as they come to the knowledge of these corruptions, they complain of them, they labour earnestly to reform and amend them, though they be kept under long for their good, that they might see what they are, and be humbled in the sense of their corruption. Now from this that hath been said, it is easie to discerne what are the cogitations of this young Christian. First, He takes more notice and consideration of his manifold corruptions, his unruly de∣sires, and inordinate passions, then he did in former times, or any unregenerate man can do.Psal. 39.1. And this worketh his heart to frequent and earnest prayer, con∣tinuall watchfulness, constant shunning all occasions of sinne, and godly jealousie over himself, lest he should be overtaken alone or in company. Howsoever loosness of mind and distemper of affection was not much regarded in times past; yet now he thinks upon it with shame and confusion, seriously intending and en∣deavouring speedy reformation. But notwithstanding this unfeigned purpose, these evils are neither at once nor easily subdued; which gives occasion to ma∣ny other cogitations. Secondly, For as he meeteth with many difficulties in the way of Christianity,Ezek 3.15, 1. he is oft discouraged and beginneth to faint, finding much unset∣ledness in himself, having received many foyles, notwithstanding his advised purposes to serve the Lord better: but in this perplexity, after some heavi∣ness, he comes to weigh and ponder with himself what promises God hath made to the thirsty, what enouragements are given to them that strive, what asistance he affoardeth to them that watch and pray, whereby he is encouraged to shake off heaviness, with security, and to persist in seeking grace from above. And if he be wisely instructed to live by faith, not onely for the pardon of his daily infirmities, but for strength of grace to walk before God in holiness and righte∣ousness,Cant. 3.1, 2. this doth much quicken and comfort him. Oh, he will wrastle mighti∣ly, and take courage to rise again being foyled, so long as he is supported with hope of Victory: He will never be secure nor heartless, so long as he is assured
of the Lords help. Thirdly, This Christian bethinks himself how he might provide and put on the spirituall compleat Armour of God, whereby he might be enabled to withstand and hold out against all the furious assaults of that wicked One. He hath not learned the use, but knoweth the need of that furni∣ture, which moveth him to seek it by earnest prayer. For seeing Weapons are for the War, now he is exercised with conflicts and temptations, he would not go unprepared.Eph. 6.12, 13. The Apostle exhorteth Believers to take unto themselves the whole Armour of God, that they be not put to the worst, or forced in fight to turn their backs: which direction this young man is fit to hear, being ac∣quainted with the malice of Satan and his own infirmities. Fourthly, His heart is not so deeply set upon worldly businesses, nor let loose to vaine rovings as be∣fore: but he looks to the Principall, and labours especially to have peace with God. For he well perceives that these things do blind-fold judgment, and poyson the will: Therefore the labour of the mind in great part is this, to keep himself from being taken up with carnall, excessive musing about earthly things or vanities, seeing good meditations are not onely hindered, but even estranged, and for the time driven quite away. Fifthly, He doth oft and earnestly consi∣der the directions given out of the Word how he might curb his passions, and reform his thoughts, that he might reap the benefit and profit of them. As men of crasy temper willing to better their health, are ready to hearken to any good prescription of diet or exercise: so fareth it with this Christian, who is desirous above all things to get riddance from those evils, that disturbe the peace∣able disposition of his soul Q Whom call you Babes? A. They are of two sorts; for some are as it were in the birth, as the Apostle speaketh to the Galathians, My little Children,Gal. 4.19. of whom I travell in birth again, till Christ be formed in you. The other be such as hang upon the breast, even as Infants which are new borne; whose property is to know their Parents, though they know nothing else, and to cry after them,1 Joh. 2.14. and to call them by their names (though unperfectly and with a stammering tongue) and to desire the breast whereby they are nourished.1 Pet. 2.2. They are like to fresh and inexpert Souldiers, who have not as yet been feared in the field; they little marke and consider how they are tempted and inticed. Many follies, weaknesses, and gross ignorance are in the most of them; many deceivings of themselves, many phantasies, and oversights are carried about of them. They know not the mul∣titude of fleshly lusts, which secretly lurk within them, and the passions which ruled them before, keep their hold, and abide in great strength to their disgrace and discouragement. There be two dangers whereinto they are subject to fall; whereof the one is when they feele comfort, and the other when they feele it not For whilest their comfort continueth, the sweetness thereof doth so affect them, that they are ready (to the dishonour of God, and offence of others) to neglect their lawfull business, as being a great let to their spirituall exercises; and thereby fall into the snare of the Devill, grow to be idle and unprofitable, to censure and spie faults in others. When they want comfort they fall into heavy dumps, and distractfulness, fearing all was but a shadow and a dream. Because as young Children that are not acquainted with the rod and frowns of the Father, they look to be set upon the lap. Q About what are our thoughts occupied? A. His favour is all in all unto them, in so much as if they have not some know∣ledge that he is tenderly affected towards them, they so long after it, that nothing can satisfie them without it. And about this their thoughts are chiefly occupied, af∣ter they know what it is worth; and in the meanes of their spirituall nourishment, which is the Word of God, and not least of all in this, that they may not in the smallest thing offend or displease God in that which they know.1 Pet. 2.2. And by this
that hath been said, it may appeare that the thoughts of Gods people, even the weakest, differ much from others, who are unrenewed, to whom the thought of heavenly matters is tedious, who have no delight to think how they may be better reformed, who will not be brought to put themselves in the weights of the Sanctuary, that is, to try their estate by the Word of God. For the temporary Believer doth never so think upon the grace of God and his favour in Jesus Christ, as to preferre it simply and in comparison above all worldly con∣tentments, that this earth doth afford; nor upon the Word of grace, as to re∣ceive it into an honest and good-heart, to retain and feed upon it and every part thereof with savour and delight; nor upon the vanity, uncertainty, and feeble∣ness of worldly comforts, as to renounce all interest in things below, that he might obtain a more certain, durable Inheritance in Heaven; nor upon the hainousness of sinne, deliberatly to resolve not to offend God against know∣ledge in any wise. But all true Believers, even the weakest Babes, have pro∣ceeded thus farre: who are yet unable to governe their thoughts, and rule their passions in any good manner; know not the frowardness of their own hearts. Nevertheless, these weak Christians must remember, that they are compared to Children, for that they should daily grow out of childishness, and not think that from time to time they should be borne with, and their follies winked at in them. Therefore, our Saviour compareth the state of his Church and people in the first age and beginning of it,Mat. 13.31. to a graine of mustard seed, which being once rooted, how small soever it be, groweth forward from appearing above ground, to be a blade, and so to branch. Teaching his thereby, that they should so look to go from one degree to another, that though they did not know what was to be done of them in this their Christian course, when they first enter into it: yet now after they have been trained up in it for a season, and have tasted of the Promise of life, they should hasten thither through all lets which might hinder them; and purge out, as they come to see them, many unbeseeming qualities and old evill customes. Q. May not these three degrees of Christians in some respect fall one into a∣nother? A. Yes without question: for the most grave Father may sometime, and in some things, be as weak as the youngest Child, and as violently tempted as the Young man. And many of the things noted before, are incident equally and a∣like to them all; yet because it hath seemed good to the wisdom of God, by his Servant to make this distinction,Gal. 1.8. Eph. 4.13. Heb. 5.13, 14. we must not neglect it. Besides, it may be confirmed by sundry testimonies and examples of holy Scripture, that some are stronger then others; and we have particular mention of many, who of weak became strong, and increased as in knowledge and years, so in faith, courage, zeal; as Moses, Esay, Peter, &c. Q. Are any sort of Christians altogether free from evill Cogitati∣ons? Psal. 39.3. Psal. 31.22.A. Not any, though some be freed in greater measure then others. Gold hath its dross, Wine its lees: the best soyle will beare weeds, the most holy man doth offend in words, in thoughts much more. Every Christian is a Souldier by profession: But our warfare were at an end, if we were freed from the remainders of sinne. Nay, the Children of God, weak and strong, are not onely thrust, from their peaceable condition with evill cogitations sometimes, but sensibly dazled also, as men not knowing where they are. The clearest Springs may runne muddy after a storme or tempest; Low Brooks swell high at a Flood by the inundation of other waters; The most exact constitution is now and then shaken with a Feaver: and the best man by suggestions and allurements may be turned out of the way for a time. An hypocrite is good for a fit, ma∣king fair promises which he forgetteth to make good: and a good man may be dis∣tempered
for a fit, lissening unto those evil motions, which upon more narrow consideration they renounce and detest. Q. What are the causes of evill Thoughts? A. Evill thoughts spring from corruption of nature, proceed from Satan,Jam. 1.14. or be occasioned by outward objects, as hath been said: But we may further note some speciall causes of them in respect of our selves, such as these; Neg∣ligence in watching over our hearts; carelesness in meditation of good things; formality in matters of Religion; neglect of good and holy motions of Gods Spirit; idleness, the fountain and nourse of filthy and terrible thoughts; slight observation of the Word and Works of God, which causeth barrenness; Curiosity and vaine prying into things not revealed. But though continuall watchfulness, may prevent evil thoughts in good measure, yet no diligence that can be used, will free altogether from evil motions: because the flesh that abideth in us will lust against the Spirit Q. Why doth God suffer his Children to be molested with evill Thoughts? A. This he doth for divers ends. First, That they might learn to know themselves, how miserable and corrupt they are by nature, unapt to good, prone to evill, unable to help themselves, or to merit any thing at his hands. Secondly, To keep them in humility, that they be not puffed up with the measure of grace received from him, when they feel the fruits of corruption continually troubling and interrupting them. Thirdly,2 Cor. 12.7. The Lord leaves us to be buffeted with evill thoughts, to prevent security, carelesness, and falling into gross and scandalous sinnes: as we have often temptations to distrust, to make us the more carefull to renew our faith. Fourthly, The daily occurrence of evill thoughts, our inability to avoid them, and the continuall annoyance we have from them in our best duties, is an excellent meanes to drive us out of our selves, and to send us to Christ for daily pardon of sinnes, and increase of grace, which we cannot but see to be exceeding necessary. Fifthly, The abounding of sinne doth the more commend the rich and superabundant grace of God,Rom. 5.20. who is pleased to continue gracious and mercifull to us notwithstanding our daily in∣firmities, and to heale our stained leprous nature by degrees, untill they be made perfect and pure from all spot. Q When and what thoughts do most trouble the godly? A. First, What sinne we are most accustomed unto, the thought of it will be sure most to disturb us, and that at such times as we would set our selves to me∣ditate upon some spirituall good thing, or prepare and make our selves ready to walk with God Secondly, When we are about to do most good, we are sure to be pestered and interrupted with vilest thoughts. Thirdly, The thoughts of the godly are various, according to their condition, constitution, disposition, and growth in grace; as in prosperity to be molested with temptations to se∣curity, pride, forgetfulness of God, formality in Religion, if they be not exercised with some affliction in another kind: In adversity to be assayled with thoughts of distrust, impatience, faintness, discontent, repining, and such like. The fearfull and tender hearted are beset with thoughts of dejectedness, hor∣rour and unbelief; the more bold of nature with presumption and self-confi∣dence, &c. Fourthly, Vaine, idle rovings, and unseasonable cogitations do more trouble the Children of God in the practice of good duties, then thoughts in them∣selves simply evill and ungodly. Q. What course must be taken for the preventing of evill Thoughts? A. First, If evill thoughts arise in our hearts, we must presently make re∣sistance against them, humbling our souls by speedy repentance, stirring up our selves to a further dislike of the evill, and turning the heart to the contrary good or present duty with more fervency and devotion. Secondly, We must
store the heart continually with good matter, and set it on work about some thing that is honest, pure, and profitable, so shall there be no room for idle thoughts. Thirdly, Inordinate boundless desires of mind are occasions of many unseasonable and evill cogitations, which must be limited and brought into sub∣jection, before we can be freed from noysome thoughts about them. Labour we then to confine our desires, and strive for contentment in our estates; so shall we avoid a world of covetous and ambitious thoughts, with such as accompany them, viz. thoughts of deceit, flattery, murther, &c. Fourthly, Watchful∣ness is a meanes to keep evill out of the heart, or to apprehend it that it cannot roost there. To be rid from wicked imaginations, we must make a covenant with our hearts, and set continuall watch over them. Especially we must look narrow∣ly to our selves in the performance of holy duties, that unseasonable thoughts foisted into the mind, hinder not present intention, and draw the heart another way. For the neglect hereof gives the Lord just occasion to leave us to be buf∣feted with all sorts of evill thoughts, impure and terrible. Also we must care∣fully look to our selves, when we are alone, that we let not our thoughts rove at randome, but confine them to some certain bounds; as the goodness of God, his works of mercy and judgment, &c. Fifthly, It is good to remember, that we must give account for our thoughts, and so to reckon with our selves for them in this life, that we may not be judged for them in the life to come. Sixthly, We shall graciously prevent evill thoughts, if we beheedfull to entertain the good motions of Gods Spirit, to obey the checks of conscience, to make use of Gods wonderfull Works, seasoning our hearts with the meditation of them. Seventhly, It also much availeth to make a covenant with our eyes and other senses, keeping them from carnall objects; to avoid wicked company, and to turn away from all occasions of evill cogitations. Q. What are the severall kinds of evill Thoughts that must be shun∣ned? A. First, Unseasonable disordered thoughts beside the business or duty in hand, tending to coole intention, or to interrupt and draw us from the present work we go about. Q. What are the speciall Causes of these evill Thoughts? A. What hath been said before of the causes of all evill thoughts, may be applied to these; unto which these speciall causess may be added. First, want of preparation to holy duties, and of intention and setling the mind upon God, and as in his presence, in the performance of them. Secondly, A dissolute, in∣constant practice of holy duties, arising from love of carnall liberty, gross igno∣rant conceits of Gods worship, prejudicate opinion, or indulgence to some speciall sinne, may occasion roving and distracting thoughts. Seldome can we keep our hearts to what they affect not, be not accustomed unto, esteeme not at an high rate, set not upon with all their might. Thirdly, Covetousness and eager desire of worldly things causeth manifold wanderings. He cannot attend upon God, lissen to his Word, lift up his heart to Heaven, that is fast glued to the earth.Ezek. 33.31, 32. The worldling may sit before a Preacher to hear the Word, but his heart goeth after his covetousness. Fourthly, Conceit of our ability to serve God of our selves, may justly cause the Lord to give us up to be buffeted with carnall imaginations, that we might learn better to know our selves, and be more humble in our own eyes. For trusting in our sufficiency, is it to be wondered at, if we finde our selves disturbed in the service we take in hand, and be made to see the vanity of our hearts? Fifthly, Ignorance and unsedledness is the cause of much slightness, uncertainty, and wandering, of fear, distraction, and in∣constancy. When we be ever doubtfull of our course, whether it be pleasing to God or no, we must necessarily be tossed to and fro in our selves, neither knowing what to do, no leave undone. Sixthly, The liberty of the senses in
holy duties, as of the eye to rove, and of the ear to wander after pleasing ob∣jects, as pompous ceremonies, may be occasions to cloy the heart with carnall thoughts. Seventhly, The heart is to seek in holy duties, because we suffer it to wander all the day long. Q. What be the unseasonable Thoughts that molest the godly in good duties? A. They be of divers kinds; some in themselves good and profitable, but not sorting with the present occasion, nor leading us along therein; some in them∣selves lawfull, if they had been recalled in their season; as of matters pertain∣ing to this life, arrands, journeys, building, buying, selling, business that we had forgotten, or have to do with some other person, &c. some triviall, vaine, idle and sottish, of things of no worth, or that shall never come to pass. To say nothing of thoughts evill in themselves, carnall, presumptuous, vaine-glo∣rious, filthy, curious, &c. which do grievously trouble the heart in the per∣formance of that service, wherein he desires to enjoy most sweet com∣munion and fellowship with God. These latter are not onely unseasonable, but sinfull in themselves: therefore I will reserve them to their proper place. Q. What are the Effects of these Thoughts? A. First, At the best they interrupt the intention of heart in the worship of God, and so hinder the work of the Spirit in the power thereof, and de∣prive the conscience of much comfort. Secondly, If we give way unto them they may prove occasions of hypocrisie, formality in Religion, prophaneness of heart; nay they may procure some spirituall desertion, and move the Lord to give us up to the reproach of some gross sinne, to punish our disregard of his glory. Thirdly, Scrupulousness is caused by vaine thoughts. Is not this a tentation incident to many weak ones in the day of their desertions; that they dare not meddle with the Ordinances of God, their hearts are so full of ignorance and vanity? they have so abused them heretofore, and their minds are so choaked with vanity and abhomination, that they are afraid to come before God, lest they should be found guilty of taking his name in vaine. But against this, it must be remembred, that the sinne which cleaveth to us, cannot excuse the omission of a duty that God requireth. The vanity that disturbes must be laboured against, but the duty which God necessarily requires, must not be neglected. Q. Why doth the Lord suffer his servants to be pestered with unseasonable Thoughts in his service? A. Satan intends the molestation of the Saints and the dishonour of God, by stirring up such idle imaginations in their minds at that time: but the Lord in great wisdom orders all things to the good of his people and the confusion of Satan. First, Hereby the Lord doth tame the pride of our hearts, and keep us in humility, discovering to us the sinfull vanity that doth possesse the soul, and our averseness to that which is good. Oh, what wretchedness doth lodge in the heart, that men should delight more to busie themselves vainely, then to com∣mune with the Lord? Secondly, The grace of God is the more glorious, in that he doth enable us to pray, and accept of our prayers. The vanity of our thoughts sufficiently testifies what our hearts by nature do affect and runne after: if they be lifted up in any measure to desire spirituall things, it is by the power∣full work of grace. The imperfection of our prayers is manifest by our rovings, that we must acknowledge it the great mercy of God, if he vouchsafe audience or grant our requests. What hath been said before of the causes why God suf∣fers his Children to be troubled with evill cogitations, may be applied to these in speciall. Q What are the Remedies of these Thoughts?
A. First, To wake with God in the morning, is a speciall preservative a∣gainst idle wanderings in holy duties. If the eye be lightsome to see God in Christ, through the glass of the Word, and to hol waking before him; If the affecti∣ons be moved to him in thankfulness, who hath led us all our daies, who is that Prince that maketh peace in us, whose secret is the strength of our heart that it fainteth not, whose favour is that Shield which doth so cover us, that evils have not leave to assaile us, much less to prevaile against us; If we fly to Christ early to have the dimness of our sight cleared, to get the distillation of by-thoughts stopped, by looking to him who unites our hearts to himself; if we seek to that quickning Spirit to scatter our slumber, and labour him who is light it self to expell those externall darknesses which inviron us; If we look to Jesus Christ who is made of God our righteousness and sanctification, to wash a∣way the guilt of sinne, and by his Spirit to cleanse us from the spot of corrupti∣on; If we put on Christ by faith, and gird about us the compleat Armour of a Christian; If we look to Christ by faith as our salvation, who must bring all our graces forward from one degree to another, as to our Vice-roy, who must tread Satan under our feet, as to our Guide and Directour who must lead us forward in the waies of peace: If we learn thus to awake with God every morning, and pre∣pare our selves to walk with him, we shall the better be fenced against unseasonable thoughts all the day after. Secondly, Holy preparation to good duties is pro∣fitable against idle thoughts. Did we set our selves to the consideration of our inability and unworthiness to appeare before God; to the meditation of his Majesty and holiness with whom we have to do; to the thought of our mani∣fold wants, and the sweet comfort we might have in communion with God, we should not be distracted as many times we are. It is our rushing upon holy things without deliberation, that causeth so many by-thoughts in the perfor∣mance of our best services. Thirdly, In the practice of all spirituall exercises we must especially look to the intention of the heart, setling it in the presence of the great and all-seeing God, and fixing it constantly upon him alone. Fourthly, Constancy in keeping our times and occasions for holy duties is a great furtherance of intention. Neglect breeds unfitness; discontinuance causeth distraction. If the nest of wandering imaginations be not purged by constant resistance, they will encrease more and more. The less communion we have with God, the more untoward are our hearts to come before him. Fifthly, The daily renewing of repentance for all known sinne, doth embolden to appear be∣fore the Lord in his worship, and fit to free and entire conversing with his Ma∣jesty. For the heart that is purged and made clean, is not haunted with the thought of sinne, when we are about the most excellent works, as it would be if sinne were suffered to have quiet harbour. Sixthly, We must make a cove∣nant with our senses, as with our ears and eyes, &c. that in the worship of God they may not wander after vanity, and so let in such objects as may divert and corrupt our serious Meditations. Seventhly, The confining of our thoughts and affections in worldly occasions all the day long, is a speciall meanes to prevent vaine rovings, when we intend spirituall duties. If our conversation be with∣out covetousness, discontent, distrust, lightness; If we prosecute our civill af∣faires with heavenly minds, undertaking them in obedience, depending upon his goodness for success, submitting our selves to his good pleasure, aiming at his glory, resting in his approbation; If we be frequent in meditation of heaven∣ly things, and draw our selves into Gods presence to have private familiarity with his holiness; If we observe our hearts, that they runne not loosely up and down we know not whither; and take notice of our wants, that we might seek supply: then shall the heart be more ready and spirituall when we come to set duties. Eighthly, If we cannot get freedom from vaine imagina∣tions, yet may we not omit the practice of good duties: for that were to give
way to the corruption of nature and malice of Satan. Therefore casting away all confidence in our selves, and calling to remembrance the mercifull Promises of God to pardon the weaknesses that cleave unto our best duties, we must still draw near unto the Throne of grace, complaining unto our God of the unruliness of our hearts, and labouring to approve them in his presence; waiting upon him for the accomplishment of his work, and comforting our selves in the promise of his rich, free, undeserved mercy. Thus if we humble our selves, and prepare our heart to meet the Lord, we shall finde the Lord gracious, both to grant pardon, and to vouchsafe freedom from these vaine and wandering imaginations. Lastly, If we be distracted with buzzing thoughts in time of Prayer or such like, we must not turn our imaginations upon the temp∣tation, and discourse with it, though it be to work the heart to a detestation of such vanity: for by that meanes the heart shall be drawn aside from the present duty, and more distracted. But humbling our selves and checking our sloth in that spirituall work, we must set all the powers of soul with more life, vigour, and attention about the business under our hands. As the corruption of our hearts seconded with the malice of Satan shall labour our unsetling; let us con∣tend by the power of the Spirit to fix our thoughts upon God before whom we stand. CHAP. V. Of a second sort of evil Thoughts, viz. Vain and Roving Cogita∣tions. The Effects or Consequences of such Thoughts, with the course to be taken for the prevention thereof. Wherein is a large digression about Meditation, shewing how it may be raised both from the Works and Word of God, from the Book of the Creature, and of the Scriptures. Question, WHat are a second sort of evil Thoughts that must be avoi∣ded? A. Idle and vain rovings, with excessive thoughts touching the profits and pleasures of this life, which draw the heart from God, and disturb that sweet and heavenly disposition of soul which ought to be in us. Q. What are the Effects of these Thoughts? A. First, They hinder much sweet communion with God, and cause the mispen∣ding of much good precious time, with the omission of sundry occasions where∣by we might enrich our selves with grace and comfort. Secondly, They di∣sturb peace of conscience, and disorder the heart when it should enjoy most en∣tite fellowship with God in Christ. For let the heart runne loose all day, and it will not stand at command in the evening to waite upon God. Thirdly, They coole the heat of the Spirit and pollute the heart with evil: As they come from corruption, so they encrease and strengthen inward corruption; like weeds that fat and make rank the soul to bring forth bad fruit in more abundance. Fourthly, Idle thoughts expose the heart to manifold temptations. Sinne may enter and finde room with more ease, when the door is held open for it by idleness and roving. Q. Is it not a thing impossible to bring all our Thoughts into subjection,
and a bootless labour to attempt any such thing? A. We must not look to be free from idle thoughts so long as we carry about with us this body of sinne. But as by the grace of God (being of our selves unable to do any thing) we may do all things, so farre forth as shall further us to happiness: so by the gracious assistance of his Spirit, we shall prevaile so far in the government of our thoughts, as to entertain occasions for the quickning and well disposing of them, to avoid the contrary, to be humbled for our by-thoughts, and to be drawn nearer unto God in spirituall worship. Therefore to labour against vaine imaginations is no vaine task: for by diligent and constant endeavour, we shall dissolve the Troops that did assault, and gaine freedom in measure, though farre from perfection. And say we did prevaile nothing for a time, by that holy contention we shall approve our hearts to God, that we allow not the evill, which doth molest continually. Q What course may be taken to prevent these roving imaginations? A. First, It is to be remembred that we may lawfully set our thoughts upon the businesses of this life, when the Lord calleth unto them. For the labours of our Vocation are the works of God, wherein he hath ordained us to walk: which being followed with moderation in obedience to his Commandement, do not separate the heart from him, but unite it closer unto him. And even whiles the mind is holily employed about the things of this world, it is virtually lifted up to God and looketh towards him. This Caveat is here added, lest scrupulous consciences should needlesly afflict themselves, as if it were an argu∣ment of earthly-mindedness in lawfull manner to mind the duties of their place; or that their case was evill, because they did not constantly set their thoughts up∣on things above, when they were exercised about the affaires of this life. Secondly, Cast thy business so that God may have his times every day set out unto him, and our own imploiments and occasions, their shares and portions allot∣ted them conveniently. And what time shall be set apart for divine duties, let it be observed constantly, as much as may be, yet without superstition. But withall look unto it, that the constant allowance for good duties, be neither nig∣gardly, nor unseasonable, nor slightly passed over; as if the least care were sufficient, where the greatest is too little: nor must we rest in the daily portion, when necessity or opportunity require or afford more liberality. Thirdly, The heart must be well stored with good matter, whereupon it may exercise it self as occasion is offered.He must let great purchases alone, that hath nothing to disburse. And that we might with more readiness recall to mind what is treasured up in memory, and know what is fit to be thought upon; it is good to digest it into order and methode, that each thing may offer it self at con∣venient time, and we be not to seek what to do, when we have opportunity to be doing good. As to make choice of some thing to be thought upon in the morning, that is fit to season the heart all the day after: viz. how we are to hold communion with God, and prepare our selves to walk before him that day without offence; what thankfulness we owe unto him for the comforts of the night, and how to preserve our faith in Christ touching all the promises of grace made in the Word. And for the rest of the day, it is good sometimes to think of our manifold wants and infirmities, the haniousness of sinne, the benefit of Justification, the royalty of Adoption, the power of grace, the practice of re∣pentance, the priviledges of a godly life; the power, truth, mercy, un∣changeableness of God, and such like, and that in such order as we have propo∣sed to our selves For many times we know not about what to busie our thoughts, and so give way to idleness: because what we have learned, is not ranged into any methode. Before we enter upon the performance of holy duties, as prayer, praise, &c. let us not be negligent to fasten our cogitations upon somewhat that might quicken devotion, zeal, reverence and attention; as to consider what we are, with whom we have to deale, what wants do oppress us, what liberty
we have to ask, what Promises to speed, how we should make our Petitions devotionally, and stirre up our selves to return praise with cheerfulness. So likewise for the Works of God, both of Creation and Government, nature and grace, the observation of them is exceeding profitable to prevent idleness, and to further suddain and setled meditation. Now touching the Works of Creation, we may observe their qualities, use, benefit, and what comparisons are taken from them in the Word of life. For example, in the WorldWorld. comes to be considered the unity, figure, connexion of parts, order, variety, beauty, perfection, circumscription, temporality, and destruction of it: the benefit, delight and comfort that it affoardeth unto man:Psal. 8.1. which gives just cause to admire the goodness, wisdom, power, perfection of God; his love and bounty towards man; and to manifest their folly that dote upon things transitory, forgetting God the maker of them. In the FirmamentFirmament. we may observe that purity, solidity, greatness,Job 37.18. sal. 36.5. sal. 148.4. Psal. 19.1. Rom. 1.20. immu∣tability or constancy, roundness, locality, order and efficacy by light and mo∣tion: all which things set forth the glory of God, and his singular bounty to the Sonnes of men. In the LightLight. we may consider the purity, clearness, pleasantness, visibility, swiftness in operation, profitableness, beauty, diffusion farre and nigh, and perpetuity of it, that is ever like it self, varieth not,Prov. 15.30. Prov. 4.18. Eccl. 11.7. Job 38.19, 20. languisheth not by the con∣tinuall sending forth of vertue. The benefits of light are many and great. It is the Ornament of the World, begetting a real Image of it self. By it all things are made visible: it gives order, time, end, measure and distinction to all corpo∣rall things: for without it there is nothing in the world but horrible confusion. Light doth beget, conserve, and adde vigour to all inferiour things, Herbs, Plants, Trees, Fish, Fowle, Beasts and Men. It doth wonderfully temper, mingle, subdue, knit together and contain all elementary bodies according to the Laws prescribed of the chief Work-man. The light causeth vicissitude of day and night, labour and rest, waking and sleep: It directeth in the way, mani∣festeth things hurtfull and profitable, shutteth up wild Beasts in their dens, and ministreth opportunity to seek nourishment. By the Light Beasts are tamed, wicked men are restrained and shut up in their holes or Caves; all men are fur∣thered to avoid things noysome, and to persue thing healthfull, to behold and consider the things that are, to converse more comfortably together, to mea∣sure their actions by certain periods of night and day, and to grow in knowledge and understanding. When the Light appeareth the Herbs revive, Birds sing, Beasts play, and man rejoyceth. In Scripture many things are compared unto Light. God is called Light. Christ our Saviour is called the true Light,1 Joh. 1.5, 6. 1 Tim. 6.16. Joh. 1 8. & 8.12. & 9.5. Esa. 9 2. & 42.6, 7. & 49.6. & 60.1, 2, 3. Act 26 18. Joh. 12.36. 1 oh. 2.8. Job 24.13. 2 Cor. 4.6. Mat. 5.16. 2 Cor. 6.14. sal. 4.7. & 88.17. Psal. 111.4. Isa. 50 10. Mat. 5.14 Joh. 12.36. Eph. 5.8. Phil. 2.15. Prov. 4.18. 1 Thes. 5.5. the Light of the world, the Light shining in darkness, the Light of the Gentiles. Light is taken for the Doctrine of the Gospel, for the true knowledge of the Word of God and Gospel; for the knowledge of the glory of God, for holiness of life. It is also taken for heavenly glory, for the grace of God illuminating the under∣standing. Christians are called the Light of the world, and the Children of Light. Light is put for prosperity, peace, and favour with God; as the Saints pray, Lord lift up the Light of thy countenance upon us, and we shall be saved. These things minister occasion of singular meditations. In the SunneSunne. heate, light, position or place, greatness, beauty, efficacy,Psal 19.5, 6. Psal. 89.35, 36 But the Sunne it self is not beauti∣full in compa∣rison of God. Psal. 104, 1. sal. 96.6. Job 25.5. sal. 136.8, 9. Psal. 104.19. Rev. 21.23. Isa 60.19, 20. al. 84.11. Mat. 4.2. Cant. 6.20. Jer 31.35. sal. 89.35, 36 Mal. 3.6. Amos 8.9. Jer. 15.9. Cant. 1.6. Mat. 13.6. Job 9.7. Psal. 29.5, 6. Psal. 136.7, 8. & 148.3. swift∣ness of course or motion, and perpetuity, are to be marked. The benefits of the Sunne are exceeding great. It lendeth light to the other Starres, expelleth
darkness, inlightneth the earth, maketh day and night, Summer and Winter, tempereth the seasons of the year, refresheth all things, and by its heat stirreth up vitall spirit, produceth, conserveth, ripeneth Herbs, and Fruits, and delighteth both man and beast. In Scripture God is called the Sun of the godly, Christ is the Sun of righteousness. The Church is said to be pure as the Sunne. The constancy of Gods Promise and Covenant is set forth by the continuall course and duration of Sun and Moon. The decay of truth, change of prosperity, and vanishing of all hope of deliverance, is compared to the setting of the Sunne, or the going down of it at noon day. And the persecutions and afflictions of the Saints, is resembled to the scorching heate of the Sunne. Who so shall consider these things, he shall finde just cause to stand astonished at the goodness, power, Majesty of the Lord, and to break forth into the remembrance of his holiness. The AireAire. is subtile, moist, cold, lighter then earth or water, thin, with∣out colour, capable of heate and driness, void of light but apt to receive light, fluid, by which the parts are divided, and give place to other bodies and succeed them with incredible swiftness,Eccl. 1.6. moveable, by which it is diversly tost too and fro of winds and other bodies, sincere in it self but capable of putrefaction, set in the middest betwixt Heaven and Earth. The benefits of the Aire are excellent: It refresheth and cooleth the heart and other members that boyle with heate; it cherisheth native heate without which it would die presently: It tempereth the parching heate of the Sunne, and the exceeding brightness of it, which other∣wise would much annoy and hurt the eye. It is the chariot of light, voice, sound, representations which come into the senses: It serves the eye to see, the ear to hear, the nose to smell. It is the minister of motion and breathing, the fosterer of life, the fodder of fire: for when Aire is shut forth, fire is quickly extinguish∣ed. Now if we compare the qualities of the Aire, with the use and end why it was made, we cannot but admire the singular providence, admirable wisdom, and great goodness of Almighty God, in fitting all things so exellently for the good of man.Iob 28.25. He fitted the Aire by weight, &c. Had the Aire been light, man could not have taken his rest quiet∣ly; had it been thick, it could not have been the instrument of motion, breathing, sight or hearing; had it been coloured, all things would have ap∣peared like unto it: Had it been hot, it would soon have destroyed the native heate, and caused death. Who would not fear thee, O Lord, most High? in wisdom thou hast ordained all thy Works. The Aire that thou hast appointed to give life unto us, thou canst corrupt, that it shall become our bane, destruction and death, if we sinne against thee. From the Aire let us come to the Cloudes:Cloudes. in them we may behold the wisdom, glory, goodness, and power of the Lord. The Cloudes are heavy, and yet hang above in the Aire without support;Iob 37.12, 16 Esa. 60.8. Iob 38.37. Iob 26.8. & 36.27, 28. Gen. 7.1, 12. Psal 77.17. Iob 36.22. Iob 38 9. Hab. 3.8. Psal. 104.13. Psal. 104.3 Nah. 1.3. Esa. 19.1. Psal. 18.9, 11. Numb. 9.15. Exo. 13.21. & 40.34. Psal. 99.7. Esa. 4.5. Prov. 25.14. 2 Pet. 2.17. Jud v. 12. fluid, but runne not abroad. Their motion is swift and various, as they are driven by the winds that blow out of divers Coasts of the world. The use of the Cloudes is great: They are heavenly Bottles hanged on high, to cary and contain the waters, wherewith God is plea∣sed to moisten the earth to make it fruitfull, or to drown it in judgment for the sinnes of men; They are as a Veil covering the light of the Sunne, and defen∣ding all inferiour things from the scorching heate; They are the Garments of the Sea, and swadling bands for it. They are called the Chambers of God, the Chariots and Horses of God, the dust of his feet. When the Lord covereth the Heavens with thick Cloudes, he is said to descend, or to come nigh the wicked in judgment. God hath sundry times manifested his presence to his people in a Cloude. False Teachers, and such as make fair promises, but performe nothing, are compared to Cloudes without water. These things minister occasion of
good thoughts, and lead us to the meditation of Gods power, goodness, glory, and wise providence, who hath made and doth order all things according to his in∣comprehensible understanding. The RaineRaine. is a common and base creature, but a lively notable testimony of Gods liberality, wisdom, and almighty power. In Scripture he is called the Father of the Raine. It is heavy of it self,Psal. 147.8. Iob 37.11, 12, 13. Iob 36.26, 27. Psal. 135.7. & 148.4. Iob 5.10. & 28.26. & 38.26. Deut 11.14 Psal. 65.10. Act 14.17. am 5 7. Zech. 10.1. Iob 37.5. Iob 38.28. Iob 26.8. Amos 5.8. Psal. 65.10, 11, 12. & 68.9, 10. Lev. 26.4. Esa. 55.10. Ioel 2.23, 24. Esa 30.13. Iam. 5.18. Psal. 104.13, 14. Amos 4.7. 1 King. 8.35. & 17.7, 9. Luk. 4.25. Deut. 28.23, 24. Esa. 5.6. Ier. 14.4. Gen. 7.11, 12. Deut. 32.2. Mic. 2.6. Esa. 55.10 11. Esa 45.8. Mic. 5.7. Psal. 72.6, 7. Psal. 11.6. Mat. 7.26, 27. Ier. 14.22. & 5.24. 1 Reg. 8.35. yet drawn up into the Aire by the heate of the Sunne, where it hangeth in the Cloudes by the appointment of God, untill he command it to descend. It falleth by drops, and is not poured down all at once, lest it should destroy the fruits of the ground, and prove hurtfull to man and beast. Nor is this to be omitted, that it descends more frequent and in greater abundance then Snow or Haile. The Raine-water is more thin, sweeter, hotter, more boyled of the Sunne, and so more wholsome, more availeable for the in∣crease of the fruits of the Earth then any other water whatsoever. The Raine doth moisten the Earth, and make it fruitfull; it causeth Grass, Herbs, Seeds and Plants to grow and increase: but if God withhold the former and latter Raine, the Earth is barren, the Grass withereth, the Fountains drie up, and the Fruits of the Earth die and perish: whence followeth famine and death of men and Cattel. Raine also doth allay immoderate heate, and so preserve the life and health of man and beast: but extream Raine destroyeth the fruits, washeth a∣way the fatness of the earth, breedeth distempers in the body, and many waies afflicteth. The Doctrine of the Gospel is compared to Raine; the blessing of God upon the Just is resembled to the Raine that causeth the Herbs to flourish; the calamities that overwhelm the wicked are shadowed forth by an extream and vio∣lent Raine, that throweth down all before it. And by these things we are taught to waite upon God, to walke before him in obedience, and to repent of our sins if we have gone astray. The DewDew. that fals upon the ground in small round drops is an argument of the wisdom, power, and goodness of God, as the restraining of that,Iob 38.28. & 29.19. Prov. 3.20. Gen 2.28. Deut. 33.13, 18. Zch. 8.12. 1 Reg. 17.1. Hag. 1.10. is a token of his wrath and displeasure. The Dew is cold and moist, and falleth in great abun∣dance at some times of the year, bedewing the Herbs with small sprinklings as it were with Pearles. It is more effectuall to refresh the Earth, moisten Herbs, and cherish the fruits then any shower; It is profitable not onely to the nourish∣ment of man and beast, but as Physick it is usefull for their health; It ministers matter to Hony, Sugger, Manna, and Pearle. But Beasts, specially Sheep and young Cattel, feeding upon Herbs full of Dew, do catch harme and die. The Lord saith, He would be as the Dew to Israel, to refresh and comfort them.Hos. 14.5. Psal 133.3. Deut. 32.2. Psal. 110.3. Prov. 19.22. Hos. 6.4. Hos. 13.3. The blessing of God upon the Just is resembled to the Dew. The Doctrine of grace is compared to the Dew: the Children of the Church in the time of the Gospel, to the Dew of the morning. The favour of the King is as Dew upon the Grass. The righteousness of the hypocrite like the morning Dew, which soon fadeth. The Hoare-Frost,Hoare-Frost. which the Lord scattereth as ashes, is an argument of his goodness and severity, the swiftness and efficacy of his Word.Psal. 147.16. For he turneth the Dew into Hoare-Frost, and the Frost into water according to his plea∣sure. The Hoary-Frost of Heaven, who hath gendered it?Iob 38.29. The use of it is to contain the remaining heate and to repell it into the inner part of the root, that it may lie hid there as balme for the preservation of the Tree. This is the fruit in the proper time or Autumn; behold the goodness of God. But in time extraordinary or unfit, as in Summer and Spring, it is hurtfull to Vines,
Corne that beginneth to shute forth the ear, and Trees that bud or blossome. This is the rod of God to correct us for sinne. The Lord gives his SnowSnow. like wool; He saith to the Snow, be thou on the earth. This is the work of God alone:Psal. 147.16. Iob 37.6. Iob 8.22. Lam. 4.7. Esa. 1.18. In Armenia Snow faleth somewhat red. Keck. Physic. lib. 6. cap. 9. for man cannot enter into the Treasures of the Snow. The Snow is pure and white, and descendeth in light flakes: it is softer then Haile, but melteth not so soon. It moisteneth the earth slowly and by de∣grees, as it sucketh in the milk of Snow; As a garment of wool warmes the bo∣dy of man, so this woolly garment of the earth doth cherish its inward heat, and preserve the vitall spirit of Seeds that they be not killed with cold. And by its lightness and purity it doth leaven and purify the earth. In Summer the Lord refresheth the earth with raine, and in the Winter he clothes it with a garment of Snow. Thus he preserves all things when he seemeth to consume them. This Work of God setteth forth his glory,Psal. 148.8. and affords great matter of praise. Let us a little consider of the Haile;Haile. Who hath looked into the treasures of the Haile,Iob 38.22, 23. which the Lord hath reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of Battell and War? Surely the Lord is wonderfull in this, as in all his Works. The forming of the Haile, the divers shapes and figures, the impetuous manner of descending, is it not wonderfull and terrible? Haile-stones are the Bullets of the Lord of Hosts,Exo. 9.17, 18, 19 Psal. 78.47, 48 & 105.32, 33. Iosh. 10.11. Hag. 2.17. Apoc. 8.7. & 11.19. & 16.12. Esa. 28.17. Ezek. 13.1, 13. ordained for the execution of his just Judgment, hurting the Fruits, Trees, Beasts and men themselves: whereby such as daube with untem∣pered morter, may learn that their work shall not stand. The WindsWind. are Witnesses, Chariots and Stewards of God. Witnesses, for they shew that there is a God Almighty,Ier. 10.13. & 51.16. Psal. 135.7. Mat. 8.27. Amos 4.13. Ecc. 11.5. Ioh. 3.. who bringeth the Winds out of his Treasures, raiseth and stilleth them at pleasure. Who can bind up the Wind in his den, or cause it to blow upon the earth? none, but the mighty Lord. The Wind is invisible, but strong and mighty, discovering it self by sound and effects; but we know not whence it cometh, nor whither it goeth. They are the Chariots of God: for he is said to ride upon the Clouds, and the Winds are as wings added to them.Psal. 104.3. Psal. 18.11. 1 Reg. 18.45. Gen. 8.1, 2, 3. They are the Stewards of God, because they dispence his be∣nefits and judgments. The Winds with their wafts do move and alter the Aire; gather Cloudes and dissolve them, cause raine and make fair wether, purge the Aire and Water by motion that they putrify not, and so become perillous to man and beast. Further, as they are instruments of much good to man, so are they meanes of many evils, because of sinne. For they bring raine, cause diseases,Iob 1.19. Exo. 10.13. Psal. 48.7. Ion. 1.4. Mat. 8.26. Ier. 22 22. Psal. 55.8. Ier. 18.17. Ezek. 5.12. & 13.13. Prov. 1.27. Esa. 41.16. & 57.13. Psal. 1.4. Iob 21.17, 18. Ezek. 1.4. Amos 4.13. Ioh. 3.8. Eccl. 11.5. Iob 6.26. & 15.2. Hos. 12.2. Iob 7.7. Prov. 11.29. Iam. 1.6. Eph. 4.14. Mat. 7.27. rent Trees, overthrow Houses, break Ships, eate up the green Pastures, blast the Corne, &c. Whence the wrath of God is compared to a Windy storm or Tempest, and the destruction of the wicked to a Whirle-wind. The consideration hereof doth admonish us to praise the Lord for his goodness, and to return unto him by true repentance, if we have gone astray. The work of the Spirit in our regeneration is compared to the way of the Wind: so is the work of God, which he is about to do. Vaine words are called words of Wind: vaine hope is resem∣bled to the Wind. The life of man is a Wind. He that troubleth his house [saith Solomon] shall inherit the Wind. The wavering, halting, unsetled man, that is tossed too and fro with every temptation, occasion or blast of vaine Doctrine, is said to be blown up and down with the Wind: Whereby we are taught to build surely upon the Rock Christ Jesus.
ThunderThunder. and Lightning is the terrible voice of God, which with vehemency of the crack, swiftness of motion, large excussion of fire,Iob 28.26. & 37.1, , , 4. Psa. 11.6. & 18.13. Psal. 97.3, 4. & 144.6. & 104.7. Psal. 29.1, 2, &c. Psal. 29.4. Iob 37.2, 3. and strangness of effects suddainly following, doth terrifie man and beast, yea, make the Mountains to leap, and the Hills to quake for fear. Thunder is most vehement, exceeding the noise of many waters, swift, most potent, and full of Majesty. The Effects of Thunder and Lightning are both profitable, and hurtfull. They are profi∣table, that they purge the aire from poysonous and gross vapours, they prepare the womb of the earth to nourish the Seeds better, they make the earth fruitfull as they are accompanied with showers which shut the Pores of the earth, that the spirits of Fruits do not breath forth, and the Seed wither; or as the Light∣ning with its hot and subtile spirit, doth open the passages of the earth tied to∣gether, and so cause the Seed almost choaked, to bring forth increase. Their hurtfull Effects are many: they drie up tender herbs, offend the sight, infect the body with noxious vapours, corrupt Wine and Beer. Strange things are repor∣ted of the Lightning; as that it hath burnt the Vessel when the Wine hath not runne out; it hath melted a Sword and not hurt the sheath; and silver and gold hath been molten by it, the Purse not touched: It hath burnt the hair upon mans body, not hurting the skin or any other member; and the like of his garments, shooes, girdle, &c. The Mother being safe, Infants do oft perish in the womb by Lightning. Some by Lightning are brought to madness.Psal. 29.1, 2. Exo. 9.23. Exo. 19.16. 1 Sam. 12.18, 19, 20. Esa. 29.6. 1 Sam. 2.10. It hath consumed man inwardly, without any visible or apparent hurt outwardly. These things call upon us to praise and extoll the great and glorious Name of the Lord our God. When it thundereth, then God doth speak and warne, that we ac∣knowledge our impotency and uprighteousness, and ascribe unto him power and Majesty, trusting in his defence, who is able to subdue all our enemies, and fly∣ing unto him by hearty prayer, and true repentance. Let us come down to the Water:Water. It is a cold, fluid and moist body, inclining to a round figure, greater then the earth if we respect naturall extensibility, but lesser then it if we consider profundity, lighter then the earth, without colour, thicker and more solid then the aire, of perpetuall motion, apt to receive divers qualities,Iob 26.10. Psal. 104.6, 9. and for the good of the whole gathered together into certain chanels of the earth. The Water is the great Miracle of the world, if we consider its motion, variety, place, and qualification for the sundry uses whereunto it is ap∣pointed. It is moved continually, but the naturall cause of it unknown;Psal. 104.2. the variety of things that are bred in the Waters are innummerable; The Water hath concavities in the earth, but is not properly sustained of it, as being lighter; It is ordained to be a receptable for the Fish, and matter for their nourishment; and accordingly it is fitted, being more thin and subtile then the earth, else they could not move therein, but not so subtile as the aire, for else it could not be mat∣ter of food, nor fit for their swimming. Who knoweth not the profit of the Wa∣ter? whereby the earth is moistned, which otherwise would be unfit to bring forth fruit: It washeth away the filth of the body, cooleth against the heat of the Sunne; refresheth when we are tortured with thirst; profiteth both in Sum∣mer and Winter, sick and whole, night and day. It is the Seed of Minerals and Metals, Gold, Silver, Brass, Lead, Pearle and precious Stones. For as the Fruits of the earth have their roots and seeds in the earth, but their perfection and ripeness they obtain in the aire: so the Fruits of the Water have their seeds and roots in the Water, but obtain their perfection and ripeness in the earth. Oh, the incomprehensible wisdom and goodness of God!Psal. 104.6, 7, 8, 9. How clearly doth it shine in this world? Who can shut his eyes so close, as not to see, it is his mer∣cy that the Water doth not overflow and drown us; or that it is made serviceable for our use? The trunck or body of this Water gathered together into one place, is called Sea; and the Fountains or Rivers dispersed through the earth, are as boughes or branches of it. The Sea is great and spacious,Psal. 104.25. swelling in some
parts above the earth, but keeping it self within limits or bounds prescribed by the providence of God; not rising with the Waters that flow into it from the Rivers,Eccl. 1.7. not decreasing notwithstanding the abundance of Waters it sendeth forth to refresh the earth, Herbs, Plants, and for the use of man and beast. The saltness of the Sea is both wonderfull ad profitable for the more fit habitation of Fishes,Psal. 104.26. who are delighted with saltness, and that it might the better carry the heavy burdens of Ships, and be more commodious for sailing. The course of the Sunne is admirable, so is the ebbing and flowing of the Sea. O Lord, thou hast not left thy self without witness,Job 38.8, 9, 10 in that thou hast bounded in the proud waves of the Sea by the Sands upon the shore, saying, hither shalt thou go, but no fur∣ther.Jer. 5.22. Esa. 50.2. Who would not fear thee, O Lord of Hosts, and tremble at thy presence, who hast placed the Sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetuall decree that it can∣not pass it. If the raging Sea be obedient to thy Word, how stubborn shall man shew himself if he be disobedient? The Fountains and Rivers, that are as branches of the Sea, are fresh, sweet and more pure: and may fitly be called the milk of things vegetable. And it is admirable to think, that Waters should con∣tinually issue from the Sea by cavites and veines into all parts of the world, and in passage should lose their saltness. How exellent are thy works, O Lord? How great is thy goodness towards the Sonnes of men? Thou art the Father of the Family,Psal. 104.10, 11, 12. Esa. 28.25. that providest liberally for every living thing. Thou sendest the Springs into the vallies, which runne among the hills. They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild Asses quench their thirst. By them the Fowles of the Heaven have their habitation, which sing among the branches. Who can comprehend the benefits and comforts, that the Streams and Fountains do afford to man and beast?Psal. 42.1. Apoc. 22.1. Ezek. 47.12. Esa. 12.1, 2, 3. Jer. 2.13. Who knoweth the cause of their perpetuall flowing? O my God, I will praise thy goodness as long as I live. What are the Rivers of Water to the thirsty Plants or chased Hart, that is thy favour, thy grace, and the word of comfort to the thirsty soul: Oh, satisfie me with thy favour, refresh me with the Waters that flow from thy Sanctuary. IceIce. is water in substance, differing from it onely in manner, viz. in congela∣tion:Job 38.29, 30. but God must be acknowledged the Author of it. Out of whose womb came the Ice. The Ice as a stone or bright Christal, doth sometimes cover the face of the deep, and grow to that hardness and strength, that it is able to bear loden Waines.Psal 147.17. Is not this a great work of God to be had in remembance? He casteth forth his Ice like morsels. The EarthEarth. is the lowest Element, cold, drie, thick, heavy, placed in the Cen∣ter of the World, unmoveable, the receptable of heavenly influence, round, that on every side it might receive the influence of the Heavens, making one Globe with the water,2 Pet. 3.5. Psal. 136.6. standing in the water full of hidden quickning seed, tem∣pering the moistness of the aire and water in bodies with its driness and solidity; the glory of God, his eternall power, wisdom, and goodness do shine clearly in the qualities,Psal. 115.16. situation and use of this body great and massy. It is firme and solid, that might be commodious for the habitation of men and beasts: for otherwise the bruit creatures could not walk, feed and lie, nor man with safety plant, travell and build upon it. It is heavy and great, yet hangeth in the middest of the world, as the Center, being underproped with no pillers, or naturall foundations. It is the powerfull Word of God that hath fastened the Pillers of the Earth,Job 38.4, 5, 6. Psal. 24.1, 2. Job 26.7. Psal. 93.1. Psal. 104.5. Esa. 42.5. Psal. 119.90. Esa. 48.13. and laid the corner Stone thereof. It is round, yet immoveable; in figure apt to move, but cannot be moved of the water. This is the work of God, and it is marvellous in our eyes. It is seated lowest, that it might receive the influence of the Heavens, and other creatures might lend their help for the preservation and bringing forth of all things requisite for the use of all living crea∣tures. Oh, the admirable frame of the Earth; as in the body of man there be Veines and Arteries, humours and marrow: so in the Earth, there be Veines
and Concavities by which waters are conveyed from the Sea to all parts of the Land; there be humours and marrow, which is the vitall spirit and seed of things that grow upon it, or be fostered in the bowels thereof. The outward face of it may seem dark, had, dead, drie and cold, but it is a most fertile Mother, best, most patient, unwearied, most constant, most faithfull, most liberall, alwaies bearing in her womb, and in her armes. What shall we say of the benefit of the Earth? It is the seat of men, it receives, nourisheth and sustaineth them when they are born and brought forth; It takes them into her lap when they die and return unto the dust. It is the storehouse of plenty, the Garden of delights, the shop of Medicines; It is prodigall of all good things, fruitfull, even to pleasure and de∣light. It bringeth forth and nourisheth infinite variety of yearly fruits, of divers kinds, colours, forms, tast, qualities and operations;Psal. 104.24. and these not for neces∣sity onely, but to please and delight the senses. The Earth, O Lord, is full of thy goodness. This first Leafe sheweth, what plenty of good matter might be gathered out of this large Volume of the Creatures: but it is infinite to prose∣cute each particular in this order: I will therefore briefly note by some particu∣lars mentioned in Scripture, how use may be made of every thing in Heaven and Earth, and of whatsoever doth befall us. Thou canst not abide t look upon the Sunne:Iob 37.10.22. how should we comprehend the reverend Majesty of God? Good men are resembled to TreesTrees. planted by the Rivers of water, whose leafe never fadeth, and that bring forth seasonable fruit in their kind:Psal. 1.3. Jer. 17.8. Psal. 92.8, 12. Mic. 7.4. Isa. 10.27. Jude v. 12. The ungod∣ly are likened to bryars and brambles, to the barren Fig-tree, to Trees twice dead and plucked up by the root, whose end is to be burned. The Grass,Grass. Herbs and Flowers which quickly wither, or are cut down before the evening, represent the shortness and vanity of mans life, and all outward glory.Esa. 40.6. 1 Pet. 1.24. The good GroundGood Ground. that receiveth the seed, and bringeth forth ripe fruit, is an Image of the good Hearer, that hideth the Word in an honest and good heart, and yeeldeth perfect fruit with patience.Luk. 8.15. Mat. 13.19. Mat. 13.20, 21 The high-way side shadoweth forth the Hearer that understandeth not the Word, giveth it no entertainment; the Corne upon the house top that withereth before Harvest, resembleth the tem∣porary Believer, that rejoyceth in the truth for a time, but starteth aside in per∣secution, or is choaked afterwards with the carnall pleasures or profits of this world. Our Saviour compareth the Doctrine of the Gospel to LeavenLeaven. that leaveneth the whole lump, and seasoneth it to be fit for use:Mar. 4.31, 32. and the Word of his King∣dom to the graine of mustard seed, that being cast into the earth doth grow and increase, till it become a great Tree. The wicked are likened to the Chaffe,Chaffe. that is scattered too and fro upon the face of the earth, driven with the wind, and at length cast into the fire:Psal. 1.4. Psal. 35.5, 6. Amos 9.9. the godly to the graine full of sap, that cannot be blown away, and is carefully laid up for use. The Church is likened to a Barn-Floor,Barn-floor. wherein there is both Chaffe and Wheat, light and good Corne mingled together, till it be sifted with the sive, or fanned with the fanne:Mat. 3.12. The Doctrine of the Gospel Discipline carefully exerci∣sed, and afflictions sent of God, are compared to the sive or fanne, whereby the good and bad are seperated one from another. The cursed GroundCursed Ground. that drinketh in the former and latter raine, but bringeth forth nothing but bryars and brambles, is a representation of their condition that live under the meanes of grace,Heb. 6.8. but walk after the flesh and lusts of their own hearts. The knowledge that the OxOx. taketh to his Owner, and the Asse to his Masters Crib,Isa. 1.3. is an admonition to us to look up to the Lord from whom every
good and perfect gift cometh, and in thankfull obedience to acknowledge his love. The StorkStork. in the Heavens knoweth her appointed time, and the Turtle, and the Crane,Jer. 8.7. and the Swallow observe the times of their coming; whereby we are instructed to observe the Judgment of the Lord, and the day of our visitation. As the EagleEagle. stirreth up her nest; fluttereth over her young, spreadeth a∣broad her wings,Deut. 32.11, 12. Exo. 19.4. taketh them, beareth them on her wings: So the Lord preser∣veth his people, and leadeth them in safety notwithstanding all that rise up against them. By the meekness of the poor Sheep,Sheep. not bleating when his fleece is taken away,Joh 0.27. Isa 53.7. or his throat cut, we are taught to be patient in all wrongs, afflictions, and disgraces of this world. As the HenHn. gathereth her Chickens under her wings, so doth the Lord defend and shadow them that put their trust in him.M 23 37. The provident AntAn . gathering her meat in Summer, doth call upon us to re∣deem the time,Prv. 6 6, 7, 8. & 30 25. and observe the opportunity offered for the gaining of things tem∣porall and spirituall. The Hill-RatsHll-Rat make their houses in the Rocks, and so deliver themselves from dangers that beset them:Prov. 30.26. thereby we are taught, to work our selves by a lively faith into the impregnable Rock Christ Jesus, and to fly unto him as our strong Tower of defence. The SpiderSpider. taketh hold with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces: whereby we are taught to be industrious and diligent,Prov. 30.28. not slothful in our Vocations; to be expert Artificers and exact workmen, not unskilfull slubberers in our Trades. And from the three last mentioned examples we are instructed, that though we be weak in our selves, we should not fear to set upon hard and difficult things, if we be called thereunto; for industry and skill can effect great things, and over∣come manyfold impediments. The Spider plies her web in Kings Palaces, where are many comers and goers; and is not ashamed in respect of the pomp and Ma∣jesty of the presence, nor drawn aside to look after them that pass too and fro, nor dismaied though her work come to nought and be swept away: by which ex∣ample we may receive instruction, not to be terrified from the works of our cal∣ling by any presence. The LocustsLocust. have no King, yet go they forth all by Bands: whereby we are admonished,Prov. 30.27. that needfull and good services are to be performed, though we be not urged thereunto by compulsion, nor forced by the command of authority; and that association and concord is very usefull, and of great validity, in every state publique and private. As the PatridgePatridge. sitteth on egges, and hatcheth them not: so he that getteth riches and not by right,Ier. 17.11. shall leave them in the middest of his daies, and at his end shall be a fool. The HorsleachHorsleach. that crieth, give, give, representeth the nature of the covetous that is never satisfied.Prov. 30.15. The SerpentSerpent. is wise to save his head; and the Dove innocent and harmeless without gall:Mat. 0.16. whereby we are admonished to be discreet without fraude, and innocent without folly. Ma. 3.12. 1 Thes 5.19. Ioh 4.4. Psa. 66.10. 1 et. 1.7. Esa 48.10. Zech. 3 9. Esa. 27.4.The Spirit of God is resembled to FireFire. that enlighteneth darkness, purgeth dross, melteth Iron, and warmeth the cold stone: It is also compared to living waters, that refresh, quicken, make fruitfull, and spring continually. Afflicti∣ons to the godly, are as Fire to Gold, which it purifieth and refineth: but the wrath of God to the wicked, is as Fire to thornes, stubble, dross, drie wood, which are easily consumed. The continuall disquietness of the Sea,Sea. setteth forth the restless state of theIsa. 57.20, 21.
wicked, that boile inwardly with lusts, and are tortured with an evill conscience. Many profound and deep mysteries of Divinity are notably pourtraited to our sight by earthly similitudes. The helpless condition of a poor InfantInfant. new born, whose navell is not cut, that is not washed with water, nor salted with salt,Ezek. 16.6. may put us in mind of our misery by nature, who are defiled with sinne, and dead in trespasses. Our spirituall incorporation, conjunction and growing up in Christ, is sha∣dowed by the union of the VinesVine. and branches, of the head and members,Joh. .. Eph. 1.21. & 4.16. & 5., 32. of the foundation and building, and of man and wife in one matrimoniall body. The branch draweth sap from the Vine; so do we suck grace from Christ: the branch abiding in the Vine beareth good fruits; so shall we if we abide in Christ. The thirsty ground drinketh in the raine; the new born BabeBabe. desires the sin∣cere milk of the Word, that he may grow thereby: so must we desire, drink in,1 Pet. 2.2. digest, and keep the sincere milk of the Word, that we may encrease and thrive in spirituall things. The seedSeed. that is not quickened except it die,1 Cor. 15.36. is a similidude of the resurrection of our bodies, that shall be raised again, though they be turned into the dust. The Lord is compared to a Nurse,Nurse. a Father, a Shepherd, a Vine dresser,Esa. 49 15. Hos. 11.3. Esa. 48.4. or Husbandman. The Nurse cannot forget her sucking Babe, taketh it by the armes, teacheth it to go: so dealeth the Lord with them that be his people, whom he hath chosen to be his treasure. Fathers correct their Children in love, for their amendment; they draw them with the cords of love and kindness;Psal. 113.13. Luk. 15.15, 16, &c. Mat. 6. they provide things necessary for them according to ability; they rejoyce in their return, if they have gone astray: in all these things the Lord sheweth him∣self to be a most kind Father to all that fear before him. ShepherdsShepherd. lead their Flocks to green Pastures, put the tender Lambs into their bosome, drive the great with young softly, watch them by night,Psal. 23.2. Io. 10.1. Esa. 40.11. Psal. 121.4, 5. Luk. 15.4. Io. 5.2, 3. that they be not devoured with wild Beasts, and seek the strayed Sheep till they have found him: in all these things the Lord sheweth himself to be the good Shep∣herd, that careth for his Flock. The Husbandman will hedg and plant his Vineyard, manure and prune his Vines that they might bring forth sweet Grapes in greater plenty: this setteth forth the manner how the Lord dealeth with his pleasant Plants. ChildrenChildren. delight in their Parents, runne to them for what they need, trust in their providence, be content to live at their finding,Psal. 13.1, 2. Ps. 0.12, 13. desire to behold their smiling countenance, if at any time they frown upon them; whereby we are ad∣monished to rejoyce in God, to trust in his mercy, to desire his favour, and free∣ly to resigne our selves to live at his finding. Lukewarme waterLukewarme water. is noysome to the stomack, and meat half rosted unsavory to the tast: no better the service of a lukewarme Christian before God.Rev. .16. Holiness is resembled to a Garment;Garments, faith to a Shield, hope to an Helmet, sincerity to a Girdle, righteousness to a Breast-plate,Col. 3.12. Rom. 13.13. Eph. 4.23, 24. Eph. 6.14, 15, 16. the Word of truth to a Sword, the preparation of the Gospel of peace to Shoos: when we put on our apparell, and gird them to our loynes, that they may sit close and be for use, we are put in mind of that spirituall Raiment which must be put on and worn continually. The loathsome course of them that turn to sin again after profession of a∣mendment, is likened to the returning of the Sow that was washed,Swine. 2 et. 2.22. Prov. 26.11. to wallow in the mire, and of the Dog to his vomit. As the ClayClay. is in the hand of the Potter, so are we in the hand of God, who hath power to frame us to honour or dishonour, according to his own pleasure.Isa. 45.. Ier. 19.11. Isa. 30.14. Rom. 9.20. The Potsheard cannot say to the Potter, why hast thou made me thus; nor is it for man to dispute with his Maker. Children grow as in age, strength, and sta∣ture, so in wisdom and discretion, forgoing their childish conditions: so should
we grow from grace to grace,1 Pet. 3.18. renouncing those vanities that we formerly de∣lighted in. Corporall HungerHunger. and thirst after the supply of things neccessary for the main∣tenance of this life,Matth. 5.6. Isa 55.1. Jo.  37. 1 Cor. 14.1. doth minde us of our duty to thirst spiritually after the true bread and water of life, after sound righteousness and true holiness. Our readiness to give good GiftsGifts. to our Children when they crave them, should bring to remembrance the readiness of our heavenly Father, to give his Spirit to them that aske it.Luk. 11.13. Matth. 7.11. Washing.Sinne is the stain and filthiness of the soul, which must be washed away with the bloud and Spirit of Christ:Isa. 1.16. Iam 4 8. Ier. 4.14. 2 Cor. 7.1. When we wash our hands, rub our garments, clense our vessels, we should remember it is our duty to make clean the inside of the cup or platter, to purge and purifie the heart and conscience. The creatures are subject to vanitySubjection to vanity. for the sinne of man, and thereby we should be put in minde of our transgression: If the earth give not her encrease, the fruits be smitten,Rom. 8.20. our horse stumble or fall under us, we must consider how we have dealt undutifully with God, and turned aside from his Comman∣dements Sinne is a spirituall sleepSleep. or slumber: as we rouse up our selves from bodily drousiness when we have any speciall occasions,Matth. 25.5. Eph. 5.14. so should we at all times watch against sinne and the occasions of it. StrangersStragers. are carefull to walk inoffensively, love not to be long absent from home,2 Pet. 2.1. and patiently bear many things not so agreeable to their mindes: whereby Christians should be admonished, that it is their duty to haste towards Heaven, live unblameably, and possess their souls in patience. The courage of the Lyon,Lyon. which turneth not away from any; and the valour of the Horse,Prov. 30.30. Iob 39.20, 21, 22, 23. that rusheth valiantly into the battell, as it setteth forth the good∣ness and power of God, who hath given such gifts unto his creatures; so doth it teach us to be couragious for the truth, and to go forward with undaunted resolution in the wayes of godliness. Wisdom in ordering earth∣ly business. Isa. 63.13, 14. Esa. 28.26, 27, 28, 29.Wise men leade their Horses or Cattell gently down steep hills or descents, lest they should stumble or catch harm: so doth the Lord lead his children in their dangers. The Husbandman observes his times and seasons to plow and sow, orders all his grain according to the nature of it: so hath the Lord his times for mercy and judgment, and he dealeth will all men according to their state and condition, as may be most for the glory of his name, and the comfort of his servants.Prov. 18.10. In times of warre or great peril, men plant themselves in the stron∣gest Castles or places of defence; so should we run unto the Lord our rock and high Tower of defence. The diseased seek to the Physician, the wounded to the Surgeon;Esa 53.5. Mat. 8.16, 17. so must the distressed conscience to Christ Jesus the spirituall Physician of the soul. Clyents, that cannot speak for themselves, nor lay forth their own Cause, are glad to entertain Advocates, to make known their sutes and procure them favour: what a priviledg is this, that all the elect have Christ Jesus to be their Advocate and Intercessour?1 Ioh. 2 2. The Merchant is diligent to take his opportu∣nities to buy and sell;Eph. 5.15. Gal. 6.9, 10. so is the Husbandman to plow and reap: which mind∣eth us of our duty to repent and do good whilst the season lasteth. Men dig for silver and gold; in receiving summes of money, they are wary not to take slips for current Coyn:Prov. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Thes. .22. 1 Ioh. 4.1. so must Christians cry for wisdome, search for know∣ledg, and try the spirits that they be not deluded with errour. He that disburseth money upon Lands, will look to it that he be not deceived in the tenure: In our spirituall purchase,Lam. 3 40. we must be circumspect not to embrace a shadow for the sub∣stance. The Providence of GodProvidence of God. in causing it to rain upon the desart where no man dwelleth, in feeding the young Ravens, in satisfying the Lyons whelps, and clothing the Lillies of the field,sal. 147.9. Iob 38.29.40, 41. Mat. 6.20.27 28. 2 Sam. 17.14 Esa. 19.11, 13. Job 12.17. 19.23. doth teach us to trust in the Lord for food and
raiment, casting off excessive and distrustfull care. The manner of Gods admi∣nistration also doth minister infinite occasion and variety of good meditations; if we do observe how he doth forbear the wicked, correct his children; destroy the ungodly, deliver them that trust in his mercy; confound the devices of the crafty, set at liberty the simple and him that hath none to help him. But when should I make an end, if I stand to rehearse particulars; these may suffice to shew how we may raise matter of good meditation from the works of God, yea from every thing we go about, or that doth befall us. I will not stand to rip up that treasury of matter that is to be found in the word of life, the holy Scriptures: without question from the Works and Word of God, a man, if he will be in∣dustrious, may abundantly furnish himself. Fourthly, Diligent conscionable reading the holy Scriptures and other holy books, is a speciall means to prevent rovings: for it furnisheth the heart with good matter, helpeth the memory, quickneth the affection, and kindleth the desire of good. Fifthly, Pray God earnestly to keep and direct our thoughts. We are not able to turn our eyes from vanity, nor to keep the door of our lips, much less to order our cogitations, without his speciall grace. Sixthly, We must hold our thoughts to things above, though it be painfull at the first. The greater strangers we be to good thoughts, the more tedious it is to keep our hearts unto them: but custome makes that easie and delightsome, which at first was harsh and difficult. CHAP. VI. Of the third sort of evil Thoughts, viz. such as proceed from original corruption, which are of divers kindes, respecting God, his worship, Word and Works, our neighbour, or our selves. Rules for the triall of our selves touching our Thoughts. How these evil Thoughts are to be reformed. Question. VVHat are the third sort of evil Thoughts that must be shunned? A. They are evil in themselves, which proceed from original cor∣ruption, that poysoned fountain of impiety and unrighteousness. Q. What Thoughts proceed from Corruption? A. They are of divers kindes, respecting God, our neighbours, or our selves. Natural imaginations concerning God, respect his Glory and Majesty, his Worship, his Word or Works.Psal. 4.1. Exod. 5.2. Gal. 4.8. Eph. 2.12. Rom. 1.22, 23. Psal. 106.28. Psal. 96.. Hab. 2.18, 19. Job 22.13. Psal. 10.11. Esa. 29.15. Psal. 94.7. Deut. 9.19. Psal. 50.21. Amos 6.3. & 9.10. Psa. 78.19, 20. Esa. 37.10. Psal. 30.6. Eze. 12.27. Esa. 28.5. Obad. v. 3. Esa. 10.11. Esa. 14 13. Rev. 18.7. Esa 47.7. Psal. 12.4. Psal. 3.22. Numb. 20.12. Matth. 14.30. Psal. 116.11. Luk. 1.20. Judg. 6.13. Gen. 1.12. 2 King. 7.2 2 Pet. 3.3. The corrupt Thoughts of men concerning God himself, are 1. Atheisticall; as the fool saith in his heart, There is no God; Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that I should obey him? 2. Idolatrous; when men give that to Idols, things that are no Gods, which is proper to the Lord alone. 3. Hereticall; when men deny the distinction of Persons, question the Divinity of the Sonne or holy Spirit, or conceive of God according to their own fansies, not as he hath revealed himself. 4. Impious and prophane; as that he doth not see, behold or take notice of the doings of men; that he will not punish or call to reckoning or account for our misdeeds; that he is not omnipotent to save or destroy; nor good and gracious to help or succour in due season. And from hence arise Thoughts of security, that evil shall not come nigh unto us: of pride, that we can never be moved, that no man can withstand our power; that we shall fit as Queens, and never see any sorrow or calamity; that we shall not be subject to any commands: of distrust; that God doth not regard, will not make good
what he hath promised:Exod. 5.21. & 14.10, 11. & 6.2, 3. Psal. 106.7, 8. Matt. 8.26. Ih. 3.9 Hab. 1.16. Esa. 22.10, 11. & 30.2. Iob 1.15. Psal 73.13. Mal 3.14. Ier. 44 19, 20. Ma 1.3. Amos 8 5, 6. Ma. 1.8. Esa. 58.3. Esa 29.13. Mark 7. . Iudg. 17.13. Ioh. 18.38. 1 Cor. 1.21. & 2.14. Iob 21.14. Esa. 5.19. Ier 6.16. & 43.2. Luk. 19.14. Ezek. 8.12. Zeph. 1.12. Ier. 12.1. Ezek 18.2. Rom 9.9, 20. 2 Chro. 28.23. Rom. 6.1. Rom. 3.7. of derision and scorn; that what he promiseth or threatneth shall never come to pass: of murmuring and impatience, fainting and unquietness: of contempt and disregard; as if the help, assistance and favour of God were not to be esteemed: of carnall confidence; as if we were able to pro∣vide for or help our selves, by wit, wealth, friends, or wicked devices. Touching the Worship of God, the corrupt thoughts of men are, that it is a vain thing to serve the Lord, or pray unto him; that the true worshipping of God, is the cause of famine, war, pestilence, unseasonable weather, sickness and death; that it is tedious and burdensome, a great loss and hinderance; that the vile and base is good enough to be offered unto the Lord; that he should be pleased with lip-service and good intents; that vain inventions and Traditions of the Elders are to be observed, above whatsoever the Lord commandeth; that we shall prosper when we commit Idolatry. Concerning the Word of God, the corrupt imaginations of man are, that Re∣ligion is but a matter of policy to keep men in awe, and that it is indifferent of what Religion we be, whether of any or none, true or false; that it is most vain and foolish to suffer any thing for the truth of God, or to be scrupulous of lesser sinnes that are not forbidden by the Laws of men; that the wisdome of God is foolishness: and from this followeth, that we desire not the knowledg of the Al∣mighty, that we set light by and deride his threatnings, and resolve that we will not deny our pleasures to yeeld obedience to his Commandements. As for the Works of God, the Thoughts of men are, that the Lord will neither do good nor evil; that he hath forsaken the earth; that his works are unequall, in that the wicked prosper, and the godly are afflicted every morning; that his Decrees are unjust; that they please God best that finde good success in the things of this life. And these blinde, crooked imaginations, bring forth many other perverse conclusions; as, that we may sinne freely, because God is mer∣cifull; that we may do evil to save our selves from danger, to please our friends, or that good may come thereof; that of two evils of sinne, the least is to be chosen. Q. Some natural men never found any such Thoughts in their hearts, how then may it appear, that these be their Thoughts? Prov. 14.12. 2 King. 8.13.A. The heart is fraudulent and deceitfull: Hazael knew not the cruelty, nor the Disciples that fearfullness and timidity that was in them But the better to try our selves touching our Thoughts, we must observe these Rules. First, These Thoughts are not alwayes in the heart, but as occasion is offered: The rich man thinks that he would not steal; the poor man that he would deal liberally: but the present state and occasion manifesteth what we are. In peace our Thoughts are presumptuous,Psal. 30.6. Psa. 77.10.11. Iob 16 13. distrustfull in danger, repining in affliction, wearisome in the service of God when we would follow any other delight, impatient when we are reproved, admonished, urged to any duties that cross our wills, loose in secret, &c. Secondly, Our prophane ungodly Thoughts may be discerned, by certain signes and tokens which appear in our life and conversation;Iob 21.14. as, Contempt of true knowledg: for did men fear the Lord, they would receive the Law at his mouth, and enquire how they might serve and please him in uprightness and in∣tegrity.Psal. 14.4. & 91.14, 15. Neglect of holy prayer; for they that know the power and goodness of the Lord, will certainly have recourse unto him. Senselesness in hearing the Word of God:Ier. 36.24. Psal. 53.4. sa 14.5. Matth. 24.37, 38, 39. Jer. 5.3. Amos 6.5. Esa. 22.13, 14. for if the Lyon roar the beasts tremble; the Tenant is dismayed if the Landlord threaten: and if men believe the soveraignty of the Lord, will they not be moved when he speaketh? Careless seeking the face of God and his favour in pri∣vate, by faith, repentance, sincere worship, and true-hearted obedience: Scorning the poor that putteth his trust in the Lord. Voluptuousness; when men eat and drink, and sport and play, never minding the judgments of God, nor the miseries of their brethren. Partiall outward reformation; no further then custom driveth
or fear compelleth: Prophaneness; when our wayes are corrupt,Psal. 14.1. Psal. 53.. and our works abhominable in the sight of God. These things be undoubted evidences of evil Thoughts, that possess the mindes of all naturall men. Q. What are the evil thoughts of naturall men concerning their neighbours? A. These also are divers. First, Thoughts of dishonour and abasement; as,Luk. 18.11. Isa. 65.5. Matth. 20.20. Prov 30.17. 1 Cor. .2. Gen. 58.24, 26. that others are base in respect of our selves; that we are too good to be counsel∣led, guided, advised by our parents; that the offences of other men are great and hainous, ours light and small. Secondly, Of Injustice; That we envy, re∣pine, disdain that others be preferred before us; that we will not lend or give to our brother in distress, because we shall not gain by it; nor help him, because he is our enemy: that we will do this or that wrong unto him,G n. 4.6. Deu. 15.9. Job 31.2. Exod. 23.5. Psal. 8 .4. & 4.8. Ma th 24.9. 1 e. 4.4. Prov. .29. Prov. 24.29. Prov. 20.22. 1 King. 22 8. Luk. 3.19. Luk. 11.53, 54. Gen. 20.15, 16. Psal. 0.18. 2 Sam. 13.2. Hos. 7.1. Amos 8.5, 6. Mich. 2.2. Amos 4 1. Hab. 2.9. 1 Sam. 1.13, 14. & 17.28. Matth. 9.3. Act. 2.13. Psal. 70.2. Obad. v. 12. because he feareth God, or dwelleth securely by us; that we will do to others as they have done to us; that we will be avenged of them that urge or provoke us; that if we be re∣buked, it is in spite and malice, and not to be endured. To this head may be referred, Thoughts of filthiness and uncleanness; of fraud, consenage, circum∣vention, and oppression; of slander, suspicion and misconstruction of mens say∣ings and doings; of covetousness, fretting, and rejoycing in the hurt of our bre∣thren. Q. What are the Thoughts of naturall men in respect of themselves? A. Naturally we are marvellously conceited of our selves, greatly in love with our own shadow, and accordingly do our imaginations runne. First,Zep. 2.15. Isa. 14.13. Rev. 18.7. Joh. 4.8. We lift up our selves as the only excellent in wit, wealth, strength, beauty, courage, sufficiencie, friendliness, &c. And hence proceeds discontentment, boasting, conten∣tion, desire of vaine glory, obstinacy, affectation of novelties, presumptuous adven∣turing upon callings and actions too high for us, inconsiderate rashness, froward∣ness, and what not? Secondly,Mat. 9.12, 1. Luk. 15.2. Jer. 2.35. Rev. 3.17. Hos. 12.8. Deut. 9.4. Psal. 10.6. Esa. 28.15. We fancy that we are righteous and holy by nature, pure, innocent and just in conversation, and that whatsoever God giveth it is for our own righteousness and good deeds. Thirdly, We flatter our selves that God is pleased with us, because we prosper; that we shall never be called to reckoning, because we have so long escaped; that if we be afflicted we have our punishment here; that it is repentance sufficient, to say, God forgive me, I am sorry for it; that it is well with us, so long as we have a good meaning, though our deeds be evil. Fourthly, In distress we are ready to faint,Psal. 13.1. and to think that our wound is uncurable, our case forlorn, worse then any bodies. Thus we are apt to run from one extream to another, but never to abide in the right way. Q. Are all Thoughts that proceed from corruption evil and sinfull, even those whereunto no consent of will is given? A. That all such imaginations are evil, appeares; First, Because the root from whence the least Thought doth spring is naught, our own inborn corrup∣tion, whereby the heart is set open to conceive such wicked Thoughts, yea, apt to give some room unto them, without detestation, at the first rising. Secondly, Lust conceiving bringeth forth sinne: But lust cannot conceive and be with child of sinne, and be any other thing then sinne. Are fishes bred of Serpents? Or is it possible, that the Fruit and the Tree should be not of one nature? Third∣ly, The Law condemneth all such motions: for Philosophers and other Heathen men, that never heard of the Law of God, have condemned settled purposes to do evil. Therefore this must needs be more close and secret, which Paul him∣self, so great a Doctor of the Law, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, was al∣together ignorant of, till he was taught a better lesson in the School of Christ: I know not sinne, but by the Law: for I had not known lust,Rom. 7.7. except the
Law had said, Thou shalt not lust? Q. How are these Evil Thoughts to be reformed? 2 Cor. 10.5. Phil. 4 8. Prov. 12 5. Eph. 4.23, 24.A. The reformation of our Thoughts is to be laboured, that every high ima∣gination be brought into the obedience of faith. For the soul is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, in which he dwelleth by his speciall presence. But the Temple of God is holy, and should be kept undefiled. We love outward neatness in feature, favour, apparell, rooms and places of habitation. And shall we suffer the soul, which is the habitation of God, to be polluted? Pureness of heart hath the Promise both of this life,Prov. 22.11. and that which is to come. For the preventing of evil Thoughts, the first care must be to get, preserve and encrease a sound and lively Faith,Act. 15 9. which is a wonderfull help to redress the evils of our minds. For it clenseth the heart, and infuseth new principles of motion; it discovereth the misery of our naturall estate, abaseth man in his own conceit, representeth the majesty, power, wisdom, goodness and mercy of the Lord; it discovereth the excellency of spirituall things, warmeth the cold and frozen heart, raiseth it in admiration of Gods favour, and refresheth it with sweet delight of heavenly things: by all which acts it calleth the heart from vanity to a serious considera∣tion of that which is good, and loosing the hold it had of sinne, it fasteneth it to the Commandement of God.1 Cor. 14.1. Isa. 26.8. Psal. 42.6. Psal. 63.1, 6. Mat. 6.20. Secondly, We must stirre up our selves to covet spirituall things: for that which is eagerly desired, is seriously thought upon. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. Thirdly, We must make God our love: for if he be our trea∣sure, our hearts will be set upon him. Love maketh us one with the thing belo∣ved,Psal. 119.14, 15. Psal. 119.48. rejoyceth in its presence, and being absent, is still with it in cogitation and desire. My hands also will I lift up unto thy Commandements, which I have loved: and I will meditate in thy Statutes. Fourthly, To be deeply affected with the Word of God, and care of our own salvation, is a speciall meanes to procure the entertainment of good meditations, and detestation of evil Thoughts: for matters of great joy or grief carry the mind after them, and cause indignation against whatsoever doth cross the enjoying of the chief good desired.Psal. 16.7. Psal. 77.6, 11. Psal. 1, 9.16, 17. How precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O God? when I awake I am still with thee. Fifthly, If we exercise our selves in the Word of God with care, diligence, and delight; if we treasure it up safe in the heart, and bind it about our necks,Psal. 119 17. Prov. 6.21, 22. as men do their Chaines and Jewels: then it will lead us when we go, and talk with us when we awake. Sixthly, Watchfulness is necessary for the preventing or keeping under of evil motions. For the heart is deceitfull, and will beguile if it be not observed. Again, of all things it is most difficult to keep and preserve the mind pure, there be so many occasions to pervert and draw it aside: that there can be no hope to prosper, if the watch be neglected. It stands in recalling the thought as soon as it beginneth to wander;Prov. 4 23. in checking evil at the first beginning; and in cherishing, blowing up and stirring the good motions of the Spirit,1 Thes. 5.19. 2 Tim. 1.6. Act. 8.22. Psal. 51.10, 11 Psal. 25.1. & 8.4. good counsell and admonition. Seventhly, We must pray continually, and lift up the soul to God, for pardon of sinne, and purity of heart, not forbearing, because we finde our selves dull, dead, hard-hearted, but rather rousing up our selves to wrastle so much the more: for these our necessities minister matter of prayer. Such as keep Clocks or Watches do every day wind up the weights or springs. Eighthly, It is good to take occasion from our present barrenness and rovings to meditate of our misery, vanity, loos∣ness, earthly-mindedness, folly, prophaneness, want of love to God, &c. that we might be humbled thereby,Psal. 119.25.28. and seriously turned unto the Lord. Ninthly, The better to keep out evil imaginations, it is good to be exercised in the meditation of Gods power, mercy, long suffering, exceeding love in giving Christ to die for us; of the particular favours which he vouchsafeth unto us, of the tempta∣tions that we are subject unto in our place and calling; of the houre of death,
and day of judgment, &c. If the heart fasten upon these things, and take them into consideration, it will earnestly turn from such motions as spring from corruption. Tenthly, Though we have laboured long and prevailed but little, yet we must not faint, but strive the faster, as earthly men do in things of this world, if it fly from them. For it profiteth not to wax weary; it is im∣possible we should not overcome, if we hold out. Whatever we find, we can never lose or miscary, if we pray unfeignedly. CHAP. VII. Of a fourth sort of evil Thoughts, viz Melancholike Thoughts. What they are, the difference betwixt trouble of Conscience, and Me∣lancholy. Of a fift kind of evil-Thoughts, viz. Satanical Thoughts. Why the Lord suffers his Children to be troubled therewith. Of the difference betwixt the godly and the wicked in respect of their evil Cogitations. Question. VVHat are the fourth sort of evil Thoughts that must be shunned? A. They are such as be occasioned through the constitution or com∣plexion of body, or condition of life, amongst which Melancholike Thoughts are principal: which are violent and strong imaginations of mind, arising from such parts as are especially possessed with that strong and pestilent humour, causing strange and vehement passions, of fear, grief, jealousie, rage, despair. And these Thoughts are divers according to the condition, state, and complexion of the subject, and occasion of the imaginations. For poor and rich,Rainold Apoc. censur. tom. 1. Pralect. 92, 93, 94. naturall and renewed, sound and wounded Christians may be afflicted, and that with di∣vers kinds of Melancholy, and upon different occasions; which causeth great di∣versity in Thoughts, and affections following them. Q. Many men suppose all sorrow for sin and trouble of mind to be Melancholy: How then are they to be distinguished? A. The better to judg aright of Melancholy, we must observe these Rules. 1. All evil Thoughts proceed naturally from the corrupt fountain of our hearts, and are not to be imputed to Melancholy. This may further them and their dwelling on our hearts, but the ground of them is our cursed nature, led captive by Satan at his will 2. Thoughts of Melancholy are suddain, violent, unseasonable, vaine and idle, without sound ground, yea, contrary to common reason and Religion, and yet impatient of cure, exorbitant, very difficult to be remedied. But Thoughts concerning sanctification arise from the true ground, are not violent, but deliberate, and work kindly for the good and reformation of the heart, if they be entertained truly, and nourished by the Spirit. 3. Me∣lancholy is not trouble of conscience, nor of it self, doth it make the more subject to trouble of conscience: but when the conscience is wounded, it may encrease the measure and continuance of the distress, and difficulty of the cure. He may be wounded in conscience, that is not annoyed with Melancholy; and he may be kept under with Melancholy, that is not distressed in conscience. Again, di∣stress of conscience may breed Melancholy; but Melancholy can onely augment the anguish of the distressed, not cause the distress. These two troubles of con∣science and Melancholy are thus distinguished. First, When conscience is troubled, the affliction it self is in the conscience, and so in the whole man. But in Melan∣choly the imagination is distempered and troubled, not the conscience. Secondly,
The conscience afflicted hath a true and certain cause, whereby it is troubled, viz. the sight of sinne, and the sense of Gods wrath: But in Melancholy, the imagination conceiveth a thing to be so, which is not so; for it makes a man to fear and despair, upon supposed and feigned causes. Distress of conscience is a sorrow and fear upon cause, and that the greatest cause that worketh misery up∣on man: the other contrarily a meer fancy, and hath no ground of true and just object, but is onely raised upon disorder of humour in the fancy, and rashly delivered to the heart, which upon naturall credulity fareth in passion, as if that were indeed, whereof the fancy giveth a false alarum. Thirdly, Upon serious and true consideration of the things feared, and upon experience, the fear of Melancholy is known to be groundless, frivolous and idle: but distress of con∣science encreaseth the more we look into and weigh with our selves the causes of it. Fourthly, In trouble of conscience the body standeth oftentimes in firme state of health, perfect in complexion, and perfect in shape, the humours in quantity and quality not exceeding nor wanting their naturall proportion: Here the senses also are oft-times perfect both inward and outward the imagination sound, the heart well compact and resolute, and this excepted, want no courage. In the other the complexion is depraved, obstructions hinder the free course of spirits and humours; the inward sense and outward be feebled, and the heart up∣on every small occasion, (yea though none be) is driven with the tide of this humour to fear, even in the middest of security. Fifthly, Imaginations in the braine caused by Melancholy, may be cured, taken away, and cut off by meanes of Physick: but the distress of conscience, cannot be cured by any meanes in the world but one, and that is the blood of Christ sprinkled upon the con∣science. Q. What is the Remedy of these Thoughts? A. First, In distress of Melancholy, the person troubled must be brought to this, that he will content himself to be advised and ruled by the judgment of o∣thers, and cease to rest upon himself touching his own estate; and by this he shall reap much quiet and contentation. Secondly, If the party distressed be meerly naturall, without all knowledge of his estate, then meanes must be used [if he be capable] to bring him to some sight and sorrow for sinne, that his Melancholy sorrow, may be turned into godly sorrow. Thirdly, If he be brought to faith in Gods mercifull promises, and an honest purpose not to sinne any more, then must he rest upon the Word of life, and in no wise admit any imagination or thought, that may cross the said Promise. For what? should erroneous and false conceits draw us to question the truth of God? Or being once resolved what is to be believed, shall we enter into disputation about it to please fancy? No, we must rest in the promise we have received, and not lissen so much to conceit, as to admit consultation, whether it be true or no. Fourthly, A set calling and diligent imployment is necessary to repress Melancholy, such as may stirre up the spirits by labour, quicken the dulness of the humour, and take up the mind, that it may not harbour idle cogitations. Fifthly, Cheerful∣ness and courage do much availe against Melancholy; when we stirre up our selves to delight in that which is good, and raise up our spirits against dauntedness and dejectedness occasioned through erroneous, frivolous, false conceits engen∣dering fear. A Melancholy Christian hath gotten good victory over that humour, when he is resolved to go forward in an holy course, as he shall be enabled by the Spirit of God, labouring for soundness of judgment, and tenderness of con∣science, watching over his heart, renewing his repentance, and preserving his faith, not giving credit to any doubtfull imaginations or frivolous thoughts con∣trary to the promises he hath received. These things principally may perswade every man to this resolution. First, The end of such cogitations is directly contrary to the commandement of God: for we are charged to believe, to be
of good courage, to go cheerfully about the works of our calling, to be pa∣tient, &c. but the effect of these thoughts, if we assent unto them, is clean cross. Shall we be afraid to do what the Lord requires, and to yeeld obedience to his Precepts? Secondly, Of our selves by nature we are not prone to that which is truly good: but these cogitations do sue upon us early and late, with great importunacy. Thirdly, What wise Captain will fight for the Victory which he hath wonne, or set that at the stake which he hath in his power? It is no wis∣dom in a Christian, upon some vaine fear, to yeeld up his Title and Interest in the promises of mercy. Fourthly, A quiet mind is fittest to apprehend the truth, as a sound eye to behold the light of the Sunne. When the eye is dimme, or distempered with rheumes, we will trust others, not our selves; or our selves before distemper, better then at the present: why should we not likewise believe what we discerned when the heart was calme, rather then what we fear when it itroubled. Fifthly, No affection is good, that runneth before judgment, sound and true judgment: till a thing be truly known as it is, we cannot be affected to or against it, as we ought. But in these thoughts, affection followeth corruption, imagination, and vain conjectures of deluded fancy. Sixthly, The true use of holy society doth much further the cure of Melancholy thoughts, by mutuall conferrence, direction and counsell quickening each other to holy du∣ties, comforting in the promises of grace, and enforming how to break through the snares of Satan. Seventhly, If by reason of bodily weakness or infirmity, a man be not able to stirre about the labours of his Vocation, he must exercise himself continually in the practice of some Christian duty, as prayer, reading the Scripture, learning by heart some portion of the Word of God; that the mind being taken up about other matters, these vain fancies might not find en∣trance, or at least entertainment. And though they importunately seek again and again to re-enter, we must shut the door against them, not giving credit to what is suggested. Lastly, The effects of naturall Melancholy, must be made spurres unto grace, inciting to godly sorrow for sinne, cheerfulness in wel-doing, retiredness from the world, familiarity with God, patience in troubles, jealousie of our selves, and confidence in God, resting on his faithfulness. This may be done, if we turn vain sorrow into godly, and frivolous fear, into sound fear of Gods presence, majesty, displeasure and judgments, and scrupulousness, into holy tenderness, and strong erroneous resolutions into strong adherence unto the promises of life. Strong and suddain affections or thoughts seasoned by grace, and set upon right objects, are furtherances in godliness, occasions of zeal and courage, constancy and resolution, tenderness and divine contemplation, serious meditation and society with God. Q. What are the fift kind of Evil Thoughts that are to be shunned? A. They are Satanicall Thoughts cast into the mind immediately by Satan, that he might distract and discourage the Child of God in his holy profession and cheerfull proceeding in true godliness. Q Why doth the Lord suffer his Children to be molested with such like Thoughts? A. This the Lord suffereth in great wisdom for the speciall good of his chosen; and that both for their correction, and triall. Sometimes we are apt to stand more upon the outward form of Religion and bodily performance of holy duties, then upon the inward devotion and strain of heart; Sometimes to grieve the good Spirit of God; sometimes to exalt our selves above that which is meet; sometimes we give way to multitudes of roving, idle, and wicked thoughts without regard, which might break into outward acts to the dishonour of God, should he not leave us to the buffetings of Satan, to prevent the growth of sinne, and call us back to the remembrance of our waies: Sometimes we are ready to pry into sacred and high Mysteries too farre, some∣times
to give way to thoughts of despair, sometimes to neglect the favour of God, and disregard his presence, sometimes to presume upon our strength and self-suffici∣ency, sometimes to censure and judg others without pitty or compassion For these and the like sins, it may please God to give over his Children to be exercised with plasphemous or self-murthering Thoughts, that they might learn to walk in humility, keep within their compass, fear before him, be devout in his service, watchfull over their Thoughts, and tender-hearted to their Brethren. For the triall of his servants also, he suffereth them to be molested, that their saith, patience, zeal, reverence might be exercised, approved, and encrea∣sed. Q. Seeing the same Thoughts may proceed from Original corruption, how may we discerne when Thoughts be suggested by Satan? A. First, If they come suddainly, with violence; if we give them no enter∣tainment with any manner of delight, but reject the first motion with rembling and detestation. Q. May these Thoughts wholly be impted to Satan, that the blame be laid upon him altogether, and not at all upon corruption? A. It is not safe to accuse Satan, or excuse our selves altogether: for cor∣ruption may occasion such Thoughts, at least set open the heart to receive such temptations; it may cause them to abide longer with us, then otherwise they could; and by doubtings and unbelief, they may be stained. In these respect; we must charge our selves with folly, though in these Imaginations we may ob∣serve a principall hand of Satan. Q. What is the Remedy ef these Thoughts? A. First, If we be unsetled in the truth of God, touching the points where∣in we are tempted, it must be our care without delay to inform our selves out of the Word of God, resting in what is taught therein for our learning, and not carnally to dispute with those plasphemous Thoughts: for the seeds of Atheism are sown in corrupt reason, which is not able to comprehend the high mysteries of God. Secondly, It is good to humble our selves before God for our former irreverence, pride, self-confidence, neglect of evil Thoughts, disesteem of Gods promises, carelesness to ground our selves in the main principles of Religion, and corruption of heart, which may be the true causes why we are buffeted; and to stirre up our hearts to greater devotion in prayer, reverence of God, regard of our Thoughts, esteem of his grace, and conscience of our infirmity; that denying our selves we might be the fitter to receive mercy. To which must be joyned conscience of all known duties, with contentedness in our estate, be it more or less comfortable: for discontent and hypocrisie, and customariness in good duties, do wonderously lay open the heart to such molestations. Thirdly, Ha∣ving humbled our souls before God for former sinnes, and from the heart con∣demned these abhominable suggestions, we must with courage and confidence rest upon the Promises of God made in Christ for the pardon, sanctification, and removall of these temptations in due time. Satans drift is to weaken faith: our care must be to cleave faster to the Promises of life, to prize them at an higher rate, and above all to look that we defile not our souls with unbelief. The aime of the Devill is to drive us to despair of Gods mercy: our best meanes of resistance is with invincible resolution to stop our ears against his plasphemies, and to cast our selves upon the Promises of God. What use soever we make of these Thoughts, let it begin in faith, and end in assurance and expectation of good. Fourthly, We must with cheerfulness set our selves to the practice of piety, and works of our vocation, not suffering the heart to conferre with tempta∣tions cast into it, to divert and hinder us. For it is Satans policy, by discourag∣ment and unbelief to draw us from prayer, reading the Scripture, and the labours of our calling, as knowing that these are the way of peace, and meanes
of safety. It stands us upon greatly to take courage in the Lord, and to exercise our selves as we shall be able, in some good and honest work, not being dismaied with any terrours, or driven from it with any Thoughts. But of this somewhat hath been spoken formerly more at large, which I will not here repeat. Q. The godly are molested with evil Thoughts as well as the wicked: what then is the difference betwixt them in respect of there evil Cogitations? A. The godly are troubled with evil Thoughts, but they are not men of evil Thoughts, they give not themselves to foster and cherish such perillous guests. The particular differences are, first in their entertainment: It is the property of grace not to suffer evil Thoughts to rest quietly, though it be molested with them; and it is the property of corruption, to quench good motions that are tendered to the heart. As a good man useth all diligence to be rid of wicked imagi∣nations of all sorts, he prayeth against them, humbleth himself, desireth pardon for them, and power over them: so the wicked cherish the thought of their be∣loved sinne, but slightly respect or give attendance to holy meditations. The godly are much troubled with their evil Thoughts, as being the fountain and oc∣casions of all sinne: but the wicked, either make no reckoning of them, because they are ordinary; or if they suit with their humour, welcom them with joy and delight. Secondly, They differ in regard of the issue and effects; as that evil Thoughts in the godly breed humiliation, fear, watchfulness, examination of their hearts, judging of themselves, prayer, longing after Heaven, &c. But in the wicked they are entertained freely without resistance, or suffered to die in time without more a do, if they break not forth into the practice of evill. The most comfortable and sanctified soul, is someties overclouded with dumps of heaviness, and inwardly disquieted with its own motions, or the suggestions of Satan: There is not an heart so sweetly and resolutely composed for Heaven, but is sometimes dissetled with thoughts of indignation; and that specially, when folly is set in great excellency, and true piety had in disgrace. But marke the difference. Discontentfull discourses in the minds of unregenerate men, either break out into desperate conclusions, or be appeased by some opposite conceit of stronger worldly comforts; abandoned by entertainment of outward mirth, diverted by company, pleasures, and joyfull accidents composed by worldly wisdom, or the like. But heavy-hearted Thoughts in Gods Children,Psal. 62. & 73. though for a while not utterly without some aspersion of distrust, fretting and discontent, yet commonly at length being mingled with faith, and managed by spirituall wis∣dom, by the grace of God, break out into fairer lightnings of comfort, greater heat of zeal, more lively exercise of faith, gracious speeches, and many blessed resolutions. Q. Is every good motion a sanctified Thought? A. The goodness of the Thoughts is not to be measured by the suddain mo∣tion that occasionally ariseth in the heart: but by the room wherein they are, the entertainment we give unto them, and the effects they produce. If they dwell with us familiarly, and work powerfully, bringing forth seasonable fruits fit for the time wherein it is required, fit for the person that doth perform it, fit for the person to whom it is performed; then are they sanctified indeed. But we must hold this for an undoubted principle, that grace is operative. From whence it followeth, that the judgment of our uprightness and integrity of heart, is not to be taken so much from the simple motion to good or evil, as from the appro∣bation of the one, and rejection of the other. The simple motion to sin argues imperfection: but the sincere rejection of evil, and sound approbation of good, is a testimony of truth and uprightness. Q. Is it possible for a man to know all his Thoughts? A. If we consider our Thoughts in generall, it is impossible to discerne them
every one: for to search the heart and know the infinite variety of Thoughts, be∣longeth to the Lord alone: But we may and ought to know our Thoughts so farre, as to approve our selves sincere and honest in his sight. Namely, that we labour to keep an holy order in our Thoughts, that they may attend what they are imployed in; that we watch against and reject evil imaginations, that we cherish the good, doing all things as in Gods presence to his glory. Q Is it a testimony of an unsanctified heart to think more of earthly then of hea∣venly things? A. 1. If the multitude of loose, roving, idle, worldly and evil Thoughts, that arise in the minds of the godly be considered in themselves, it cannot be denied but they are many more in number, then their good cogitations: which is an argument that much corruption abideth in the hearts of the best, though they be not altogether unsanctified. 2. The triall of sanctification consists not in the multitude of our Thoughts either way inclined, but in the entertainment of them. Good motions rejected, are thereby to us unsanctified: and evil Thoughts repelled by grace, and subdued by the Spirit, are testimonies of sanctification, not in that they are evil, but as they are resisted. 3. The Lord hath given more time for worldly occasions, then he hath assigned for spirituall exercises: but we have not liberty to loose our thoughts upon them. For no creature of God is good, unless it be sanctified by the Word and Prayer; we are charged to use this world as though we used it not; and the labours of this life must be undertaken in obedience, with desire to glorifie God, and profit our Brethren. 4. It is one thing to be employed in the world, another to set the heart upon the things of this world. These things wisely considered, the resolution of the doubt is easie; worldly, excessive, vaine, idle motions do argue the heart to be corrupt, not altogether unsanctified: but if it be onely or principal∣ly set upon the world, if the things of this life be onely in request, it is unsanctified. CHAP. VIII. Of the fourth Operation of the soul of man, viz. Invention. Of the Devises of the godly; Reasons to shew that they are Devisers of good things. Motives to encourage men to Devise that which is good, and to act it. What the opposite Sinnes are, which must be shunned. Question, WHat is the fourth Operation of the soul? Psal. 119.113. Jer. 49.30. Deut. 19.19. Gen 11 6. Psal. 1.6. Psal. 7.3. & 39.1. Psal. 139.23. Esa. 59 7.A. Invention, whereby we search diligently to finde out things secret, and take counsell to bring our Thoughts and purposes to pass. Q. What are the Devises of them that fear God? A. The devises of the godly are good, right and acceptable in the sight of God. I am purposed or determined that my mouth shall not transgress. Try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me. He doth not simply excuse himself from all sinne, but having testimony of his adoption in his heart, from the holy Ghost, and perswaded of free forgiveness, and of true integrity, he doth not doubt to seperate himself from the contemners of God. For howsoever he did slip in many things,Vatabl. in H. p. Calvin ibid. yet he followed the right way, the study of piety did reign and bear rule in him. Therefore he saith not, Whether there be any sinne in me, but whether the way of wickedness, because professedly
and of set purpose he did not depart from God. The Prophet Isay proposing a description of the godly man under the person of the liberall, saith,Esa. 32.8. He de∣viseth liberall things, and by liberall things he shall stand. In Scripture a good man is opposed to the man of wicked devises:Prov. 12.2. Prov. 15.26. A good man obtaineth favour of the Lord: but a man of wicked devises will he condemn. The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: but the words of the pure,Psal. 1.2. are pleasant words. Whereunto may be added, That a good man meditates in the Law of God night and day, but will not admit the counsell of the wicked.Job. 21.16. & 22.18. Psal. 119.24. The counsell of the wicked (saith Job) is farre from me. And David, Thy testimonies also are my delight, and my counsellours: noting that his mind and heart was gover∣ned by the Word, with which he did consult in all his affairs. Q. By what Reasons may it be shewed, that good men are devisers of good things? A. First, The Lord requireth in his most holy Law,Deut. 6.5. Mar. 12.32. 2 King. 23.25. that we should love him with all our strength, and all our thought; thereby teaching us to love him unfeignedly, with all might, vehemency, efficacy and ability both of mind and will, and whatsoever is in us, and in our power. Secondly, The Word of grace, which they greedily desire, hath taught them not onely to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, but also to live godly, justly and soberly in this present world,Tit. 2.11, 12, 14. be∣ing zealous of good works. But zealous he cannot be, that doth not study and devise to be doing good. Thirdly, The Apostle doth expresly charge the faithfull to apply their hearts to the consideration, study and observation of whatsoever is good and honest. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,Phil. 4.8. whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are love∣ly, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any vertue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Fourthly,Psal. 119.106. The faithfull are the Lords sworn men, who have solemnly bound themselves to the obedience of his Commande∣ments. But they cannot obey the Commandements, unless they seek what is good with their whole hearts. Seek good and not evil, that ye may live.Amos 5.14. 1 Cor. 14.1. Col. 3.1. Fifth∣ly, We are commanded to covet spirituall graces, and mind heavenly things. But the covetous study and devise how to encrease their store, and enrich themselves with this worlds good. Q. What Motives are there to encourage men to devise and study that which is good? A. First, Satan deviseth mischief continually,Eccl. 7.27, 28. Prov. 6.14. Psal. 10.2. Psal. 62.4. and ungodly men imagine de∣ceit and wickedness all the day long: and shall not the godly be moved to study and devise, how they might further the glory of God, and set forward the Kingdom of Christ? Secondly, Goodness is the excellency of the soul, and perfects the power that is exercised about it. The more we take counsell with our selves, how to get and to do what good soever God requires, the sooner shall we obtain perfection desired. Thirdly, To what end hath God given the power of invention and consultation, but that it should be imployed about that which is good, and most about the best things?Prov. 12.20. Phil. 4.8. Heb. 5.14. Phil. 1.10. It is a shame the palate should di∣stinguish the least difference of sweet and souer: and the mind be unable to dis∣cerne good from evil. All his gifts bestowed for some good use, and the most excellent for the chiefest ends and purposes. Fourthly, To the Devisers and Counsellours of good things shall be peace and joy. Such as use their thoughts and words to move men to be at peace with God and their neigh∣bours, and to walk in the way of peace and good prosperity, shall not fail of the comfort of their faithfull and wholesome counsell. For the God of peace will be with them to bless and comfort them, and men will love them, and their own consciences will continually minister matter of joy and consolation unto them. Fifthly, It is necessary for Christians to have their wits exercised to discerne good and evil, not onely to know good and evil in general, but even the kinds and de∣grees thereof: But that cannot be obtained without diligent study and consul∣tation. Sixthly, Men thrive not in any Trade, unless they mind it; No cunning
work can go well forward, that is not contrived or cast in the mind, before it be taken in hand: How should a Christian practice the duties of piety and mer∣cy in right manner and due season? How should he grow in grace, and become skifull in his profession, if he apply not his mind unto the things that belong unto it? By nature we are apt to sinne and do wickedly, but without deliberation and consultation no man becomes a cunning workman in evil.Psal. 139.1. sa. 44.19, 20, 21. Seventhly, All our devises are manifest and open to the eyes of God, with whom we have to deal. The Apostle taketh it for granted, That the servant will be diligent to please his Master, so long as he is under his eye: and shall not the presence of God prevaile with us, who takes notice of our thoughts to recompence and reward them, if good and ageeable to his will? Q Is it sufficient to devise to do good? A. No: but we must study to do it in right manner, in fit season, constantly, not for a fit or start onely, being most circumspect in the greatest duties. He shall be called liberall,Isa. 32 7. that persisteth or continueth in his liberality. Con∣stancy is the praise of well-doing, and of all purposes tending there∣unto. Q. What are the sinnes opposite hereunto that must be shunned? Eccl. 7.26. Rom 1.30. Ezek. 1.2. Jer. 8.18. Psal. 37.12. Hs. 7.5. Mic. 2.1, 2. Prov. 24.2. Luk. 1.51. Job 5.13. Prov. 12.20. Job 5.2. Hab. 2.10. Prov. 11.3, 5, 6. Prov. 24.9. Prov. 14.17. Prov. 5 26. Prov. 30.32. Jo 29.9. Ezck. 6.63. Job 39.37, 38.A. First, The devising, plotting or contriving of known wickedness, is a thing odious and hatefull before God. The wicked plotteth against the Just. Wo to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds. Sorrow and grief shall be to them that imagine mischief; they consult shame, misery and destruction unto themselves. The thought of foolishness is sinne, and transgression of Gods most holy Law: And as the heart of him that deviseth wickedness is impure, so are his words and actions abhominable in the sight of God: The thoughts of the wicked are abhomination to the Lord, but the pure have pleasant words. The op∣position stands thus: The thoughts of the wicked, and therefore also their words, are abhomination to the Lord: but the words of the pure, and consequently their thoughts, are pleasant unto him. Secondly, Continuing to give entertain∣ment to wicked surmises, and uncharitable purposes of doing evil, is condemned by the Word of truth. The counsell of Solomon is, If thou hast thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth; be silent, leave off, and give over. For the first step to reformation is to cease from maintaining of sin: for the Lord by Ezekiel doth promise it as a sound testimony of unfeigned repentance, saying, That thou maist remember, and be ashamed, and never open thy mouth any more. And therefore Job also by this argument doth make profession of his humiliation, say∣ing, Behold, I am vile: what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will answer no more; yea twice, but I will proceed no further. Thirdly. The device of evil ignorantly begun, or in sim∣plicity, [when that which is indeed evil was thought to be good,] is sinne, and to be amended. For ignorance of Gods will, which is of it self a sinne, though unavoidable in some degree, cannot excuse the errour of a device spring∣ing from an etroneous and false conceit.Prov. 24.9. The thoughts of foolishness, even those that are conceived in simplicity for want of better instruction, are sinne. Therefore it much concernes good men to know not onely what is good and evil, but amongst good things what is best, and amongst evils, what is worst, and that even to the least iote and title. Fourthly, Negligent study of good is condemned also, when men seek not opportunities to be doing what is re∣quired. Q. May not good men be drawn aside to take counsell about the doing of evil? A. First, In the errour of judgment they may take evil for good, and so de∣vise to effect what is evil, not as an evil, but as it appeares good in their sight. Secondly, Being transported with passion and unbridled affection, they may
give way to wicked thoughts and reasonings; as to purpose some kind of revenge in cross speech, sullen carriage, opposition, &c. Thirdly,Jam. 4.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 3.1.2. When through se∣curity, giving way to their lusts, they are fallen from their stedfastness, then they may devise which way to bring some ungodly purpose to pass, or by what meanes they might satisfie their unruly desires. Thus David having fallen un∣advisedly in the case of Bathsheba, doth plot and cast how he might hide and conceale his fault, not sparing to intice Ʋriah to sinne. But this is not the de∣liberate or well-advised thought of a Christian, rather, Satan taking him at ad∣vantage he is driven by the power of corruption he knoweth not whither. It is to be observed also, that the Child of God in his distemper is not himself: for he hath soundly, upon good advice, deliberately,Ruth 1.16. with a well planted resolu∣tion, cast off the liking of all sinne, with full purpose never to return unto it again; and it is contrary to his former course that now he looketh with in∣dulgence to any known evil. CHAP. IX. Of the fift Operation of the soul of man, viz. Judgment. How the Judgment of the godly is to be exercised. Wherein the sanctification of the Judgment consists. How it is to be obtained, and what the contrary Evils are that must be shunned. Question, WHat is the fift Operation of the soul? A. Judgment, approbation and improbation, whereby upon serious triall and examination we judg what is true or false, good or evil,Rom. 2.18. Psal. 4.4. Prov. 2.9. and freely approve it as true and good, or disallow it as false and evil. Q. What are the Rules of Judgment? A. They are three, Experience, Right reason, and principally the holy Scripture, without which the other two cannot stand.Esa. 8.20. For whatsoever agreeth with the holy Scripture rightly understood, that is true and good: whatsoever is contrary to the Scripture rightly understood, that is false and evil. For, seeing God is the first truth and goodness: there can be no second truth and goodness, unless it have its original from it, and agree and consent with it. Q How is the Judgment of the godly to be exercised? A. In the sound tryal, clear and distinct discerning of things that differ, true or false, good or evil, necessary or indifferent, expedient or inexpedient,Col. 1.9, 10, 11. 1 Joh. 4.1. 1 Thes. 5.21. Phil. 1.10. Heb. 5.14. 1 Cor. 2.15. 1 Cor. 10.15. & 11.13. Act. 17.11. and approving what is good, disallowing the contrary. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God or no. Try all things, and keep that which is good. So the Apostle prayeth for the Philippians, that they may discerne things that differ. And to the Hebrews he saith, Strong meat belongs to them which are of age, who through long custome have their wits exercised to discerne both good and evil. In like manner to the Corinthians, The spirituall man di∣scerneth all things. Again, I write to them that have understanding, judg ye what I say. Hereby those Noble men of Berea are commended, that they searched the Scriptures, whether the things that Paul said, were so or no. Q Why is it necessary that the Judgment should be thus exercised?2 Job. 7.10. 2 Pet. 2.2. Deut. 13.1, 2, 3. Col. 2.7, 8. A. First, There be many false Teachers, which corrupt the simplicity of the truth, and under feigned pretences seek to bring in damnable Doctrines; there∣fore we must learn to discerne and approve the right, that we be not deceived by
them. Children that cannot distinguish meats, are in danger to eat what is un∣wholesome, if they be not forbidden of their Mothers: so fares it with Christi∣ans that be babes in understanding.Mat. 7.15, 16. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheepes clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves, ye shall know them by their fruits. Secondly, The true and faithfull Ministers of Christ may erre as men,1 Reg. 13.18. both in Doctrine and manners; they may teach and do things not con∣senting to the words of wholesome Doctrine:Col. 2.2. in which respect it behoveth all men to get good evidence and assurance of knowledg in their own hearts. Third∣ly, If we receive the truth upon the credit of men, we shall be ready to stagger when persecution comes, and be much perplexed if we see them, of whom we learned the truth, to shrink and fall away. Fourthly, Want of Judgment causeth rash censuring, superstitious scrupulousness, vaine presumption, and feigned reverence. He that is not able to discerne betwixt good and evil, will condemn good for evil, and take evil for good many times; he will be fearfull of sinne in every thing, or bold to rush into sinne without fear; either he will not respect the Ordinances of God, or think to please him with counterfeit humi∣lity. Fifthly; Truth the more it is tryed, the better it doth work. The more clear and certain apprehension we have of the promises, the more stedfast is our faith, the more vehement is our love, the more sound our joy, the more con∣stant our hope, the more calme our patience, the more fiery our zeal, the more earnest our pursuit of true happiness. Probable hopes of encreasing their temporall estates, draw men to adventure over the Seas, to sayl into India, and the remotest parts of the world, though they perceive many perils in the voyage: Did we assuredly believe the promises of life, it would make us endeavour early and late to compass that everlacting Inheritance. What is the root of all indiffe∣rency in Religion, but want of Judgment? Sixthly, Good Judgment brings us to be acquainted with our selves, to see our misery, vanity and folly, to take sound tryal of our estates, to prevent occasions of sinne, to discerne what is fit for our condition, how to carry our selves inoffensively, and to proceed in godliness in good order. For lack of Judgment we perceive not many things that be amisse, know not what to resolve in many doubts, are oft plunged con∣cerning our estate, see not how to encounter the assaults of Satan, are hurt before we be aware, and be to seek how we should behave our selves towards others. Q Should all Christians be able of themselves to try and examine which is a true or false Doctrine? A. All Christians should be able, though not of themselues, nor by them∣selves onely, but by the rule of Scripture; which is the touch-stone that our Saviour and his Apostle giveth into their hands, wherewith they themselves should try the truth or falshood of the Doctrine that is brought. For, is there any so sensess as to give a man a touch-stone into his hand to try the goodness and lawfulness of the Gold, and yet withall to charge him that he shall not use it himself, but alwaies when he is doubtfull of a piece of money, go to the Gold∣smith without daring once to enter into any Judgment of the unlawfulness or lawfulness of it by himself? And yet both the touch-stone of the Scriptures which God hath given us for the tryal of truth, is incomprably better then any touch-stone of the Goldsmith: and the difference of true Doctrine and false, is infinitly greater then the difference between fine and pur Gold, and base and Bell-mettall.Joh. 2.20, 27. And when as John ascribeth unto every one of the Church the a∣noynting of the Spirit, which teacheth them whatsoever is necessary: It is evident that he will have that every one shall be instructed to try the Spirit: especially considering that the Apostle teacheth that the spirituall man (that is to say a man indued with the Spirit of Adoption) judgeth all things so farre as they may ne∣cessarily concerne him.1 Cor. 2.15. And unless the faithfull should be able to try and discerne
of the divers colours of mens Doctrines, how should they once desire the help of their Pastors and Governours; For the blind eateth (as they say) many a fly, a man cannot so much as surmise the doubtfulness or superstitiousness of any Doctrine, unless he be able to make some tryal of the Doctrine himself.2 Pet 1.19. with 2 Pet. 2.1. Where∣fore our Doctrine which teacheth that every one should try the Spirits by the light which himself carrrieth about him, is so farre from taking away the help and assistance they should have of their Governours, that unless it have place, there is no place for the other: seeing no man can pray aid against his enemy coming towards him, unless he be first able to discover him to be an e∣nemy. Q. The discerning of Spirits is not given to all men? A. The Apostle speaks of that discretion of Spirits which is miraculous,1 Cor. 12.9, 10 which although it be sometimes aided by outward things, as by behaviour and counte∣nance, yet it gathereth, and discerneth more, then it hath by ordinary discourse, any certain ground of. For the skill of the Scriptures, and judgment in them,1 Cor. 12.2, 9, 10. both that which is ordinary consisting in knowledge and wisdom, and that which is extraordinary consisting in prophesie, is manifestly distinguished from the gift of discretion of Spirits. And it is evident, that as there were many that excelled in Judgment of sound and unsound Doctrine, which had not this gift of discretion of Spirits: so this gift of discerning Spirits reached not so much unto the discerning of Doctrines one from another (which might be done by labour and travell in the Word of God) but the use thereof was principally in discovering the traiterous and treacherous natures of those, which pretending friendship to the Church, either were covert enemies, or at lest not faithfull friends to the same: which thing not able by any industry or discourse of wit to be found out; this gift was needfully given of the Lord to his Church,Beza Ann. in hunc loc. Pareus in 1 Cor. 12.9. Zanch. Epist. lib. 1.10. p. 60, 61, 62. 2 Reg. 5.26. Act. 5.3, 4. especi∣ally in the primitive Church, when they wanted the help of the Magistrate. This gift had Elisha in discovering Gehazi, and Peter in laying open the secret practice of Ananias and his wife. Q. Should all men be able to untie the knotty and subtile Arguments of false Pro∣phets and deceitfull Teachers? A. It belongs not to every Christian to confute them that contradict whole∣some Doctrine, nor doth the Apostle require it of them: bt onely that they be able to discerne the truth, and be ready to give an account of the faith that they profess. It is one thing to judge of Doctrines, another to refute false opinions. That may be performed of every Christian, that is endued with the Spirit, well instructed in the Doctrine of salvation, and meanely exercised in the holy Scriptures: the latter is not in the power of all men, nor doth the Holy Ghost exact it of them. He that must fight for the truth,Zanch. Epist. lib. 1.10. p. 97. had need of weapons of all sorts: He that is onely to judge, the knowledge of the truth, of right and wrong, is sufficient for him. For, when a godly man considereth, that the things propounded are not of God but of the Devill, presently he stopeth his ears to such Spirits, as Christ and his Apostles teach. If there come any unto you,2 Joh. 10. ver. and bring you not this Doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him God speed. He counselleth not to dispute with him, or to try it out by Arguments, but to shunne him that we be not seduced. The Lord gives not every man that perfect knowledge of all things contained in Scripture, nor doth he require, that by disputation or Scholar-like discourse they should confute the Adversary in speech or writing; it is sufficient they be able to give an account of their faith out of the Word of truth. Q. Doth it suffice a Christian, that he be able to discerne truth from falshood in fundamentall matters of Religion? A. No: but they must endeavour to discerne what is good, evil or indifferent,1 Cor. 14.20. Rom. 16.19. and to judge of their severall degrees; as of good things what is more or less
excellent; of evils what is greater or lesses; of indifferent things what is most expedient according to the circumstances of time,1 Cor. 6.12. place and persons. They must also exercise their wits to discerne of things considered simply and in compari∣son, in time free and not free. Even of all things that may come into conside∣ration in the life of man, they must learn to judge aright. Q. Wherein consists the sanctification of the Judgment? Psal. 119.128.A. In the clear, sound and distinct approbation of good, both simply and in comparison, in the first and second act of Judgment, according to the degrees thereof, upon due tryal and examination, known and discerned to be truely good: and the improbation of known evil according to the nature and degrees thereof, as it is considered in it self and with all occurents, or inticing allure∣ments; To which must be added a right discerning of the expediency or inex∣pediency of things indifferent. Or more briefly, it is to approve truth and goodness according to the will and after the Image of God, and to reject the contrary. Q. How is this sound and true Judgment to be obtained? 1 Cor. 2.10, 14. 1 Ioh 2.20, 27.A. 1. The inspiration of the Holy Ghost, the Authour of supernaturall light and faith, is necessary, whereby, being taught the truth as it is in Christ Jesus, we are enabled to discerne what is contrary to the words of wholesome Doctrine. For, as he that is indued with an humane Spirit, doth easily discerne men from beasts; so he that hath the Spirit of God, by which he is taught the heavenly Doctrine, discerneth the Doctrine of God, from the Doctrine of the Devill, things divine from humane. Nothing is more like it self then God, none better knows the things of God, then the Spirit of God. Nay, if we have not the Spirit, we cannot know God nor the things of God; no more then a blind man can judge of colours. Whence is it that Christ saith of the Elect, that they cannot be seduced of Antichrist: to wit, because the Spirit of God doth preserve and keep the truth once engraven in their hearts, that they cannot fall from it? 2. The Spirit of God in teaching the Sonnes of God the heavenly Doctrine, is wont to keep this order: that first he doth affect them with an earnest desire of heavenly Doctrine; and doth so affect, that they de∣sire to know the will of God for no other cause, then that they might avoid whatsoever is displeasing to God, and do whatsoever is pleasing in his sight. This desire being stirred up in them, he provoketh to prayer, wherein they crave of God, that he would lead them into all truth, and teach them to do his will. If therefore we would know the truth, First, We must set our hearts to the love of Religion and Piety:Ioh. 7.17. Ioh. 3.21. Mat. 11.20. Ioh. 6.45. & 8.47. Psal. 25.12, 14 & 111.10. Psal. 119.18, 26, 28, 33, 34. Act. 10.3.32. For if any man will do the will of God, he shall know the Doctrine that is of God. They shall be all taught of God, to whom true god∣liness is a speciall delight and treasure. Secondly, We must earnestly desire of God to be informed in the true and perfect way: and without doubt the holy Spirit will reveale the truth unto them, in whom he hath kindled an holy desire of the truth. Cornelius may be for example, he prayeth to be instructed in the truth of God, and the Lord sendeth Peter to shew him the way of life, and acquaint him with the Doctrine of salvation. Thirdly, if we would know the truth, we must with all diligence give our selves to the meditation and study of the holy Scriptures.Psal. 119.99. Psal. 119.184. I have more understanding then my Teachers; for thy testimonies are my meditation. Through thy Precepts I get understanding. The Word of God gives understanding to the simple, that exercise themselves there∣in. And what is more certain, then that the Doctrine, which is consonant to the Scriptures, is of God; that not of God, which is repugnant to it? Fourth∣ly,Heb. 6.1, 2, 3. 1 Tim. 1.13. 1 Ioh. 4.1, 2. Out of the Scriptures we must collect a forme of wholesome Doctrine, accor∣ding to which other points must be tried and examined. This is an undoubted principle, that God is ever like himself, and that his words do most exactly consent and agree together: so that no Doctrine can be of God, which is re∣pugnant
to the truth contained in plain places of Scripture, which are in them∣selves most evident, and cannot be understood otherwise then as the words ma∣nifestly import. For the authority, which doth warrant our faith unto us, must every way be free from all possibility of errour. For let us but once ad∣nut of this, that there is any possibility that any one point of faith should not be true; if it be once granted, that I may be deceived in what I have believed, how can I be assured that in the end I shall not be deceived? If the Authour of faith may alter: or if the evidence and assurance that he hath left us be not pregnant, and impossible to be defeated, there is necessarily opened an inlet to doubtfulness and wavering, which the nature of faith excludes. Fifthly, Our Saviour Christ hath given a good Rule, whereby we may discerne whether the Doctrine be of God; He that speaketh of himself, seeketh his own glory:Ioh. 7.18. but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true and no unrighteousness is in him. Lastly, If we would attain sound Judgment in the truth, we must sub∣mit our selves to the ministry of the Word, and use the advice and counsell of the prudent and judicious. For the Spirit that openeth our eyes to see the the things that belong to godliness, stirres up in us a desire to learn: Desire to learn makes us thirst after the meanes: and pious sedulity and carefulness makes us watchfull in the choice, and diligent in the use of our meanes. The Promise to the Apostles of the Spirit which should lead them into all truth, was made good unto them by private and secret informing their understandings, with the knowledge of high and heavenly mysteries, which as yet had never entred into the conceit of any man. The same promise is made to us, but fullfiled after ano∣ther manner. For what was written by revelation in their hearts,Gal. 1.121 for our in∣struction have they written in their Books. To us for information the Spirit speaks not by immediate revelation, but sends him to the ministry of the Church and to the Scriptures, opening our eyes effectually to discerne the truth contained in them, and that so much the more, as they shall be more diligent in the use of all holy meanes that God hath ordained for that end. The Spirit in∣fuses not the knowledge of any point of faith without meanes; but engraves in the heart what is spoken in the Scripture, according as we shall be faithfull and carefull in the use of his holy Ordinances. Q. What are the contrary Evils that must be shunned? A. First, Levity and wavering in matters of Rligion;Gal. 1.6. & 3.1. & 5.7. 2 Pet. 3.16. 1 Cor. 14.20. Eph. 4.14. when we take up opinions lightly without due examination, relying meerly upon the credit of the Teacher, and be as ready upon every small occasion to receive another Doctrine. The Apostle reprehends this inconstancy, writing to the Ephesians; That we henceforth (saith he) be no Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine; by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they ly in waite to deceive. The sense and meaning of &c. is the rule and ground of our Christian faith, and whensoever we alter it, we must needs give a new sense unto the word of God. The especiall cause of this flitting disposition in the common and ordinary sort of men, is disability to discerne of the strength of such Reasons as may be stamped against them. For which cause they usually start, and many times fall away, upon every objection that is made. Secondly, Presumption upon the strength and subtilty of our own wits. For the holy things of God must be handled with fear and reverence, not with wit and dalli∣ance. Hereunto sounds that of the Apostle; Beware lest any man spoile you through Philosophy and vain deceit, Col. 2.8. The dangerous effects of wit not over-ruled and limited by grace, hath appeared, not in the green tree onely, in young heads, but in men of constant age, and great place in Church. For this was that which undid Origen, a man of great learning and industry; whilst in sublimity of his wit, in his Comments on Scripture, conceiving meteors and alerie speculations, he brought forth those dangerous errours, which drew upon
his person the heaviest censure of the Church, and upon Posterity the loss of his Works. And not in private persons alone, but even in whole Nations, shall we find remarkeable examples of miscariage in this kind. The Grecians, till barbarisme began to steale in upon them, were men of wonderous subtilty of wit, and naturally over indulgent unto themselves in this quality. Those deep and subtile heresies concerning the Trinity, the Divinity of Christ and of the holy Ghost, the Union and division of the Divine Substance and Persons, were all of them begotten in the heat of their wits; yea by the strength of them were they conceived, and born, and brought to that growth, that if it had been possible for the gates of Hell to prevaile against the Church, they would have prevailed this way. As from the firmest friendships do spring the deadli∣est enmities, and from the soundest health the deadliest maladies: even so from the rarest and quickest agitation of our souls, the most desperate resolutions and most deadly frensies. The spirit of man, if it be quick and vigorous, industri∣ous, free and universall, maketh its motions so irregularly, useth its liberty so boldly in all things, not tying it self to any thing, that it easily shaketh the com∣mon opinions, and all those Rules whereby it should be bridled or restrained, as unjust tyranny; it undertaketh to examine all things, and to judge the great∣est part of things plausibly received, to be ridiculous: and thus not suffering it self to be kept within any bounds, it wandereth out of the way and loseth it self. The first lesson a good Student in Divinity must learn, is to deny his wis∣dom,1 Cor. 3.18. Gal. 6.3. 1 Cor. 8.2. Mat. 11.25. 1 Cor. 1.26. Jam. 4.6. and to become a fool, that he may be wise. For the wisdom of God is hidden from the wise and prudent, that be puffed up with conceit of their naturall understanding, and is revealed unto babes. Thirdly, Love and affection to our own opinions and conceits, is an impediment to sound Judgment: it breeds prejudice against the truth, and possesseth men with resolution to defend their opinions, if by any wresting or writhing of Scripture to their purpose, it be possible. And it is no hard thing for a man that hath wit, and is strongly possest with an opinion, and bent to maintain it, to finde some place of Scrip∣ture, which by good handling will be woed to cast a favourable countenance upon it. Fourthly, Simplicity, whereby men being void of understanding and sound Judgment, are easie and ready to be preverted, and drawn into error. O ye simple ones, how long will ye love simplicity? Prov. 1.22. Fifthly, Vani∣ty, whereby men being destitute of the true knowledge of God and their own estate, do fondly promis emselves much comfort and rest which they shall never possesse,1 Cor. 3.20. Esa. 4.20. Iob 11.12. Eph 4.17. Jam 1 31. and please themselves in many things which are displeasing to the Lord. This say I and testifie, that ye walk not as other Gentiles in the vanity of their minds. They became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Sixthly, Foolishness, whereby men trusting in their own wit, do scorn and deride admonition given unto them out of the word of life, being also poysoned with pestilent opinions, and corrupted with wicked courses of life which they approve in themselves and others. Fools hate knowledge, Prov. 1.22. My people is foolish, they have not known me; they are sotish children, and have none understanding; they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge, Jer. 4.22. Seventhly, Sleight and superficiall Judgment, whereby we approve things as good simply and in the first act of Judgment, which we disallow in the second, when we consider them as invested with some dif∣ficulty and unpleasantness, or compare them with some matter of pleasure or profit, which we most forsake if we would possesse them. Orpha will follow Naomi into the Land of Israel, [Ruth. 1.14.] if she may do it without inconveniences. The Young man esteemes salvation as a thing worthy to be enquired after: [Mar. 10.20] but is loth to forego his earthly Possessions to purchase that Inheritance. Again, the Judgment is superficial, when that estimation or approbation of good which is entertained for a time, doth after∣ward
vanish and come to nothing because it wanteth rooting. This is the errour of them that receive the Word, and rejoyce in it for a season: but after fall a∣way, because the truth had not deep rooting in them. Eighthly, Men in years must not rest in this, That they know the Principles of Religion;Heb. 5.14. & 6.1, 2. 1 Cor. 14.20. but leaving the Doctrine of the beginnings, they must grow forward towards perfection. It is a fault not to grow in knowledge, as we grow in age. Time will bring wisdom in naturall things: and should not men grow in spirituall wisdom according to their time and meanes? I have written unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning, 1 Joh. 2.14. It is a notorious fault, that grace should be suffered to wither, when nature encreaseth. CHAP. X. Of the sixt Operation of the soul, viz. Willing and Nilling. How the godly are to exercise this faculty. In what order good is to be desi∣red. And What opposite Sinnes in the exercise of this faculty, must be avoided. Question. VVHat is the sixth Operation of the soul? A. Willing and nilling, whereby we choose or refuse,Esa. 28.12. Prov. 1.10. Psal. 35.27. desire or do not desire the object known and judged, approved or disallowed. And because all willing and nilling doth follow the judgment of man concerning the thing ob∣jected, it is also diverse according to the diversity of the judgment. But the judg∣ment is two-fold. For, either it proceeds from the mind, approving that to be good which the law prescribeth, that evil which it forbiddeth: or it proceedeth from the sense and affection, esteeming that good which is pleasant, profitable, and delightfull, though forbidden, disallowing that which appeares difficult, un∣profitable, unpleasant though it be commanded. There is a judgment of generall estimation, and a judgment of particular ap∣plication. 1. There is a first and a second act of judgment; a judgment of the thing simply considered in it self, and a judgment of the thing as it is considered with all circumstances, or as it comes in comparison with others that must be borne, endured, or forgone. And according to these there is a two-fold willing or nil∣ling: One following the first act of judgment,Magis dici po∣test velleitas quam absolute voluntas. Tho. Aq. 1 p. q. 19. Art. 6. ad. 1. which may be called a wish or vellcity, because it doth not prosecute the thing willed, or forsake the thing nilled; the other following the second act of judgment, or the judgment of par∣ticular approbation or improbation, considering the thing both simply and in comparison, which is an effectull compleat willing, and doth produce the act and prosecute or avoid the thing willed or nilled. And these two acts of wil∣ling or nilling, are sometimes contrary the one to the other: for a man may wish that after the first act of judgment, which he nilleth or doth not prosecut after the second; and he may nill that simply considered, which he willeth when it is com∣pared with other things to be done, born, or forsaken. Q How are the godly to exercise this faculty of willing and nilling?1 Chro 28.9. Psal. 40.8. Psal. 119.35, 36. Heb. 13.18. Psal. 119.173.174. Neh. 1.11. A. It is to be exercised in the effectuall, constant, orderly willing of all good truly known and judged to be good; and the nilling of all known evil. I de∣light, or bend my will, to do thy acceptable will, O my Lord. Make me to go in the paths of thy Commandements: for therein I take pleasure, [or thereto I have addicted my mind.] We are willing in all things to live honestly. Let thine hand help me, for I have chosen thy Precepts. O Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear
be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayers of thy servants, who bend their wils, or desire to fear thy Name, Neh. 1.11. Q. In what order is good to be desired? A. According to the degrees of excellency. First, The absolute and chief good, which is God himself, the first truth and goodness, is above and before all to be desired.sal. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. Secondly, That which hath greatest similitude and affinity with the first and chief goodness; so grace and vertue, that is to be de∣sired in the next place.Psal. 119.16. Psal. 143.10. Incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God. Christ did therefore redeeme man, that they should no longer live the rest of their time in the flesh, according to the lusts or will of men,1 Pet. 4.2. but according to the will of God. Thirdly, Things profitable and pleasant are to be desired with relation to piety and honesty. For matters of pleasure or profit do wholly depend upon godliness and honesty, and are what∣soever they are, by the benefit of them. Gaine is not gaine but loss, if it be not honest.1 Tim. 6.6. Pleasure is not pleasure but paine, it separated from piety. God∣liness is the true gaine and pleasure, without which gaine and pleasure, are da∣mage and vexation. In this order we must desire good to our selves and others And from hence it followeth,1 Chro. 15.25. First, That in the service of God our desires and will ought to be most earnest, more then in matters of meer honesty, pleasure and profit. Our will should be most fervent, when we come to deale with God: for earnestness doth principally belong to the duties of the first Table, which yet in proportion must be carried to the rest. Secondly, When we come unto our selves,Mat. 6.33. 1 Cor. 12.31. 1 Cor. 14.1. the soul is to be respected before all worldly commodities. Seek first the Kindom of God and his righteousness. So in spirituall graces, every one as it is more excellent. Desire the best gifts. Covet after spiritual things. Thirdly, Circumstances of time, place, persons and such like, ought to inforce the strength and power of will. Paul though he carried himself in all sincerity to∣wards all,2 Cor. 2.12, 17 yet he professeth he did it more abundantly unto the Corinthians. Fourthly, In things that are indifferent, the less and fewer circumstances must yeeld to the more and greater, and that is to be chosen which is most expedient. EzraEzra 8.22. being in a straight, either to pass unto Jerusalem with danger of his own life, and of theirs that went with him, or to give the King occasion to suspect the truth which he had taught him, preferred that rather; I was ashamed (saith he) to ask of the King an army and horsemen, to help us against the enemy in the way, because we had spoken to the King, saying, The hand of our God is upon all them that seek him in goodness: But his power and his wrath is against all them that for∣sake him. Q. How or in what manner is good to be willed? 2 Cor. 9 7.A. First, It must be willed freely, without co-action from any externall agent: for,Phil. 2.1. the will cannot be compelled. But this ability to will what is truly good cometh meerly of grace. It is God that worketh in us to will and to do. Second∣ly,Psal. 119.112. 2 Cor. 8.11. Psal. 40.8. Phil. 2.13. The will doth not onely desire good, but endeavoureth to obtain it, and putteth forth her appetite to execute and possesse what she willeth. For of God comes both to will, and to do. In the sanctification of the will, the rectitude and promptness of it are to be considered; by the one, the will is carried with right force to good truely known; by the other, it doth persecute and perfect good known. Therefore the true willing of good doth imply both a desire and prosecution of what is willed. Thirdly, The will that desires good effectually, doth also mo∣derate and governe the sensitive appetite and locomotive power, and that either without or with great reluctancy. For, sometimes the appetite doth willingly follow the will, sometimes it doth strive and struggle against it, that the will is compelled to tame the appetite,Deut. 6.5. 1 Chro. 29.9. if it will follow and execute good. Fourthly, We must put forth our selves to will good with all the power and strength of will.
Whatsoever ye doe, work from the soul. Doing the will of God from the soul.Eph 6.6. But a difference of good things must necessarily be holden: for some are more, o∣thers less excellent, which must be respected in degree and place. Every duty is to be willed with so much the greater strength, as the duty doth excell. Q. How is the power of Nilling to be exercised? A. In the free, constant, orderly forsaking and flying from all sin and evil, truely known and judged so to be. Touching this matter, these Rules must be known. First, Of two evils of affliction, the lesser is to be chosen. Secondly, The greatest misery is to be endured, rather then the least sinne to be committed.Psal. 119.109. & 44.17, 18. Thirdly, All sinne is to be nilled universally, but not equally: Not equally, for there be degrees of sinne: but universally, for every sin is contrary to the chief good of man. Q What are the opposite sins that must be shunned in the exercise of this faculty? A. 1. The willing of good according to the first act of judgment onely, which it doth not prosecute or perfect; and the nilling of evil according to the first act of judgment onely, which it doth not shun or avoid. 2. The disorde∣red willing of good, when that is principally affected, which should be least re∣garded; as when profit or pleasure is preferred to honesty or godliness; or of good duties, the less is set before the greater. 3. Remisseness, when good is willed without life, power, and earnestness; which ariseth from disesteem or slouth or power of corruption. 4. Superstitious willing of that which in blind devotion appears good, but is not tried and found to be agreeable to the will of of God. Sound Judgment is the informer and mover of the sanctified will; therefore whatsoever is ignorantly willed without the light of truth to direct, that must needs be evil. 5. The partiall willing of some good, because it suiteth with our disposition or corrupt inclination, when some other good things more excellent, no less necessary, are refused and neglected. 6. Inconstancy, when for a fit, in some good mood we choose that which is good, the interest in evil not being renounced in heart: which causeth an easie revolt into the former sinfull course. 7. The willing of evil, wherein there be sundry degrees. First,h. 4.22. Gal. 5.17. The wishing of evil, because it is pleasing to corrupt nature, though the act be not pursued: for if the thought or motion of sin be evil, much more the first de∣sire, though it be resisted and quelled by the power of grace. Secondly, The willing of sinne to prevent other inconveniences, losses or dangers,Job. 36.21. and choosing of vanity rather then affliction. Thirdly, The willing and following of sinne, contrary to the Law of God and light of nature:Rom. 13.13. Gal. 5.16. Rom. 6.12. Prov. 11.19. Ezek. 25.25. & 36.5. which is called doing or ful∣filling the lusts of the flesh, and obeying the flesh in the lusts thereof. Fourthly, The wilfull and eager desire of doing wickedly, which is called pursuing wicked∣ness, or committing it from the soul, or with a despitefull mind. So Solomon saith, It is an abhomination to fools to depart from iniquity, Prov. 13.19. The End of the Second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK, Of the Affections. CHAP. I. Reasons to shew why our Affections are to be exercised according to the Rule of Gods Word. How a man may come to know to what Passion his soul most bendeth. How the Affections are to be ordered. What that disorder of Affection is, that must be shunned; And how it may be discovered. The meanes by which unmortified Passions are to be subdued. Question, AFfections and appetite are subordinate to the will, let us therefore see how they are to be exercised; and first, what Reasons there be to shew, that we must carefully look to our Affections, and exercise them according to the Rule of Gods Word. A. There be divers Reasons that may confirme it. The first taken from the effects of disordered passions. 1. Wise men confess, and ignorant prove, that passions blind their judgments and reason. As when the eyes are troubled, we cannot perceive exactly the objects of our sight; even so, when the heart is troubled, no man can come by the knowledge of truth. As the faculties of our eyes being pure and bright, it laboureth nothing to deprehend the least moaths, but if an ill humour descend from the head, or some darkness fall upon the eyes, a dimme cloud is cast before the Pearles thereof, which permitteth them not to see, even gross blocks: so it befalleth to the soul, when every inordinate af∣fection is purged that might offend her, she seeth all things convenient most aptly, but being troubled with many passions, all that vertue she loseth, nei∣ther can she behold any high thing. Experience confirmeth this: for men troubled with vehement passions of hatred, ire, or love will bring many rea∣sons to confirme their purpose, although after they have performed their plea∣sure, and the tempestuous passions are over-blown, they condemn themselves, and think their fact vicious, and their Reasons frivolous. Passions not unfitly may be compared to green Spectacles, which make all things resemble the co∣lour of green; even so, he that loveth, hateth, or by any other passion is vehemently possessed, judgeth all things that occurre in favour of that passion, to be good and agreeable with reason. The reasons hereof may be, first, The soul being of a determinate power and activity, cannot attend exactly to
two vehement and intentive operations together: wherefore the soul being po∣ssessed of a vehement passion, her force is so exhausted in that action, that if she will continue therein, she cannot exactly consider the reasons which may disswade her from attending or following such affections. The passion there∣fore that hindreth and stoppeth the eyes of the understanding from the conside∣ration of those meanes which might move the mind to withdraw it self from that action, may well be said to blind the wit, as he which shutteth another mans eyes, maketh him blind-fold, not by taking away the power of seeing, but on∣ly by hindering it from action. The second reason is, not only a privation of consideration of those things, which may extinguish the passion, but also an en∣forcement or constraint, onely to consider those Motives or Reasons which tend in favour of that passion. For although the main part of the souls activity be haled away with the passion, yet there remaineth some sparks of light in the understanding, to perceive what is represented unto it: which is al∣most nothing, but what may conduce to the continuation and preservation of the distempered affection, the imagination being prevented, and almost shut up with the consideration of that which feedeth the passion, and pleaseth the appetite. Furthermore, the imagination representeth to the understanding; not onely Reasons that may favour the passion, but also it sheweth them very intensively, with more shew and appearance then they are indeed; for, as the Moon when she riseth or setteth, seemeth greater unto us, then indeed she is, because the Vapours or Clouds are interposed betwixt our eyes and her: even so, the beauty and goodness of the object represented to our understanding, ap∣peareth fairer and goodlier then it is, because a cloudy imagination interposeth a mist. And here it falleth forth, as he which is most studious, is best learned; and commonly, he that is best learned, is most studious: so, he that once ap∣prehendeth the pleasure of the passion, ordinarily followeth it, and the passion encreaseth the imagination thereof, and the stronger imagination rendreth the passion more vehement, so that oftentimes they enter with an inch, and in∣crease an ell. The third Reason, which importeth more then both the other, proceedeth from a naughty will: for that the soul, having rooted in it, these two parts, sensitive and reasonable: the will perceiving that the soul rejoyceth, she also contenteth her self, that the inferiour appetite should enjoy her plea∣sure, or eschew her grief, with reason, or against reason, she careth not, so she may be made partaker. And for this cause she commandeth the wit to employ all the power and force, to finde out reasons and perswasions that all the appetite demandeth, standeth with reason, and is lawfull. Thus reason is brought to yeeld to the pleasures of sensuality; the Lord to attend upon the servant, and not only so, but being once entred into league with passions, it becometh a better friend to sensuality then the passions were before: for rea∣son straight-waies inventeth ten thousand sorts of new delights, which the passions never could have imagined. 2 Passions seduce the will: because the wit being the guide, the eye, the stirrer, and director of the will, which of it self being blind, and without knowledge, followeth that the will representeth, propoundeth and approveth as good. Wherefore the waves and billowes of apparent reasons, so shake the sandy shelfe of of a weak will, that they mingle it with them, and make all one. Besides, appetite and affection being rooted in the same soul with the will, if it be drawn or flyeth from any object, consequently the other must follow: even so, the object that haleth the sensitive part, draweth with all the will, and inclining her more to one part then ano∣ther, diminisheth her liberty and freedom. Moreover, the will, by yeelding to the passion, receiveth some little bribe of pleasure, the which moveth her to let the bridle loose unto inordinate appetite: because she hath ingrafted in her two inclinations, the one to follow reason, the other to content the
sense: and this inclination (the other being blinded by corrupt judgment, caused by inordinate passion) here she feeleth satisfied. Finally the will being the governess of the soul, and loathing to be troubled with much dissention a∣mong her subjects, as an uncarefull Magistrate neglecteth the good of the Com∣mon-weale to avoid some particular mens displeasure; so the will being afraid to displease sense, neglecteth the care she ought to have over it; specially perceiving that the soul thereby receiveth some interest of pleasure, or escheweth some paine. 3. Passions mightily change the quiet temper and the dispo∣sition of the mind: for the mind is at peace when the will ruled by prudence, over-ruleth, moderateth and governeth passions: and on the contrary, the soul is troubled, when passions arise up and oppose themselves against the rule of Government. First, Passions rebell against reason, and undermine the un∣derstandings of men to their great molestation. For, no sooner doth the mind endeavour to ascend to Heaven by contemplation, but inordinate pas∣sions hale the heart back again, and draw it down to the earth, or privily steale upon us, and transport the soul clean another way. Secondly, One passion fighteth with another; as fear opposeth anger, covetousness prodigality. And on a suddain men fall from one extream passion into another; as from the prime of joy into the Sea of grief. Thirdly, Passion is unsatiable. How en∣creaseth the passion of covetousness, as riches encrease? And herein we may resemble our passions to men affected with a dropsie, who the more they drink, the more they thirst: for drink causeth such a desire and encreaseth it; even so, a vehement inordinate passion inclineth vehemently the soul to embrace or fly the object propounded; and a stronger passion causeth a stronger propension and inclination, and consequently an insatiable desire of pleasure, or an exorbi∣tant abhomination of paine. Fourthly, Inordinate passions either prevent reason, or are stirred up by a corrupt judgment, and therefore neither ob∣serve time, nor place: but upon every occasion would be leaping into action, importuning execution. Let a man fall a praying or studying, or be busie in any negotiation of importance, and very often he shall feel a heedless passion to rush in upon him, importuning him even to leave all, and prosecute revenge, lust, gluttony, or some other unbridled desire. Sometimes you shall have a number of greedy passions like so many young Crowes halfe stra∣ved gaping and crying for fond, every one more earnest then another to be satisfied; to content them all is impossible, to content none is intollerable, to pro∣secute one and abandon the rest, is to carry so many hungry Vipers gnawing upon the heart strings of the soul. Fifthly, There is no man in this life which follo∣eth the stream of his passions, but expecteth and verily believeth to get at last firme rest, contentation, and full satiety of all his appetites: the which is as possible, as to extinguish a burning Ague with hot Wines, or drown an Eele with water. For, the desires of passion keep neither sense, order, nor mea∣sure. Sixthly, Inordinate passion it self is an extream torture and vexation; the Lord in great wisdom having so ordained, that they that will give way un∣to them, should feel the burden and trouble of them. Doth not anger, en∣vy, and pride more disquiet them that be distempered, then they be able to hurt or annoy any other man? 4. Rashness, inconstancy, craftiness are the companions of inordinate passions. The Resolutions and determinations of the passionate are unripe, inconsiderate, not well concocted: for judg∣ment blinded with passion, considereth not exactly, for the importance of the business, those circumstances which may withdraw it from the prosecution of such a vitious action. As they are uncircumspect, so be they inconstant, chang∣ing from the purposes and resolutions, which they had prudently determined in the calme of their passions. And yet passions breed craft, enforcing the mind to excogitate new waies and meanes for performance of what is affected.
What is said of love, that it is most witty, that may be said of all other passions. For, the passion delighting or afflicting the mind, causeth the judgment to think, invent, devise all meanes possible, either to enjoy the passion of de∣light, or to avoid the molestation of sadness and for. 5. Inordinate passions are hurtfull to the body, impaire health, breed humours, nourish diseases, shorten life. The second reason, to shew that affections must be rightly or∣dered, is taken from the profit and benefit of the affections well guided, and discreetly moderated. For, they rather serve for instruments of Vertue, then foments of Vice, and as an occasion of victory, then a cause of foyl. Christ our Saviour in whom neither sinne, nor inordinate affection could fall, no doubt was subject to these passions. My soul is heavy even unto death. He began to be afraid and heavy. The Scriptures do exhort us to love, fear, sorrow, rejoycing, mercifulness, &c. And therefore it were blasphemous to say, that absolutely all passions were ill, for so the Scriptures should exhort to evil. Lastly, If the motions of our wils be vertuous, directed with the square of Gods Law and Prudence, if the inferiour appetite or passions obey and concurre with the will, then with much more ease and pleasure, and de∣light, vertuous actions are accomplished and performed: Yea, oftentimes they take away the molestation and tediousness that occure in the practice of good works. (But of this more hereafter, in the holy exercise of particular affections.) Q. How may a man come to know his Affections, or to what Passion his soul most bendeth? A. 1. Consider with what company thou most delightest, and in them thou shalt see a patterne of thy passions: for like affecteth like, Customs and com∣panies are Cousen Germans; and manners and meetings for the most part sympathize together. 2. Thoughts and words discover affections. If one think and speak much of beauty, vaine attire, glory, honour or reputation; if he feel in his heart, that often he desireth to be praised, or to insinuate his own praise, it is most manifest that the passion of pride pricketh him. And so of all other affections: because the mind doth think, and the tongue will speak according to the passions of the heart. For, as a Rat running behind a painted cloth, betrayeth her self; even so, a passion lurking in the heart, by thoughts and speeches discovereth it self. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. For, as a River abounding with water, must make an inundation, and runne over the banks; even so, when the heart is overflown with affection, it must find some passage by the mind, mouth or actions. 3. By a certain reflection we may come to discerne our passions or Affections. Marke in other men their words, gestures and actions, when they seem to thee to proceed from affection ordinate or inordinate; and having well noted the fruits of affection, make then a reflection upon thy self, and weigh whether thou hast done, or daily doest such like. 4. It is good also to have a wise and discreet friend, to admonish us of our passions, when we erre from the path and plain way of Vertue: for self-love much blindeth a man; and ano∣ther may better judge of our actions, then we can our selves. 5. It chanceth sometimes by the Providence of God, that our enemies, (who pry into our actions and examine more narrowly our intentions then we our selves) discover unto us better our passions, and reveale our imperfections, then we our selves. Lastly, A good way to know the inclinations of the mind, is like the manner we come by the knowledge of the inclinations of our bodies, that is, by long experience. For, as we say, if a man, before forty years of age be not a good Physician of his own body, that is, if he know not whether his inclina∣tion bendeth, what doth him good, what bringeth harme, he deserveth to be registred for a fool; even so, he that in many years by continuall practice of
his own soul perceiveth not where his passions lie, he scarce deserveth the Name of a wise man, As he may be begged for an ideot, who riding an horse for twenty years every day from morning to night, yet knoweth not the qua∣lities of his horse, and the wices whereunto he is subject; so he which every day manageth his own soul, if after twenty years labour he cannot find whither the inclinations tend, he may well be thought either very passionate, or very simple. Q. How are the Affections to be ordered? A. According to the command of faith, uniformely, universally, sincerely, constantly. Cleaving to all good in an holy order, and shunning all evil in their severall kinds and degrees, as they are discovered to be evil by the power of faith judging according to the Word of truth. In what order the affections must be carried unto their severall objects, hath been noted be∣fore in the sanctification of the will and powers subordinate, and may be taken thence. Q. How are these Affections moved in us? A. Faith moveth, animateth, and setteth bounds to all sanctified affections: but there are sundry Motives to stirre them up. The first is sound and true reason; But, not every kind of reason hath force to stirre up affection, but an urgent and potent, either really or at least in conceit: This we may prove by experience, for common and ordinary Motives move us not much to love or like a thing: wherefore God to induce the Israelites to wish and desire the Land of Promise, described it as a Countrey flowing with milk and hony, &c. And commonly every one who would perswade us to love or affect any thing, highly commendeth it; or contrariwise, if a man would have us to hate and de∣test any thing, he endeavoureth as much as may be to make apparent the excess of evils, or great damages it importeth. Passions then must be moved with ur∣gent Reasons clearly, distinctly, soundly apprehended. And he that would move passion in other must deale discreetly, imitating herein the common practice of prudent Physicians, who apply their Medicine to the same Maladies with particular respect and consideration of the Patients temper; and so to a little Child they will not give the like purgation they would to a strong man. In like manner, common people and profound Doctors, are not to be per∣swaded with the same Arguments: for, popular perswasions these prize not, and deep demonstrations they pierce not. The way to fit both sorts, is, to propound deep Reasons plainly, and plausible Perswasions sharply, that the plainness of the one may make them plausible, and acuteness in the other may make them pleasant. In the Reasons which are produced to move and affect, great perspicuity is required, because the attention which otherwise should be imployed about the affection, will wholly be consumed or drawn to the understanding: for, it is impossible to attend much at one time both to speculation and affection. Again, our reasons should be largely declared, yet with sharp and short variety inter-laced, resembling a volley of shot spee∣dily delievered, but not without bullets to batter down the wals of wilfull affections. And as Passions are diverse, so Motives to stirre them up are va∣rious. 2. Affections are moved by the holy use of the senses, which are the gates whereby pass and repass all messages sent unto them. Affections are stirred by the hearing of the ear,Lam. 3.51. much more by the sight of the eye. Mine eye breaketh my heart. No sense is so sure and certain of his object and sen∣sation, as the sight; no sense rangeth abroad and pierceth the Skies like unto this; no sense hath such variety of Objects to seed and delight it, as this; no sense imprinteth so firmely his formes in the imagination, as this; no sense serveth the soul so much for knowledge, as this; no sense is put so oft in action, as this; no sense sooner moveth, then this; and consequently, no sense
well guided, more profitable to the soul then this. And here it is to be con∣sidered, that affections are not onely moved by their principall objects and di∣rectly, but also by certain appurtenances, appendices, or scraps of the prin∣cipal object, indirectly, which appertaine and have some reference thereunto. The reason of it, is from the very nature and heart of every affection: for when we love God, our Parents, or friends, we are well pleased, and content∣ed with all those treasures of goodness, honesty, wealth, and all other per∣fections they have, and wish them such as beseem them, which they want: and this we desire to see performed, and rejoyce when it is accomplished: In hatred and envy contrariwise, every one detesteth not onely the person, but also all that pertaineth unto him; neither can he abide to see any thing prosper which concerneth him. 3. Musick will move affections; as joy, and sadness. Heavenly Songs, as they be Arguments of spirituall joy, so do they kindle and inflame it. But how causeth Musick sorrow and sad∣ness? What are Jeremies lamentable threens, but a sorrowfull Song breath∣ed over the City of Jerusalem? What are Davids penitentiall Psalmes, but mournfull Themes inclining the soul to sorrow for sinne? Elizeus prepared his spirit to receive the influence of Prophesie by the straines of Musick. David in penning Psalms, ordaining Instruments, providing Musicians for the service of God, by Word and Deed taught us,Psal. 84.8. by the vertue of Musick to stirre up men to devotion. And for this cause it hath been usuall amongst them in the old Testament, after any great grace or favour shewed them by God, to rouse up their souls with musicall Songs and Instruments to give thanks, to give him thanks, and praise his Name, for the bestowing of such benefits,Exo. 15. Jud. 5. imparting to them such great good, or delivering them from such evils. And the Christian Church for the same effect useth the harmony of voyces, and that by the warrant of the holy Ghost. 4. Action in the Speaker doth move affection in the Hearer: But here it is to be noted, that he that would affect another in any kind, must be moved first himself: and as the internall passion is more vehement, the externall perswasion will be the more potent. For, how shall my reasons perswade another, when they have not first wrought upon my self? Q. What is the disorder of Affection that must be shunned? A. Affections be disordered. 1. When they are blindly or superstitiously moved, and not according to sound judgment. If the mind, which is the guide of affection, mistake and erre, the affections, which follow the errour of mind, cannot keep good rank. Zeal is evil, when it is not according to knowledge. 2. Affections, that prevent judgment or resist reason, and fol∣low sense, inclination, or appetite, are unruly and inordinate.Gal. 5.24. Rom 1.26. Rom. 7.5. God hath ordained, that affections should ever keep within the pale of sound reason, and move according to her information: if at any time they refuse her gui∣dance, and turn after vanity, agreeable or pleasing to corrupt sense, they are without compass and range amiss. And the danger of giving way to loose affections is very great: for, as wild horses that have gotten the reignes upon their own necks, runne hither and thither to the danger of the rider: so passions car∣ry men up and down into many evils, after they have burst the bands of rea∣son. He that hath no rule over his own spirit, is as a City broken down and with∣out Wals. As a City without fence lyeth open to the spoyl to be sacked,Prov 25.28. bur∣ned, and taken by the enemy at pleasure: so are they exposed to the tentations of Satan, and to the fraud and illusion of wicked men, who are ruled by their lusts and passions. 3. Partiall affections are vicious, when some good suiting with our disposition or corrupt affection is desired, loved, pursued, but some other no less good, necessary and excellent is disaffected. Universall good is the object of good affections: if we affect not every good that beareth the
stamp of God, we affect no good sincerely as we ought. 4. Immoderate affections are vicious, when some inferiour good is desired with greater eager∣ness then is meet,2 Tim 1 7. 1 Tim 3.2. Tit. 2.5, 12. Gen. 30.1. and the chief not affected as it ought. The desire of Chil∣dren is not unlawfull, but to be passionate for them, as was Rachel, Give me Children or else I die, is much awry. 5. Inconstant flitting affections are to be reprehended: for, God requires that the heart be constantly set upon him, and carried to that which he requireth. 6. Affections are most out of order when they resist good, and follow evil. Q. How are disordered Affections discovered and made manifest to o∣thers? A. By words and deeds, speech and action. Speech is the image of life, and discovereth what is hidden in the mind. If mens words openly tend to their own commendations, if they brag or boast of their valour in warres, learning, qualities given by nature, or purchased by nature, it is plain that they are of a proud disposition. If they discourse lasciviously or shameless∣ly, questionless what the tongue speaketh the heart affecteth. Much speech and hasty, proceedeth from rash foolishness. A fool uttereth all his mind, Prov. 29.11. In some majesticall and very grave persons, whose prudence and wisdom men much admire, few words pithy and leasurely spoken, argue both wisdom, gravity and magnanimity: but slowness of speech in some others, if it proceed not from naturall impediment in the instruments of speaking, is a token of slowness in conceiving, or of some great vain conceit they have of their own wisdom, which they would distill into other men by drops. Much affectation in speech proceedeth from most vain and notorious pride, which maketh men seek to please itching ears to gaine applause and commendation from them. Scoffing, gibing, nipping, and quipping with intendment of disgrace, proceedeth from pride and malice. For, it declareth contempt of others, or a great desire to bring them into disesteem. To dispute contentiously about matters that surpass our capacity, or at least that we understand not, for lack of exercise, study, or practice, cannot but argue great ignorance or ar∣rogancy: for, no wise man will contend in such matters as he knoweth not. It is not unbeseeming an ignorant man to propound his doubt to the learned, that he may be informed: but to contend about things beyond our sphere is no point of wisdom. Contradictions speech, whereby men shew themselves in company, able to controll, and gainesay other mens opinions, is rooted in vain glory. To discover secrets of importance to every man almost upon the first fight, before tried and sound experience of firme and faithfull friendship; is a token of much indiscretion and simplicity. The wicked inventions; which many use to sow dissention between friends, proceedeth from a most malitious, uncharitable, and envious mind, which hateth the peace of friends; it argueth also a crafty politick wit, apt to sift out other mens actions Affections also are dis∣covered by actions: for, as if the fruit and flowers be corrupted or vicious, we know the root must be infected: so if mens words or actions be disconforted, doubtless the soul cannot be well-disposed. A troubled Fountain yeeldeth unpure water, and an infected Soul, vitious actions. Pride, choler, and covetousness, commonly wait upon great Gamesters, who vaunt of their gaine, if they win, chafe if they be crossed in their game, and in as mad a mood, boast of their loss, if they lose. Although the most pleasure in play consisteth in Victory, yet to affect it too much, to rangle, to chafe, to fret therefore argueth an unmortified affection. To think, talk, and earnestly procure to have great chear, to feast often, to delight therein much, are tokens of gluttony. Jer∣full and fumish pronuntiation is the flame of that choler that lodgeth in the breast. Fidling about our Garments, gazing upon our selves, majesti∣call walking (except in persons of authority) are tokens of foolishness, pride
and inconstancy. If we see one much to please himself with others praises, and (as it were) to feed upon the wind of mens words; we may be assured that self-love and vanity possess the best tenement of his heart. And this we may know, if the person praised, either openly confess it, understand insinuate it, or as it were with a countenance silently approve it: for, as Gold is tried by the fire, so a man by the mouth of a Prayser. New-fangledness in apparell proceedeth from levity and inconstancy of mind: and the root of gay and gorgeous apparell, pride and arrogancy. Commonly by conversation men discover their affections: for he that frequenteth good company, for the most part is honest, and he that useth ill company, can hardly be vertuous. But of these things more at large in the discovery of particular Affecti∣ons. Q. How are unmortified Passions to be subdued? A. 1. To bridle extraordinary and unlawfull pleasures, it is good to ac∣custome our selves to abstaine from lawfull and not prohibited. He shall not fall in things unlawfull, that warily restraines himself sometimes in things lawfull. For, if one be addicted to drunkenness, he shall with more facility overcome this passion, if he abstaine from strong drinkes he most affecteth, even at such times as lawfully he may use them. 2. Fly the occasions which may incense the passions where unto we are inclined: for a commodious and fit occasion to steale maketh oftentimes Thieves, who otherwise would have been honest men. Wherefore he that committeth himself to Sea in a boisterous tempest, deserveth to suffer Shipwrack, and he that willingly without necessity dealeth with infected persons, may blame himself if he fall into their diseases. For this cause the Lord commanded that the Nazarites which were conse∣crated to him, should drink no Wine, nor any thing that might cause drunken∣ness: and lest they should by eating Grapes and great Reysins be allured to drink Wine,Numb. 6 1, 2, 3. he commanded them they should neither eat Grapes nor Rey∣sins. The third remedy may be drawn out of the very poyson of passions, that is, when a most vehement and rebellious motion assaulteth us, when the fierceness and tyranny thereof well-nigh possesseth us, when we are almost yeelding consent unto it: then should we turn the force of our soul with as much endeavour as we can to the contrary good,1 Cor 10. 2 Cor. 8.9. and with one naile drive out ano∣ther; make of tentations a benefit, let vertue in infirmity and weakness of resistance be more perfect and ennobled. For, as in Warres the valiantest Souldiers in greatest encounters are best tried, so in most vehement passions, the resolutest minds are best proved. For, Josephs chastity had never been so glorious, if his unchast Lady had not so vehemently allured him to defile the Bed of his Lord. Jobs patience had never been so conspicuous, if the passion of grief and sadness had not so violently seized upon him. Abrahams forti∣tude had never been so heroicall, if the death of his onely Son had not cut in a manner his heart-strings asunder. This meane is one of the most forcible and important remedies that men can use, especially for two causes. The first, that by these contrary acts are bred in the souls, certain habits, helps, stayes, or inclinations most opposite unto our passions: and therefore the passions being strong, they cannot be overcomed, but by the might of excellent ver∣tue. For, as the deeper a Tree is rooted in the ground, it requireth greater force to pull it up; even so, the greater possession the passions have taken of the soul, the greater vertue it needeth to supplant it. It seemeth that Job, after so mny temptations practised this remedy, when he saith,Job. 13.15. Although God kill me, yet I will hope in him For questionless, those pangs did incite him to desperation; the which with contrary trust in God he most valiantly suppressed Another cause may be yeelded, for that many passions proceed, not onely from the inclinations of nature, alterations of humours, bt by the
very suggestion of the Devill, who watcheth his opportunity, to take men at an advantage, and to induce them to sundry inordinate affections; for which cause they are called unclean Spirits, because they lead men into unclean passi∣ons and actions. The Devill therefore seeing his temptations so valiantly re∣sisted, his poysoned Darts rebounding into his own breast, I mean his illusions redound to his own shame and confusion, dareth not be so bold another time to invade so strong a Fort, but with all his Troope will fly from it, as a swarm of flies dare not approach near unto a boyling Pot.Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devill, and he will fly from you. The fourth remedy is to resist passions at the beginning. In all soares and diseases it is an approved Rule, that we must withstand the be∣ginnings. Cure the wound whiles it is green: and take Physick before the Ma∣lady have taken rooting. Use the remedy for vertue, that Pharaoh practiced for tyranny, in killing all the Infants of the Jews, lest they should encrease too much, and so over-runne his Countrey. Passions, while they knock at the door of the mind, whilest they are a little entertained if we expell them not quickly, they will lodge longer with us then we would have them. And the most easie way of all, and by spirituall men daily put in ure, is to drive the thoughts to some other object: for, as we use in common conversation, when two be brawling about any thing, to divert their talk to another matter (for as long as they continue about the same subject, they are in danger to fall into the same inconvenience). so the best way to expell an inordinate passion, is, to transport the attention to some other matter; as he that will be rid of an ill guest, the worse he entertaineth him, the sooner he shall be dispatched of him. The fifth remedy to mortifie passions is,1 Cor. 9.27. to chastise the body. For, question∣less he that pampereth his body, feedeth his enemy, and he that will feed it wi h dainties, cannot but find it rebellious. Spare diet, and much waking, is the best meanes to tame wild Beasts: Pamper an Horse, and you shall have him too wanton: Pamper the flesh, and it will kindle passion to over-rule. And he that will mortifie his passions, and let his body flow with delicates, doth like him which will extinguish fire by adding more fewell. The sixth remedy requi∣reth a resolute good will and endeavour to attain unto this perfect Government of a mans self: whence-from will follow a diligent execution of mortification; for, such a man will not cease daily and incessantly to demand grace and favour of God to overcome his rebellious nature, resist temptations, whithstand all false allurements of this inticing world. Such an one will examine daily his con∣science, and note what thoughts, words, or deeds against God himself, and his Neighbour, he hath committed; whereby either vertue is extinguished, or vice en∣creased: Such an one will determine in the morning when he ariseth, not to let pass that day, without the extirpating of some stinking and poysoned thorne, and planting some sweet and pleasant flower within the Garden of his Soul: Such an one will not onely prevent occasions, but also arme himself as well as he can to resist such temptations as he knoweth especially shall be offered in cer∣tain places and companies, which he cannot conveniently avoid. To this help∣eth greatly the consideration of that small pleasure, passions do yeeld; for al∣most in a moment they are commenced, practised, and past: wherefore much better it were to cross them a little, and win a Crown of Glory, then to please them a moment, to be condemned to Hell. The seaventh remedy, when thy passions are most vehement, then humble thy self before God with sorrow and shame, and seek for succour from Heaven; fly under the wings of Christ, beat at the gates of Mercy, and by the Prayer of Faith, crave grace to overcome thy misery. He is thy Father, and will not give thee a Serpent, if thou ask him a Fish: cast down thy self before him, open thy soares and wounds unto him, and the good Samaritane will poure in both Wine and Oyl; and then thou snalt see thy pssions melt and fall away as Clouds are consumed by the Sunne.
Lastly, by serious meditation upon the death and resurrection of Christ, we must work our hearts into the similitude of Christ, that his vertues may be stamped upon our soul, and we be made like unto him in righteousness and true holiness. The healing vertue of Christs death applied unto our hearts, will heale our affections, and renew them according to their first integrity. Q. How is a man to behave and carry himself when he is troubled with passions? A. The first point of Prudence, which all prudent men confess and observe, is to perswade our selves when we are moved with a vehement passion, that our souls are then, as it were infected with a pestilent Ague, which both hindereth the sight of our eyes, and the taste of our tongues, that is, corrupteth the judgment, and perverteth the will; that as certain Spectacles make Mountains seem mole-hils, and others, mole-hils like Mountains; even so, passions make the passionate to judge all those things which tend to the favour of his passion, reasonable, great and worthy, and all that stands against it, base, vile and naughty. Hereupon followeth, that at what time the passion is afloate, and reigneth, it were not good to make any resolution or determination of change: for, there be few men living, which have not over-shot themselves in this point, and repented when their souls were calmed, that they committed when they were tempested. 2. The second point may be, Not to vex and trouble thy selfe too much when a passion seizeth upon thee, but diverting thy mind from it, and re∣straining thy consent as well as thou canst from yeelding unto it; and in short time thou shalt see it vanish away: as we prove in daily temptations of ire, sadness, love, lust, and such like, which fall and consume away even by them∣selves; either because the impression made in the imagination diminisheth, or the attention of the soul distracted with other matter, faileth, or some other passion expelleth it, or the Devill ceaseth to tempt, either all these, or most of them mitigate, consume, and wholly subvert that passion which before so troubled us, and seemed insuperable. The third point which ought principally to be con∣sidered, and well weighed of those whose passions are most vehement and in∣ordinate, is this, that they which perceive in themselves such disordered affecti∣ons, ought first to know the root of them to be self-love, and the greater they find the boughs of their passions, the greater and deeper root let them be assured, lyeth hidden under the bottome of their soul: for which cause, such men must perswade themselves to have great difficulty to vertue, and extream facility to vice: that as they love pleasures of the body exceedingly, so they hate all that may hinder or oppose it self thereunto mightily. That they be blinded as Battes in their own conceits, apprehending that they love or hate, far differently from that it is in very deed; that they be commonly too rash, attempting greater en∣terprises then their forces are able to performe, and for the most part more bold then wise, guiding their actions not by reason and judgment, but by haire-braine affections. And as they are headlong and obstinate when strong passions pos∣sess them, so are they irresolute and inconstant when a weak affection doth move them. For, being accustomed to follow their appetites, as long as they continue they persist in one mood: but after the weak passion is appeased, their judg∣ments and determinations are changed. These men ought to be wonderfull in their words, and circumspect in their actions, alwaies having themselves suspected: wherefore it is good for them, first, To crave of God help and grace, to overcome so hard a nature. Secondly, To conferre with wise and discreet men about their own affairs and determinations, rather relying upon them then their own judgments. Thirdly, That every day they use some mean to over∣come their perverse nature: for, as we prove by experience, such men have many crosses and griefs of mind; their company commonly all eschew, and to be short they are a burden to themselves, and others: whereas if they would but with a little diligence moderate their passions, they would be humble and affable;
there is no sort of men, whose conversation would be more gratefull then theirs: for they are like unto a fat soyl that yeeldeth great abundance of what is sown, Good or Evil, Corne or Darnell, Flowers or Weeds. The fourth point of Prudence is, To conceale as much as we can our inclinations, or that passion we know our selves most prone to follow. For it impeacheth questionless greatly a grave mans credit, a great mans authority, and a civil mans good conversation, to be subject to some one only inordinane passion: for such a corrupt judgment hath now so much prevailed with men, yea, and ever hath been, that they will contemn the whole, for some notable defect; as for example, if we see a Picture of man or woman, drawn with excellent colours, great proportion, and Art; yet if there be but one eye, one arme, yea, or one finger out of square, men will say, the Image is spoiled for that one defect: even so, we try by daily talk, that commonly men descant upon other mens doings; they will say, such a Noble∣man is resolute in Wars, goodly in Person, but subject to choler, too much addicted unto his own judgment; such a man excelleth in learning, but pride over-ruleth him; such a Senatour judgeth profoundly, but is impatient in hea∣ring of causes; such a man reigneth in the Pulpit, but is blinded with covetous∣snes; such a man giveth great Almes, but attendeth too much to good cheer. Many inconveniences may follow, if others know what passions men are sub∣ject unto; for if thy enemies would be revenged of thee, no fitter meanes they might sleightly use, then to procure some way whereby thy passions should be stirred and put in execution: for by often ministring matter, thy passions would easily subdue thee, and by those baits it will not be hard to bring thee into the power of thine adversary. It is therefore a point of wisdom, to conceale passions as much as may be, and seriously to dispraise in words, that passion whereunto we are most inclined. I say not this, because I would have men to regard more their credit and reputation with men, then the approba∣tion of God, or to dread the danger of an enemy, more then the great dis∣pleasure of Almighty God, or yet to do one thing, and speak another, but that if he cannot but sometime of fragility slide, it may be a good way to re∣call him again, and not to fall so often, if he speak in dispraise of his own fault: for men will be ashamed to commit often, that they themselves dispraise eager∣ly. Lastly, It is an high point of Prudence to look well into the measure, deformity, and inconvenience of our passion, to shame our selves for it before God, and to endeavour to master and overcome our selves in private: so shall we be better able to subdue and keep them under in our conversing with others. To abate the power of turbulent affections, it is good every day to be drawing somewhat from them, and if at any time they exceed, (though but a little) up∣on private occasions, to curb them by the power of grace, and to arraigne them before the Tribunall of Grace. Continuall watchfulness and daily judging of our smaller Aberrations, doth keep under sinne, that it shall not domi∣neer over us.
CHAP. II. Generall Rules to direct us how to deale with them that be passionate. How the Affections may be divided. Of the sanctified exercise of those Affections that embrace their Object, and of those that decline their Object, with Reasons to move us to affect that which is good, and to avoid that which is evil. The Reason why we are so back∣ward to good, and forward to evil. A comparison betwixt the meanes of Vertue, and allurements to Vice. Of the Kindes of Af∣fections, viz. Intellectuall and Sensuall, These are not to be abando∣ned, but onely moderated. Question, SInce men by nature are addicted to conversation, let us consider of and set down some generall Rules, whereby we may be directed, how to live and deale with them that be passionate? A. 1. Likeness causeth love, and as every one judgeth he doth best, or at least approveth well; even so, he cannot disapprove, but allow the same in o∣thers. We see that Lyons, Tygres, and Leopards,Nec tua lauda∣bis studia, aut aliena reprendes, Nec cum ve∣nari volet ille, poemata; ang∣ges. Gratia sic fratrum ge∣minorum, Am∣phionis atque zethi dissiluit. Horat. Epist. lib. 1. 18. whose inclinations are most cruel, whose passions most fierce, yet one affecteth another, and liveth in quiet society, for the similitude of inclinations, and likeness of passions. Hereupon followeth, that if thou wilt please thy master-friend, or compani∣on, thou must as much as may be without sinne apparell thy self with his affections, and condescend to what is pleasing in his sight, so farre as will stand with a good conscience. But sometimes likeness of passion engendreth con∣tention, as we say one Potter hateth another, and among proud men there are ever brawlings: for if similitude of passions prejudicateth profit, dignity or honour, then likeness of affections causeth dissention. Proud men be pleased with praises, honour, and account, discontented with comparisons, with com∣mending their equals, in not yeelding them honour, in disparaging their actions. This wisely discerned and fore-known, giveth direction how we may prevaile with men addicted to such passions. 2. Men commonly hate those whom they know to be of contrary passions; whereupon proceedeth that common Proverb, He that hateth whom I love, how can he love me? For, as fire with fire doth never jarre, so fire and water can never agree. From which ground may be drawn this Rule, That when men are pssessed of a vehement passion, they must not be dealt with by apprehension or indignation, espe∣cially in vehement manner, but rather by mild and soft perswasions. For, he that is passionate will hardly be perswaded by him, whom he conceiveth contrary to him: yea, often those that at other times were good friends, in time of passions for such opposition, fall into endless contention. We see, when an house in the middest of the street is vehemently inflamed, it were bootless to quench the flame with water, but the best remedy, and commonly practised, is to pull down the next houses, that thereby the lack of foment might diminish the flame: so, him that rageth with anger, hardly you shall appease by wrangling or chiding, but either answer mildly, for, a soft answer pacifieth strife; or answer nothing, withdrawing the matter of anger from the sight. This Rule holdeth universally in all those which be our equals, or at least do not much exceed us in state, or we them. But if a superiour, or a Magistrate see his inferiour, or subject, vehemently carried in any passion, he may threaten or reprehend him, because one passion often cureth another: so here, the passion
of fear may expell the passion of anger, lust, or what else soever tempteth, either to the passionates evil, or any disorder in the Common-wealth; albeit, if the passion tend not presently to some sinne or great offence, it may be better to deferre such reprehensions till the subject be more capable of them. 3. Be not too credulous to men in their own causes: for as self-love for the most part conceives what appertaineth to our selves, with a greater shew of good and honesty, then indeed the thing carrieth with it; so men moved there∣with, declare the matter as they conceive it: for words spring from conceits, these are the Tree, those the Flowers and leaves, which do follow by just pro∣portion. Contrariwise, other mens matters, which hinder our profit or cross our designes, for the most part we extennate and abase. 4. Mild modest, humble, meek men are beloved universally, because we think them vertuous, who will honour or not contemn us. If Jacob bow before his Brother Esau, speak courteously,Gen. 33.2, 3, 4. call him My Lord, he shall asswage his fury. Gideon by his mild and modest answer,Judg 8.2, 3. pacified the anger of the Ephraimites, who began very hotly, though without any just cause, to expostulate with him, that he called them not to go with him to Battell against the enemies.Prov. 15.1. A soft answer putteth down anger. The second blow makes the fray, as the Proverb goeth. Wrath wanteth matter to work upon, if it be not opposed. Meekness sha∣meth anger; humility makes pride to hang down the head. Thus David by Abigails mildness, was stayed from the bloudy attempt which Nabals boiste∣rous roughness provoked him unto. Thereby Abraham prevailed with Lot. Contraries are cured with contraries, as we know, and Physicians cure not hot Agues by inflaming, but asswaging. The skilfull Fencer doth scape ma∣ny a blow, and foyl his adversary by declining and giving back, and not by opposing his body and weapon unto it. Cannon-shot batters down Castles and Walls, which yeeld not, but rebound from the soft pack of wooll, that gives place and resists not. The Lightning passeth by slight and slen∣der Objects, but consumes and devoures the solid and well-compact substances. And yet, who is he that sheweth forth this meekness and wisdom? But (as is to be seen in the common jarrings and quarrels of men) the most count it their glory (and boast of it afterwards) when their words be fierce and more stinging then their fellowes, and come out of a furnace seven times hotter then his. What (saith he) did he think I would turn my face from him or be put down with words? No, I trow I gave him the full measure that he brought, yea ten for it, I spared him not a whit. Loe how fools fome out the froth of their own shame. It were indeed an honour for a man to depart, and say, I see he was not in frame to be answered with angry words, therefore I durst not strive to out-shoot the Devill (as it were) in his own bow. That which he thinks becometh him, I count it my reproach, who profess to fight against my corrupt nature. But this is not to be taken, as though in all things we ought to yeeld to froward and peevish persons, but in our own private cases onely, and when we lawfully may, but in no cases or mat∣ters that are contrary to Gods will, or prejudiciall to his honour. If any rough, boisterous, proud spirit, be more incensed by meekness, rather then overcome thereby; roughness towards such bad and base natures, is more meet then kindness, so a man keep his measure, and contain himself within the limits of his calling, and under colour of resisting sinne in another, disobey not God, give not liberty to his own disordered passions. Thus Elisha willed the Elders to answer Jehorams servant.2 King. 6.32. 5. If thou wouldst work a man to pensiveness, sorrow for sin, the fear of God, take the oppor∣tunity that God seemeth to offer, when he openeth the ear, and mollifyeth the heart by afflictions. Crosses that make the heart sad, and cast it down with heaviness, make way for the entrance of godly sorrow, strike then for
the iron is hot. 6. No man ought to be employed to any Office, Act, or Ex∣ercise contrary to his natural passions or inclination. For, by long experience we learn, that men be oftentimes imployed to one Trade, and never can profit therein; contrariwise, when either they of themselves, or others, do change that course to another, whereunto they are inclined, they become very excel∣lent men. For, if inclination be lacking, the subject strive against the stream. This rule may not be understood so absolutely, but that it admitteth some limita∣tion, for some contrary inclination or passion, proceedeth not from defect of nature, or inability of mind, but from an ill and vitious self-will or wilfulness, and then it were good with sweetness and inticements to allure such a person to follow that Science, Art, or Trade, whereunto nature most inclineth him. Another exception is, if the impediments of nature be but small, and the ha∣biliments otherwise great, then the one ought to over-rule the other; and after a little labour in overcoming that impediment, will follow a great facility in the atchievement of the rest. Q. How may the Affections be divided? A. They may be ranked into two kinds: Some embrace their Objects; as love, joy, desire. Other shunne and decline them; as hatred, fear, &c. First, Touching the order of passions in generation and production, they all acknow∣ledge love to be their Fountain, Root, and Mother. For those that fly evil, presuppose the love of some good, the which that evil depriveth; as for ex∣ample, Who hateth death, but he which loveth life? Who feareth adversity, but he that loveth prosperity? And amongst them that prosecute good, love proceedeth: for the passions of our mind are not unlike the motions of our bodies: for as things naturally moved, have an appetite or natural inclinati∣on to the place whereunto they are moved, and rest therein: so it is with the affections, desire and joy presuppose love of what we move unto, or rejoyce in. This ordinary course keep passions: but sometimes this subordination is changed: for, if a man be wounded, upon a suddain, the present passion of grief and ire invade him: and so in many other cases, by accident, the foresaid order may be broken. Secondly, If we discourse of those Passions with reside in the sensitive appetite, it ever intendeth pleasure and delight, because there∣with nature is most contented: from which intention followeth love, hatred, ire and such like. Nevertheless, Vertuous men, whose passions are ruled by reason, level at an higher marke, and subordinate pleasure to honesty, and de∣light to Vertue; because (as we say) glory waiteth on Vertue, as the shadow followeth the body: even so, unto good actions followeth a certain pleasure and sweetness. Thirdly, If we compare our passions in dignity or perfection, then those wherewith we prosecute good, are more excellent then those where∣with we eschew ill: and among these, love holdeth the principall place, and as a Queen in dignity preceedeth the rest: because that love uniteth the lover in affection with the Object beloved, love is the root of all other affections, love joyneth us in friendship with God and man. Q. Wherein consists the sanctified exercise of those affections that embrace or pro∣secute their Object? A. In this, that they move to all known good soundly, orderly, in fit season, constantly at the command and appointment of a lively and wel-planted Faith. Q. What Reasons are there to move us to Affect that which is good. A. If we that be Christians will expend what meanes we have to do good, and what to do ill, we shall find that these be fewer in number, and weaker in force and efficacy, then the other. We are moved to do well, First, By the law of nature imprinted in our hearts, like a Lanthorne,Rom 2.1, or a Torch to direct
us in the darkness of the continuall night of this miserable life. Secondly, We see in every good Common-weale vertuous men preferred, esteemed, and ac∣counted of, why then should not credit and reputation nourish and augment ver∣tue? Thirdly, By natural discourse a man may well perceive how the Oyl of his carnall Lamp daily consumeth, the natural heat vanisheth, death approach∣eth; And therefore, why should not the vicinity and certainty of death cause him to lead a vertuous life? Fourthly, Nothing can have more force to allure a man to do well, then the peace and tranquility of the mind; a quiet and serene conscience is a continuall Feast; this we gaine by Vertue, this we loose by Vice. Fifthly, Why was Christ drawn up the Cross, but to draw us to Vertue from Vice? Why was he crucified, but to kill sinne? Why did he rise again, but to quicken us to newness of life? Sixthly, The internall gifts of God; the Ar∣mour of faith, hope, and charity, with graces and favours, wherewith the Holy Ghost endueth our souls, fortifies us against vice, and habilitates excee∣dingly to vertue. Seventhly, The manifold inspirations of God, tend to no other end, then to perswade us to vertue, and disswade us from vice. Eighth∣ly, Why hath God provided so many Teachers and Preachers, but to be so many watchmen over the House of Israel, to keep them from sinne, and al∣lure them unto godliness. Ninthly, The holy Scriptures were written with the finger of God, as Registers of his Eternall Will, Letters of Love to invite us to Vertue, and threatnings of ire, to dehort us from Vice. Therein by more sure authority he delivereth unto us whatsoever he had written more ob∣scurely in the Book of nature, perswading, directing, counselling to goodness, Piety, and Religion: disswading, diverting, threatning, and terrifying from vice, impiety and ungodliness: wherefore one of the chiefest scopes for which that Sacred Volume was sent from Heaven, was to make us decline from evil, and do good, die to Old Adam, and live to Christ, crucify sinne, and follow Vertue. Tenthly, The Sacraments of the Church, those Seales of the Covenant, and linkes wherewith the Members of Christs Church are United in Religion; Were they not instituted for the spirituall refreshing and watering of our souls to the increase of Vertue? Eleventhly, God in his infinite wisdom and love, hath given us, not onely Teachers in words, but also Actors in deeds; not onely them that filled our ears with godly perswasions, but also them which repre∣sented Vertue most lively to our eyes, with good examples and holy actions: so were the lives of Saints in all ages as so many Starres, which give us light how to walk in the darkness of this life, and so many spurres to prick us forward, that we should not linger in so Divine a Voyage. Their fervent charity repre∣hendeth our lukewarmness, their diligence in Gods service, our negligence, their watching and praying, our sluggishness and indevotion. But above all we have the spotless example of our Saviour Christ for our imitation, who most exactly fulfilled whatsoever was required of him, whose life is a perfect patterne and samplar of all true holiness without the least blemish or imperfection. Twelfthly, Those who live in Christs true Catholike Church, by the Communi∣on of Saints enjoy another mean to do well, and that is the common prayers and supplications of the faithfull, which beate continually at the gates of Gods mercy, and doubtless return not void again. Thirteenthly, Adjoyne hereunto the supernaturall Providence of God, which feedeth the Fowles of the ayr, and clotheth the Lilies of the field; who being so carefull of unreasonable creatures, what shall we think he doth to the faithfull? questionless, he neither will sleep nor slumber that watcheth the House of Israel, he will keep his servants as the Apple of his eye, he will give them meat in due season, he will finally sustaine their weakness, erect them if they fall, direct them if they erre, succour them if they want, refresh them in the heats of concupiscences, mitigate the tempests of their temptations, moderate the waves of wicked occasions. Fourteenthly,
Vertue of it self, even naked, if neither reward had been promised, nor punish∣ment threatned, might sufficiently have moved us to love her, and follow her: because her internall beauty, her grace and excellency, her fruit and sweetness is such, that her possession may be thought a sufficient remuneration. What wise man doth not esteem goodness the greatest Riches, the best Treasure, the soundest credit? Philosophers did erre when they placed happiness in the pos∣session of moral vertue: but in that error was enwrapped a truth, viz. that true Vertue was a rare and precious Pearle, Divinity, pure and excellent, ex∣ceeding all delights that nature affordeth, or art inventeth. Fifteenthly, Unto all these may be added, the rare and precious Promises that are made to them that follow after righteousness. If God had onely terrified us from sinne with in∣explicable paines, every discreet man might have had sufficient cause to abhorre it: but besides, having invited us to vertue, by promising ineffable joyes. Who can now excuse us? What can we pretend? With reward he pricks us for∣ward, with torments he draws us backward; he bridles our wantonness with one, and spurres on our slothfulness with the other. Q. Is it not mercenary and servile to yeeld obedience to God, being moved with hope of reward? A. It is not: for if the Lord be pleased by such Arguments and meanes to move and perswade us to obedience, how can it be mercenary or servile if we be moved with it? The Gospel, which is called the Law of Faith, was given for our direction, is the most perfect and compleat rule of life.Joh. 3.16.18. Rom. 2.7. Heb. 11.26. But the Gospel teacheth plainly, that it is lawfull to obey God in hope of future reward. Q. Wherein stands the sanctified Exercise of the Affections that decline or fly from their Object? A. In this that they shunne or decline all evil soundly, orderly, constantly according to the direction of Gods Word. Q. What Reasons are there to fly and avoid that which is evil? A. 1. The remorse of conscience, which in the very act of sinning, keepeth the watch of our souls, adviseth us by barking, that enemies are present: and after that we have sinned, how the wall is broken, and consequently opened to the invasion of infernall Thieves. 2. The infamy and discredit which waiteth upon vice, for, such aversion all men by nature carry in their minds from sinne, that no man can esteem in his heart, or love truly any vitious man. 3. All States and Kingdoms ordered by Laws, and governed by reason, appoint punish∣ment for vices, according to their qualities; for what mean, Prisons, Stocks, Fetters, Gives, Racks, Gallows, Hatchets, but to warn us that their creation was for sins extirpation? 4. If there were a Kings Sonne of most beautifull countenance and divine aspect resembling his Father as much as a Sonne could do; Who would not judge this Prince both inhumane and mad, if he would cut mangle, and disgrace his own face with grisly wounds, and ugly formes? What an injury were this against his Father? What an offence against all his Pa∣rents? Even such cruelty use sinners to themselves and God: because by sinning they deface that lively Image of God, according to which they were created and so are injurious not onely to themselves, but also to their God, their Fa∣ther, their King. 5. Who spoileth Gods Temple, is accounted irreligious, who prophaneth his Church, is thought sacrilegious: and who but he that hath lost all sparks of piety, dare adventure to attempt so henious a crime? Yet the Vitious adventure and performe it, they prophane their bodies and souls, they sell them to lust and wickedness, they expell the Holy Ghost from them, they put him forth of his just possession, which he holdeth over them as a Father by vertue, and after by wicked deserts enforce him as a Judge, like prisoners, to jayle them by Justice. 6. The horrible punishments mentioned in Scriptues
inflicted for sinne, even in this life, (if we had grace) might drive us from sin. For, what cast Adam out of Paridise? Sinne. What wounded him in nature, and spoiled him of grace? Sinne. What drowned the World? Sinne. What rained fire and brimstone from Heaven upon those infamous Cities of Sodome and Gomorah? Sinne. Many Examples more might be brought out of the Old and New Testament; as deaths of private men and Princes, subversions of Armies, dispersions of Countries, mortality of thousands, famine, warres, and plagues, captivities, and imprisonments, for no other cause inflicted then wickedness and sinne. But, let us onely fix our eyes upon the Sonne of God nayled upon the Cross, and we shall see how sinne mangled his body and afflicted his soul; those nayls, teares, streames of blood, exclamations, gall, and paines, are monuments of sinne, and memories of our wicked and perverse life. 7. Above all other evils incident to an evil life, of great force to restrain our untoward affections from sin, is the extream wrong we offer to God by it, transgressing his Law, perverting his order, disposition, and providence, injureing his infinite goodness, which ought of all creatures to be beloved, despising his Majesty, to which as to their last end, all men ought to direct their actions: And finally, shewing our selves ungratefull to his love, the which ought to be affected with all submission, obedience and gratitude. 8. What can more deterre men from wickedness, then their own private loss, or move them more to vertue then their own private gaine? By vice our souls are spoiled of their Riches, their most precious Robes, and heavenly Attyre; by vertue they are apparelled: by vice they are wounded to the very centre; by vertue they are healed; by vice they are impoverished, by vertue enriched; by vice they are defiled, by vertue cleansed; by vice they become dennes of Devils, by vertue seates of Glory. 9. Sensible Reasons want not to draw us from vice, no day or houre passeth wherein appeareth not some silent Sermon or real perswasion, to avoid sinne and follow goodness. Do we not see daily men die? Is not death of the body caused by the death of the soul? Is it not an effect of Adams disobedience? Whence proceed so many diseases, plagues, pestilences? What first brought hunger and thirst, paine and weariness, sweat and labour? What causes our daies to be so short, and full of misery? nothing but sinne and disobedience. 10. Wicked men do not onely by offences hurt themselves, and injure the Majesty of God, but also they abuse his gifts and benefits; like ungratefull debtors, who oppugne their creditours with their own goods. For, the un∣godly use that power of soul God gave them to love him, to hate him; that wit he bestowed upon them to meditate upon his Law and Commandements, they pervert by thinking how to transgress them; that heart he imparted to affect their Neighbours in pure love and charity, that they defile with malice and dishonesty; that tongue he lent them to utter his praises, that they blot with Oathes and Plasphemies; those hands he framed as flowing Conduits to feed the poor, those are wholly imploied to avarice and rapine; and to be brief, the soul and body which ought to have been kept in holiness and sancti∣fication, they abuse to offend God with sinne and prevarication. 11. All cre∣tures which God created for the use of man, and as servants attended upon him as their Master; all they, I say, exclaime against a vitious life; they are so ma∣ny Trumpets, which cease not to sound the abuses we offer them, by offending their Maker. The Sunne giveth light, to work works of light, and not to live in the shadow of darkness; and so of the rest. 12. The horrible paines of Hell thundred in holy Writ, the weeping and gnashing of teeth, the worme which will gnaw perpetually upon the very heart of the soul, with remorse of conscience: those inextinguible flames of infernall Furnaces; those remediless paines and torments without hope of recovery, remission or mitigation; and above all that privation and loss of the sight of the face of God, prepared
for all those that would serve him in sanctity and holiness of life: all these evils, certainly to be incurred, might sufficiently move any wise man to look a∣bout him, what he doth, whether he goeth, what reckoning he must make, for these be not May-games, but sacred truths registred in Scriptures, daily put in execution, hourely felt, and of every wicked man to be pro∣ved. Q. Is it not servile to forego sinne for fear of punishment? A. The Scripture expresly commandes the faithfull,Mat. 10.28. Heb. 4.1. & 2, 3. & 10.26. to fear him who is able to cast soul and body into Hell. In which words is contained not onely a description of the person that is to be feared, but also a reason, why that person, as a a Judge and Lord armed with that power, is to to be feared; as is manifest by the antithesis, fear not them that can kill the body, that is, for fear of that death which they can inflict upon you, do not commit those things which are acceptable to them, displeasing to God, but do that which is acceptable to God for fear of eternall death, which he can and will inflict, if to please men ye deny him As long as we live, the Law of faith, established or ratified with promises of eter∣nall life, and comminations of eternall death, doth continue. But so long as the Law of faith continueth, so long continueth our obedience effected by meanes of the threatnings and promises. For, what arguments God useth to move us, it is not absurd for us to be moved with them. But God is pleased to use Arguments drawn from comminations of eternall punishment. Again, the reason of that positive obedience is one, which is performed to some Com∣mandement, and that freely, and willingly; another of that, which floweth rather from some motion or force of nature, then from the Commandement of another and our choice and liberty. For, that obedience is best performed, which is performed according to his will, who gave the Law. But it is perfor∣med according to his will, when any man performeth it moved with those Ar∣guments, by which the sovereigne Commander would have his Law to be esta∣blished. Nor is it servile to be moved to obedience for fear of eternall death, but grudgingly, unwillingly, not freely to performe some externall acts of obedience. If a man easily, freely, with propense will, that is, with all his heart and all his soul, yeeld obedience to the Commandement of his superiour, with whatsoever argument he be moved to obey, he is said to obey as a Sonne, not as a slave. Nevertheless, the Child of God is not distrustfully to fear fal∣ling into condemnation; but so to fear it as to be warned against sinne, which leadeth unto it. He is to fear it as a thing which he is assured to escape, but so as he must withall depart from iniquity. The godly mans confidence in the Pro∣mises of mercy, is no greater then his care to walk in obedience; his assurance to escape eternall death, is answerable to his casting off the works of darkness: so, that fear of eternall wrath, as it makes men fly from sinne, may well stand with confident assurance of eternall happiness and finall perseve∣rance. Q. If we have so many meanes, so forcible, so Divine, so continuall, so super∣naturall, to serve God, to follow Vertue, to fly Sin; What is the reason that we are so dull and untoward to good, so forward to evil, for one that doth well, thousands do ill? A. The main cause is Original corruption, whereby we are prone to evil, slow to good. But besides this, we may adde these Reasons. 1. The lack of prudent meditation. Men miscarry so often in this perigrination, through the want of good consideration: because most of the meanes God hath vouchsafed to bestow upon us, require a certain meditation and ponderation. For, they be like hot coales, the which you may take in your hands, and presently cast a∣way without burning, [because all actions wel nigh require time or space for their operations] but if you hold them a while, you shall feel their effects. So it
falleth forth in the Mysteries of our faith, he that meditateth, burneth, he that prefunctorily runneth over them, scarce feeleth their heat. Meditation bloweth the coales by consideration, whereunto followeth the flame of love and affecti∣on: for otherwise what profit can we take of the inconstancy of our lives, and certainty of our deaths, of the severe and infallible judgment of God, the inexplicable paines of Hell, the ineffable joys of Heaven, if we never con∣sider them? What availeth us to have the Scriptures, that God punished in this life so many with extraordinary deaths, that by sinnes we are spoyled of grace, wounded in nature, dis-inabled to goodness, and incited to illness, if we never ruminate them in our minds, or ponder them in our considerations? Question∣less, it were to swallow meat without chewing, which rather endamageth bealth, then restoreth the lost forces. The second reason is ill education and wicked company.Jer. 13.23. As it is impossible for the Ethiopian to change his skin, so is it for youth brought up licentiously to change their ill manners; for use bree∣deth facility, facility confirmeth nature, nature strongly inclined, can hardly be diverted from her common course, but followeth her vitious determination. Again, ill examples and ungodly conversation imprinted in tender years and weak souls, take such root, that hardly after they can be supplanted. This we see by experience, that as those speak with whom Children converse, purely, or barbarously, so Children learn. Wherefore holy Writ hath instructed us, that as a man useth wise or foolish company,Prov. 13.20. 1 Cor. 15.33 so he shall become himself wise or foolish. A man therefore being brought up among wicked men, for the most part accommodateth himself to their humours; the reason is, not onely, because, as men perswade by words, so they do much more by deeds, every action be∣ing a silent perswasion, but also for that many examples, I know not how, come at length, to breed such impressions in men, that even vices seem vertues. The third reason is present delectation: for that we hope is future, that plea∣sure worldlings perceive, is present. Sensible pleasure feedeth the corporal substance of senses, and therefore we easily perceive it: but vertue affecteth the soul, not after so palpable and gross manner, and therefore despise it. Where∣fore mens souls, by inveterated customs used to sensuall and beastly delights, either not believing, or mistrusting, or rather doubting of spirituall joys, they neg∣lect, and for the most part care not for them, contenting themselves with their present estate,Psal. 49.12, 0. not looking any further: and so as beasts they live, and as beasts they die. For, since they see not by faith present, those things which we expect by hope, or abhorre by fear, in the mean time the Devill, flesh and world, delighting them with a present baite, they neglect that they should expect, and accept that they find next: not unlike to Children, who preferre an Apple be∣fore their Inheritance: For, worldlings will be of the surer side, they think it better to possess one Bird in their hands, then expect two in the fields; to be sure of a present commodity, then to be uncertain of a future gaine. Fourthly, The lack of preservation hindereth our spirituall profit; because our souls with∣out prayer, meditation, the Sacraments of the Church, exercise of vertue, and works of piety, those balmes which God has prepared as preservatives, are soon infected with vices, and stink with sinnes; not unlike a dead body, which for lack of a living soul daily falleth away by putrefaction, looseth colour, tempe∣rature, all sweetness, and becometh gastly, loathsome and stinking. If we be negligent in the meanes of grace, remiss in the service of God, inconstant in the pursuit of vertue, no marvell if vice grow, and our appetite to vertue de∣crease exceedingly. Q. Let us briefly compare the means of Vertue and the allurements to Vice, that it may the better appeare which are the more forcible and weighty? A. 1. The Devill by his suggestions allureth us to sinne. He represents pleasures with a goodly shew, propounds vertue as a most bitter Object. His
craft is wonderfull, his malice extream, his experience long, his forces mighty, his darts invisible. But unto these inticements of Satan, we may oppose the inspirations of the holy Spirit, the admonitions of the Word, the readiness of the good Angels to further us in the waies of holiness. 2. By evil examples we are vehemently inticed to vice and wickedness. But we have the express charge of God to walk in holiness, which is more to be regarded then many ex∣amples of the wicked. We have also the examples of Christ and his Apostles, the Prophets and Saints daily preached, besides the practises of many godly men living amongst us, whom we see, which cannot but countervaile the examples of men, either void of reason or Religion: for, who is he, but either an Atheist or a fool, who will imitate anothers vices contrary to law, conscience and rea∣son, onely because he seeth many do so? 3. Inconstancy, whereby we become wonderfull various, and fickle in our own estates, exercises, and manner of living, is a great impediment to godliness. But against this inconstancy may be opposed many meanes to goodness, of greater force and efficacy, the which can more constantly further us to goodness, then inconstancy can incite to illness. Have we not registred in holy Writ, and sounding alwaies in our ears, the inexplica∣ble joys of Heaven promised to the godly, and the terrible paines of Hell threatned to the ungodly? Will not the fear of Gods judgment, which houre∣ly we attend, enforce us to watch and pray, lest we be taken at unawares? May not the incertainty of our deaths, move us to a constancy in life? Will not so many warnings of Death, Judgment, Hell, Heaven, so often inculcated, suffici∣ently stirre us up to stand upon our ward? Cannot so many stayes of grace up∣hold and stay the inconstancy of nature? How many are withholden from wick∣edness, onely through terrour of temporall judgment? and shall not so many terrours countervaile a fickle and inconstant inclination? where lieth the Anchor of hope, and unmoveable grounds of faith and charity? 4. Sensuall pleasures work strongly upon the nature of man to draw it to vice. But what are all these fading, transitory pleasures? which waver like wind, quickly cloy, sting like scorpions, give no contentment; What are they in comparison of that true Peace, divine, solid, pure, permanent joy of the Holy Ghost, that passeth un∣derstanding, which God bestoweth upon them that fear him? What to that plea∣sure, comfort and contentment that issueth from vertuous actions? But most of all, what to the incomprehensible joys of Heaven freely prepared for, and certainly expected of them that follow righteousness. 5. Discontent with our estates is no small hinderance to the progress of vertue. But those who attend indeed to serve God, find a certain secret Manna, a Paridise of Consolations, which will easily mitigate the crosses and discontentments ministred by a nature ill inclined: for, as God permitteth no evil to escape unpunished, so he letteth pass no good unrewarded; and although this reward shall be reaped in the Har∣vest of Eternall life, yet with a quiet conscience, the tranquillity of mind, an internall peace and consolation in heavenly affairs, he fully in this life recom∣penseth all disasters and calamities which occurre. The crosses of this life should drive us to the practice of holiness: because without godliness there is no contentment. Wealth cannot stay, riches cannot satisfie the mind of man; the pleasure of sinne is a deadly torment, a continuall vexation unto the heart. What then will quiet and content the soul? Nothing but true piety and godliness. It is good to have the heart stayed, or ballaced as it were, with grace,Heb. 13.9. not with meats. That that must keep the Ship stiffe and steady on the Sea, must not be leavers and shores without it, but weight and ballast within it. So, that that must stay a mans raging and ranging desires, must not be the outward sup∣porting of his worldly estate, but the inward ballacing and setling of the heart and mind; that which Gods grace alone can do.Psal. 37.16. Prov. 15.16. And in regard hereof it is that the Psalmest saith, that a small matter to the godly, is much better then the
greatest wealth and riches, that the ungodly or mighty hath or can have. It is godliness then alone, that can cause true contentment; and that can cause true con∣tentment alone. Godliness alone bringeth man home unto God, out of whom true contentment cannot be had. For, the foul of man, as it beareth the I∣mage of God, so nothing can satisfie it, but he whose Image it beareth. 6. Ma∣ny and great persecutions are raised against them that exercise themselves in well-doing, which doth not a little hinder many from the practice of holiness. But against the terrors of persecution sundry encouragments may be opposed. First, As he that guideth by his providence the sterne of mens souls, permitteth them not to be moyled with tentations above the forces and abilities wherewith they are indued; so likewise, he will not see them so dejected with crosses, that he will not errect them with consolations. So said he, who well had tried the passions of the Cross: For as the passions of Christ abound in us, even so by Christ aboundeth our comfort.2 Cor. 1.5. Psal. 93.19. Heb. 12.5. Secondly, If we weigh that the Sunne setteth the same houre to him that passed the day in good works, in fasting and prayer, as to him which viciously spent it in feasting and play, we shall per∣ceive how vain fancies, and voluble crosses vanish away as little Clouds before the Northerne winds. Thirdly, The troubles of this life are nothing in com∣parison of the eternity of pleasures, provided and kept in store for them that with patience continue in well-doing. Worldly men will lay out money before hand for great advantage; And shall not we adventure our goods, honour, li∣berty and life in the cause of God, for an incorruptible Crown of Glory? It is the best traffick to part with all that we have, even life it self for Christ his sake: For, they that forsake all for the truth and Gospel, shall reape a thou∣sand-fold more in this life, and in the world to come Eternall Glory. 7. Neg∣ligence in serving God, or seeking meanes how to come to our end, is a great impediment of vertue: when matters of honor, pleasure or profit are sought with double diligence. But against this poyson we have divers remedies, and cures of vertue to heale these sores of vice. For, consider but with thy self, that notable Parable and palpable Reason taught us by Christ, and proved by con∣tinuall experience, when the rich man hath massed up his Treasures with hook and crook, moyling and toyling, when he thinketh to enjoy, loe, a voice cometh, Thou fool, this night shall they fetch thy soul from thee, and then whose shall all these things be? And doubtless, if men were wise, the continuall fear of death might enforce them to condemn such a drudging life. Besides, if all creatures by the instinct of nature, endeavour so much to winne their full and compleat perfection, Why should we degenerate so farre from our own nature, as not to accomplish that we lack? Mark but the Seed cast in to the ground, how it la∣boureth to die, after to live, how it fixeth his roots, pierceth the ground to en∣joy the Sunne and ayr, erecteth the stem, springs and husks, issues the ear, yeelds with the winde, and never gives over till Corne be brought to a full ma∣turity. We see how new Wines, Beer, and all Liquors work, by boyling the rawer parts, expelling the dregs, reducing themselves to a due temper, proportionated mixture and perfection: if these insensible creatures so industri∣ously labour to come to their end, shall not we endeavour to atchieve our end, and perfection, and felicity? If they according to their small ability imploy their naturall Talents, why should not we endued with so many graces, procure our own spirituall good and welfare? All things naturally move to their cen∣ter or place of rest, and so much the swifter, as they come nearer unto it. You cannot hold a stone in the ayr, but it will fall down, and its motion will be more speedy in the end then in the beginning Heaven is the habitation and resting place of the soul, it cannot be quiet till it come thither, from whence it came.Rom. 3.1 And should not we covet happiness and perfection with the more earnestness, as we come nearer unto salvation? Why standeth God at the
doors of our heart beating, but to inter in? Why do Gods servants cry out upon our negligence, but to bring us to diligence?Apoc 3.20. Why doth God punish ma∣ny in the prime of their years, in the fat of their fortune,Jer. 25.34. in the glory of their prosperity, but to advertise us by their examples of the inconstancy of this world, and that we might learn to be wise by their losses, to be vigi∣lant and carefull by their carelessness. 8. The flesh molesteth us in the service of God, with an Army of unruly sensuall passions, for the most part withdraw∣ing from goodness, and haling to illness. They toss and turmoile our miserable souls, as tempests and waves the Ocean Sea, which never standeth quiet. Our souls are puffed up with self-love, shaken with fear, now flowing with concupi∣scences and desires, and presently ebbing with desperation and sadness: joy al∣tereth the mind, and ire tyrannizeth and consumeth both body and mind. A∣gainst the garboile of these tumultuous passions, we may oppose the barking, biting and gnawing of a wounded conscience, which waiteth continually upon inordinate passions. Also we may oppose the Law of nature, the brevity of all pleasures; for no passion can long content the mind, but even a gust of plea∣sure gulleth the soul, and so cloyeth it, that the very dainties seem loathsome. Hereunto may be added, the infamy and disgrace, which commonly accompanieth exorbitant passions. What gaine we by fulfilling passions and giving way to lusts? When the account is cast, nothing is gotten but this, that we have changed our condition, and are become bruitish. The beasts of the field en∣joy sensuall delights in common with man; and if we hunt after none but these, be contented to loose spirituall comforts to possess them, do we not make our selves worse then bruitcreatures, in that we degenerate from our kind, and conforme unto them? Lastly, Passions are set in subjection to the will, which is the commander of the outward man, that they cannot draw us to evil, un∣less we yeeld unto them. They may stirre and rebell against reason, but cannot prevaile to the committing of evil, if the will consent not. 9. The many oc∣casions offer'd daily to do ill, the great readiness of matter and favourers there∣of, are main impediments of vertue, furtherances of vice. The world is full of allurements, the occasions of sinne are ever at hand, and multitudes are ready to tempt and perswade unto wickedness. But if the matter be well weighed, we have many motives and means to do good, more then occasions to do ill, as appears by that which hath been said before. Compare the occasi∣ons of sinne, with the causes and reasons why thou shouldst eschew evil, and follow that which is good, to wit, the Law of God, the light of nature, the peace of conscience, the joys of Heaven, the torments of Hell, the manifold blessings that accompany well-doing, the sundry crosses, afflictions, evils, dis∣graces that pursue the sinner and ungodly, and upon little consideration it will be most evident, that the means of good are most weighty and forcible. There be many that perswade to evil, some, though few in comparison that counsell to good: but the advice of one that teacheth or informeth what is just and up∣right, is to be preferred before the suggestions of many thousands that would allure to evil: for, the force of perswasion depends upon the truth and sound∣ness of reasons alledged, not the multitude of voices: But truth favours them, that undertake the maintenance of piety, and exhort others to the practice of it; they use deceit that would allure unto sinne. What?Prov. 24.24. that the works of darkness bring infamy and disgrace, even in the judgment of them that sollicit unto it. The inciters unto sinne, cannot but disregard them, that consent unto their counsell. Q What are the kinds of Affections? A. Of affections some are Intellectuall, others Sensuall. That there are some affections in the highest, and chiefest part of the soul, cannot be doubted: For, to God the Scriptures ascribe love, hate, ire, zeal, who cannot be subject to
any sensitive aberrations. And therefore, as in him they are perfections, and we are commanded, and may imitate him in them, there is no reason why they should be denied unto us, in such sort as they be perfect, and that is principally in the intellectuall power of the soul. Besides, we know most certainly, that our sensitive appetite cannot love, hate, fear, hope, &c. but what by imagination or sensitive apprehension may be conceived: for, we may love an ill thing, but we cannot love an unknown thing. Now experience teacheth us that men do fear the judgments of God, they love him, and hope in him, they hate sinne, and exercise many notable affections which reason prescribeth, and whereunto the sensitive apprehension ascendeth not. Finally, as our wit understandeth whatsoever our senses perceive, even so our will may affect whatsoever our passi∣ons do follow: for, as the object of the wit is all truth, real or apparent, so the object of our will is all goodness indeed, or carrying the gloss thereof. But these affections which reside in the reasonable part or power of the soul, differ much in nature and quality from those that inhabite the inferiour parts of the soul: because, these being bred and born in the highest part of the soul, are immateriall, spirituall, independant of any corporall subject, but those of the sensitive appetite are materiall, corporall, and depending upon some bodily instruments. Q. How may it appear that these passions, specially the sensitive, are not to be abandoned, but onely moderated according to the Rule of reason and faith? A. 1. Vertue never ruines that which is wholly conformable to reason. But what is more reasonable then to see a man moved with pity and compassion of his like, of his friends, or of his kinsman? What inhumanity were it for a Mother to see her Child in the throat of wild a Beast, or exposed to Ship-wrack, or broken upon a Wheele, or torn in pieces by tortures, or only sick of some violent infirmity, and not to have her soul sensible of grief? Would we that a vertuous man should not be touched with indignation to see crimes honoured, and the wicked advanced to the height of dignities? These motions being so just, were it not a great cruelty to seek to suppress them, as it were, in despight of nature? 2. To apprehend evil, to fear punishments, to attend recompences with joy, to long after Promises, are they not so many incouragements to piety, temperance, and other vertuous actions? Who is it then, that will blame so commendable a thing? Nay, is it not to quench the fruits of vertue, and to deny it the content which is due unto it, in enting off thus generally all passions? For, who knoweth not, that she doth usu∣ally plant in the souls of men an ardent love of the goodly fruits which she pro∣duceth? What just man but feels a certain pleasure and sweetness in the effects of justice? What sober man but receives content in the actions of sobriety? 3. Who doth not know but the passions of our souls are the objects of many excellent vertues, which do moderate them, and reduce them unto reason, when they seek to fly out? Fortitude is nothing but a mediocrity betwixt fear and hardiness: That is to say, it is nothing but a vertue by meanes whereof we do moderate our exceeding fear, and our immoderate boldness. The like may be said of courage, patience, perseverance, modesty, honesty, temperance, and divers others. 4. The sensitive appetite is a present of nature, which God hath freely bestowed upon us: but vertue never destroyes nature, but adds un∣to it the perfection which it wants. It must then suffer the sensitive appetite to act according to his inclination, yet moderating his motions, and restrain∣ing them under the Laws of reason. For, as health doth not consist in the ruine of contrary qualities which are found in man, but in the temperature which a good constitution gives them: And, as to make a perfect musique, we must not take away the diversity of Tunes, but reduce them to a good accord to
make the Harmony perfect; so the strivings of vertue consist not wholly to root all naturall Passions out of the soul, but to moderate and governe them by the Rule of reason. 5. Passions, if they grow inordinate, be infirmities of the soul: but if they submit to reason and the Laws of faith, they are instruments and objects of vertue, the armes of reason, and as it were lively sparks which inflame desires in our souls. CHAP. III. Wherein the holy Exercise of Love consists, and why it is to be rightly ordered. The Means or Motives whereby Love may be stirred up. What those Exercises of Love are that must be shunned. Of the Marks or Signes of Love. Question, LEt us now come to the sanctified use of some Affections in particular, and first to begin with Love, which is the prime and chief Affection Intellectuall or Sensu∣all: wherein standeth the holy exercise of it? A. In that it followeth the Motions of faith, and being ruled by the light of truth, doth imbrace all good soundly, constantly, and in an uniforme order ac∣cording to the Law of God. Q. Why is Love to be rightly ordered? A. 1. When this Passion contains it self within the bounds of honesty, it is a lively Spring and Fountain of all good things in the life of man. But when like a wild and untamed beast it exceeds the bounds of reason and limits of truth, there is no misery which it brings not into the world, nor any disorder which it causeth not in our lives. It is as it were a fatall Source, from whence flow all kinds of horror, uncleanness, adulteries, incests, sacriledges, quarrels, warres, treasons, murders, parricides, cruelties, and violences: besides, the particu∣lar torments it gives unto the souls of such as give themselves to be surprized; filling them with envies, jealousies, cares, terrors, yea and madness; drawing them many times to despair, and to do things whereat Heaven and Earth blush and are ashamed. 2. Love prescribes a Law to our other desires, and to all our other passions; so, as we may terme it the Key and beginning of our thoughts, of our words, of our actions, and of whatsoever we do in this life: So it makes the first impression in our souls, where it excites the desire of that which we resolve to pursue; and then it fortifies this desire by hope, which inflames us to the pursuite of that we desire; and if there appear any difficulty, it hath no rest, untill it hath vanquished and surmounted all lets, wherein she settles her contentment and rest. 3. Love hath an uniting vertue, by meanes whereof it causeth him that loveth to aspire to unite himself to the thing beloved. They which love, said Aristophanes, would passionately desire to be transformed, and changed one into another, and of two bodies to become one. But for that, this transformation cannot be without the destruction of their being, they strive to recompense this defect, by a civil and honest union, which tends not to the ruine of their nature, but contents their affections; that is to say, they con∣verse continually together, entertain their passions, and are as little absent as may be one from another. Moreover, they have the same thoughts, the same desires, the same affections, the same wils, the same delights, and the same distasts, and seem to be but one soul in two bodies. So, as that which is pleasing to him that loveth, is in like manner to the party beloved, what he affects the other embraceth; and what he rejects the other flies, and doth abhorre. So, as their
wils being thus strictly united, all their actions and carriages conspire to the same end, and propound unto themselves the same Object. For, Love is a desire to enjoy the good we propound unto our selves, as proper for our content, and capable to make us in some sort better by the fruition. But this enjoying and participation cannot be effected but by uniting the Object to our affection, which is the same good we propound unto our selves, wherefore it is the essence of Love that it produceth this Union. 4. Love causeth the soul of him that lo∣veth, to be more where it loves, then where it lives. The reason is; for, that the souls of such as love, are perpetually attentive to contemplate the Image of that they love, and have no other thought nor greater pleasure then that they receive by this sweet entertainment: By reason whereof the soul making shew of a more exact presence, where it doth most frequently work, it followes thereby that it is more with the party beloved, then in its own body. For these Reasons it followeth, that Love (if it be not rightly ordered) will draw the heart to vanity: but being truly directed, doth most sweetly linke and unite the soul unto God. If Love be not set upon God as it ought, we must nece∣ssarily stand guilty of spirituall adultery, because the heart is withdrawn from the chief good by some carnall or base pleasure. Q. What are the Meanes or Motives whereby Love may be stirred up in us? A. The Meanes or Motives to stirre up Love are many, as we will shew in one particular Branch, sc, the Love of God, which may be applied to other things, as occasion is offered. Parentage.1. We love our Parents as Authors of our being, and imparters of life, and this without Teacher by nature we are instructed. But there is a very small spark of Paternity in our Progenitors, compared to God. He gave them bo∣dies, being and life to be Parents; he preserved, conserved and enabled them: he created our souls alone, wherein they neither had part nor action; he for∣med our bodies, when they never minded us; he kept us day and night, when they never remembred us; yea, when both they and we were fast asleep, his watchfull eye waked over both them and us. Benevolence.2. In the Progress of our tender years, we love them who bestow favours and benefits upon us. But if we consider the meat we eat, the cloths we wear, the ayr we breath, the senses we use, the life we enjoy, the wit wherewith we reason, the will wherewith we affect, all are Gods daily gifts, hourely, momently; yea, instantly by his provident hand upheld and maintained. Of all Benefactors he is the best, and worthily deserves to be loved most. In every instant we wholly in body and soul, life and being, depend upon him and in every instant, if it were possible, we should consecrate our selves intirely, with most gratefull recognition and remonstrance of his benefits bestowed upon us. Excelency.3. The excellency and worth of men famous for courage, justice, wisdom, or piety, enforceth a reverent affection towards them, and men count it an ho∣nour to be admitted into society with them. But, what is the worthiness of man, compared with infinite surpassing Glory and Perfection of God? What hath their power to do with his omnipotency? Their base excellency with his supream Majesty? Their prudence, policy, stratagems, with his infinite Wisdom, and incomprehensible Counsels? As the high pitch of mans prehemi∣nency is vile vassaladge compared to the sovereignty and blessedness of God, so his love should disdain not onely to be equalled, but also conferred with theirs. Beauty.4. Many men are ravished with beauty, in such sort that their hearts are more present in thoughts and desires with such bodies as they liked and loved, then with that body wherein they sojourned and lived. But that beauty of the
Lord transcendeth this gross, terrene, massie, corruptible beauty, more then all the world, the least graine of sand which lyeth upon the Ocean shore. For, his harmony, consort, and proportion, springeth from the admirable Union of all his Perfections. The beauty of any or all the creatures is infinite, as they are of limited essence; Of God most finite, as he is boundless in him∣self. 5. Bounty,Bounty. humility and goodness, are principall Motives of love. All Beasts, though reasonless, yet in love, follow this generall instinct and inclina∣tion of reason, imprinted in their hearts with the indeleble Characters of Divine Providence, to affect nothing but that in some sort concerneth their good. But God is good of himself, essentially, without list or limit, all things else by limitation and participation. An Angel hath goodness, and therefore is amiable, yet he is but a drop distilled from God, in that quantity, degree, and measure his wisdom prescribed, and his limited nature required. As God is good in himself, so is he to his creatures. The Lord is good to them that fear him, to them that hope in his mercy. How good is the God of Israel to them that be pure in heart? How bountifull and humble, that he disdaines not the signification of our affection towards him? Nay, his goodness reacheth to all things that he hath made. What man ever lived and enjoyed not the heat and light of this visible Sunne? Or who ever lived or continued life, but by the beames of God his invisible bounty? 6. Beasts and men are carried with an unsatiable desire of delight,Delight. as daily experience testifies. But God is the Paradise of pleasure, the delight of de∣lights. In his presence there is fulness of joy for evermore. Nor are all the Treasures of spirituall, honest, vertuous, supernaturall, divine pleasures re∣served for the Saints in Heaven: but even in this barren wilderness, in this troublesome world, God refresheth his servants with spirituall Manna and sweet streams of Consolation. For, what are those admirable comforts which the faithfull feel in the inundation of their adversities, endured for the truth, but as Rivers of water in a drie ground? What signifie those secret joys, which proceed from a good conscience grounded upon a confident hope of future sal∣vation, but those great clusters of Grapes shewed unto them, in signe of the fertility of the future Land of Promise? What else can the sweetness of fervent Prayers prognosticate, but the infinite suavity and happy contentati∣on, which once fervent believing Lovers shall enjoy in blessed fellowship and communion with God? 7. All men love Profit,Profit. and that best which they judge most profitable. But God is the inexhausted Treasure of all goodness, the end of all profits and commodities. Who doth not know the innumerable meanes and helps he daily receiveth from God, to conserve nature, and further grace, but he that neither knowes God, nor himself? God is the root, fountain, and origin of all crea∣tures, profitable in all, by all, and above all. In the spirituall life of our souls, the Sacraments are meanes of grace, holy inspirations helps to godliness, the Word a Medicine for Ghostly Maladies, crosses and afflictions meanes for a∣mendment. 8. Vertue and honestyHonesty. causeth solid friendship, love and amity. But if ver∣tue and vertuous men ought to be loved and esteemed; what love is due to God, the supream Perfection of all goodness, Dignity and Majesty: which are as farre above the pitch of all excellent vertues, heroicall, supernaturall, or theologicall, and infinitely more, then the chiefest vertues, surmount the bad∣dest vices. All men by nature are sinners: but God is spotless, as farre from all sinne, as incomprehensible wisdom from ignorance, and infinite goodness from malice. 9. The Diamond formeth and fashioneth the Diamond, and LoveLove: formeth
and fashioneth Love. Fire converteth fewel into fire, and fewel converted en∣creaseth fire: Love causeth Love, and the beloved reloving, augmenteth the Original Love. What wrong shall we offer to God, if we love him not, who hath loved us first? It is of his Love that we live, that we are preserved; It is of Love, that we are redeemed from death, adopted to be his Sonnes. Great is thy Love, O God, to men in this life: for here thou dost not onely affect them, poure out thy benefits upon them, distill thy graces into their hearts, and a thousand waies externally and internally work their salvation: but also that which surpasseth all, it seemeth thy will and power are at the command, or rather ready to obey the desires of thy faithfull servants. And if in this life, such be the puissance of Love, what shall we conceive of that Love, wherewith the Saints in Glory are affected and embraced? It passeth all that heart can conceive, or tongue express. Union.10. Union breedeth Love; and the stricter this Union is, the stricter affection it engendreth. But every Christian is most strictly united unto God, and sound∣ly renewed after his Image. Agreeableness11. The Lord is the onely fit Object of absolute Love, and hath the most agreeableness with a reasonable nature. For, he is the prime Truth in being and speaking, and infinite in both; the chief good, the only Object of com∣pleat contentation. Who can explicate the admirable proportion, conveni∣ency, and agreeableness betwixt his mercies and our miseries, his riches and our poverty; his abilities to perfect us, and our indignities to be perfected; his patience and long-suffering to support injuries, and our perversness to commit offences? Necessity.12. Pleasant Arts, delightfull creatures, complementall Ornaments be great∣ly loved and liked; necessary Trades, Creatures, and Parts much more: be∣cause every one first loveth himself, and then all those meanes, which in some sort concerne the being or conservation of himself, among which those that are most necessary have preheminence. But in all things we have dependance upon God, whose aide is as necessary to the preservation of our being, as to the first imparting of it. If he uphold not the weak Pillars of our bodies, they presently fall and come to nothing: such and so extream is their feebleness, that no hand, but his Almighty is able to sustain them. What way can we walk, what sense can we use, what work can we work, what word can we speak, what thought can we think, what wish can we will, if he guide not our feet, concurre not with our senses, work not with our hands, direct not our tongues, manage not our wit, move not our will? Pardoning wrongs.13. The passing by and pardoning of injuries without intendment or medi∣tation of reveng, doth much ravish and affect the heart. Herein none is to be compared unto our God, who freely pardoneth iniquity, transgression and sinne. Who can recount the wrongs that are done unto his Highness every day, by disobedience to his Commandements, contempt of his mercy, abuse of his long-suffering? And yet no sooner do we cry, I have sinned, but he forgiveth our transgressions; with invincible patience he expecteth our repentance, and by internall favours and externall benefits cherishes us, as though he were not offended. Deliverance.14. Our affections are strong to them that have delivered us out of danger, and stand to us in the times of trouble and distress, and have suffered many wrongs, injuries, disgraces for us. In this respect we owe unto God, he may challenge from us the most tender love. What paines hath Christ suffered in soul and body, to rid us from eternall torment of soul and body deserved by sinne? Manner of giving.15. The manner of giving gifts or bestowing favours do much augment love; which are to be considered in respect of the giver, if he be great and excellent, a
stranger, our friend, an enemy; in respect of the gift, if exceeding great in it self, if marvellous dear to the giver, if common to many: in respect of the receiver, if it tend to his great good, or riddance from some great evil, if in giving he be singled from the rest; in respect of the manner of giving, If with alacrity, if without suite or request, if with vehement affection, if without interest, if with the danger and damage of the giver. Most of these circumstances may be observed in the gifts, which God vouchsafeth, specially in that Gift of Gifts, Christ Jesus, his onely begotten Sonne, whom he gave to die for us. Q. What are the Exercises of Love that must be shunned? A. 1. Blind Love, when vain devises and conceits are affected contrary to the direction, or at least without the warrant of the Word. This affection is ill guided, because it is not led by truth; and wrong placed, because the thing beloved can give no ease,Isa. 55.2. bring no profit to the soul Why do ye lay out your money for that which is no Bread? 2. Carnall Love, when wealth, health, honour, pleasure, friendship, ease and life are more affected then ho∣nesty, vertue, piety, and the favour of God. To which heads must be referred, the corrupt affection of them who will not adventure the loss of their friends, favour and good-will, to performe some necessary duty unto their souls.1 Tim. 6.10. The love of money [and so of pleasure] is the root of all evil. They that love earth∣ly things in this sort, do neither Love God soundly, nor are beloved of him.1 Joh. 2.15. Luk. 17.3. Psal. 141.5. Prov. 9.8. Psal. 52.3, 4. Prov. 1.22. Psal. 58.2. Lev. 19.17. 3. The Love of sinne is a notorious abuse of that affection. The mind erreth, when it is deluded with falshood; the heart is perverted, when it embraceth evil for good. Sinne deformeth, corrupteth, troubleth the soul: but all good desires tend to the good and perfection of it in some kind. It is a sign we love not our Neighbour, when we suffer sinne to rest upon him. 4. Love not uniforme or disordered, when the least duties are earnestly affected, but not the greater with answerable vehemency and freeness of spirit. Love is mishapen, if it be not proportionable to the excellency of her Object. 5. Partiall Love, [which argueth more indulgence to the corrupt disposition of heart, then power of grace,] when such duties are affected, as cross not, but rather further our main designes and projects, whereas no less necessary, profitable, excellent, and well-pleasing are disregarded, because they sute not with our inclination. Love is not fashioned according to its true and proper samplar, nor moved by sound and lively faith, if in motion it be not uniforme and universall, orderly and totall, proportionable, and generall, 6. In∣constant Love, whose immediate and proper cause is want of soundness. Con∣stant friendship is in most request with men; as for them that are in and out, off and on, now pleased, anon displeased, they are not respected of any, unless it it be for their own ends. Will God entertain them into his service, that upon every occasion of offence taken (for none can be given) are ready to cast off his service? Q. What are the Signes of Love? A. 1. Sorrow and joy are the marks of our affections, and of that we have in the soul, which rejoyceth or afflicts it self, as the Objects which present themselves are pleasing or distastefull. If we grieve at the free passage of the Gospel, or to see the prosperity of them that fear God, without question we Love that which is evil. If we rejoyce in the misery of godly men, the over∣spreading of prophanness, the decay of truth, it will not be hard to judge what affection beares sway. 2. Friends share equally betwixt them the good and evil. There is such a bond of affection betwixt friends, as the harme which happens to the one, afflicts the other, and fils him with bitterness, so, as many times we have seen true friends die with sorrow, for the loss of their friend. Yea, prophane Histories are full of persons, which have slaine themselves, for
that they would not survive them whom they have loved dearly. In like man∣ner the prosperity of friends passeth from one to another, so as the Triumphs of Alexander, are the contentments of Ephestion, and the glory of Ephestion, is the joy of Alexander. 3. They which love have the same friends, and the same enemies. They say the Adamant or Loadstone doth not onely make an impression upon iron which it draws, but doth also impart his vertue by his touching; so, as the iron which it hath toucht, draws other iron unto it, and makes as it were a continuall chaine. In the same manner, a friend brings his friends to him he loves, and he reciprocally imparts unto him his friends; whereof there is framed a common bond, which makes them ready to succour one another, as if they were Members of one body. Hence is that Proverb, How can he love me, who loves not them that I love? 4. Thoughts and words are signes of love: for love desiring union with the thing beloved, carrieth the thoughts where it would be, and so becomes present in heart with that, from which it is severed by distance of place. Where our Treasure is, there will our heart be also, Mat. 6.21. If our cogitations, studies, cares, de∣sires, and appetite be to earthly Treasures, our love is carried to things be∣low: but if our thoughts be lifted to Heaven, our Treasure is above. 5. Men testifie, that they love those before whom they are ashamed to do or say those things which of themselves are shamefull or dishonest: wherein the Persians gave good testimony of their love to their Wives, when as they caused them to retire from their banquets, being unwilling that their eyes should be Specta∣tors of their excess. For this respect and reverence which they gave them, was a sign of true love, for that we are ashamed to commit any unworthy Act before them we affect. 6. By our company we may try our affection: for men cannot but affect their manners, with whom they delight to converse familiarly. Likeness of manners causeth agreement amongst men. One wick∣ed man loveth another for his sinnes sake, and is the more willing and desi∣rous of his company for his lewd conditions. But goodness, even such as is ap∣proved of God, and pleasing to good men, doth unite the minds of those which are godly, and maketh them loving and kind to each other. This caused Jonathan so earnestly to set his affection upon David, and to have him in such estimation, because he saw him to be full of grace and valour, as himself was also. And this caused David likewise so gladly to entertain the love of Jonathan with constant care to requite the same unto him, and his posterity. 7. Our affection is discovered by looks and gestures. The eyes are as Glass-windows, in and through which do shine the motions of the heart. In the countenance, we may read what men desire. The affections have such affinity with the senses in their motions, that it is hard to hide them so at all times, that they shall not appeare to such as do observe us.
CHAP. IV. Wherein the Sanctified Exercise of Hatred standeth, and why it is necessa∣ry. How this Hatred may be stirred up in us. Of the severall Kinds of Hatred that are to be shunned, or corrected; And who they are that are most subject to this disordered Passion. Question, WHerein stands the Sanctified Exercise of Hatred? A. In that it is obedient to the Law of faith, and truely,Prov. 8.13. Psal. 97.10. Amos 5.15. Rom. 12.9. Apoc. 2.6. Psal. 101.3. Psal. 119.163.128. v. Psal. 45.7. Psal. 26.5. sin∣cerely, constantly turneth from all known evil with detestation, accor∣ding to the nature and degree of evil. As good is the object of love; so, evil is the object of Hatred. To understand this, we must remember, that whether it be in the mind, or in the body, there is a befitting e∣state and sweet harmony, which makes us to abhorre that which may dis∣solve this consort. This harmony considered in the body, is no other thing then the good constitution, by meanes whereof we enjoy perfect health; the which being impaired, our nature receives paine, as when we endure great hunger and thirst, or when we receive any hurt or wound. As for the soul, this same harmony may be considered: first in the senses, as well externall as internall, and consisteth in the proportion they have with their objects; which is such, as they hate whatsoever puls them away, or which divert them by any kind of violence. As for example the eyes hate darkness and obscurity, and our imagination is ter∣rified, and troubled by the fearfull apprehensions of Dreames, which it frameth during our rest. The same harmony considered in reason, either it regards the simple knowledge of the truth, which our understanding conceives with pleasure, or the use and execution of things which depend on wis∣dom, which we do with content. In regard of the first, our spirit is e∣nemy to lying, although at some times it takes delight in the art where∣with they colour a thing to give it some shew of truth. And as for the se∣cond, there is such diversity of judgment in humane actions which are as it were the element of prudenee, as it is a thing in a manner incredible As for that which concernes the will, her harmony consists in the pro∣portion and love which she beares to the good, which makes her detest and abhorre whatsoever presents it self unto her, under the shew of evil, as pernicious and hurtfull to her content and rest. The harmony of the sensitive appetite consists in the familiarity and concurrence it hath with the good of the senses, which causes it to abhorre whatsoever shall offend them; as whips, tortures, punishments, hunger, thirst, wounds, and such like. The harmony of the intellectuall affections consists in the fami∣liarity and concurrence, they have with the good of the mind and will, which causeth an irreconcileable Hatred to those things which the mind apprehen∣deth as spiritually evil, and the will renounceth as hurtfull to her spiritu∣all estate. Now when Hatred is moved truely according to the direction of sound judgment, and abhorreth all evil according to the nature and degrees thereof, sc, that most, which is most opposite to spirituall happi∣ness and contentment, and others as they have reference unto it, then is it exercised as it ought to be. It is here to be considered, that Divines and morall Philosophers distinguish two sorts of Hatred, the one they call Hatred of abhomination, the other Hatred of enmity. For as in love,
we affect the person and wish him well; so in Hatred of enmity, we detest the person, and wish him evil: as if I love my friend, I wish him health, wealth and prosperity: If the Judge hate the Thief, he wisheth him the Gallowes: But in this they differ; that love respecteth both the person and the good desired, and is intire and compleat: but Hatred detesteth the Malefactor, loveth the punishment as an evil deserved by the offendor. Contrariwise, as in Hatred of enmity, the person stained with vice moveth me to detest him, so in Hatred of abhomination, for the love I bare any per∣son, I hate all evils which may befall him: for example, a man loveth his Child, and therefore abhorreth death as evil of the Child; a just man God, and therefore detesteth sinne, as an injury done to God; a man loveth his own health, and therefore hateth diseases, or what else may cross his health. So that here we have three things; Hatred of evil in re∣spect of the person we love: love of evil, in respect of the person we hate; Hatred and love combined in one respect of perfect enmity and compleat Hatred. Q. Why is the Sanctified Exercise of Hatred necessary? A. 1. This Passion was ingraft in us by nature, to the end that at the first approach, at the first taste and imagination of evil, we may retire our selves, and fly it, lest we runne into ruine. 2. Hatred of evil, is a preservative against allurements and temptations.Mat. 6.24. The world is full of baits, whereby Satan endeavoureth to catch and ensnare us: But so long as the Hatred of sinne doth burne in our breasts, his practises shall take none effect to hurt us. As he shall lay ginnes to entrap, we shall be circumspect to decline his malice. 3. The most universall, the most ope∣rative, and the most durable passions of the soul, are Love and Hatred: they spread farthest, they pierce deepest, they last longest: and therefore great cause we should look to the right ordering of them. 4. No per∣swasions can move, no examples draw, nor difficulties compell men to embrace what is evil, if there hearts be carried with a true Hatred and detestation of it. For, as likeness is the cause of love, and that, of Union: so dissimilitude is the cause of Hatred, and that again, of separation. That which we hate, we suffer not to come, or at least not to abide near us: but either we remove it from us, or our selves from it. If we hate vanity more then affliction, and judge the evil of sinne more hurtfull then outward misery, we shall not entertain sinne, to escape the lesser danger. I hate the works of them that fall away, it shall not cleave unto me, Psal. 101.3. The latter is an effect of the former: for what we hate in others, we cannot embrace and entertain in our selves. 5.Psal. 119.113.163. v. Love is the Fountain of Hatred; and in what measure we love truth, we hate falshood. To love good and hate the opposite evil in the same kind, are inseparably linked. If our soul thirst after God as a drie Land where no water is, if his favour be better unto us then life it self; it can∣not be, but our Hatred must answer in proportion to that which is oppo∣site to Gods Law, and derogatory to his glory. And from hence it fol∣lowes, that Love and Hatred are so conjoyned, that if both be not ordered aright, neither is exercised as it ought. Q. How may this Hatred be stirred up in us? A. To move this Hatred, two things specially are diligently to be ob∣served. First, The person beloved, and all those reasons which may stirre up his love: then the hurt of the evil, and all the harms it bringeth with it. For example, we ought for the love of our souls, and the souls of our neigh∣bours, detest and abhorre sinne and the offence of God: now all those induce∣ments which move us to love our souls,Lev. 19.17. strike in our hearts a horrour of sinne,
which is the death and destruction of souls. And all those reasons which shew the deformity of sin, stirre up a detestation thereof. The general Motives al∣ledged above, applied to this Particular, wlll suffice to perswade us to love our souls: the nature and harms consequent unto sinne and all other evils, may be gathered out of the holy Scriptures, and from Christian experience. Q. What are the Severall Kinds of Hatred that are to be shunned or cor∣rected? B. 1. Blind Hatred, when we detest what is presented unto us, out of some superstitious conceit, not according to knowledge;Gal. 4.19. Mat. 15.9. Prov. 26.24, 25, 26. Mat. 5 44.  S m. 13 22. Mat. 24.10. 1 Pet. 4.8. Tit. 3.3. Prov. 10.12. Prov. 1.22. Psal. 9.13. 1 King. 22.8. Joh. 3 20. Psal. 7 4. Psal. 38.20. Ioh. 7.7. Psal. 35.19. Ioh. 15.25. Gal. 4.16. Psal. 25.29. Rev. 2.6. as the Pharisees hated to eat meat with unwashen hands. 2. Carnall hatred, secret or manifest, when we hate our enemies that have some way wronged us in word, or deed: the effect whereof is, contention, upon the renewing of the memory of former faults, now buried in forgetfulness, or the upbraiding of secret sinnes. 3. Wicked, bruitish, and perverse, when we hate good, and love evil; hate the harm∣less and innocent, love the prophane and dissolute; love falshood, hate the truth. 4. Devilish, when we hate them that seek to do us good; as them that admonish, rebuke, exhort to repentance and amendment of life, or that live uprightly themselves, and follow that which is good. The world hateth me, because I testifie of it, that the works thereof are evil. They hated me without a cause. Am I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? 5. Partiall Hatred, when some sinnes are hated, but others liked and practised; as the Angel of the Church of Ephesus hated the deeds of the Nicolaitans, when he inclined to luke-warmness; many men detest theft, that love covetousness; abhorre whoredom, that like irreligiousness. 6. Sleight disordered Hatred, when dislike of sinne is subordinate to our worldly pro∣jects, pleasures, or matters of commodity: which causeth that it is neither sound, set against sinne because God condemneth it; nor uniforme, rising in detestation according to the nature of the offence; nor constant without flit∣ting or starting. To this Head is referred, the affection that men bare to their friends, when they will not adventure the loss of their favour, to rid their souls from sinne. Q. Who are most subject to this disordered passion? A. 1. Faint and base minds are sooner moved then generous spirits. The reason is, for that cowards fear every thing, so as their Hatred is inflamed a∣gainst all such as they think may hurt them, be it in their person, in their goods, or in regard of their friends. Hence it is that great men which have no courage are commonly cruell. 2. The proud and envious are also subject to the motions of Hatred. The first, for that they think they are not honoured as they should, or should be debased more then is fit by the practice of obedience; the latter, for that all the prosperities of their equals offend them. 3. They that love themselves too much, are wonderfull apt to the same motions, for that they take every thing as an injury, and are so nice as they cannot endure to be crossed.
CHAP. V. Why the Affection of Pleasure or Delight is to be exercised aright. Of the Delights of Faith and Reason, and of Sense. Rules for the right Ordering of Delight. How this Affection is stirred up, with the Effects thereof. Question, WHy is the Affection of Pleasure or Delight to be exercised a∣right? A. By that which already hath been said, we may easily perceive wherein the sanctified exercise of the affections doth consist, and how they may be discerned, therefore it is needless to repeate it any more, it shall suffice briefly to shew for what singular reasons some other affections must be rightly ordered, and what is specially to be observed therein. Touching Pleasure or Delight it is holily to be exercised, because all the passions of our souls depend upon Pleasure and paine, which grow from the contentment or distast which we receive from the divers objects which present themselves unto us in the course of this life. If we love, it is for that we find a sweetness in the Subject that doth ravish us. And if we hate, it is in regard that we imagine the Object which presents it self unto our imagination, is full of grief, contrary to our apprehension, The Pleasure we take in the Idea of a good thing, which we enjoy not, and yet promise to our selves the possession in pursuing it constantly, begets hope: as contrariwise, when we think it is not in our power to obtain it, the grief we have a∣fflicts us, and leads us to despair. Desires in like manner are framed in us by the imagination we have of a benefit which may give us content; and the distaste we have of things which we flie, is, for that we imagine they may cause our discontent and vexation. So as in all other passions we still find pleasure and grief intermixt, in regard whereof we may rightly terme them, the Springs whereby all other passions are set on motion. 2. The Authour of nature hath united Pleasure and sweetness to the actions of this life,Peregr. de affect de gaud. cap. 3. to the end we might with more courage endure the toyles and paines, and that they might be as salt which seasoneth meat, and which makes it more pleasing to our taste. 3. Joy is the strength of mind and body.Prov. 15.13. & 17.22. Q There be Delights of Faith and Reason, and Delights of Sense, Which of these be greatest? A. Undoubtedly the intellectuall, and those of the mind, (if we consider them in themselves,) are more delightfull then those of the senses. The Reason why the pleasures of the mind have an advantage over those of the body, is, for that to cause Pleasure or Delight in us, there must concurre three things; that is to say, the Object united to the Power; the Power to the which it is united; and the Actuall union of the one with the other, which presupposeth knowledge of this good. And first of all, the goods of of the mind (in the enjoying whereof consists the intellectuall Pleasures) are more noble and more lovely then all the goods of the senses, and body: whereof we have a notable proof, in that we see men, (yea most abandoned to vice,) deprive themselves of the sweetest Plsures of the body, to purchase glory, which is a good of the mind. Moreover, the power of the intellectuall nature, in which is made the impression of these kind of Pleasures is much more excellent then the senses which are corporeall, and
the actions which she produceth, and which are followed by these Pleasures, are more noble then those which derive from the senses. And by consequence, the union which is made of spirituall Objects with the will and intellectuall nature, is farre more strict, more worthy, and more durable, than that which happens betwixt the senses and the Objects which they pursue. It is more strict, for that the senses regard onely the outface of things, and do not busie themselves but to consider the accidents which inviron them: whereas the understanding pierceth into the nature and substance of the Objects. It is more worthy, for that it is made without any alteration or corporeall change: whereas the Ob∣ject pleasing to the senses, cannot be united with them, but it will cause some kind of change which is full of imperfection. It is more durable, for that the Objects of the senses are of perishable goods which soon fail; whereas the Ob∣jects of the mind, are of eternall felicity which continues for ever. Yet it is true, that the Objects of the senses make a more violent impression in our souls, and that the pleasure which we receive, toucheth us much more then that which the spirits gather from the Objects which are pleasing unto it. The which happens first, for that the goods of the body are borne with us, en∣crease with us, and are preserved with us: so as handling them daily and hourely, we have a more exact knowledge, then of the goods of the under∣standing, which are removed from us. Knowledge is necessary for the enjoy∣ing of Pleasures, wherefore, where this knowledge hath least power, there the Pleasures are least sensible. This also happens, for that we use Pleasures as re∣medies and cures against the crosses, troubles and cares of this life, which are sweetned, and as it were charmed by their presence. But most men being either indisposed, or not capable to raise themselves up to spiritual consolations, seek and tie themselves to pleasing Objects, which present themselves easily to their senses. The which is fortified, for that the sweetness of Objects which Delightour senses, are suddainly tasted, and do not much trouble us to seek them. It is an infallable Maxime in Philosophy, that the Objects by their presence make a more power∣full impression in our souls, then when they are absent. And these things which give us least paine, are most sweet in their acquisition: so as for all these con∣siderations, the Pleasures of the body seem unto us greater then those of the mind. In a word, those of the senses are more sensible, but these of the mind, more perfect and more excellent. Q. What Rules are to be observed for the right Ordering of Delight? A. 1. It is not lawfull to take Delight in evil, either in the present act, the re∣membrance of sin past,Prov. 24.17. Prov. 29.27. Psal. 22 17. Prov 17.5. Iob 31.29. Psal. 35.13, 14, 15, 16. Luk. 21.34. & 8.14. Iob 31.25. or the hope of future accomplishment of what we de∣sire; as in unchast thoughts, expectation of revenge, the calamity of our ene∣mies, &c. Sinne is the trangression of the Divine Law, the bane of the soul, the disturber of inward peace; the onely evil that robs God of his Glory, man of his Dignity, the soul of Beauty: which cannot minister content to him that takes not Pleasure in his own shame. 2. In matters of corporall Delight, as the use of meat, drink, mirth, apparell, recreation; the possession of riches, friendship, ho∣nour, reputation, benefits, and such like; we must take heed of excess; that our thoughts be not taken up about them; nor our hearts over-joyed, if our desires be fulfilled; nor our souls disquieted, if we be crossed therein.1 Thes. 5.6. 1 Pet. 4.7. 2 Tim. 1.7. Tit. 2.6.12. 2 Pet. 1.6. To this purpose the Holy Ghost hath commended unto us Christian sobriety and temperance as a principall vertue, yea as a nurse and a staff of godliness and righteousness; which consisteth in a sparing, a moderate affection at least, not of meat and drink only, but of all bodily benefits. All the wise men in the world exhort us to set a care∣full guard over the Pleasures of the senses, which they call the poyson of the mind. For the which we must the more carefully provide; for that these passions are accompanied with a certain sweetness which flatters us at her first approach, and surprizeth our judgment, and charmes it in such sort, that it helps to deceive it self.
An Ancient said well, That nature had engrafted no such pernicious desires, as those of the Pleasures of the body; for that these desires besot the mind, and growing unbridled, do so inflame the courages where they get possession, as they leave nothing undone to content their passion. Immoderate Delight, what is it but the drunkenness of the mind?Gat. of Lots. cap. 8. p. 244, 245. Pleasure hin∣ders not sim∣ple knowledg, but depraves Judgment, and corrupts the esteeme that it should make by the Laws of wis∣dom, of that which is good. Of the effects of immode∣rate Joy, see Peregr. de gaud. ca 3. Valer Maxi. lib. 9. cap. 12. Kecker. Phy∣sic. lib. 3. cap. 26. Plin. lib. 7. cap 53. Quas dolor non exxcrat, laetitia con∣ mpsie. Psal. 4.6, 7. & 31.10. & 44.3. & 67.1. Vid. Aul. Gell. li. 3. cap. 15. As one saith west of prosperity, that it so tran∣sporteth some, that they are even as drunke with it; and some sorts of mirth and Musick are said to make men little better. Yea, excessive Delight in these things engender many perilous diseases in the soul, as folly, ficklenels, inconstancy, nice∣ness, fond admiration of what cannot profit, neglect of Gods favour, an eter∣nall blessedness. 3. In matters of spirituall Delight, we are specially to rejoyce in the favour of God, and in all other things as they have reference unto him, wherein the greatest exceedings (if it were possible to exceed) are most praise-worthy. Enlarge thy heart as much as is possible; herein take thy fill of plea∣sure: The more thou doest rejoyce in God, the better it is. And here it must be remembred, that the Delights of the senses charging, and as it were importuning our naturall dispositions, become tedious and troublesome; as it falls out when we suffer our selves to be surprized with the excess of eating and drinking. Whereas those of the mind never exceed the carriage nor capacity of the natu∣rall disposition of the soul, but rather adde perfection to her nature: wherefore when they are fully enjoyed, they Delight most. And if there beat any time a distast, it is for that the action of the mind is accompanied with the action of the inferiour powers, the which being corporeall, they are tired with the continu∣ance of so long an imployment. Wherefore they call back the spirit that it may give some rest unto the body. And doubtless, the reason why those happy souls are never weary to behold the presence of God, is, for that the contemplation of this pleasing Object doth not overcharge nor weaken the spirits, but doth ease and fortifie them. Q. How is the affection of Joy moved or stirred up? A. 1. All those Motives which stirre up love and affection, consequently move desire and Delight: for love is like the quality of levity or lightness in fire, which inclineth and bendeth it to motion, desire is the motion, village or voyage, Delight the quietness or rest of the soul in her Object: and there∣fore all those causes of love we have delivered in the matter of love, all those may serve for this subject. 2. A firme hope and assurance of those things we desire and love, causeth Delight. Hope nourisheth the Country∣men; for the hope of gaine causeth the labouring Husbandman not to feel the scorching heat of Summer, nor the hoary Frosts of Winter. Hope of glory allotteth the Souldier to receive a certain sweetness in all dan∣gerous Encounters: Hope of lucre maketh the Merchant merry at mid∣night, although he lie in the midst of the vast Ocean Sea tossed with Billowes, and shaken with Tempests: and the surer the hope is, the greater joy ensueth, as when the Merchant after his long voyage returneth with his Ship laden with Merchandize and cometh with a pleasant gale with∣in the sight of his expected Haven, then his hope for the certainty of his future possession of apported wealth, being delivered from all danger, is changed into Joy and present Delight. He therefore that will move De∣light in this matter of hope, must exactly declare the certain grounds and undoubted security of obtaining the thing expected. 3. Because Delight consisteth in the possession of some good thing reall or apparant; there∣fore all those reasons which tend to the amplification or evident demon∣stration of the goodness of the thing, all those are fewel of Delight, and
sparks of Joy. It is admirable, how the mincing and particularizing of the Object of Delight increaseth and augmenteth Delight. Wherefore the fan∣tasticall and lascivious Poets, though vainly and vitiously, yet wittily and artificially depaint their Lovers bodies from the head to the heels, in every part discovering one or other perfection, excellency, or amiableness, apt to move and stirre up Delight. And herein also all Tradesmen excel, for to perswade their Wares to be good and perfect, they will open unto you a num∣ber of circumstances or appurtenances of goodness or excellency wherewith their Merchandize is affected. And for this cause all that would stirre up themselves to vertue and godliness of life, should particularize the Pleasures and Delights incident thereunto, as the quietness of conscience, the grate∣fulness of God, the honour and reputation of all good men, the reward in the world to come; and every one of these the finer it is sifted, the more pleasant it will appear. 5 It importeth much in moving Delight to perswade the stability and continuance hereof, that it seem not like a May-Flower, which is budded, blossomed, and blasted in a small time: and the reason is, for momenteain and cursory Delights are for their brevity rather dispiseable then commendable. The continuance of Delight may be grounded upon the removing of all impediments which any way may im∣peach or diminish it. 6. In every Object of Delight there is a certain intensive goodness and perfection, and there is an extensive; as in a Cellar of Wine, there may be excellent good Wine, and variety of excellent good Wine, and thereby our taste may be delighted with the perfection of Wine, and with variety of Wine. In like manner, in all the Objects of Delight, we may find a certain intention of goodness, and a certain extention, and both these seriously considered, exceedingly increase Pleasure and Delight: for the in∣tention filleth and satiateth the soul, and the extension or variety taketh away a certain distastefull loathsomness which one kind of uniforme Pleasure draw∣eth with it. Q. What is the Effect of Pleasure or Delight? A. There is nothing in this life more potent then Pleasure to move men to action. True it is, that ambitious men aspire after honours, but why thirst they so after them, but because they take an extraordinary Delight to be honour∣ed? Why do covetous curmogions the best substance of their braines to get riches, but after they have gotten them, to Delight in the possessi∣on or fruition of them? And the reason is, for joy and Delight are a pos∣session of some good thing, wherein nature receiveth great contentation. If the heart be raised up to rejoyce in the fruition of Gods favour, and the Joys of Heaven, he will spare no paines in seeking rest, quietness, and eternall happiness with God.
CHAP. VI. Why the Affection of Grief is to be Exercised aright. Of Sensible and Intellectuall Grief. Rules for the right Ordering of Grief, and how it may be stirred up in us. Motives against immoderate Sorrow, with the Meanes to redress it. Question, WHy is Grief to be Ordered aright? A. 1. There is not any Passion wherewith man is more afflicted in this life, then with Grief and sorrow, whose Objects present themselves continually to his mind and sense. 2. Excessive heaviness hath troublesome effects, for that first of all, it takes from the mind all meanes to attend the search of the truth. The reason is, for that all the powers of our soul, be∣ing tied unto, their essence, as the Branches unto the Tree, it doth of necessi∣ty follow, that when she is wholly busied in the functions of one of her powers, she abandons the rest, and cannot assist them in their actions. Where∣fore, when as any thing draweth the soul wholly unto it, and imploys her whole action, she cannot attend any thing else: by consequence whereof, an exceeding heaviness seazing upon her, it draws her away; so, as she cannot think of any thing else, feeling her self opprest with Grief as with an heavy burden, which beares her down and hinders the liberty of her functions. It is therefore generally true, that there is not an action of the soul whereunto heaviness is not an hinderance and let. The which we find verifi∣ed in our selves, for we never do any thing so well being possest by cares as when we are in joy; whereof the reason is visible: for that the will is the cause which excites us to act, the which hath the good for Object, and makes the more powerfull effect when it appeares pleasing and is accompani∣ed with delight. It is true, that when there remains any hope to surmount the causes of our displeasure, then heaviness may serve to fortifie our action, and to enflame our courage, for that the more we feel any Grief, the more we strive to be freed from it. But if there be no hope remaining we become as it were senseless, and abandon our selves in prey to Grief. We flee the company of men, we hate the light, we find, the comforts and consolations of our friends importune,Iob 16.1. Luk. 22.4.16.  l. 22.15. sal 3.7, 8. Psal .6, 7. Psa 88.9. Prov. 1.13. Psal. 32 4. Prov. 17 22. sal 102 4, 5. Peregr. de do∣lor cap. 2. lin lib. 7. cp. 36. K cktm. ubi su ra¦ea cor Pirrhi¦m rtur vis m est torvum & rigrum & veluti tostum. and have no content but to feed our selves with bitterness. Again, immoderate sorrow causeth deadness and hardness of heart, dis-inableth in prayer, stoppeth the ear against all words of comfort, and weakneth the powers of the soul and strength of grace, exposeth to temptati∣ons of impatience, and filleth the soul with much bitterness. Besides the torments which heaviness gives unto our spirits, she doth also produce fear∣full effects upon our bodies, for that it is a maligne, cold, and drie Passion, which wasteth the radicall humour, and by little and little quenching the naturall heat of the body, thrusts her poyson even unto the heart, whose vigor she causeth to wither, and consumes the forces by her bad influence; whereof we see the signes after death, when as they come to open those that have been smothered with Melancholy. For instead of an heart, they find nothing but a drie skin like to leaves in Autumne. So that all things considered, we may say, that this passion is most pernicious, which thus consumes our forces, causeth our heart to languish, and makes our life short, but ex∣treamly miserable. 3. There are many remedies against inordinate sorrow, but most commonly the Grief is so obstinate, as all applications are unprofitable.
To cure it, we must first take away, or at least diminish the opinion of the evil which afflicts us: the which is easie to do, seeing it depends of our opinion. For, as Dignities, Honours, Crowns and Triumphs, give us no content, but what we take our selves when as they arrive; for that we have seen many weep even in the midst of all this pompe: so the paines of this life, ignominies, banishments, the loss of goods and kinsfolks, with all other miseries, afflict us not extraordinarily, unless we our selves make them more bitter and vio∣lent by our own weakness; for that we have seen many laugh in the midst of all there miseries. 4. Great and many are the benefits of well-ordered sorrow. It is the Physick of the soul; it purgeth, melteth, refineth,Eccl. 7.3. and preserveth the heart in good temper: It is the ground of spirituall comfort, the Nurse of Joy. It plougheth up the fallow of the heart, that the Word of salvation might sinke deeper and deeper. A mourning soul is a welt-manured soyl, that receiveth the seed of the Word, and bringeth forth fruit with advantage. Immoderate sorrow deadeth and weakneth the powers of the soul: but sorrow kept within limits and bounds, quickneth the heart to apprehend, judge and make use of whatsoever doth befall. Q. There are two Kinds of Grief, the one which resides in the sensuall appetite, and the other which hath its seaete in the rationall: How do they differ? A. 1. Sensible Grief ia alwaies accompanied with a visible alteration and change of the body which is moved; whereas the Grief of the mind hath not alwaies an agitation of the body, but most commonly contains it self within the bounds of the power where it is framed; in regard whereof it is sometimes attributed to God and Angels. 2. The cause of sensible Grief resides in the body, which suffers some violent impression that alters it. The cause [I say] doth reside in the body, which receives some kind of outrage: But the mo∣tion of Grief is alwaies framed in the soul, for that the body is not capable but by the presence of the soul. But the cause of the intellectuall Grief resides in the rationall part, and in the mind, which represents unto it self the evil which the receives from the Objects which present themselves unto her thought. 3. The apprehension and knowledge which the exteriour senses have of things,Keckerm. Physic. lib. 3. cap. 26. they do only regard the present Objects which make an actu∣all impression in them; but the understanding not onely conceives things present, but even those that are past, and which may happen, or fall under the imagination of man. Hence it comes that corporeall Grief which follow∣eth the apprehension, which things present make in the senses, grows only from the presence of Objects contrary to their inclinations. Whereas the Grief of the mind following the knowledge of the understanding, may grow from Objects that are present, past, or to come, and from those which man doth presuppose may succeed unto him. Q. But whether of these Griefs is greater, this of mind, or that of the body? A. We shew our selves more sensible of the Grief of the senses, then that of the mind: but it is most certain that the interiour Griefs which a∣fflict the soul, are much stronger then the exteriour paines which torture the body. For that the apprehension of the mind and imagination, is much more noble then that of the senses, and especially, then that of feeling which hath the greatest share in corporeall paines. For proof whereof, we see great courages to avoid inferiour Grief, expose themselves voluntarily to the exteriour paines of torments and punishments, which are in some sort pleasing unto them, for that the interiour joy doth mollifie their paine: whereof we have glorious examples in the constancy of the Martyrs, who have exposed themselves to the fire, to tortures, to Wheeles, and to
the rage of wild Beasts, for that they would not sinne against God, and burn Incense unto Idols. Q. What Rules are to be observed touching the right ordering of Grief? A. 1. That which in it self is good and holy, cannot be a just Object of Grief. No man can justly be grieved to see the wicked change their life unto a better, to embrace piety, to become just, valiant, moderate, wise, and adorned with other vertues. Yea, the most innocent souls rejoyce whenso∣ever they see a man, who was formerly vitious and disordered, become ver∣tuous and temperate: There being no man living that is unworthy of vertue, seeing that vertue by her presence doth extinguish vice. 2. In worldly things, such as concern our Estate, Name, Credit, Friends and the like, we must look, that our sorrow be not distrustfull, distracting, excessive, causing deadness, violent carrying reason captive, breeding impatience, blind and senseless looking onely to the cross, not to the proper cause of all miseries, which is sinne and wickedness. 3. Spirituall sorrow for sinne; hardness of heart, and other Maladies of the soul, must be moved and moderated by faith, that it might quicken to Prayer, stirre up to receive the promises of comfort, and fit the heart to rejoyce in season. The affections do all move in a circle, each one drawing other, that if any one move aright, all follow in their course. Thus joy and sorrow succeed one another, and both take their fit season, if eiher be orderly in motion. Sorrow is immoderate if it admit not joy: Joy is excessive if it drownsorrow. 4. Sorrow must be universall and uniforme proportioned to evil that doth afflict. As it is a fault to grieve when we should rejoyce, and to rejoyce when we should grieve; so its not to grieve for all evil, in a measure answerable to that which doth afflict. There be degrees of evils, so are there of sorrow for them. Q. How may this sorrow be stirred up in us? A. 1. Desire doth cause Grief, when the possessing of the desired good is hindered or delayed. And therefore what Motives soever do stirre up desire, the same may be used to awaken sorrow. 2. Love of good, causeth Grief for evil; as love to our preservation, doth oftentimes cause sorrow and heavi∣ness, for that we apprehend as meanes of our destruction. By what meanes love to good is kindled,Psal. 55.4, 5. by the same is the heart wrought to sorrow for the contrary evil apprehended as present. 3. The apprehension of evil, is the Object or ground of sorrow, which is more or less intense according to the knowledge we have of the evil that presents it self unto our thoughts, the great danger, and eminency of it, The arguments that set forth unto us the certain∣ty, likelihood, and extension of the evill, will be effectuall to work unfeigned sorrow. Q. What Motives should perswade Christians to look well about them, that their sorrow be not immoderate? A. 1. God requires, that we serve him with a cheerfull and merry heart, which they cannot do,Deut 16.11, 14 2 Cor. 9.7. Mal 2 13. who give way to excessive sorrow. Thou shalt rejoyce before the Lord thy God. God loves a cheerfull giver. See how the Lord com∣plains by his Prophet, of the severity and perfidiousness of the Husbands, whereby the Wives were compelled to wet the Altar of the Lord with teares. That Exhortation of Nehemiah made to the people, when they wept at the hearing of the Law, may be alledged here very fitly. This day is holy unto the Lord your God,Nh 8.9. mourn not nor weep: for all the people wept, when they heard the words of the Law. The course that many good Christians hold is very pre∣posterous, who afflict themselves for lack of delight and cheerfulness, and yet crucifie themselves with inordinate sorrow and dejectedness of Spirit. Elizeus being distempered with the presence of wicked King Joram, before he attempted any thing,2 King. 3.19. whereby the three Kings distressed for lack of water,
might be refreshed; he commanded that one skilfull in Musick should be brought,Cartw. in Prov. 5 13. by whose art and skill the clouds of sadness and distemper might be dispelled. But if Prophets, who spake by immediate inspiration, needed this help of cheerfulness, much more others. 2. With men, the Offices which are performed with sad and heavy hearts, are unacceptable.Neh. 2.1, 2. Est. 4.2. What Master can away with a servant that is ever whining? Who can take pleasure in a sad lumpish companion? Delight and cheerfulness graces all Offices, is the Ornament of all Societies. 3. Sorrow is the band of the soul, that ties it close together that it can scarcely pant or draw breath in the open or free ayre.Psal. 4.1. Isa. 59.15. Q. What course must be taken to redress immoderate sorrow? A. 1. The principall meanes is serious meditation of Gods gracious promises, with full purpose and resolution of heart to rest and cleave unto them. My soul melteth for heaviness, quicken me according to thy Word, Psal. 119 28. The Word of God doth sustain and quicken the heart, promise grace and remissi∣on of sinnes, reveale unto us the mercy and loving kindness of the Lord, by which light and brightness the mists of sorrow are dispelled. And whereas ex∣cessive Grief doth arise from a false apprehension of evils present, which ma∣keth us judge our case to be farre more intolerable then indeed it is: By the Word of truth we come to see our estate, what evils hang over our heads, of what quality, how they may be prevented, or where we may find strength to bear them, and how all things shall work for the best unto us. 2. Grief of mind is eased by faithfull prayer, wherein we lay open our cares into the bosome of the Lord, and waite upon him till deliverance come from above. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, Psal. 77.2. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall ustain thee, Psal. 55.22. Pray and waite, seek and rouse up thy self to trust confidently. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.Psal 130.1, 2. 5, 6. ver. Lord hear my voice, &c. I waite for the Lord, my soul doth waite, and in his Word do I trust. Both these, Prayer and expectation must be joyned, as we must strive to pray, so we must stirre up our selves with all earnest resolution to waite with patience, otherwise the weight of sorrow will fall back upon us more heavily. 3. Former experience is very effectuall to asswage bitterness of heart. Psal. 143.5. I remember the daies of old, I meditate on all thy Works: I muse on the works of thy hands. Why hath the Lord dealt tenderly with us above all he promised, and made good whatsoever he hath spoken? Why hath he holpen us in our distresses, kept from us the things that we feared, granted our hearts desire? but that we should learn to trust in his mercy, and to expect like aid and assistance from him. And say we be plunged into the depth of sorrow, former experience giveth wisdom what course is to be taken to procure freedom. In bodily paines, if we have found ease by a Medicine, when the same evil pincheth, we know what is to be done. But in spirituall affairs it is much easier to get understanding by former experiments. 4 We must foresee the accidents of this life, not as if they should happen infallibly, for that were to make us mi∣serable before the time; but as incident to all men, and that being of this num∣ber, if any cross or misery shall fall upon us, we may be the less amazed. For the crosses which we have foreseen, strike us more gently, and make a weaker impression in our soul. Wherefore a wise man of the world, who had prepared himself for all the accidents of this life, receiving the heavy news of the death of his Sonne, was no otherwise moved, but onely said, I knew I had begotten a mortall creature. Doubtless it is the effect of an exact and singular wisdom, to have this feeling of humane accidents, not to be amazed at that which happens, nor to see any thing befall him, which he hath not foreseen. So as a wise man must alwaies remember, that dangers, losses, banishment, infirmities, yea the
death of his Children, Wife, and that which he holds most dear, are things which may happen daily, and which threaten all men; and therefore if he be exempt, it is the benefit and gift of God, and if they befall him, that they are the miseries of his nature. For having this consideration of the common miseries of men, he finds himself bound to suffer constantly, and with patience, the necessities and crosses of this life: lest he should seem to fight against God, who hath laid this yoke upon him, to punish his offences, or to keep him in awe. 5. To mollifie our sorrows, we must remember that the miseries of this life give us a glorious subject to exercise our vertue, and to shew our constancy before the eyes of Heaven and Earth, which are Witnesses of our combates. For as Pilots cannot shew their Art and Industry but in stormes, nor Souldiers give proofs of their Valour, but in the midst of dangers: so a vertuous man hath no meanes to make his vertues shine, but amidst the adversities which befall him in this life. 6. But that which should most fortifie us in this thought, is, that God who doth cast us into the middest of these combates, will comfort and assist us in them, crown our constancy, and not suffer our labour to go unrewarded. 7. Grief is dispensed by divertisements, by affairs, by the entertainment of wise men, by the discourse of such as are learned and fear God, and by the force of our own judgment, conceiving with our selves that we should not suffer any misery to triumph over our courage and constancy; that to be toucht with affliction is a thing common to all men, but the glory of this constant opposition, belongs onely to an eminent vertue. And lastly, that he who sends us these afflictions, is a Father, and no executioner. That it is that great God, without whose Decree there falles not a haire from our heads, and whose will no man may contradict, unless he will shew himself desperately mad. 8. As in other infirmities of the soul, a greater evil makes the less to be forgotten: so we may disperse a present heaviness, either by considering that it is not the present misery which we must lament, but others of greater mo∣ment, which more threaten us; or else in fortifiing our resolutions with a bet∣ter hope, as in representing unto our selves the glory of Paradise, after the miseries of this life, and the Crowns of Heaven, after the combates of the the earth. All these things make great impressions in religious souls, capable of the feeling of piety. 9. Besides all these, there are remedies which are taken from the Objects of the senses, which recreate the mind and body in the midst of Grief. For first, whatsoever delights and gives joy unto the senses, causeth ease to the heaviness of the soul; for that joy is to the soul, that which rest is to the body. So as they which rest, repair their forces, mollifying the paine which hath tired them; so they which begin to tast any sweet pleasures, feel their Griefs to decay by little and little, and their heaviness to vanish away and go to smoke. Wherefore it is fit to draw them that are afflicted into the Fields, to enjoy a free ayr, and the sight of Heaven. It is good to shew them Harvest, Rivers, Medowes, and Hills; for that these divers objects divert the afflicted soul, and make it forget a part of its Grief. Some have thought that Musick and Songs are fit to charm our Melancholies, whereunto they referre that of Solomon, As he that putteth on a Garment in cold weather, and powereth vineger upon niter, so is he that fingeth Songs to an heavy heart:Prov. 25.20. Jun. in hunc. loc. Cartw. in Prov. 25.20. Cleaver. ibid. Which they further confirme by the example of David, who by the sound of his Harpe did pacifie the evil spirit which tormented Saul: and of Elijah calling for a Minstrell, who by his cunning and skill might asswage the bitterness of his spirit. But experience hath taught us, that all these things do many times rather entertain Melancholly, then disperse it. Wherefore in this subject we must observe the nature of the infirmity, and the quality of the Musick, which must be proportionable to the disease. The use of Wine also hath a particular vertue to expell cares.Psal. 104.15. Prov. 31.6. Jud. 9.13. Wine makes a cheer∣full heart. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and Wine unto
those that be of heavy hearts. The reason is, for that Wine being moist and hot, it doth at one instant both water sweetly, and heat that bilious humour, which is as it were the center and root whereunto Melancholly doth fix it self. Sleep also and the use of Bathes, are very behovefull; for that both the one and the other reduce nature to her first habite, and restore her good constitution, which Grief had corrupted; the which disperseth heaviness, and causeth joy to enter into the afflicted soul. 10 To rectifie this Passion of mind, we must withstand the beginnings, and by all possible meanes expell those vaine, false, frivolous imaginations, absurd conceits, vaine sorrowes that afflict the heart,Lemnius. lib. 1. cap. 16. by doing something, or other that shall be opposite unto them, thinking of something else, perswading by reason, or howsoever to make a suddain alteration of them. It is not in the power of a Melancholly man altogether to free himself from fear and sadness: but he may choose whether he will give way too farre unto it, he may in some sort correct himself. A Philosopher was bitten with a mad Dog, and as the nature of that disease is to abhorre all waters, and liquid things, and to think still they see the Picture of a Dog before them, He went for all this to the Bathe, and seeing there as he thought in the water, the Picture of a Dog, with reason overcame this conceit. Thou art discontent, thou art sad and heavy, but why, upon what ground? Examine it throughly and thou shalt find none at all, or such as is to be contemned. Rule thy self then with reason, satisfie thy self, accustome thy self, weane thy self from those fond conceits, vain fears, strong imaginations, restless thoughts As he that weares an up∣right Shooe, may correct the obliquity or crookedness, by wearing it on the o∣ther side: so may we overcome and master our affections if we will, by tur∣ning them some other way. As in a City they do by stubborne rebellious Rogues than will not submit themselves to politicall Government, compell them by force: so must we do by our affections.Melancton. de anima. Epist. 3. c. 12. If the heart will not lay aside those vitious motions, and the phantasie those fond imaginations, we have ano∣ther forme of Government, to enforce and restrain our outward members, that they be not led by our passions. If appetite will not obey, let the moving fa∣culty over rule her, let her resist, and compell her to do otherwise. As in an Ague, the appetite would drink, sore eyes that itch would be rubbed, but rea∣son saith no, and therefore the moving faculty will not do it. When we are urged with any matter of great importance, we forget our fears for the time, a business of more weight possessing that room in the heart. But what we can do upon such occasions, we may do voluntarily at another time if we will: for outward objects cannot give ability that was not in us before. 11. If Judgment be so depraved, reason over-ruled, will precipitated, that we cannot seek our own good, or moderate our selves, our best way for ease is to impart our misery to some friend, not to smother it up in our breasts.Strangulat indusus dolor, atque exaestuat intus. Ovid. Trist. lib. 5. That which was most offensive to us, a cause of fear and Grief, when we shall but impart it to some discreet, trusty, and loving friend, is instantly removed by his coun∣sell, wisdom, perswasion, advice, good meanes, which we could not other∣wise apply unto our selves. The simple narration many times easeth our di∣stressed mind, and in the midst and greatest extremities,Senec. de tranq c. 7. Commincus. com. lib. 7. many have been relieved by exonerating themselves to a faithfull friend. And this is one cause why tears disperse heaviness, and diminish our paine: for when we pour forth teares, we cast out that which afflicts us, and emptying the humour which oppresseth us, and smothers us within, by this meanes we free our selves from an heavy bur∣den which lay upon our hearts, by reason whereof our soul helping her self to cast out the enemy of our life, diverts and frees her self from the importune thought of Grief, and imploys her imagination to this divertisment, the which for this occasion is pleasing unto her. Another reason there is, for that it is a contentment to man, to do an act befitting the estate wherein he
finds himself. So, as if amidst the mourning of our friends, we chance to laugh unadvisedly, when we enter into consideration with our selves, this light∣ness doth displease us, for that laughter agrees not well with mourning; And there is nothing doth accord and concurre better with the condition of mise∣rable men then teares, wherefore they are pleasing unto them, and by consequent sweeten their torments. CHAP. VII. Why the Affection of Hope is to be moderated aright. Wherein the sanctified Exercise thereof consists. The Effects of Hope. The sevrall Kindes of disordered Hope that must be shunned. How a lively Hope is to be stirred up, and preserved in us. Question, WHy is Hope to be moderated aright? A. 1. Hope well ordered serves to mollifie the paines, and to en∣counter all the crosses and accidents of this life. Amidst the miseries of this life, and all publique and private calamities, which otherwise would be intollerable; the wise providence of God hath provided us this remedy, to fortifie our con∣stancy, and to keep us from shrinking, and falling under the burden of adversi∣ties. And therefore a Rhodian being cast into an obscure and cruell Prison, a∣mong Serpents and venomous Beasts, and conjured by some of his friends, to make an end of so many miseries by a voluntary death, he answered wisely. That man hopes still while he breathes: as if he would say, that death onely could de∣prive man of the hopes of life, and better condition. But the Prophet David more Christianly,Psal. 27.3. I had fainted in my affliction, unless I had hoped to see the good∣ness of the Lord in the Land of the living. Hope holds up the head in the midst of all stormes, which violently beate upon, and seem to overwhelme our ship. 2. As the North Starre is the Mariners Guide, who look continually upon her light to assure their Navigation: so Hope is that which inflames us to the difficult actions we undertake. 3. As the brightness of the North Starre doth fill them with joy that sayl by the Sea, but when as it shines not they are dismaied, and fear hourely to perish by the violence of some storme, or to see their Ship split upon some Rock: so whilest we have any remainder of Hope, our souls are content; but if it be quite vanished, we hold our selves miserable, and begin to neglect and forget our selves. 4. Hope fortifies our resolutions, and makes them more prompt in their actions. Hope fills with courage to en∣dure hardness, to beare crosses, to fight manfully, strive mightily, and persist immoveably. The which is for two reasons. The first, for that she hath for Object, a good hard to be obtained. But the apprhension of the difficulty, which presents it self in the pursuite of the good, whereunto we do aspire, doth usually make us gather our forces together, to vanquish all obstacles, and to attain unto it, notwithstanding all the difficulties that must be encountered. And therefore we imploy more care and diligence, by meanes whereof we at∣tain more easie to the end of our designes. Secondly, Hope breeds pleasure and sweetness, which makes us more active and ready to pursue that which we desire; For that we behold nothing painefull wherein we take delight. Wherefore as pleasure makes all actions delightfull unto men, so the content we receive from our Hopes makes us pursue with more heat, and less paine, that which we have once conceived in our thoughts. This joy which proceeds from a certain Hope
we have of injoying, disperseth it self into all the members of man, the which do joyfully receive the impressions of the moving faculty, yeelding upon this occasion a more prompt obedience to execute the Commandements of the soul. The labourer would not expose himself so freely to the rigor of the ayr, nor endure with such patience the injuries of times, in tilling his Land, if he did not promise unto himself a rich Harvest for the fruit of his labour. The Soul∣dier would not cast himself into dangers, he would not mount up to breaches, nor thrust himself into the fury of combates, if the expectance of glory, or Hope of booty did not animate his courage. The Merchant would not pass through Rocks, fires, waves, and stormes, running from Sea to Sea, and from Port to Port, if he did not promise unto himself great wealth, in recom∣pence of his voyages and travels. So as Hope is as it were, the soul of good∣liest actions, making us to surmount all the difficulties and obstacles, which might hinder the execution by the mollifying of our resolutions. Yea, it is certain, that courage hath alwaies been held an effect of good Hope: for when as man hopes to surmount those fearfull things, which seem to threaten him, he goes couragiously to encounter them; whereas when he is surprized by fear, he faints and abandons himself unto the misfortune, his despair rising from the difficulties which he apprehends in the good which he should pursue. 5. Al∣though Love be the Fountain of all the Passions of the soul, yet Hope may be the cause that we love any one. For Hope may propound unto it self two things, that is to say, the good which we Hope for, and the meanes to obtain it. Wherefore an Object of good presenting it self unto us, which we are not able to attain unto, but by the assistance of other; for this reason, Hope doth also regard those that assist us, and make the thing easie. Seeing then that Hope regards the Objects which we propound unto our selves, undoubtedly Love is that root and cause of Hope; for that we Hope not for any thing, but that wherewith we are in love, and whereunto we have tied our affections, de∣siring passionately to enjoy it. But for that Hope regds him which doth open to us the meanes, and makes the thing possible; Love is a bud of Hope, seeing that we love him, for that we Hope to attain unto our desires by his assistance. So as the first impression which the Object which we pursue makes in our souls, is an effect of the love we bear it, conceiving it to be a good fit for us. But the consideration of the meanes to attain unto it, which comes from others, makes a second impression in us, and induceth us to love him that doth procure it, representing him unto us as profitable unto our design, and therefore worthy to be beloved. 6. Vaine Hopes do grievously delude and beguile the heart, leaving nothing behinde them but vexation or despair, after great labour and toyl, when we be utterly disappointed. It is not unfitly defined, to be a Dream, that presents it self to a man awake. For as Dreames in the night fill us with illusions and vain formes, which abuse us, and which make us imagine that we are rich in our extremest poverty, that we are happy in our greatest mi∣sery, that we injoy Scepters and Crowns, in the midst of bonds and Irons, that we command great Empires, when we are restrained in an hard and slavish captivity: In like manner, Hope abusing our imagination, fils our souls with vain contentments, and represents unto us that all things are subject to our power, that we are in right good estate, assured of salvation, able to repent when we please, and to shunne the practice of evil by our own power; when in truth, our state is most miserable, our course abhomination, our waies tend to death; and we have no power in our hands to deliver our selves from the reign of sinne, or the power of wrath to come. Yea, in the middest of our greatest disgraces, we flatter our selves with this conceit, that humane calami∣ties and miseries have their bounds, and that they are weary to be alwaies about one man; as the winds and stormes in the end break, and are pacified after the
most violent gusts. Thus we hope to see a change in the course of this life, and that the day which we attend will make our condition better, and convert our misfortunes into incomparable felicities, when beside fond conceit we have no rea∣son to expect better times. The Scripture resembles the hope of the hypocrite to the Spiders web,Job 8.13, 14. which is spun with labour, breaks of it self without any violence: To the dream of an hungry man, who is the more tormented after he awakeneth, because he findeth he did but dream of plenty:Iob 11.20.18.24. Prov. 11.23. To a puff of breath, or the giving up of the ghost, which shall bring him to the King of terrors. The expectation of the wicked is wrath. 7. Lively well-ordered hope is most necessary and profi∣table in all the parts of our life, and the severall actions of it. Our life without hope is a most heavy burden: no work can find good success that is begun with∣out Hope. Hope is much better than any stately palace, delightfull gallery, orchard, garden, pleasant aire and prospect, which the sonnes of men prepare with great cost, travell and pains for their comfort. These without hope can avail nothing; Hope without these is sufficient of it self. Give a man hope in prison, banishment, poverty, disgrace, and he will endure without fainting or impatience. 8. Sound Hope is certain in event. They that hope in the Lord shall not be confounded. If the Lord promise life in death, light in darkness, a setled state of the Church in the midst of confusion, a calm after many storms and hideous tempests; it is meet the faithfull should rest in the word of promise, and their expectation should be gladness.Prov. 10.27. Q. Wherein stands the right exercise of Hope? A. In this, that it be directed according to the commandement of faith, to expect all good things promised according to the nature of the promise,Psal. 130.5. & 119.45. in all estates and conditions, both when means are at hand, and when they fail, ground∣ing it self upon th free grace of God. In things spirituall absolutely promised, hope must be certain, stedfast and constant, even when all things seem to threat∣en the contrary: The like may be said of things temporall promised in the same manner; as of Israels possessing the Land of Canaan, Davids coming to the Crown. In outward things conditionally promised, hope is conditionall; for it is grounded upon the word of truth received by faith, and what faith cannot believe, hope cannot expect. In the most desperate dangers we must hope for an happy issue, but the particular event is uncertain. We may expect good from men as the instruments of God, and in lawfull causes we may hope to finde success by lawfull means, wit, friends, power and such like: but still our con∣fidence must be fixed upon the Lord, without whose blessing all second causes are of no validity.Prov 21.31. Prov. 29.26. The horse is prepared for the battell, but safety is of the Lord. Many seek the Rulers favour, but every mans judgement cometh from the Lord. Many employ all their friends, and use all possible means to have the Magistrate made for them in their suits and questions:Prov. 19.6. but the sentence which the Magi∣strate shall pass upon every mans cause, whether it be to clear him or to cast him,Iob 27.9, 10. Ps. 142.3, 4, 5. is of the Lord. In all conditions of life, seem our case never so forlorne or past cure, we must hope in God, in the use of lawfull means alone: but we can never look to speed well, if we turn unto evil courses, for there is no promise that God will bless them.2 Chro. 25.8. Q. What are the effects of Hope? A. 1 He that hopeth truly will wait patiently without fainting or impatien∣cy, though the Lord seem to delay. My soul, wait thou only upon the Lord; for my expectation is from him.Psal. 62.1, 5. 2. Hope drives a man to seek the Lord early with ear∣nestness and contentation, In the use of all good means, and when they sail, un∣till he be found for his help,Psal. 40.1. Psal. 86.2. Psal. 130.5, 6. Psal. 142.5. Psal. 61.2, 3. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my cry. Faith looketh unto God as a poor beggar, and hope waiteth as a petitioner at the throne of grace, knowing that he from whom all good things come, looketh to be sought unto, that it may appear that his mercies
are free and undeserved, 3. Hope preserveth pure from defilement of flesh or spirit: it will not suffer corruption to harbour quietly in the bosome, nor turn aside to ungodly courses. 4. The man that waiteth upon God, is not puffed up with present prosperity, knowing that a change may come;Iob. 3.2, 2. Psal. 33.22. Psal. 142.5. nor dejected with evil tydings, as if there were no helpe in God: nor doth he judg of things by outward appearance and present success. But of the effects of Hope see be∣fore, in that which hath been said of the sanctification of this affection. Q. What are the severall kindes of disordered Hope that must be shunned? A. 1. Hope is evil, when men expect to thrive and prosper by ungodly practises; as cosenage, lying, oppression, prophanation of the Lords day, &c. Do they not erre that devise evil? There is nothing almost,Prov. 14.22. Gen. 11.3. Psal. 12.4. Prov 1.11, 12, 13. Isa 7.6. which wicked men do not hope they can obtain and compass by their sleight and cunning; as the Gyants who attempted to build the Tower of Babylon, nothing doubted of the effect. But the Spirit of God speaking in the mouth of his Prophets, declareth that they are false in their hope, and shall come short of their purpose. Never could wicked man obtain his hope to his contentment in his sinfull devices. Either he cometh too short of that which he concluded to do, or misseth of that hap∣piness which he looked for in his exploits, or falleth into those troubles which he never stood in fear of. 2. Carnall hope is evil, when we rely upon strength, wisdome, authority, riches, casuall experience, and promise great security to our selves, when we be compassed about with humane aides. The heart of man is apt to flatter it self in these things, as if nothing were impossible to him that is thus underset: whereas the Lord can easily beat down the force of the mighty,Confide regnis cum levu mag∣nas opes Huc feras & illuc casus. Sen. trag. Medea. Isa. 8.9, 10. and bring their glory into confusion. An horse is but a vain thing to save a man, neither is any man delivered by his much strength. Associate your selves O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. How hath the Lord taken the crafty in their own counsel, and troden the glory of the mighty under feet? It is all one with our God to save by few and many, with and without the strength of men. 3. Limited hope, when we can be content to wait for a season, so it be not long; but faint or give over to expect help, if it be deferred. How oft are such like voices heard amongst Chri∣stians; Till such a time I had good hope, but now I am clean out of heart? If I finde not comfort by such means, I can never look for it? But this is our infir∣mity, we must wait till the Lord shew mercy,Psal. 119.81. & 123.2. and hold fast his promise when he seems to be far from our help. 4. Superficiall and slight hope must be setled and rooted better. Such is the hope of them that hold out in lesser tryals, faint in greater difficulties. In some particular troubles they lift up their hearts, and stick to the promises: but if they be pressed hard, they start aside and give way to the temptation. The temporary believer shrinks in persecution if he be not choaked with the world and the pleasures of it: so fareth it with the hope of the hypocrite, which wanteth rooting. 5. Partiall hope is unsound,2 Chro. 25.9, 10. misorder∣ed, when we expect help fom Heaven in some particular occasions, but ordi∣narily rely upon our own devices, or the arm of flesh, It is many times repro∣ved in the Saints of God, that they trusted in Egypt, Assyria, the arm of flesh,2 Chro. 16.7, 8, 9. but relied not upon the Lord. Q How is lively Hope to be preserved or stirred up in us? A. 1. In stirring it we must alwayes have an eye to the grounds and founda∣tions whereupon our Hope shall be built; for as hese fadge, so Hope follow∣eth: if these be small or frivolous, Hope is vain and ridiculous; if they be strong and sound, Hope will prove more certain and prudent. 2. All Chri∣stian Hope depends upon the gracious promises of God which never fail; and to quicken it the better, it is profitable to discourse over these circumstances; who hath made the promises, how he standeth affected towards us, in what relation he is obliged unto us: What he hath promised, how it makes for his glory to
accomplish it, for what reasons he will be pleased to grant our suits or requests: What a potent and wise Intercessor we have to plead our cause, and of what credit with the Father: What plentifull means he hath in store to bring to pass what he hath spoken, and how easily he can accomplish them. 3. It is not amiss to set down all the objections which any way may frustrate hope, and briefly, orderly, and as evidently as may be, refute them: for thereby all cavils and impediments shall be removed. 4. We must make use of former ex∣periments,Psal. 64.10. comparing them with the Word of God, and judging accordingly: But experience is only a fortification, not the ground of Hope. By experience we come to see and are perswaded, that what others hold impossible, may not∣withstanding succeed happily, which doth much prevail with us: but if all ex∣perience were wanting, we should yet rely upon the infallible promise of God. Grace is the ground,Psal. 33.18. & 130.7. truth and power the props of Hope, experience a notable furtherance to strengthen and encourage in expectation of Gods mercy. CHAP. VIII. Why Courage and hardiness is to be exercised aright, and wherein the right exercise thereof consists. How faith begets Courage. The things wherein spirituall Courage doth shew it self. The kindes of disordered Courage that must be shunned or corrected. The means whereby spiri∣tuall Courage may be encreased. Question, WHy is Courage and Hardiness to be ordered aright? A. Hardiness, which is a passion of the soul that doth fortifie it and make it assured against the miseries which are most difficult to avoid,Dan. 1.19. 2 Chro. 32.7. and encou∣rage it to pursue those good things which are most painfull to obtain, notwith∣standing all opposition to the contrary, must be rightly moderated; because it is of excellent use in a Christian course. For 1. A godly life is beset with many difficul∣ties from the Devil and the world. Satan rageth, the world raiseth manifold persecutions,1 Cor. 16.13. which cannot be resisted without courage. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. Courage is for the warre; but all Chri∣stians are the souldiers of Christ Jesus, who have received press-money to fight under his banner.2 Tim 2.3. 2 Sam. 10.12. Thou therefore endure hardness as a good souldier of Jesus Christ. Like as Joab exhorted his souldiers fighting for their countrey, to be valorous and to play the men: so doth the Lord by his servants call upon us to be hardy,Deut. 11.6, 7. Iosh. 1.6. & 10.25 Psal. 27.14. & 31 24. Mat. 4.1, 2, 3. strong and valiant in heart and carriage, Be strong and of god courage, fear not. 2. The practice of any publike duty, or the effecting of any common good, shall finde much enmity against it. The Devill will soon (if we set our selves this wayes) cry for clubs, and reach us some knocks: We shall know that these things shall cost the setting on. Thus in Christ, when first he set up∣on the work of our redemption, Satan set upon him with incredible fury: and after when he was fruitfully teaching, he sent his acquaintance to speak with him,Mat. 12.46. Mat. 20.22, 23 thereby intending to interrupt the work in hand: and when he told his Disciples of his suffering, Satan by Peter sought to turn him from it: Master, save thy self.1 Thes. 2.8. If Paul purpose to come and visit the Thessalonians for the streng∣thening of their faith, Satan will lay blocks in the way: If Nehemiah go about to repair the walls of Jerusalem,Neh. 4.1, . and to reedifie the Temple, Tobiah and San∣ballat will turn every stone to dismay him in that work. In this case what can be done without courage? It is not for timorous and faint-hearted men to un∣dertake
such enterprises. The fearfull heart and remiss hand are nothing fit to perform any great matters in the house of God. 4 All the duties of Christiani∣ty are weighty, some very difficult, yea, seeming altogether impossible, which no man destitute of courage will adventure to begin, much less to finish. He had need to be a man of some spirit and resolution, that must neglect the displeasure and frowns, reject the Letters and suits, contemn the mocks and disgraces of great men and superiours: But this straight is the man that would live godly, thrust upon many times. Had not the brain need to be of a strong constitution, that must dispell and disperse the fumes ascending from a corrupt liver, stomach or spleen? What strength of valour shall we think needfull for him, that must stand out against the flatteries, inticements, tears of friends; the rumours, cla∣mours, slanders of the wicked: that must oppose the current of times and the torrent of vice; hazard the loss of maintenance, liberty and life? But all these miseries doth the sincere practise and pursuit of piety bring upon us. In which respects, some duties in themselves not difficult, do appear very troublesome, from which we are willing to withdraw our shoulder; as namely, to open our mouthes for the poor in the cause of judgment,Prov. 24.11, 12 & 31.8. to deliver them that are unjust∣ly drawn to death, to adventure our credit, reputation and honour, in defence of the innocent that live in disgrace and misery. What, that sometimes we are called forth of God to adventure our selves farre in desperate cases? As Esther must go in to King Aashuerus to speak for the life of the Jews, a people ap∣pointed to the sword, by a Decree that could not be reversed. Besides the duties themselves laid upon us, do farre exceed our strength and ability: which is suf∣ficient to daunt and dismay the cowardly and faint-hearted. Many are hindred, not so much with defect of strength, as pusillanimity and sloathfull desparation of mind, that they dare not undertake any thing that is excellent, or having un∣dertaken lay it aside, if any difficulty appear. But if the work indeed be too hard for us, what man of many will attempt any thing therein?2 Chro. 22.13. &. 28.10. 1 King. 2.2. If Solomon must build an exceeding magnificent Temple to the Lord, David will call upon him to be strong and of good courage; because no man of weak resolutions would ever un∣dertake a work of that cost, pains and weight, for the glory of God- 4. The conquering and subduing of many boisterous, unruly, deep-rooted passions, is a labour beset with manifold discouragements; both in respect of their strength, which seems unconquerable, and of the many foils we have already received in that battell. The Israelites being now to enter into the Land of Canaan,Numb. 13.28. & 14.2. Deut. 1.28, 29. were so terrified with the height of the walles, and strength of the inhabitants, that casting off all hope of possessing that countrey, they began to think of return into the Land of Egypt. Thus they were affected upon the first report they heard of that Land: what would they have done, if once or twice they had fallen before their enemies? But every Christian must fight with his head-strong lusts, that are fast riveted in his nature, and by long continuance are become a second na∣ture, notwithstanding he hath been often foiled by them. By all this it is mani∣fest, that a Christian must be of a generous spirit and resolution, one that clea∣veth unto God with full purpose of heart. 5. He that will live godly must suffer persecution, which is terrible to flesh and blood. Through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:Isa. 35.3. Heb. 11.1 Prov. 28.1. but the fearfull-hearted and feeble-handed are unfit for such encounters. The courage of a Lyon is necessary for a Christian, who must not be amazed with any terrors. 2. Passionate courage is very inconstant: We may observe, that many which shew great hardiness and courage to cast themselves into danger, as soon as they find themselves en∣gaged, are often amazed; as we see in those that go valiantly to a charge, but finding resistance, they turn their backs to the enemy: whereof we can give no other reason, but that they are not valiant by judgment, but by the bounty of nature; so as apprehending not the greatness of the danger before they enter,
but imagining that they shall vanquish whatsoever opposeth it self against them; when as they find resistance which they did not expect, they are amzaed at the strangeness of this accident, and their hearts grow cold and relent in such sort, as sometimes they flie before their enemies, But the contrary happens to those that are truly valiant, for when as they govern their courages by wisdome, there is no sudden accident that may befall them, that can dismay them; whereas com∣monly they find less resistance than they expected before they entred the fight, so as their resolution is alwayes fortfied and never deciaes; yea, commonly they shew themselves more cold in the beginning than at the ending; for that it is not the passion that doth animate them, but it is judgement which doth act in their courages.Prov. 30.30, 31. The Law is caled the Roy∣all Law, [as some hink] Jam 2 8. because it is to be p rfor∣med wih a princely, that is, a firme, or valan, and constant spirit. Jun par. l. 3. Append. in Jam. 2.8. 3. Good courage is a comely ornament in a Christian. There be three things that order well their going; yea four that are comely in going: A Lyon which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not away from any: a Horse which hath his Loyns girt up: an he-Goat, and a King against whom there is no rising▪ In these verses Solomon presents to our view for a pattern of courage, the example of some heroicall creatures, all agreeing in the well ordering of their going: by whose example he incites us to a constant going forward in things well undertaken without fear. As these four do so much prevail by their strength, that they will not be turned or terrified from their enterprises by any terrours: so it becomes us to be of that courage and resolution, that we desist not from things excellent for any fear. So that nothing is more requisite, than that he which undertaketh a good matter should be of good courage, and no∣thing more fit and decent, than that a good cause be prosecuted with courage and resolution. 4. Inordinate courage is very pernicious; for it thrusteth men into apparent dangers without cause, and stirreth no small troubles in the Church of God.2 Chro. 25. 2 Reg. 23.29. 2 Chro. 35.20, 21, 22. Herein wicked Amaziah offended to the damage of his Kingdom, and good Josiah further to the loss of his life. He that loves danger shall perish in it: Improvident hardiness, through presumption, rusheth upon destruction and apparent danger. 5. Excessive tenderness is a great enemy to a Christian course.Dut. 30.11, 12, 3, 14. Deut. 1.28. Ma 11.30. Deut. 20.8. Jud. 7.3. Conceits of difficulty keep under some, that they will not set upon the practise of godliness: Despair of good success drives many to retire in the mid∣way: and one faint-hearted souldier turning his back in battell, doth weaken the hands of those that fought couragiously. As melting mettal cast upon other may make it melt, so a sort of fainting, swooning fellowes may cast all the rest in a syncope. Q. Wherein stands the right exercise of Courage? A. In this, that it be universall, uniform and constant, being moved, quickned, directed,Psal 60.12. Psal. 18.32. Psal 27.14. & 1.24. Eph .10. Col. 1.11. Ia. 0.15. Phil. 4.4. 1 Pet. 1.5. moderated by a lively faith. The Authour of Christian resolution is the Lord of Hosts, It is God that compasseth me with strength; it is he that sta∣blisheth the heart. The ground is, the wisdome, grace, mercy and goodness, but especially the might and power of God. Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Gods almighty power is it, on which our courage must be builded. Thus saith the Lord God, In quietness and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence shall be your strength. I can do all things through Christ that strengtheneth me. We are kept by the power of God unto salvation: for no strength but his can prevail against the strong one in the world.Psal. 42.5, 6. The mover and quick∣ner of Christian hardiness is faith in the Promises: Faith is the hand apprehen∣ding, the faithfulness, wisdom, mercy, (for all these do strengthen us) and power of God,Heb. 11.23. the matter apprehended. By faith Moses when he was borne, was hid three Moneths of his Parents, because they saw he was a proper Child, and they not afraid of the Kings Commandement.Hb. 11.27. Psal. 0 7. Psal 56 11. By faith Moses forsooke Aegypt, not fearing the wrath of the King. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses: but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God. In God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me. Thus sound Faith is
the root of Christian valour, which being guided in all things according to the Rules and Directions of Faith, is rightly exercised. Q. How doth Faith beget Courage? A. 1. Faith in the Blood of Christ doth quiet and appease the conscience. A guilty conscience is the greatest cause of darstardliness,Prov. 28.1. which being purged by Faith in the death of Christ, causeth boldness and resolution in the midst of all dangers that compass us about. 2. It subdueth boisterous passions which are the ulcers of mind, dis-inabling it to bear any burden, and increasing the smart of any affliction manifold to that it is in it self. Sound flesh will endure to be handled, and a sound spirit, that is, an intire, well-confirmed heart,Prov. 18.14. will beare out his infirmities. 3. By Faith we receive the Spirit of Courage, and Power,Isa. 1.2. 2 Tim. 1.7. Vincenti, Rage, and do the worst that the spirit of malignity can set thee on work to do. Thou shalt see Gods Spirit strengthen the tormented, more then the Devill can do t e tormentor. Rom. 8.31. Heb. 11.27. See Par. Psal. 25.15. Numb. 14.9. Deut. 1.29.30. & 31.8. Jud. 1.19. Psal. 63.8. Psal. 138.7. 2 Chro. 16.9. Polycarpe to him that would have ti d him to the Stake. Let me alone (I pray you) for he that gave me strength to come to this fire, will also give me pati∣ence to abide in the same without your tying. John Rogers to one that told him he would ch nge his note at the fire; If I shuld trust in my self, I should do so, but I have determined to die, and God is able to enable me. Psal. 60.12. Psal. 23.3. Psal. 118.6. Psal. 3.6. & 56.4. Psal. 25 4. Prov. 28.1. Psal. 112.8. Iud. 1.19. of love and a sound mind, which constantly sharpens and whets on to despise every high thing, that exalts it self against Jesus Christ. By nature we are as timerous as the Hart, ready to fly at the very noise or cracking of trouble: but being endued from above with the Spirit of fortitude, we lift up our heads in the times of adversity, and put forth our selves with undaunted magnanimity to withstand encounters, and overcome difficulties. The least blast is sufficient to overturn us, leaning upon our selves, but the greatest stormes are not able to shake us, being sustained by the divine power of the Spirit. 4. Faith looketh unto God, and gleweth the soul close unto him by supernaturall power, where∣by the heart is mightily encouraged. For if God be on our side who can be against us? Moses was couragious, as he that saw him, that is invisible. Mine eyes are ever towards the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of the net. The Exhor∣tations in Scripture runne thus; Be strong, be of good courage, for the Lord is with thee, he will not leave thee nor forsake thee. David assured himself that he should be upholden by the right hand of God, when his soul did stick fast unto him. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me, thou wilt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies; and thy right hand shall save me. For seeing there is no wisdom, nor counsell, nor strength against the Lord, Oh how should he be affrighted with danger or difficulty, that is assured of Gods help, assistance, presence and protection? To be resolved of Gods presence with us, and providence over us, is the best remedy of all inordinate fears. In Warre men use the sound of the Drumme and Trumpet to raise the courage of the Souldier, and it must be granted they be good incitements and provocations un∣to Battell: but when it comes to the point of danger, to know that God stands at our right hand, is the only thing that puts heart into us. He that with his bodily armour brings the Shield of Faith, whereby his heart is assured that God hath called him to that fight, and that he is present with him to cover his head in the day of Battell; he is truly valorous, though by nature weak and timerous. Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil. The Lord is on my sie, I will not fear what man can do unto me. 5. Faith informeth of the manner of Gods dealing with his people, how he corrects them in love, as may be for their profit, and sends deliverance, when it may be for their good: whereby the heart is much confirmed to bear calamities more equally, and to seek help from the Lord alone. David prayeth in faith, Shew me thy waies, O Lord, teach me thy paths. 6. By faith we are assured of good success, which doth not a little incourage and confirme the heart against all lets and impedi∣ments. Why is the righteous as bold as a Lyon? because his heart is established, he shall not be afraid, untill he see his desire upon his enemies. Distrust causeth sloth and dastardliness; as it is noted of the Israelites, that they went not a∣bout to drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in the Valleys, because they had
iron Chariots: but he that hopes to see a good issue of his labours, will pro∣ceed with valour and resolution.1 Sam. 17.37, 46, 48. Let David be assured of Victory, he will go forth against Goliah, that Gyant of the Philistins, that trusting in his might de∣fied the Hoast of Israel, at whose words all Israel was dismaied and greatly afraid. 7. No recompense is to be compared to the joys of Heaven, nor any loss to the torments of Hell, which faith represents as the reward promised to them that continue in well-doing, and the punishment of them that fall away, or withhold the truth in unrighteousness.Heb. 11.35. Through faith the Saints of God have been inabled to endure maine, terrible and exquisite torments, that they might receive a better resurrection.2 Cor 4.17. Ignatius, I am the Wheate of Christ, to beg round with the teeth of Beasts, that I may be pure Bread for my Masters tooth. Let fire, racks, pullies, yea all the torments of Hell come on me, so I my winne Christ. Gordius to the Tyrant of∣fering promotion; Have you any thing equall or more worthy then the Kingdom of Heaven? For all the sufferings of this life are but light and momaintany, if they be weighed with that superabundant glory that we look for in Heaven. Men are contented to labour hard all day in sore work, for a small piece of silver; What will he refuse to do that he might obtain salva∣tion, who hath certainly, though but obscurely, seen the Glory of it? 8. Faith worketh by love: and what will not love do and indure, if hot and fervent? The timerous Ewe, in love, will put forth her self and defend her Lamb: so will the Hen for her Chickins. Q. In what things doth Spirituall Courage shew it self? A. It must be remembred, that spirituall courage doth ever keep it self with∣in the compass of the Word, and will not move without the guidance and di∣rection of the truth: and then it doth shew it self in these things. First, It doth expell the fear of cowardize, when we see great enemies against us. Should such a man as I flie?Neh. 6.11. & 4.14. Deut. 20.3. Who is there that being as I am would go into the Temple to save his life? Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified, because of your enemies. Though a man see an hideous mass of corruption, yet shall it not affright him; though Satan oppose him with incredible fury, yet will he not forsake his standing. 2. It makes us not to be dismaied at the difficulties that meet with us, either in respect of the duties to be done, or the opposition that is made against us. Though passions be strong, and the duties hard, and a man may come by knocks, yet he maketh not dainties of them. Nehemiah was not daunted with all the assaults that were made against him, to hinder the repairing of Jerusalem, and the building of the Temple. 3. It ties a man with constant, stedfast, and well-advised resolution, to set upon all known duties, seem they never so difficult, or the case never so desperate. 4. It represseth the fear of torment and death, whereby many are kept under that they dare not profess the faith of Christ, and shew them∣selves in the maintenance of the truth. Therefore it is an act of Courage, to remove the impediment whereby the will is drawn back from hard and dan∣gerous things which ought not to be shunned, and to defend the will that it be not drawn back from the good of reason,John Ardley, If every hare of my head were a man, it should suffer death in the faith I now stand in. Psal. 27.14. & 31.24. Neh. 6.9. Iud. 20.22. through fear of corporall evil. Courage doth fortifie the will of man, and keep it strongly to the good that God commandeth against all evils of body, amongst which death is most terrible. 5. It carrieth us to set upon the work of God earnestly without fear, and maketh us immoveably to persist untill all perils and labours be overcome, although they continue for a long season. When the hands are weakened, the work fal∣leth down: but if the heart be confirmed, it will not cease from the enterprize. 6. It doth shew it self in this, that after we are foyled, it maketh us renew our battell, and valiantly charge our enemies with fresh assaults. The men of Israel plucked up their hearts, (there is courage) and renewed the Battell. So Paul, though the Devill did buffet him again and again, yet being coura∣gious,
he did renew his strength against it by often Prayer. 7. It scornes all contentments of the world, whereby the heart should be withdrawn from God. Q. What are the Kinds of disordered Courage that must be shunned or cor∣rected? A. 1. There is an evil and wicked Courage,Ier. 9.3. when men bend their tongues like bowes for lies, but are not valiant for the truth. If a Bear or Lyon be in the way, they will not shrinke; they will encounter the greatest difficulties; if one course prove not, they will turn every stone. 2. Carnall courage is evil and to be reformed, which ariseth from confidence in the meanes,2 Sam. 2.20, 21, 22, 2. 2 Reg. 1.9, 10. but is not grounded upon the Promises of God. This confidence may grow from the opinion we have, that the evil which threatneth us is farre from us; or from our belief, that if it should present it self, we should be able to surmount it. As when a City hath a conceit that no man will attempt any thing against the peace of her Citizens, and if they should, they were able to repell the injury, and to endure the attempts of their enemies; this belief makes them hardy and assured. It may grow also, for that we find our selves weak, and unable to resist our enemies, yet we believe that we shall be powerfully assisted by our Allies, with whose aide we hold our selves invincible. Again, this may grow, for that we believe, we have neither received nor done injury to any man, which should make us apprehend revenge; Or for that we think we have no enemies, or else that they are so feeble and weak as they cannot annoy; Or for that they who have power to hurt us, are our friends, and live in good correspondency with us, and have assisted us in our occurrents, as for our part we have endea∣voured to bind them unto us by all occasions which have been offered. More∣over, it may grow from an imagination that all things shall succeed happily in regard of former felicities. So Alexander undertaking the Conquest of India, apprehended nothing, by reason of the happy Victories and Triumphs which he had gotten over the Persians. So Caesar being overtaken with a cruell storme, and in a small barke, feared nothing, but to confirme the resolution of his Pilot whom the storme had amazed, he wisht him not to fear, seeing he car∣ried Caesar and his fortunes. And so they are hardy, who having been ingaged in great dangers, have yet escaped; for they imagine that good fortune which hath been so favourable unto them in many other occasions full of despair, will not abandon them in that present danger. There be many other occasions of carnall valour; as want of experience, when we know not the greatness of the danger we are to encounter; fury and anger, with abundant furniture with all things which may make us fearfull to our enemies, as store of coyne, disposition of body, greatness of mind, extent of Empire, support of friends, the power of Armies, and such like: And to this Head may be referred, the confidence that men have in the goodness of their cause, when they look not to the Promises of God, nor take care to reforme themselves according to the Law of God. 3. Partiall, slight, inconstant courage is to be corrected, when at some time, in some things we shew courage, but at other times, and in other duties, we give way to slackness, and suffer sloth and timerousness to bear sway. The Tribe of Judah believed the Lord and his Promises in one thing,Iudg. 1 19. and did vali∣antly in expelling the Canaanites, that dwelt in the Hill Countries: but in ano∣ther they did not believe, namely, that God would expell the enemies that dwelt in the Valleys, and therefore they went not about it, neither did they ob∣tain any such thing of God. Our courage is but weak, when at one time, in a matter of less difficulty, and wherein we have more experience, we can shew some heart. but are striken dead in another which appeares more difficut, wherein we have not been exercised. But most imperfect is their valour, who making profession of great boldness before the conflict, do shrinke in the wet∣ing,
and deceive the expectation conceived of them. If thou faint in the day of adversity,Mat. 2.33, 34 Iob. 4.3, 4, 5. Prov. 24, 10. thy strength is small. 4. Boisterous resolution is to be amended, when men unadvisedly thrust themselves into danger. Passionate courage ends in faintness, endures with disquietness. Q. By what meanes is spirituall Courage to be stirred up in us? A. 1. Hardiness is alwaies accompanied with a certain hope, to be able to vanquish and disperse those fearfull things which present themselves to the un∣derstanding; whatsoever therefore is availeable to confirme hope in the gracious Promises of God, that is effectuall to beget and stirre up holy resolution; namely serious meditation upon the faithfull and never-failing Promises of God, the former experiences of Gods favour, the manner of his dealing with others that cast their care upon him, and attentive consideration of that glory that is reserved in Heaven for them that fight the good fight of Faith. 2. This con∣sideration, that we are spirituall Souldiers, chosen to fight under the banner, in the cause, and by the strength of Christ Jesus, ministers many Arguments of courage.Lauren e Saunders, I was in Pri∣son, till I got into Prison, and now saith he, kissing the the Stake, Welcome the Cross of Christ, wel∣come ever∣lasting lie: my Saviour began to me in a bitter Cup, and shall I not pedge him? Couage is a mans Glory. Great is the renown of valour in de∣fence of our Countrey; much greater to fight vali∣antly for the Glory of God, the salvation of our souls. Ambrose to Calligon, Va∣lentinians Eunuch threatning deah, Well do you that which becomes an Eunuch, I will suffer that which becomes a Bishp. John Mallot a Souldier, Often have we hazarded our lives for the Emperour Charles the fift, and shall, we now shrinke to die for the King of Kings? Let us follow our Captain. Neh 6.9. For Christ our Captain hath overcome for us, goeth forth with us to Battell, will minister strength unto us abundantly. But he is a bad Souldier that followeth his Captain sighing. In temporall warre, the Souldier will ad∣venture to fight in the mouth of the Cannon, in hope of glory or perferment: What should we do in expectation of eternall happiness? In earthly conflicts, the victory is uncertain, the reward transitory, the booty insufficient to counter∣vaile the charges: but in this warfare, he that fights manfully shall Triumph, and winne a never-fading Crown of Glory. And as the Victory is certain, and the reward perpetuall, so is the fight easie to the resolute and couragious, that relyeth not upon himself, but upon the power and might of the Lord. For Courage daunts the enemy, as cowardize doth encourage him. He hath more then half wonne the Field, that is resolved to enter into the lists. 3. To pre∣serve Courage, we must labour against all conceits of self-sufficiency, endeavour the subduing of inordinate passions, and digge out of the heart the desire of earthly things. Why do men faint? but either they trust in themselves, or affect inordinately the base things of this world, or be poysoned with self-love; either they be unsound, or build upon a sandy foundation. 4. We must duly consider what difficulties and dangers do beset us, and what strength and pro∣tection we have against them. For all the adverse powers of godliness, the more we truly consider of them, the less terrible they are: and the more we weigh what encouragements we have to proceed, the more forcible they seem. Suddain accidents most amaze, whereas foresight and preparation diminish the apprehension of present miseries. It is most commonly seen, that they never faint, who have wisely cast their accounts, and foreseen the dangers that may befall them. 5. Courage descends from above, and must be craved by earnest supplication. Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands. 6. Valour pro∣ceedeth from love, which must be stirred up by all holy meanes, if we would continue our resolution to godliness. Q. Doth Courage altogether expell fear? A. No: he is fool-hardy not couragious, who doth not fear. As love and hatred, so Courage and fear do well agree, though they seem opposite one to another.
CHAP. IX. Why Fear is to be rightly ordered. Reasons taken from the ill Effects of disordered Fear; And the singular Benefits of right ordered Fear. Wherein the Holy Exercise thereof consists. How Faith stirreth up this Fear in us. The severall Kindes of Fear that are to be shunned or amended, with Directions how to depend upon God, when all out∣ward meanes fail. Question, WHy is Fear to be rightly ordered? A. 1. Vain and imaginary Feares do much trouble and annoy the mind, for that we frame and forge to our selves the miseries, the apprehension whereof afflicts our souls. The which made an Ancient to say, that there are more things which amaze us, then that press us: and that most commonly, opinion and apprehension, doth us more harm, then the thing it self. Where∣in doubtless the condition of man is lamentable, for that as if he were not in∣vironed by a sufficient number of true miseries, he forgeth others, which are not in nature, to increase his miseries. For we see daily that although there appear no presages, nor any signes of a calamity that doth threaten us, yet our minds do frame false imaginations and vain Feares, which many times are the causes of our ruine. There are some things which torment us more then they should do, others trouble us before the time, and some afflict us without cause or subject, for that either we increase our griefs and paines, or we forge them our selves, or else we runne before them and anticipate them. And whereas we should strive against these jealousies and false opinions which cause them, we suffer our selves to be vanquished, resembling therein certain Soul∣diers who being amazed at a little dust raised up by a Flock of Sheep, turned their backs, as if the enemy had been at their heels. 2. Disordered Fear breeds many ill effects in the mind of man, filling it with such confusion, as she leaves him neither memory, nor judgment, nor will to encounter any danger that threatens his ruine. Moreover, it deprives man of all courage: and whereas the apprehension of danger is a spurre to generous spirits, to fortifie them, and to make them seek powerfull meanes to avoid the danger; it doth so de∣ject faint-hearted and fearfull men, as they remain, as it were immoveable and uncapable of all action. Moreover, it makes a man ashamed and confounded, and to contemn himself; it fils him with amazement, and as if it were able to convert him into a rock, it reduceth him into that stupidity, as he for∣gets himself, and becomes as it were, insensible of the miseries which oppress him, although they vex him worse then death.Peregr. Affct. Keckrm. hys. li 3. cap. 26. The effects of disordered Fear are divers and strange upon the body, as common experience and naturall reason do witness and prove apparently. 3. Carnall fear is very pernicious: for it cherisheth passion, feedeth vice, and turneth the heart away from God. He that feareth the loss of this worlds goods, or the disgrace of the times,Ioh 9.22. Ioh. 1.1.2. & 19.38. Pov. 28.14. Jb. 1.1. Prov. 14.27. Prov. 8.13. Exo. 20.20. Prov. 14.16. & 16.6 more then the hazard of Gods favour, or the joys of Heaven, will never hold out in times of persecution. How did this Fear tyrannize over sundry followers or Disciples of Christ, who believed in him, but durst not openly profess him, least they should be cast out of the Synagogue? 4. Singular are the benefits of right ordered Fear; it preserveth from sinne, stirreth up to watchfulness, ta∣meth the pride of nature, is the friend of counsell and advice, curbeth and quelleth all contrary motions, fears or terrors, whereby the heart might be tur∣ned from God. It strikes reason gently, and makes us circumspect to provide
with Judgment for that which concerns us; for that it makes us carefull and at∣tentive to look to our affairs, and to take order for that which is necessary to shelter us from stormes. But of the severall effects and benefits of Fear, see be∣fore in the sanctification of this Affection. Q. Wherein stands the right Exercise of fear? Heb. 11.7. Psal. 11.120. Rom. 13.7. Eph. .5.A. When it is moved, quickned, and directed by Faith, both in respect of the object, order, degree, and effects of it. A good man is to fear whatsoever is to be feared, God and man, sinne and judgment, in himself and others, ac∣cording to the nature, qualities, and degrees of the things to be feared, in such sort as to be made circumspect to depart from sinne, and to avoid evil by lawfull meanes. From which generall Rule spring these Particulars. 1. God is to be feared and not wicked men,Isa. 8 2, 13. Mat. 6.26, 28. Luk. 12.4, 5. that set themselves against him. Fear ye not their fear, nor be afraid. But sanctifie the Lord in your heart. 2. Sinne is to be feared more then judgment, as that which is the cause of all sorrow and misery. 3. In respect of our proneness to sinne, and the snare that is laid for us in every creature,Exo. 21.29, 4, 35. 2 Cor 6 5. 2 Cor. 11.28. ct 1.36 1 Thes. 3.5. we must be carefull to prevent evil in the least things: but as the things we handle are more weighty and of greater importance, so it behoveth to be of greater fear and circumspection, because in such cases many things happen, which do hinder their wicked success. 4. The fear of sinne or punishment should drive us to walk circumspectly, to shunne and avoid all causes and occasions of them, trusting in the free grace and mercy of the Lord. 5. The wrongs and troubles that we suffer from wicked men for welldoing,Psal. 56.3, 4. are not to be accounted evils that tend to our hurt: but gracious corrections or tryals, whereby God is pleased to purge, refine, prove, and do us good in the latter end. Therefore in doing good we must be of good courage, being well assured that we shall lose nothing by any hard measure that ungodly men lay upon us, for the testimony of a good conscience. Q. How doth faith stirre up this Fear in us? A. 1. It informeth truely of the goodness, power, and excellency of the object apprehended, what it can do, with what difficulty it may be obtained. Thus, by faith we come to discerne and know the Majesty, goodness, mercy, wis∣dom,Ier. 10 7. Apoc. 15.4. power, and absolute sovereignty of the Lord; the worth of his favour, and terrour of his wrath; what mercies he hath and will heape upon the righte∣ous,1 Reg. 3.28. what judgments he hath and will execute upon transgressours. And the like may be said of men; by faith we learn what their worth and authority is, how farre their power and displeasure reacheth. Now according to the certain, clear apprehension of the mind, such is the fear and reverence of the heart. 2. It acquainteth us with our naturall proneness to sinne, our weakness and in∣ability to withstand any evil; which worketh self-deniall, and holy jealousie, least we should runne into offences. He that knows how little he is able to do, will ever live in fear of himself, that he dash not upon the Rocks. 3. By faith we discerne what dangers we be lyable unto, how nigh they be, of what qua∣lity and degree, which be greater, and which less, which certain and unavoi∣dable, which uncertain. It certifieth undoubtedly, that sinne is the greatest evil; and the displeasure of God is much worse then the frownes of men; that if we sinne to please men, he will cast soul and body into Hell; but if we venture the displeasure of men, to please God, their power cannot reach further then to torment the body,Eccl 8.12. Hos. .5. Psal. 7.1, 2, 3. sal 31.19. & 15.11. & 47.11. Exo. 20.20. Isa. 44 8. they can do no more then God hath determined, nor will he suffer them to do any thing, which shall be to our hurt, if in truth and singleness we cleave unto his testimonies. 4. It assureth of mercy, protection and strength of grace from above, so long as we cleave unto God, and fol∣low hard after his Commandements: without which assurance fear would dege∣nerate into frightfulness and desperation. Thus faith moveth sound, uniforme, and constant fear of circumspection, not of despair, of humility, not of dismaiedness.
Q. What are the severall Kinds of Fear that are to be shunned or amen∣ded? A. 1. Ignorant, superstitious fear,Psal. 53.5. Mat. 14.26. which ariseth from blind frivolous con∣ceits, that some things are of bad presage, although they be meer effects of na∣ture, which should not be observed with any such trembling; as we have many times seen an Eclipse of the Sunne, or of the Moon which have their naturall causes, trouble whole Armies, and terrifie their Commanders. To this Head may be referred, the fear of silly and ignorant people to transgress the traditions and fond observations of their Fore-fathers, least some great evil should overtake then, when in the mean space they are altogether regardless of Gods Comman∣dements. 2. Carnall fear, when the fear of men, or dangers from them, doth withdraw the heart from the love of piety or justice,Joh. 12.43. & 5.43, 44. Apoc. 21.8. or keep us back from ear∣nest pursuite of fellowship with God. When the fear of disgrace, imprison∣ment, death withholds from the constant, sincere, bold profession of the truth unto which we are called; or when we fear misery more then sinne; then do we fear amiss. 3. Slavish fear, when the dread of evil drives to desperateness in evil, forceth to fly from the presence of God, or worketh only forbearance of the act of sinne, but expelleth not the love of it. 4. Fear of fainting or per∣plexity in respect of the difficulty of the duty, the strength of oppsition, the eminency of danger, malice of the adversary, and the long continuance of afflicti∣on. Be not afraid of suddain fear,Prov. 3.25. Luk. 12.32. neither of the desolation of the wicked when it it cometh. The meaning is not that we should be senseless of the afflictions that be upon us, or coming towards us, but we must not be dismaied or oppressed with fear, so as to forget or doubt of the providence or protection of God. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom should I fear?Psal. 27.1, 2, 3. Heb. 13.6. the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Though an host should encampe a∣gainst me, my heart shall not fear: though warre should rise against me,Psal. 46.1, 2. in this will I be confident. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear though the earth be removed;Psal. 49.5. Psal. 91.5. Job. 5.19, 20, 21. Isa. 41.10, 13, 14. & 43.1, 2. and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Why should I fear in the daies of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about? Thou shalt not be afraid of the terrour by night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day; nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismaied, for I am thy God; I will strengthen thee, yea, I will hlp thee. 5. Slight, inconstant, par∣tiall fear, must be deeper rooted, better setled, and extended to all the parts of life, and the occasions of it. True fear must shew it self, not in some,1 Pet. 1.17. & 3.2. but in all the estates of life, and that in one thing as well as another. To be couragious in one particular, and to faint in another; to cast off the fear of shame, disgrace, trouble in one case, and in another to be withdrawn thereby from the duty which we owe unto God, is not to fear as we ought. Q. How is this Fear to be stirred up in us? A. To the right stirring up of this fear,Luk. 1.65. Mar. 4.40. & 5.15. Ier. 5.22, 24. Luk. 7.16. & 5.26. Act. 2.43. & 5.5. sal. 90.11. Rom. 11.20. 2 Cor. 11.3. Heb. 4.1. Psal. 40.3. we must rightly exercise faith in the serious meditation of Gods Power, Majesty, goodness and mercy, shining in his works of creation, providence, mercy and judgment: we must also duly consider our own infirmity, weakness and frailty, the impotency of all means without Gods blessing, and the care and regard which the Lord hath over us, so long as we keep our selves close under the shadow of his wings; that he will be our hiding place and Pavillion against all them that rise up against us, be they never so many, mighty or malitious. But if we forget the Lord, and sinne a∣gainst him, he will not spare to punish, such is his hatred and wrath against trans∣gression. Did we truly acquaint our selves with the incomprehensible Majesty, goodness, and mercy of God, the security of the Saints when forsaken of all men, the danger of the wicked when compassed with humane aide on every side, the admirable over-ruling providence of God, providig for, and trying his ser∣vants,
confounding his enemies after that he hath suffered them for a time, we should fear aright in all things according to the Word of God. Q. Ought a man to look for as good success of his affairs, when all meanes fail, as if he had all meanes at hand? For example, should one that were lost in a fearfull wilderness, where he had no food in the world to refresh his body, as firmely believe, and as confidently trust, that he shall be fed at the time of his meales, as well as if he sate at a well-furnished Table? A. The means which commonly God useth in giving his blessings, are indeed but as curtains and drawing clothes, after or under which God doth hide himself so, that his working cannot be seen, but by the eye of faith: wherefore also the Lord God, when he hath been pleased sometimes to manifest himself, in some work which he intended to do, hath taken express order, that the ordinary means should be removed,Iud. 7.2. that all the world might see the finger of God there∣in, and acknowledge that he did it. But howsoever the means in regard of him, who is bound unto no means, are but as Curtains whereunder he hideth himself; yet in regard of us, who are bound unto the use of them, when we may have them, they are the hands of God, whereby he is pleased ordinarily to reach unto us his blessing: wherefore when the means fail us, then withdraweth God his hand, whereby he commonly useth to help us, and we may well take it as a token of his displeasure and anger, which must be taken to heart; yet are we not to be troubled thereat, so as commonly men are, as if without those means there were no hope of help; but we ought to grieve that we have displeased God, and so apply our hearts to seek earnestly his favour and blessing, which is abundantly all-sufficient without all means. For if God compass us with his mercy, we may be of good comfort, even in the midst of the Lyons Den with Daniel, or in the fiery Oven with the three young men of Israel, or in the fear∣full Wilderness with Eliah, or with King David in his manifold wanderings and chasings too and fro before his enemy. When all appearance of help is taken away, and means of escape stopped, then must we humble our selves before God in hearty supplication, with godly sorrow for our offences, resting assured of his help, if not just so as we desire, yet so as shall be best for us both in life and death. Even as it happened to Abraham when he was about to offer his Son Isaac, which yet was the only known mean, by whose life, both he and his, should be saved. And for the means, we are to know that our life and welfare is not shut up in them, but in Gods hand, which is the richest Treasure in the world, whereout (if he please to open it) he bringeth the fulnes of blessing forth.Psal. 145.15. Behold the Lord needeth but to speak the word, and the means should readily runne to him to help us. Even our enemies which oppress us, shall be compelled feignedly to serve us, so soon as it shall please the Lord to take our cause in hand. We read that King Ahasuerosh commanding that Haman should so and so honour Mordechai;Psal. 18.45. Mordechai, I say, whom he hated as a Spider in his heart; that Mordechai, for whom he had prepared a Gallowes to hang him thereon, he did notwithstanding readily obey. Shall then a King, an earthly King have so much power and authority over his subjects? and shall not the King of Kings, the King of Heaven, have power to make our enemies serve us, or do us good, in this or that manner, whether they will or no? How greatly were the Aegyp∣tians enraged against the Israelites, yet God so ordered the matter, that they sent the Israelites many silver and golden Vessels to enrich them with. In the greatest need we can fall into, let us look but unto the Israelites condition in the Wilderness, which was a figure of the manifold tossing to and fro of the Children of God in this wide world. How fared they? Did not the Lord make up all their wants, by his secret blessing? Were they an hungred, and was there no Bread at hand? Did he not cause Bread to rain down from Heaven? Were they a thirst, and was there no water near? Did not the
Lord God cause water to come out of the Rock? Had they no means at hand to renew their clothes in the Wilderness,Psal. 90.1. when they should be worn out? Did not he cause their clothes to endure forty years, without waxing old? CHAP. X. Why Shame is to be rightly Ordered, and wherein the Holy Exercise thereof consists. How Faith doth stirre up this Shame in us, with the Effects thereof; and the Kinds of disordered Shame that are to be shunned. Question, WHy is Shame to be ordered aright? A. Shame is, as it were, a shoot or fecien of fear,Pudor est con∣scientia turpi∣tudinis: or it may be defined voluntaria a mo∣tio temeritat, & singularis quaeam animi ingerutas, qae sua inicrna vt hominem prius sae dignitatis admonitum avo∣cat a turpitudine flagitij Others distinguish pu∣dor and vere∣cundi, as Me∣lanct and Magyus de anima tr. 3. cap. 12. and the right ordering of it, is fitly to be handled after the other. These Reasons may per∣swade the carefull and holy exercise of it. 1. Inordinate Shame diverts many times from commendable things; yea, and from those which are profitable, and which concerne the preservation of our lives, and the welfare of our souls. As for example, you see at banquets, some being prest to drink extraordinarily, are ashamed to refuse them which invite them; and over-ruled by their unjust in∣treaties, fall into surfets which ruine their health. Others in like manner, see∣ing themselves importuned or conjured in bad companies, not to be so modest before their friends, suffer themselves to be carried away, to commit great disorders, as at play, or with women, or to do other execrable villanies, for the which they are grieved in their souls: but they have not the courage to refuse such as press them, whereby it happens often, that flying the smoake, they run headlong into the flame: that is to say, for that they are not able to resist an imaginary Shame, they fall into an eternall reproach. There have been some also who fearing that there have been plots laid to kill them, or to poyson them, yet surmounted by Shame, have abandoned themselves to the danger. So Dyon being advertised of conspiracy which was practised against him, and his Host and Friend Calippus; being ashamed to refuse to go whether they were both invited, which was the place where the murther was intended, he went rashly to his death. So Antipater the Son of Cassander,Plutarch. de vitiosa vere∣cund. Sculiet. Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 22. lost himself for that he durst not refuse to sup with Demetrius, where he was slain. Young Hercules, the Sonne of Alexander the Great, was surprized by Poliphercon and Cassander, being ashamed to refuse their requests to sup with them, who tended only to have a means to murther him. Shame keeps many from the profession of the truth; because they cannot endure to be mocked for well-doing; It drives others to revenge injuries, to answer chalenges and such like, because they would not bear the imputation of cowardize and dastardliness. 2. Excessive Shame hath brought unto death. Diodorus Cronus, as Plinie reporteth,Plin. lib. 7. cap. 53. Origo est de∣sperationis. Quippe ingenia, quae per se pos∣sent esse firma, debilitat. Haec illa est, quae omnia ardua cpta reformidat, omnia magna, praeclaraque. Plato in Protagora. Rei est pravissima interpres; Plautus in Paenulo. Sen. in Agam act . Qui redire, cum perit, nescit pudor. Ʋna cum ipso percunt mores, jus decus pietas, fides. Quisquis cum attriverit, buic nulla salus opitulari potest. Pas. virt. & vit. cap. 70. professor of Logick, being overcome with Shame died, because he could not forthwith dis∣solve a lusorious trifling question put forth by Stilbo. 3. He that is past Shame is past hope. He that is not partaker of Shame, as the calamity of the City, should be taken out of the world, saith an Heathen man. The Comicall Poet saith, I think that he is utterly lost, that hath lost Shame: for such are exposed to all wickedness and sin; and shame once lost can hardly be recovered 4. Shame
well ordered doth retire us from dishonest things,Melanct. de anima tract. 3 cap. 12. Impuentia est morbus axi∣mus hominum. Valer. Max. lib 4. cap. 5. Ubicnque haec adest, vos vero este procul, ex∣cusatio, mendax purgatio ter∣giversatio. asch. Ʋbi supra us∣que eò pudor est exactor in∣nocentiae, ut quam plurima fiant permissu legis, quae ipse fieri vetat. as appeared in him who con∣fessed freely that he plaid not at dice, for that he was ashamed any one should see him lose his time in so bad an excercise: As it is a bridle to restrain from vice, so it is a spurre to incite to vertuous and honest actions. Many times she hath made them valiant, who were faint-hearted and fearfull; yea, there have been Souldiers, who having faintly maintained an encounter, the next day to wipe away this shame, have performed wonders. It is the keeper of vertue, the mo∣ther of honest counsell, the mistris of innocency, the governess of desires, the detecter, yea revenger of sinne. Q When is shame rightly ordered? A. When it is universally and uniformely moved and guided by faith, that we be ashamed of all, and onely of things sinfull, dishonest or evil, past, pre∣sent or future, and that in order and degree as the truth of God, and nature of the thing requireth. From whence these Rules may be gathered; 1. We must not be ashamed of the profession of the Gospel of Christ, or of well-doing according to the Gospel, though we be disgraced, mocked, persecuted in this world for it. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Rom. 1.16. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sin∣full generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels, Mar. 8.38. Every Christian in this case must put on the courage and resolution of David,1 Pet. 4.16. Heb. 12.2. If I be vile for this, I will be more vile then thus, 2 Sam. 6.22. And say with Job, If mine enemy should write a Book, surely I will take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me, Job 31.36. 2. We must not be ashamed of the servants of Christ, that suffer manifold afflictions for his sake. Be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner, but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Go∣spel according to the power of God, 2 Tim. 1.8. This is that which Paul com∣mended in Onesiphorus, he was not ashamed of my chain, 2 Tim. 1.16. 3. All sinnes or vices, and all things that do resemble or have any shew of vice, are the objects of shame.Quemcunque quando oportuit, puditum est, qui loco & tem∣pore vereri caepit qui pecca∣to, antevertit, hunc postea nec frustra pudet, nec inutiliter piget. As for example, it is a shamefull thing to refuse to re∣store that which hath been left with us in guard, and which hath been consigned to our fidelity; for that this refusall is a proof of our injustice and disloyalty. It is also a shamefull thing to runne indifferently into all dishonest places, in the which (as Diogenes said to a young man) the farther he enters, the more his infamy increaseth: for, that it is a testimony of dissoluteness and intemperance. In like manner, it is a shamefull thing to refuse to relieve them that are in misery, and implore our aid: for it is a sign of our inhumanity. Moreover, we cannot but be ashamed, when as to insinuate our selves into the favour of any one, we a∣bandon our selves to imprudency, to extoll his good fortune, and the success of his prosperity, without measure. And the like may be said of whatsoever is contrary to the Law of God. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed?Ezek. 3.7. Rom. 6.21. Impudency is a note of great obstinacy, no∣torious impenitency: Thou hadst a whores forhead, thou refusedst to be ashamed, Jer. 3.3. Were they ashamed when they had committed abhomination? nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they blush, Jer. 6.15. & 8.12. 4. Evil of punish∣ment, as it is the proper fruit of sinne, and a sign of Gods displeasure, may justly occasion shame. If her Father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven daies? Numb. 12.14 If an earthly Father should shew some token of great displeasure, contempt or anger against his Child, he would be ashamed to come into his sight: much more should a Christian be ashamed to come be∣fore God, when he manifesteth his displeasure against him by judgment or cor∣rection. 5. Shame gathered from the consideration of the knowledge or presence of men, must be subordinate to that inward confusion or shame which ariseth from the apprehension of Gods Majesty and glory. Our shame, when
any reproachfull thing befalleth us, is answerable to the worth, authority, and vertue of the persons before whom we suffer, It falls out many times that we are ashamed of the disgraces we suffer in the presence of persons we respect much, depend upon, reverence for their gifts or love towards us, and whose blame and censure we apprehend. As for example, a Souldier will be much more asha∣med to have fled from the enemy in the view of his Captain, then to have com∣mitted this baseness in his absence. For the same reason our shame increaseth, when as we receive any reproach before vertuous persons, and such as are held to be just. As when they are wise men, or reverent old men that accuse us, or be privy to our faults; when our sinnes are discovered in the presence of such which are adorned with vertues contrary to the defects which appear in our actions, especially if they be severe men, who are not accustomed to pardon or excuse the errours which they see committed. In like manner, we blush to see our selves surprized in some notable fault, by such as had us in good esteeme especially if they be our familiar friends, or of our own family, which discover the errour, into which we had never before fallen, or had alwaies cunningly concealed it. Thus sovereignty, greatness, excellency and vertue in the person before whom our nakedness is discovered, do occasion shame. But all these things are in God after a most eminent manner, who is great in power, glorious in Majesty, of most absolute sovereignty, severe in justice, terrible in wrath, of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, and of most exquisite wisdom that cannot be deceived: in which respects we have cause to be ashamed before him, in con∣sideration of our manifold offences, and the signes of his displeasure against us. O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God, for our iniquities are increased over our head, Ezra 9.6. This holy shame is an undoubt∣ed evidence of repentance. Thou shalt remember thy waies and be ashamed,Ezek. 16.61, 63. & 36.31, 32. and never open thy mouth any more: because of thy shame, when I am pacified towards thee. 6. Our shame and confusion of heart must be proportionable to the offences that we stand guilty of before the Lord. 7. We must so take shame to our selves, that we be driven to serious humiliation for our transgressions. Shame must be joyned with faith in the Wor of Promise, which forceth hearty confession of all known sinnes, and earnest prayer for pardon and grace. Q What are the effects of Shame? A. In respect of things past or present that cause Shame. 1. It stoppeth a man from rushing presumptuously into Gods presence after he hath sinned, and maketh him turn aside to bewaile the aberrations of his heart and life. When we are to speak before a person of eminent quality, of exquisite knowledge, or of exact judgment, we blush and are amazed, by reason of the great respect we have of him; which makes us fear to faile before him, and this fear fills us with shame. If fear of missing breed shame, conscience of former failings much more. The child that shameth at his fault, will not thrust himself impudently into his Fathers presence. Come we must unto God though we have offended, because he calleth us, he only can pardon and forgive us: but shame will not suffer to draw near irreverently, inconsiderately. 2. Shame makes wary and circum∣spect, that we offend not in the petitions we present unto God: Being ashamed that we have offended and displeased God, we are warned not to provoke him further, by putting up any supplication unwarrantable for matter, unbeseeming for manner. Fear what acceptance our words shall finde causeth shame, and both, consideration, what is fit, and likely to gain approbation.Pudor est facti exprobator, prima amo∣nitio, & seria quaedam ca∣stigatio. 3. Shame and sorrow are linked together. He that is ashamed of his sinne, will soundly be∣waile the folly of his waies. It is the property of shame to humble and abase the stout heart, which lifted up it self above measure: but the more we are aba∣sed, the apter to sorrow. A dejected countenance is hardly severed from a bro∣ken
spirit. 4. Hence followes hatred of sinne committed, and a burning desire of innocency, to which the mind longeth to be restored. 5. In respect of things to come which may cause confusion of face, it breedeth watchfullness and valour: watchfullness to prevent whatsoever might thrust us into danger, or be an occasion of sinne, in respect of disposition, place, time or calling: and valour to resist manfully all oppositions that withstand in the pursuit of holiness. The souldier that hath been afflicted or is affected with shame for running away, will adventure the loss of life rather than turn his back upon the enemy. He that is loathsome to himself because he hath offended, will wrestle hard to keep him∣self free from pollution,Prov. 1.5. Gen. 4 30. 1 Sam. 3.4. & 2.12. 1 Chro. 19.6. Exo. 5.21. when once he is cleansed. For what procureth shame, that maketh us to stink, and to be had in abhomination, which is more bitter than death to a repentant soul. Q. How doth Faith move or stirre up shame in us? A. 1. It certainly apprehendeth the infinite Majesty, greatness, wisdome, ju∣stice, love and purity of God, before whom we must appear, who cannot abide the least spot or stain, who distinctly knows every thought and imagination of the heart, and to whom we must give account of all our works. The confusion of a malefactor convicted of an offence, is greater, as the earthly power before whom he is arraigned, and unto whom his crime is manifest, is more excellent. But none is to be compared to the Lord our God, in authority and power. 2 It manifests the dishonesty and filthiness of sinne: Men are ashamed of their bodily nakedness, that it should be seen of others; but much greater cause have we to be ashamed of our spirituall filthiness,Prov 13.5. Pa. 3.5. Iob 9.. Dn. 1.2. Ia. 6.5. that is manifest before the eyes of almighty God, 3. It setteth before us the shame and confusion deserved by sinne, both in this world and the world to come: which worketh the heart to shame before God, that confusion eternal might be prevented. Q. What are the kinds of disordered Shame that are to be shunned? Hoc homini cunti ad honesta & fortia, grave onus, magnum∣que impedimen¦tum est: nulli rei, quae firam frontem defide ret, perficiendae est idonea. 1 et 4.16. 1 Sam. 31.4. 2 am. 17.23 Stultorum in∣curata pudor magis ulcera ceat. Hor. epist. lib 1. 18. Ʋlcera celat, relinquit incu∣rata Hic quod non in alio radi∣cs egit, sed sum a in tan∣tum cute versa∣tur, facile dete¦ritur.A. 1. Shame of infamy, loss, disgrace, that diverteth from vertuous actions, or disheartneth in well-doing. If Christians be deried from the practise of piety and holiness, they ought to rejoyce, not to be ashamed. 2. Shame of infidelity, when men are so confounded with shame and horror, that they utterly despair and runne from God, or lay violent hands upon themselves. Examples of this we have in Saul and Achitophel; the one, when he was sore wounded in battell; the other, when he saw his counsel disappointed, being overcome with shame, desperately finished their dayes. 3. Carnal shame, when the sight of men is more regarded than the presence of God. If we over∣shoot our selves by word or gesture in company that doth observe us, and we respect, it doth much trouble us, we shame at it: but we can let pass many times things done amiss in the presence of God, that his pure eye cannot but take notice of. 4. Slight, inconstant, partial Shame, when we are ashamed of our courses, but not to serious humiliation, constant watchfullness, Christian reso∣lution to abandon all wicked practises that do offend. To hang down the head like a bull-rush for a day, and then return to our former vomit, is not the shame that God requireth. 5. Excessive disordered Shame which hindreth all excellent endeavours, presseth down all excellent proceedings, is the nurse of sloath and idleness.
CHAP. XI. Why Anger is to be ordered aright? Of holy or lawfull Anger, and what that Anger is, which is forbidden in Scripture. Wherein the right ordering of Anger consists, and how just holy Anger is to be stirred up in us, with the severall kindes of disordered Anger that must be shunned. Question: WHy is Anger to be rightly ordered? A. 1. Of all passions of the soul, there is not any one that takes such deep root, or extends her branches farther than Choler, whereof neither age, condition, people nor nation, are fully exempt. There are whole Countries which living under a sharp and rough climate, are not acquainted with pleasures: There are others, who contenting themselves with those benefits which nature presents unto them, are not enflamed with any ambition. Some there be, to whom misery is familiar, as they fear not any accidents of fortune. But there is not any, over whom Choler doth not exercise her power, and shew the excess of her rage: yea she enflames whole Kingdoms and Empires; whereas the other passions do only trouble and agitate private persons. We have never seen a whole Nation surprized with the love of one woman. It was never found, that a whole City hath been transported with a desire to heap up treasure: Ambition doth puff up but certain spirits: But we see Cities, Provinces, and whole States, enflamed with Choler, and transported by this fury, with a publike conspiracie of great and small, young and old, men and children, Magistrates and multitude: we see Commonalties, whom this fury hath incensed, runne all to armes, to revenge a disgrace, or a wrong, which they pretend hath been done against them. We have also seen great and powerfull Armies, which have been the terror of the world, ruin themselves by this fury, which hath thrust them into mutiny against their Commanders. 2. Inordinate Anger is most infamous and wretched,Esa. 19.2. aschas. vir. & vit. an argument of shamefull levity, infirmity, madness. As oft as any man is angry, so often he is mad, ignorant of himself, his friends, his goods; possessed with blindness and stubbornness. He hates truth, embraceth errour, is stiff against them that admonish well, apt to follow perverse counsell: forgetfull of his own credit, an enemy to his own safety, knowing no measure of grief or fierceness. He is wholly against himself untameable, implacable, to his neighbours trou∣blesome, bitter, intollerable. He takes pleasure in his own affliction, and abhorres all remedies, flies the hand of the Physician which might cure him, Yea, in this transport he is offended at any thing, and imitates the savage beasts, whom the most chearfull colours thrust into fury: An innocent smile, a shaking of the head which signifies nothing, a glance of the eye without design, is capable to draw him to the field. How often have we seen this inhumane fury to dissolve even the most sacred friendship upon very frivolous subjects? hath she not pro∣voked dearest friends to duels, and made them serve as spectacles of infamy both to Heaven and earth, for quarrels embraced without any ground? It is then very apparent, that this passion is not only infamous, but also most wretched, seeing that under a weak pretext of revenge, she doth precipitate men into most horrible villanies, and makes them tread all divine and humane Laws under feet, to satiate her insolency and rage. Wherein doubtless she is more to be blamed than all the other passions wherewith the soul of man is afflicted: for that the other passions have this property, that even at the very instant whenas they are as it were in the height of their transport, give way somewhat to reason, and
yeeld in some sort unto her commandements, whenas she presents her self to pacifie them. Whereas Choler doth like unto Mariners which are amazed or corrupted, and will give no ear to the voice of the Pilot: or as mutinous soul∣diers, which will not hear the advice of their Leaders: Yea, she despites truth, if she oppose against her rage; and although she come to know the innocency of the party whom she presecutes, yet she holds obstinacy more honourable than repentance, so as nothing shall be able to make her desist from her unjust and violent pursuits.Hipocrates. Pereg. de ira. cap. 2. 3. If the saying of Physicians be true, that of all the infirmi∣ties wherewith we are afflicted, there are none worse nor more dangerous than those which disfigure the face of man, and which make it deformed and unlike unto himself; we must conclude by the same reason, that of all the Passions of man, there is not any one more pernicious, nor more dreadfull than Choler, which alters the gracefull countenance and the whole constitution of man. For as furious and mad men shew the excess of their rage, by the violent changes which appear in their bodies; even so a man transported with Choler, gives great signes of the frenzie that doth afflict him.Persi Satyr. 3. Senec. Trag. Act. 4. His eyes full of fire and flame which this passion doth kindle, seem fiery and sparkling; his face is wonderfully inflamed as by a certain reflux of bloud which ascends from the heart; his hair stands upright and staring with horrour; his mouth cannot deliver his words; his tongue falters; his feet and hands are in perpetuall motion. He vomits out nothing but threats, he speaks of nothing but bloud and vengeance, Finally, his constitution is so altered, and his looks so terrible, as he seems hideous and fear∣full even to his dearest friends. What must the soul then be within, whose out∣ward image is so horrible? 4. Anger is a most deceitfull motion, of which humane condition is easily circumscribed. An angry man sees not the thing as it is, and yet he swells and boyls inwardly, as the dogge that barks at the least sound or sight,Prov. 12.26. & 14.17, 29. Eccl. 7.9. but discerns not who or what it is at which he barks. 5. The holy Ghost hath told us, that anger resteth in the bosom of fools; but a man of cool spirit ex∣celleth in wisdom. The mind of a fool is ever moved; but the spirit of a wise man is quiet both in prosperity and adversity; or if his heart begin to heat, he correcteth himself, lest he slip into evil. 6. An angry man is ever unmindfull of his own condition. If poor he wasteth his goods, being a private man he would rule, being weak he becomes a Lyon, Tyger, Dragon. Where delay is requisite, he makes haste, where haste is necessary, he doubteth. He pleaseth not himself, if he be not all fiery; and of a man becomes a beast, revengefull in mind, threat∣ning in speech, fierce in behaviour, in deeds intemperate. 7. An angry person cannot please God or man, no more than the preposterous servant; who not understanding nor regarding his Masters commandment, as a trouble-house runnes hither and thither, doing nothing in order, all things rashly without discretion. Q. Is there any holy, just, or lawfull Anger? A. Anger is a natural affection which is good or evil according as it is moved well or evilly,Rom. 1.18. Jo. 3 36. Zanc. in Col. 3.8. Aul. Gell. lib. 1. Cap. 26. as it agrees or disagrees from the Law of God. 1. In many places of Scripture it is attributed to God himself, to whose most perfect and just nature nothing agreeth, but that which is just and holy. True it is, that nei∣ther this nor any other affection is in God if we speak properly, but only attri∣buted unto him, that our weak capacities may better conceive how he exerciseth his works and eternal counsels towards his creatures: But yet forasmuch as no∣thing is attributed and ascribed unto him which is not good and just, so far forth as it is ascribed, it evidently sheweth, that Anger in its own nature is not evil. 2. It was created by God, and was in man before the fall, and before any evil entred into the world:Zanch. in Eph. 4.26. being therefore the Lords own workmanship, which by his own testimony was approved to be very good, and of greater antiquity than evil it self, it followeth, that the Affection in its own nature is to be esteemed as
good and lawfull. 3. This Affection was truly and naturally in our Saviour Christ himself as he was man: For it is said of him,Mar 3.5. Mar. 10.14. Joh. 2.27. Act. 7.24. that he looked angerly upon the Scribes and Pharisees, mourning for the hardness of their hearts. So likewise being incited by an holy anger, to see his Fathers house turned into a market, he driveth the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. Seeing then Christ was angry and yet free from sinne, it followeth that anger in its own nature is just and holy. 4. In Scriptures we read of many holy men that were angry,Exo. 16.20. Act. 8.20. & 13.11, 12 Neh. 5.6 2 Cor. 7.11. Eccl. 7.3. Eph. 4.26. Mat. 5.22. as of Mo∣ses, Phineas, Paul, &c. who are not reprehended for it. 5. In true repentance there must be indignrtion and revenge: therefore all anger is not to be condemn∣ed. 6. The Scripture seems to condemn some kinde of anger. Anger is better than laughter, Be angry but sinne not. Our Saviour expounding the sixth Com∣mandement, saith, Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly: intimating that all anger is not simply unlawfull, but that which is contrary to the Law of charity. 7. There be just occasions of anger, for which we ought to be offended, and if we be not angry at them, we do fail greatly in our duty we owe to God and man. Q. Anger is in many places of Scripture condemned and forbidden.Lev. 19.18. A. In all places where this Affection is forbidden, not the affection it self, as it was created or is renewed by Gods Spirit, but as it is corrupted and depraved with original sinne, is to be understood: for anger being sanctified, is not only just and lawfull, but also commendable, profitable and very necessary, as being the whetstone of true fortitude, whereby we are stirred up and encouraged to maintain the glory of God, and our own persons and estates, against the impiety and injustice of men. Though anger therefore be but a bad mistress to command, yet it is a good servant to obey: though it be an ill Captain, to lead our forces into the field against our spiritual and temporal enemies, yet it is a good souldier so long as it subjecteth it self to the government and discipline of sanctified rea∣son. In a word, not anger simply, but unadvised, inordinate anger is con∣demned. Q. Anger is a perturbation of the minde, and therefore evil. A. As the perturbation of the minde which is moved upon unjust causes and in unequall measure is unjust and evil, so that which is caused upon just and ne∣cessary causes, with due and fit moderation, is just and commendable: as for example, when a man seeth God dishonoured, Religion disgraced, wickedness unpunished; If therefore his minde be troubled, this perturbation is not to be condemned, nay to be commended, and they rather to be condemned that are not so troubled.Joh. 2.17. & 11.23i Num. 21.7. Iracundia mo∣derate spirans, zeli est armatu∣ra. Nazian. Thus was our Saviour troubled when he saw Gods house pol∣luted; as also when he raised up Lazarus: thus was Phineas disturbed and troubled in minde, when he saw that shameless sinne of Zimrie and Cozbie: and Elias when religion was contemned, idolatry erected, and the Lords true Prophets destroyed. Though therefore anger be a perturbation of the minde, it doth not follow that it is evil, for not the perturbation it self, but the cause and measure thereof maketh it good if it be good, and evil if evil. Q. Anger blindeth and confoundeth reason. A. 1. If anger be temperate and moderate, it doth serviceably wait upon reason, and not imperiously over-rule it: and rather maketh a man more con∣stant and resolute in walking the path of truth, which he hath descried with the eye of a clear judgement, than any wayes dazel or offend the sight whereby he should be caused to stumble in the way, or else turn aside into by-pathes of errour. Secondly,Zanch. ubi supra. Though it should be granted that for the instant Reason is somewhat disturbed with the passion, it doth not follow that it is evil or unprofitable; for before the affection is inflamed▪ the reason apprehendeth and judgeth of the injury, and so as it were kindleth the flame; which being kindled, doth for the instant perturb the minde, but the perturbation being quickly
overpassed and the minde quieted, reason is made no less fit thereby to judg of the injury, and much more fit to revenge it. And therefore moderate and sanctified anger, is so far from hurting and hindring the judgment of Reason, that it rather serviceably aideth and supporteth it, by inciting and encouraging it couragiously to execute that, which reason hath justly decreed and resolved. As therefore the most precious eye-salve doth presently after it is put into the eye dim and dazle the sight, but afterwards causeth it to see much more clearly; so this affection of moderate and holy anger, doth at the first somewhat trouble reason, but afterwards it maketh it much more active in executing and perform∣ing all good designs. Q. When is Anger rightly ordered? A. When it is moved, quickned and guided by faith, stirring up godly sorrow for sinne committed by our selves or others, joyned with an holy and just desire of revenge, to the saving of the person, appeasing of Gods anger, or the pro∣moting of the Kingdom of Christ. Faith is the beginning of holy Anger, teach∣ing what is a just and weighty occasion of it, namely, a manifest offence against God. Moses in sundry places is said to be angry, but the occasions of his anger were great, as appears in the particulars. First, He was wroth, because some of the Israelites,Exo. 16.20. Exo. 32.19. Numb. 16.15. against Gods commandement, had reserved Manna till the next day: again, they tempted God in worshiping the golden Calfe. He was also wroth, because Corah, Dathan and Abiram rebelled against him, and in him against God. The causes of just anger are divers: 1. When we see God dishonoured and his glory defaced. We profess our selves to be Gods subjects, now we know that no good subject can with patience endure to hear or see the glory of his Sovereigne impeached. We profess our selves to be Gods servants, and what good servant can abide to see his Master disgraced? We profess our selves Gods children, and good children are more grieved and offended when they perceive that their parents are any wayes abused or injured, than if the injuries were offered to themselves: If therefore we be loyal subjects, faithfull servants, and loving children, we cannot chuse but be incited to a holy anger, if we see our glorious Soveraign, our good Master and gracious Father, by any means dishonoured.Numb. 25.7, 8. Phineas when he saw God dishonoured with that shame∣less fact of Zimri and Cozbie, being provoked with an holy anger, he revenged this dishonour with the death of both the offenders. Thus also was Elias zealous for Gods glory,1 King. 19.14. because the children of Israel had forsaken his Covenant, cast down his Altars, and slain his Prophets. The second cause of just anger, is when in∣jury is unjustly offered unto our selves: for by the Law of God we are bound to seek the preservation of our own good Name and state: and therefore when either of them is violated or impeached, we may justly use the aid of this holy anger in defending our selves and repelling injury. Though the Apostle Paul as of more than an admirable patience, yet being unjustly smitten by the commandement of the high Priest,Act. 23.2. he sheweth his just displeasure by a sharp reproof. Yea our Saviour Christ the lively picture of true patience, when con∣trary to all justice he was stroken by the high Priests servant,Ioh. 18.23. he sheweth himself displeased by his reprehension; though at that time he offered himself as it were to suffer all contumelious injuries which pride assisted with malice could imagin or impose.Mat. 5.39. Rom. 12.7. But this gives no place to private revenge inward or outward, which is, when out of bitterness of Spirit we seek the hurt of them that have wronged us.Luk. 18.3. If we sustain wrong, it is lawfull to implore the aid of the Magi∣strate, but not with a minde or desire of his hurt that hath done us wrong. The third cause of just anger is, when injury is offered to our brethren: for as by the Law of charity we are bound to love them as our selves, so the same Law bind∣eth us to be angry for those injuries which are offered unto them, as if they were offered unto our selves.Act. 7.24. And thus was Moses angry with the Egyptian who
wronged the Israelite.2 Sam. 13.21. Thus was David angry with Ammon for deflowring his sister, and with Absolom for his cruel murthering of Ammon. And thus was good Nehemiah provoked to anger when he saw the people oppressed.Neh. 5.6. As faith sheweth what is a just cause of anger, so it directeth in the motion, that it be conceived upon counsel and deliberation. Establish thy thoughts by counsel.Prov. 20.18. If thoughts must be established by counsel, then the affections, and so our anger also. Be slow to anger. Counsel ought to be the foundation of all our actions,Jam. 1.19. and therefore much more of our affections, which are the beginnings of our actions. Moreover, just and lawfull Anger must be stirred up by good and ho∣ly affections, as namely, by desire to maintain the honour and praise of God, by love of justice and vertue, by hatred and detestation of vice, and of all that is evil. One saith well to this purpose, that Anger must attend upon ver∣tue, and be stirred up by it against sinne, as the Dog attends upon the Shep∣herd, and waites upon his eye and hand, when to follow him, and when to pur∣sue the Wolfe. But the hatred of sinne, and love of justice, is quickened by a lively faith. The Object of holy and just Anger is sinne, and not the person, but onely by reason of the sinne. Thus David saith of himself,Psal. 119.139. that he was consumed with Anger, not because the men with whom he was angry, were his enemies, but because they kept not Gods Laws. Nothing more dishonoureth God then sinne, and nothing should more offend and displease us then sinne, whether in our selves or others. When therefore we fall into sinne, we are to be offended with our selves, that so we may avert the Lords Anger from us; for as they which judge themselves, shall not be judged of the Lord,1 Cor. 11.31. so they who are angry with themselves for sinne, shall escape the Lords Anger. And this our Anger must proceed to an holy revenge. Those that have wallowed them∣selves in voluptuous pleasures, are to judge, subdue, and mortifie them, though they be as dear and pretious unto them as their right hand or eye. Those who have defrauded their neighbour by purloyning away his goods, are with Zacheus to make restitution four-fold.Luk. 19.8. And as we are bound by the Law of charity to love our neighbours as our selves, so also to be angry with them as with our selves, namely, with this holy kind of Anger for sinne. Whensover therefore we see them by their sinnes dishonour God, we are to be displeased therewith, and so farre forth as the limits of our callings extend to shew our selves offended, according to the example of the Prophet Jeremie, who because the people would not hear the Word of the Lord,Ier. 6.10, 11. was even filled with divine wrath. But here we must further learn to put a differene between the cause and offence of God, and the cause and offence of man: for just Anger is directed against persons, more for the offence of God, then for wrong done unto our selves. And from this it followeth, that in our own case we must be meek and patient, but zealous in that concernes the glory of God. Wherefore we must look to the causes of Anger, not onely that they be just, but also weighty and of some importance: for if every small trifle be sufficient to provoke us to Anger, well may we manifest great justice, but without question we shall shew little love: for love suffereth long, it is not easily provoked to Anger,1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 7. 1 Pet. 4.8. it suffereth all things. The Properties of holy indignation are these. 1. It must begin at home: we must first be angry at our selves for our own transgressions. 2. It must be mixed and tempered with love and charity. It is the property of God himself, in wrath to remember mercy,Hab. 3.1, 2. Exo. 32. and herein we must be like unto him. This was Moses his practice, who out of his love prayed for those, with whom he was greatly offended. 3. Anger against any offence, must be mixed with sorrow for the same offence.Mat. 3.5. Thus Christ was angry with the Jews, but withall he sorrowed for the hardness of their hearts. The reason hereof is this. In any society whatsoever it be, if one member sinneth, the sinne of that one member, is the punishment of the rest that be in that society;
even as it is in the body, if one part be afflicted and ill at ease, the rest will be distempered. Paul saith of himself, that he was afraid, lest when he came to the Corinths,2 Cor. 12.21. Gal. 6.1. God would humble him for their sinnes: But he teacheth with∣all, that those which are fallen into any fault, must be restored with the spirit of meekness, because we our selves are subject to the same tentations. 4. In holy Anger we must observe Christian modesty, in abstaining from malicious and wicked speeches, or unjust and spitefull actions in expressing our Anger: and to this purpose we are alwaies to remember of what spirit we are: for un∣doubtedly, how just soever our cause be, if we defend it with spitefull and bit∣ter speeches, it is not the Spirit of God which speaketh in us. Let us rather follow the example of our Saviour Christ, who when he was buffeted, and grossely abused, reproved the offender with great mildness: and of Mychael the Arch-angell,Iud. 9. who when he strove with the Divell himself about the body of Moses, durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, The Lord re∣buke thee. 5. It is required also, that in our Anger there be observed a fit de∣corum, and due respect, and that both in regard of the party himself, who is provoked to Anger, and also the other, with whom he is angry. For first, in respect of the party himself, he is not to behave himself alike in what place and calling soever he be: for if he be a Magistrate, he is to shew his Anger not only in countenance and word, but also in actions. If he be a Father, he is not with Ely to shew his displeasure to his rebellious sonnes onely by mild admo∣nition, but also by discreet correction: On the other side, it is sufficient for him who is a private man, if he manifest his Anger in word and countenance; nay, it is unlawfull for him to proceed any further, unless his Calling warrant him thereunto. Again, the offenders are not to be used all alike; a mean pri∣vate man is not to shew his Anger in the same manner to a Noble-man or Magi∣strate, as he would to his equall or inferiour: for though he may justly be an∣gry with his sinne, yet he is to reverence his Place and Calling. The Son must not shew his Anger towards his Father, as the Father sheweth his towards his Son, for he is bound to fear and reverence his person, though he justly hate his sinne. And both these points have the Saints from time to time duely obser∣ved: Moses a Magistrate, to whom the Sword of Justice was committed, when he was provoked to Anger by the sinne of the people, did not onely shew his Anger in countenance, or by a mild admonition, but by unsheathing the Sword of Justice,Exo. 32.27. Mat. 3.7. and justly punishing the offenders for their execrable ido∣latry. John Baptist having onely authority to use the Sword of the Spirit, being offended with the hypocrisie of the Scribes and Pharisees, expresseth his Anger by sharp and vehement reprehensions.Gen. 31.36. Jacob be∣ing a private man, sheweth his Anger towards churlish Laban his Father-in-law, by mild and gentle admonitions. Jonathan being justly incensed by the barbarous tyranny of his merciless Father,1 Sam. 20.34. signified his Anger onely by rising from the Table and departing. The three Companions of Daniel though with a godly zeal they abhorred the Kings prophane idolatry,Dan. 3.16. yet they shewed their displeasure in humble and respective words. And so though Paul detested the gentilisme of Festus and Agrippa,Act 25. yet he used them with all due respect as it beseemed their high Calling. By all which examples it is manifest that we are to use Christian seemliness and discretion if we would have our Anger approved as just and holy. 6. Just Anger must be contained within the bounds of our particular calling, that is so chained, as it make us not to forgo or forsake our duties which we owe to God and man. Anger must whet on to the performance of any good Office we owe unto men, and not withdraw us in any thing, wherein we are bound unto them. 7. Anger must be uniforme and moderate, rising and falling according to the nature of the offence, but ever running in his own channell, within its banks: otherwise it will quickly
mingle with corrupt and carnall Anger, and so degenerate into fleshly Anger, and from that to fury. Godly Anger will not lean to sinne in one man, and de∣test it in another; nor fly out against this offence, approve of that: but it ab∣horreth all evil in whomsoever, himself and others, friend and foe, near of blood, and further off, according to the nature of it, without by-respects. 8. It must be seasonable, both for time and continuance. When just and weighty occasion is offered, then are we to conceive displeasure: but our Anger must not continue longer then the cause requireth, lest by reason of our corruption it de∣generate into malice. For, as the most pure Wine doth in time wax sour upon the dregs: so our most holy Anger if it be long retained, is in danger of re∣ceiving some soureness of malice from the dregs of our corruption. The safest and best course, is quickly to be appeased, if the party offending shew signes of true repentance, either for his sinne towards God, or his injury offered unto us: for reformation is the aime of holy Anger, which is to cease when the end is obtained; and seeing upon hearty sorrow God pardoneth and forgiveth, we must not retain what he remitteth. If we would have our Anger just and holy, the end must be just and holy. And that is, first, the glory of God, which is set forth by our Anger, either when being pirvate men we shew our selves his Children and servants, by manifesting our hatred and detestation of sinne in word and countenance, and so adorne the Profession which we profess; or being Magistrates do become his instruments in punishing sinnes and executing justice. The second end is, the good of the Church and Common-wealth: which end, though it appertain unto all which are members of those bodies, yet doth it more properly belong unto Magi∣strates, who are to shew their Anger in punishing sinne, not onely that civil justice, which is the prop of the Common-wealth, may be maintained, but also that Gods Anger which hangeth over whole Countries, where sinne is counte∣nanced or not justly punished, may be averted: for if sinne be punished by men in authority, God will not punish the Common-wealth for it. Whereas o∣therwise, if Magistrates wink at sinne, and so neglect their duty imposed by God, the Lord will in Anger take the Sword of Justice into his own hands, and punish not onely the Malefactors for offending, but the Magistrate for not exe∣cuting his duty, yea, the whole Common-wealth, which is stained and polluted with their sinnes. The third end of just Anger, is the good of the party who suffereth the injury, for hereby the offender is restrained from committing the like, when either private men sharpely reprove him, or Magistrates severely punish him for his offence; whereas if neither private men do by their Anger shew their dislike, nor Magistrates inflict punishments for his misdemeanour, he is ready to redouble his injuries. The last end is the good of the party, who by offering the injury provoked us to Anger. For, private men are to be angry with their neighbour, not because they maligne him or seek his hurt, but because they may discourage him in his sinne, and so work his amendment. And in like manner, Magistrates must shew their Anger in punishing offenders, not to revenge themselves on their persons, but that they may seek their good in reforming their vices. For, what greater good can a man do his Brother, then to reclaim him from his sinne, which otherwise would destroy both body and soul by remaining in it? Q. How is this just and holy Anger to be stirred up in us? A. Anger is stirred up, quickned and increased by the exaggeration of the injury done or received, which is done by the consideration of four circumstan∣ces. The first drawn from the person of him that hath done the wrong; as his baseness, wisdom, gravity, vertue, and Office; if he have pretended former friendship, have received many kindnesses at our hands, and in lieu of reward, recognition and gratitude repay us with injuries and ingratitude; if he have
offered us many injuries before, that which we never revenged, or which enda∣maging us, greatly endamaged himself, as a fly to put forth a mans eye, looseth her own life. In all these respects we have just cause to be offended with our selves for sinne committed against God. What are we in comparison of him? more base then the dust, less then nothing. If a base Pesant, should buffet a Prince, it would be accounted an heinous injury: much more abhominable is it in me, that I should rebell against the Lord of Glory. That I should sinne a∣gainst him, who have been inriched with such wisdom and understanding, ador∣ned with so many gifts, beautified with precious favours, beset with means to keep me from sinne. Ah, that I have used my wit to wrong ends, my power to evil, and so have fought against the Lord with his own weapons! Many inju∣ries have I done unto his Majesty, which he hath put up with patience; and therefore I have taken courage to offend the more; As he hath laden me with his mercies, I have pressed him with my sinnes. I that cannot brook unthank∣fullness in another man for some scraps of kindness, do most unthankfully tread the mercies of God underfeet. And what have I profited by this my disobedi∣ence? I have denied loyalty to my absolute Sovereign, and stripped my soul of grace, robbed my conscience of comfort, and endangered soul and body unto eternal perdition, and plucked upon my head many temporall calamities. The second Circumstance is the injury it self; as if we be injured in the goods of our soul or body, substance, name or the like. And as the thing wherein we are wronged is greater, of more esteeme, of larger extent, so is our Anger con∣ceived against it; specially if it aimed at an evil end. This comes to be conside∣red in the wrong done against God: for we have injured him in his glory, which is most dear unto him, impeached his sovereignty, which is most absolute and uni∣versall, denied homage which is most due; and all this to satisfie the lusts of the flesh, to inlarge the Kingdom of Satan. The third is the person injured; as if he be one of great place, authority and vertue; if one that was then pre∣sently doing or labouring for the offenders good and commodity. If among di∣vers, who might, and in reason should have been injured rather then he, yet he was singled from the rest, and if the wrong offered to one, hath necessarily redounded to the loss of many. In each of these Particulars we have just cause to be most offended with our selves. For by our sinnes we have done intolle∣rable injurie to the Lord of glory, who is great and terrible in himself, of in∣comprehensible Majesty: To whom we are indebted for inestimable favours, more then ever we can pay, who hath been ever ready to do us good, and loa∣deth us daily with his blessings. Whom should we not have wronged rather then him? but we have wronged him above all, and in that have hurt our selves, our friends, the creatures, his servants, who have all fared the worse for our disobedience. The fourth is the manner of injuring; as if we be in countenance and externall appearance held as friends, and secretly injured like enemies; if a long time the injury was thought upon and premeditated; if in place where we ought to be loved, honoured or reverenced, there we be wronged, disho∣noured, disgraced; if the injury be publique before a multitude; if often re∣peated and done against admonition. In words we professed our selves to be the servants of Christ, but in deeds we denied him negligently, willingly, before men, against warning. How lightly have we regarded his presence? How many times have we sinned against knowledge or conscience? How have we suffered our hearts to rove after vanity, when they should have attended upon God in his holy Ordinances? If ever there were just cause of holy indignation, each man hath reason to be most offended with himself for his trespasses against God. Q. What are the severall Kinds of disordered Anger that must be shun∣ned?
A. Anger is disordered when it is not moved by faith, ariseth not from love, keepeth not within its bounds, and is not directed to a right end. The kinds are many. 1. Devilish, which rageth against vertue and godliness, is incensed by most innocent and vertuous actions. Some there are whose malignant eyes do abhorre nothing more then the bright beames of vertue, either because they think that the beauty of others perfection, causeth the deformity of their vices to seem more ugly, or that their degenerated natures are become like unto Sa∣tans, who hateth vertue because it is vertue. An example hereof we have in Cain, whose Anger was kindled against his Brother,Gen. 4.5. because he was accepted in Gods sight, as being more holy then himself. As also in Saul who was in∣censed against Jonathan, for his vertuous demeanour towards David: In Asa,1 Sam. 20.30. 2 Chro. 26.20. who was offended with the Prophet the Ambassadour of the Lord, for deliver∣ing faithfully that Ambassage which the Lord had put in his mouth.Dan. 3.13. In Nabu∣chadnezar who was enraged against the three young men, because they refused to commit Idolatry: And in the Jews, who were filled with wrath, because our Saviour made a true Exposition of the Scriptures,Luk. 4.28. and rightly applied them unto them. And too many examples we have in these daies, of such as cannot with any patience endure to hear their duties taught them, and their vices publikely reproved out of Gods Word, or yet any private admonition,2 Sam. 3.8. but they are ready (like those that are in a raging fit of a burning Ague) to de∣spite the Physician, that endeavoureth to cure them. Yea, the sight of god∣liness doth move some to rage and fury, that they are vexed at nothing so much as to see that some make conscience of their waies. 2. Rash and unadvised, which hath divers branches. First, Unjust Anger, that hath no other ground but our own suspicion or imagination.1 Sam. 17.28. And thus was Eliab angry with his Bro∣ther David, because he suspected him to be proud, whereas in truth his own pride was the cause of his suspicion. And this is the most common cause of Anger in these daies: for want of love causeth men to interpret the actions of others in the worst sense, and upon their false surmises they ground their Anger. One is angry because saluting his neighbour, he did not resalute him, whereas per∣haps he did not see him, or at the least having his mind otherwise occupied did not observe him: Another is offended if any in his company is merry, thinking that he maketh himself sport with his infirmities; another because he is too sad, imagining that it is because his company displeaseth him. Yea, so prone are men to invent causes where none is, that oftentimes they are sore displeased be∣cause they have received small benefits not answerable to their expectation, or not equall to those they see bestowed upon others;Eccl. 4.4. or because they thrive not as fast as their neighbours, or such as belong unto them rise not in the world as their fellows and companions. The second branch of rash Anger is causeless, when we are provoked upon no cause, or by every small and trifling occasion. Hereby love and charity is notably violated, when every slight cause incenseth us to Anger: for love suffereth all things; and therefore their love is small who will suffer nothing. Love covereth a multitude of sinnes:1 Cor. 13.7. Prov. 10.12. they therefore that find causes where they are not, rather then cover them where they are, do plainly shew their want of love, and their too great proneness to Anger. It is the nature of love to make great faults seem little, and little faults none at all: but Anger maketh every slip a Capitall offence, and every word of disgrace wor∣thy a stab. And as when we behold the Sunne rising through thick and foggy va∣pours, we imagine it to be of a farre greater quantity then when the ayr is pure and clear: so when the foggy mists of Anger do overshadow reason, we sup∣pose every fault to be greater then it would appear if this turbulent affection were dispelled with the lively heat of ardent love. Some are angry at the im∣perfections of nature, which being not in the parties power to amend, should rather move compassion then provoke Anger. Others are angry at faults com∣mitted
at unawares, unwillingly and unwittingly, whereas they might with as great reason be angry with a Traveller for going out of his way, or with one who stumbleth in the dark for not keeping footing, or with one who is sick be∣cause he is sick.Prov. 19.11. It is the glory of a man to pass over a transgression, to wink at smaller infirmities, and to remit greater wrongs: yet not so, as to be silent at Gods dishonour, with the perill of the soul of the sinner, or at the grievances which are offered to himself from them. To this Head also must be referred hasty and suddain Anger, which is conceived without counsell and deliberation. This is condemned and forbidden in the Word of God.Eccl. 7.9. Be not of an hasty spirit to be angry, for Anger resteth in the bosom of fools. This hastiness to Anger is a foolish vice; for as it alwaies beginneth with rashness, so it commonly endeth with repentance: for after the hasty man hath injured his neighbour by unadvised words or injurious deeds, then he sheweth himself sorry for it; and so like a foolish Surgeon, first he breaketh his head, and after gives him a Plaster, which though it heal the wound, yet oftentimes it leaves a scarre. These are but the least evils which accompany rash Anger; for how many have there been who in their fury have revealed their friends secrets, more dear unto them then their own lives? Yea, how many through this rash Anger have violated the persons, nay murthered them with whom they were linked in the straightest bonds of friendship? and so have done that in a moment, which they have with bitterness repented the whole course of their lives; then the which no greater folly can be committed.Prov. 14.17, 29. Prov 29.22. Prov. 12.16. And therefore it is well said of the wise man, He that is hasty to anger committeth folly. And lest we should think that he seldom thus offendeth, he telleth us, that a furious man aboundeth in transgression. 3. Immoderate and immodest Anger is disordered: for be the cause of Anger just and lawfull, yet if it degenerate into wrath and fury,1 Sam. 25.13, 2. if it grow violent, it savoureth not of the Spirit, but of the flesh. Now if we would know how to discerne when our Anger is immoderate, it is easily known by the fruits thereof. As first, when it provoketh us to utter words dishonourable to God, either by prophane blaspheming of his holy Name, or wicked cursing and imprecations; whereby we desire that he should be the executioner of our malice; or opprobrious to our neighbours, as when our Anger bursteth out into bitter and reviling speeches tending only to his disgrace.2 Sam. 16.5. An example whereof we have in Shemei, who reviled David with great bitterness, giving him bad and unreverent termes. Secondly, when it bursteth forth in unseemly, scornfull, and contemptuous gestures.Act. 7.54. Eph. 4.31. Thus the Jews, in undecent and uncharitable manner, gnashed with their teeth at Steven. And Paul sets down clamours and crying speeches be∣tween person and person, as the fruits of wicked Anger. Thirdly, When we have no regard of any decorum or order, either in respect of our selves, or those with whom we are angry. Not in respect of our selves, as when by An∣ger we are provoked to take revenge being but private men, whereas revenge belongeth only to God, and to the Magistrate who is the Lords Deputy, ac∣cording to that,Rom. 12.19. Deut. 32.35. Avenge not your selves, but give place to Anger; For it is written, vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, saith the Lord. So also our Anger is immoderate when we have no respect of the party with whom we are angry: as when the Son being provoked to Anger against his Father, though it be for a just cause, doth not use him with that respect and reverence which becometh him, but bursteth out into undutifull and insolent speeches: quite contrary to the example of Jacob,Gen. 31.36. who being but a Son-in-law did not in his Anger forget his duty, though in vehemency he somewhat exceed. And of Jonathan, who though he had just cause to be Angry with his Father Saul,1 Sam. 20 3. yet he only shewed it by rising from the Table and departing. And the like may be said of the ser∣vants Anger towards his Master, the subjects towards the Magistrate, and of all inferiours towards their superiours. Fourthly, When it makes us to forget
any duty of love which we owe unto them, for good anger hinders not from, but furthers us to the performance of all good services in the behalf of the de∣linquent parties, as to pray for them, give them direction for reformation of their transgressions. It was an error in the Disciples, that forgetting their duty of love unto their Brethren, they desired that fire might come down from Heaven,Luk. 9.59. and destroy the Samaritans. Fifthly, When it stirreth up to violent, inconside∣rate, unseasonable reproofs. Anger is too hot,Psal. 106.32, 33. if we cannot hold in till it be fit to speak: if we be so overcharged, that we cannot rest till we have uttered our mind, without respect of the season and opportunity, it is too violent to be good. Lastly, Anger is over-violent when it is not mixed with sorrow propor∣tionable to the displeasure that we conceive. For godly anger issueth from love, and is joyned with compassion, so that he that is moved with anger against the offence, cannot but pity and grieve for the offender, in degree answerable to his anger. 4. Partiall, deformed anger is out of frame. For, as faith cleaveth to the whole Word of God, so the affections moved thereby are universall and uniforme. If they carry the stamp of God, they must necessarily be moved ac∣cording to his property. Now anger is deformed. First, When it is hot and fiery against some sinnes, but can brook others no less notorious, either because it doth sute with our disposition, or we have little wrong thereby. For holy anger must be measurably porportioned to the measure of the offence; greatest indignation must be conceived against the greatest transgressions, though they bring not to us so great annoyances: and smaller faults should less displease us, though in private respects they seem to be more for our damage: for every part ought rather to be tenderly affected at Gods dishonour, then his own detri∣ment. Secondly, When we are zealous against sinne in our enemies, or them that we like not, but remiss against it in our selves, our familiars, benefactors, kinsfolks, and dearest friends. He that is moved at sinne as he ought, doth more take to heart the sinnes of them that be nearly united to him, then of them that be further off; as the sinne of a Brother, more then of a stranger, of a Child more then of a Brother, of a Yoke-fellow more then of a Child: and our own more then of a Yoke-fellow, Child, Brother, or of any or all o∣thers. Thirdly, when we are moved equally with small and great offences: for there be degrees of sinne, and accordingly our anger must be incensed. 5. An∣ger is unlawfull when it is directed against the person of the offender, not against his offence, and aimes at his loss, hurt or destruction, but propounds not any lawfull end; as the glory of God, the publique good of Church or Common-wealth, the private benefit of our selves or of our neighbours, or the reforma∣tion of the delinquent party. He must needs shoot wide, that looks awry. And this is alwaies to be observed in all examples of unjust anger, as in Cains an∣ger towards Abel; Sauls towards David; Nebuchadnezars towards the three Companions of Daniel; the Scribes and Pharisees towards our Saviour Christ. But if we will be Christs Disciples, we must follow his Doctrine and example. His Doctrine, Love your enemies, do good to those that hate you.Mat. 5.44. That you may be the Sonnes of your Father which is in Heaven. Where he plainly intimateth, that they are not the Sonnes of God, who do not love the persons of their very enemies. We must follow also his example, who prayed for his enemies even while he was upon the Cross subject to their outragious injuries:Luk. 23.34. Act. 7.66. Numb. 24.10. Quis furor est terram sensu vexare caren∣tem? Homer repre∣hending Achil∣les. which blessed President holy Stephen imitated. But many are not only incensed against the persons of their enemies who are men like unto themselves, but also with bruit beasts, which are not capable thereof; as we may see in the example of Ba∣laam. Yea, even with things that want both sense and life, and so was Xerxes angry with the Rivers, and sent Letters full of menacing threatnings to the Hils. And many such are subject to continuall view, who if any thing in their hands displease them, will not stick to dash it against the ground, though after, they
are fain to take it up again: or to spoile and break it in pieces, though afterward, they must be glad to bestow great labour in repairing that which by greater folly they have defaced. But these men may fitly be compared unto Children, who having gotten a fall, beate the earth; so they having received some hurt through their own folly or negligence, are angry. 6. Unseasonable anger is unjust, when as being long retained it becometh hatred. And this hapneth not only when men are provoked unto anger upon weighty causes, but also when it is grounded on the most slight occasions. For when vain trifles have stirred them up to wrath, they persevere in it, lest they might seem to have begun without cause, and so against all reason the unjustice of their anger makes them persist in it with greater obstinacy. For therefore they retain it, yea, increase it, that the greatness of their anger may make men believe that it could not choose, but a∣rise from some weighty occasion and just cause: and so they choose rather to seem just, than to be just. CHAP. XII. Severall Motives to stirre men up against carnall Anger. And the Ob∣jections that are usually made by passionate men, (by way of excuse) answered. Question: WHat Motives should stirre men up to take heed of Carnall An∣ger? A. The first may be drawn from the evil and hurtfull causes of unjust Anger: which are these. 1. Infidelity or unbelief in the word of grace. David rendring the cause of his patience and quietness,Psal. 38.13, 14, 15. that he was deaf and dumb, when the ungodly did molest and vex him, he seteth down this, that he waited upon God. Therefore it is to be attributed to infidelity, that men are so easily provoked to revenge, so apt to leap unto reproaches. For the heart of man being purged by faith, would extinguish those furies, and fervent motions of mind, at least would coole them much.Eccl. 7.9. 2. Folly exalteth Anger. Anger resteth in the bosom of fools. Amongst men he is accounted unwise, who is not suddainly moved to anger for an injury offered,Prov. 14.29. and doth not repell force by force, give taunt for taunt: but the Spirit of God farre otherwise brands him for a fool that is soon provoked to anger, or to seek revenge. 3. Self-love, whereby we so immode∣rately love our selves, that we never think of the injuries and indignities which we offer others, or else suppose them to be none; or else lightly esteem of them, as not worthy the recitall: but on the other side, it maketh men hainously aggra∣vate injuries offered unto themselves, and so to make huge mountains of small mole-hils; it causeth the heart easily to apprehend the wrong, busie in medita∣ting of it being apprehended, eager in seeking revenge after meditation, and the hand no less forward in acting those tragedies which the heart hath invented. For by self-love men are induced to think themselves worthy of all love and ho∣nour, and therefore if a small injury be offered unto them, they suppose that death is too small a revenge for so great an indignity offered to such worthy per∣sonages. Yea, if they be not so much respected as their haughty ambition requi∣eth, or if others be preferred before them, and that deservedly, that is matter enough to provoke them to furious rage, not onely against them of whom they are not regarded, but them also who are preferred in others judgment. And this is evident in the example of Cain,Gen. 4. who because God respected the Offering of Abel more than his, was incensed to wrath, and had his anger so inflamed that
nothing could quench it but the blood of his dear Brother: And in Saul who could with no patience endure,1 Sam. 19.8. that the praises of David should surmount his in the sight and audience of the people, but was enraged with deadly anger against him, who for his merits deserved to be advanced. And thus doth self-love make a man wink at those injuries which he offereth others, and to put on the specta∣cles of affection when he looketh on those wrongs which are offered to him∣self, whereby it cometh to pass that every small injury seemeth great and provoketh to great anger. Whereas if we thought meanly of our selves and loved our Neighbours as our selves, we would not suffer our judgment to be over balanced with the weight of affection in judg∣ing of the injury, nor give the reines to our anger in pursuing it with revenge. 4. Pride causeth men to be more sharp-sighted in descrying wrong,Eccl. 7.8. and more furiously insolent in taking revenge. The reason hereof is apparent; proud men be∣ing jealous of their honour and reputation, are also very suspicious of con∣tempt, so that the least injury provoketh them to choler and disdain, because they are ready to imagin that thereby they are exposed to contempt:Prov 13.10. Onely by pride do men make contention. Pride alone of it self without the aid of any other thing, is sufficient to kindle contention. A clear example of this matter we have in the Tribe of Ephraim, who being lifted up and swelling in conceit of their multitude, did contend with Gideon about a thing, for which they should have been thankfull unto him. And which is more, when being called to the warre they did not come, they do yet chide with Jephte,Judg. 8.1. that they were not called, when by right he might have expostulated with them, that being called they did not come.Jud. 12.1, 2, 3. Mat. 18.1, 2, 3. Psal. 10.2. This was the cause of often disputations amongst the Disci∣ples, as is manifest by the remedy prescribed for the cure of that malady. The wicked by his pride doth persecute the poor. This we see in Haman, who was so enraged with fury,Est. 3.5, 6. because Mordecai would not in the sight of the people do him that reverence which his proud heart desired, that he thought his death too small a revenge for such an indignity, unless also for his sake he utterly root∣ed out his whole kindred and nation. So that the least spark of anger kindled with the smallest occasions, bursteth out into a raging flame of fire, if it be blowed with the wind of vain glory. Whereas on the other side, he that is humble is not provoked to anger though he be neglected, because his lowly conceit maketh him think that he is not worthy to be much esteemed; nor yet though he have received an injury, because he is ready to think that he hath de∣served it, either by like faults committed against men, or more hanious sinnes against God. 5. Covetousness stirreth anger: for this vice maketh men desire much riches, and if their hopes fail them, and be not correspondent to their desires, their unquiet and turbulent thoughts are fit harbingers to prepare a lodging in their hearts to entertain anger. It maketh them undertake great matters, which when they are not able to compass, their hearts are filled with vexations, and they become more wayward then Children; or else if their co∣vetous desires carried with the wings of ambition mount not so high a pitch, they basely stoop even to the most sordidous prey; and finding themselves unable to compass great matters abroad,Reputandum i∣ram proficisci ab anio imbecillo & abjecto. Plo∣tin. Enn. 3. l. 2. cap. 2. Iras endicatura timia est, quia respicit ratio∣nem. alam Pereg. de Ira, c. 3. they entermeddle with every domesticall trifle at home; and if they see any thing miscarry through the default of Wife, Child or Servant, though it be of no value, their anger can contain it self in no bounds of reason. So that these men are angry abroad, but mad at home, cho∣lerick with every man which hinders or doth not further their commodity, but outragious to their Wives, Children or Servants, if they sustain the least loss. 6. Impotency and overtenderness of mind, whereby it is effeminated and made unapt to endure injuries, as the ulcerated parts of the body to bear blows. Violence is a sign of feebleness, not of courage; as old men and children runne when they think to go fast. Generous spirits, are as it were, impenetrable to
offences,Cum omnia vi∣tia essent in morbis, iracun∣dos mo bosos nominaverunt. Cic. Tusc. l. 4. Invalidum omne natura queru∣lum est. Sen. de ra. l. . c. 3. The infimest body is trou∣ble with the least blast of aie. Jam. 4.1, 2. whereas they that cannot resist, shew their weakness; whereby we see that women, children, sick folks, and old men are most subject to these mo∣tions and impressions. The highest and goodliest part of the world, and nearest to the Firmament and Starres, is never covered with Clouds, and in whose bo∣som there is never any Haile, Rain, Winds, nor other tempests congealed: there is never any Thunder nor Lightning, although the Thunder-bolt fall from thence upon the Earth. In like manner, a spirit truly elevated, a generous soul, is al∣waies quiet, moderate, grave, never suffering it self to be transported with the furious motions of choler. Now the thing that effeminates the mind, are in∣ordinate lusts, which like corrupt humours in the body, do impair vigour and strength. 7 Nice luxuriousness or luxurious niceness breedeth choler. For, if you come into the house of one who is nice and curious, you shall easily perceive how soon they are incited to great anger upon little cause. If the decking and adorning of their house be not fully answerable to their minds, if their costly Cates be not so daintily cooked, that they may delight their curious learned tast and cloyed appetite, if a spot or wrinckle be upon their Garments, they are so inraged with anger, that the house will scarce hold them, or at least not contain their clamorous voices. These curious folks are not only offended with injuries, but also with shadows and appearances: for, when voluptuous plea∣sures have corrupted both mind and body, nothing seemeth tolerable; not that the things which they suffer are grievous, but because they that suffer them are nicely effeminate. And like as they who are tormented with the Gout, are an∣gry if a man come but towards them, and cry out if they be but touched: so but a shew of injury moveth these voluptuous wantons to choler and anger, and the least injury offered in truth inciteth them to rage and fury. Whereas others who have not their minds effeminated with this luxurious curiosity, they can easily pass over such trifling imperfections, and repell anger in far more violent assaults. And lest any should think, that these toys deserve not just rebuke, let him know, that the lesser the occasion is which provoketh to anger, the greater is their sinne who are so easily provoked. For, howsoever the oc∣casions are but small, yet their sinne is not small; nay, their sinne is therefore great, seeing the occasion which moveth them thereunto is but little. 8. Curi∣osity is a cause of unjust anger: for, when men are tickled with a vain desire and itching appetite to see and hear all things; how their friends behave themselves in their private meetings: what their adversaries do and say behind their backs; how their Servants bestow themselves in every corner; it cometh to pass, that desiring to know all things, they know many things which displease them, and provoke them to anger, for which they may thank their vain curiosity. Give not thine heart (saith Solomon) to all the words that men speak,Prov. 20.3. Eccl. 7.23. lest thou do hear thy servant cursing thee. For, as the looking upon a small print doth more offend the sight, then a greater, because we hold it nearer our eyes, and more intentively behold it, the letters standing thick and near together: so oft-times it cometh to pass, that these small domesticall faults being curiously pried into, do more offend and anger us, because they are near unto us, and fall out thick, and as it were one in the neck of another; then greater injuries offered abroad, which fall out more seldom, and are not so much subject to our view. 9. Light∣ness in beleeving what comes to the ear, and listening to tale-bearers. Withut wood the fire is quenched,Pro. 26.20. Pro. 16.28. 1 Sam. 22.19. and without a tale-bearer strife ceaseth. So that as wood is the fires fit nourishment, so is a tale-bearer fit to nourish anger. An example hereof we have in Saul, who giving a credulous ear to those lying sug∣gestions of that pick-thank Doeg, was incensed to such raging anger, that the blood of the innocent Priests was not sufficient to quench the heat thereof, un∣less he spilt also the blood of the Inhabitants of Nob, yea of the Oxen, Asses, and Sheep, with more then bruitish fury. And therefore David speaking of
Doegs tongue, compareth it to coales of Juniper, (that is,Psal. 120.4. to hot burning coales) because it so furiously inflamed Sauls anger. Yea, David himself giving ear to the false report of Ziba, was moved to unjust anger against innocent Mephibo∣sheth; and therefore having experience of those manifold evils which followed credulity and listning after tale-bearers,Psal. 101.5, 7. Jam. 3.6. he professeth that he will destroy him that privily slandereth his neighbour. And hence it is that James compareth the tongue to a fire, because nothing more inflameth the heart to furious anger. 10. Inordinate love, and excessive sorrow stirre up unquietness, which maketh way for anger. For, the powers of the soul being weakned by these passions, and filled with fears, cares, troubles, vexations, is dis-inabled to bear any bur∣den or cross that it shall meet withall. 11. Want of meditation concerning the common imperfections, whereunto we are all by nature subject: for if we did but consider that in many things we offend all, and that we our selves have the same faults, or greater then those which we espie in others, we would not hastily be moved to choler upon every trifling occasion.Eccl. 7.21, 22. Take no heed unto all words that are spoken: For oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth, that thou thy self likewise hast cursed others. This Argument the Apostle useth, to perswade the godly to peaceableness and moderation towards the weak:Tit. 3.3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasurs, living in malice and envy, hatefull and hateing one another. But it is the custome of men addicted to anger to imitate the Lamiae, who (as the Poets fain) use their eyes abroad, and put them into a Box when they come home: so these are but too quick-sighted abroad in spying the faults of others, but starke blind at home in discerning their own faults; and though they have a great beame in their own eyes, yet they can easily discerne a small mote in the eye of another. And the reason is, because they put their own faults into that part of the wallet which they cast behind their backs, and therefore never look upon them, but the faults of others into that part which hangeth before them, whereinto they are alwaies curiously prying. 12. Excessive tenderness of education, in∣dulgence of Parents, and foolish cockering of Mothers, doth beget anger. In little breasts great passions find too much place of harbour. And anger bred betimes, doth timely take root, grow by degrees, and wax strong by continu∣ance, that it can hardly be pulled up by any increase of age, specially if pride and insolency be added thereunto.Turgescit vi∣trea bilis: fin∣ditur, [sc. pi∣ger] Arcadiae pecuaria rudere dicas. ers. Satyr. 3. Pro. 26.15, 16, 17. 1 Thes 4.11. 2 Tim. 5.13. Pro. 6.12, 13, 14. Pro. 20.1. They that might be made meek by more severe education, first, they are made more angry then Whelps, then more proud then the Peacock, more wanton then the Asse, more ravenous then the Wolfe. Lastly, Idleness, unthriftiness, voluptuousness are the nurses of Anger. The idle unthrift soweth contentions, and imagineth mischief continually. Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging. For these things nourish lusts, and cause forgetfulness of their own transgressions, which exceedingly dispose to rage and fury. A second motive may be taken from the mischief of this Passion in comparison of others. All other passions do but draw men to evil, but this doth precipitate them; those do shake them, but this doth overthrow them; Those when they have the upper hand, suffer themselves to be curbed, but this being mistress will obey no Law; like unto the thunder-bolt, which being once falne from the cloud wherein it was enclosed, can no more be stayed. Other passions stray from reason, but Choler treads it under feet, and leads it as it were in triumph. Such is the violence of it,Pro. 27.4. Gen. 49.7. Cant. 8.6. that there is scarce any other affection so strong which it doth not easily subdue. Love is said to be stronger than death: and yet Anger if it be once admitted easily overcometh it: for there was never any love so hearty and intyre but anger hath subdued it. The Father in his anger forgetteth his love to his child, and the child to his Father, the husband to his wife, the wife to the husband, and causeth them instead of duties of love to bring forth
the fruits of hatred: yea, it maketh a man to forget the love of himself, as appeareth by those men who to satisfie their anger, violently thrust themselves into eminent dangers of death. As we cannot discern the heat of the Sunne, when we are near unto a scorching fire, so the heavenly heat of Divine love it self is not felt, if the furious flame of anger be kindled in our hearts. Co∣vetuousness also is a most strong and violent vice, which nothing almost can vanquish but death, and they who are possessed therewith, do love their riches better then their own lives, as we may see in their example, who being depri∣ved of them murther themselves; yea, they are more dear unto them then the salvation of their souls, as may appear by those who fall into outragious sinnes, whereby they plunge their souls headlong into Hell, that they may get momen∣tany riches;Kecker. Alt. Part. Log. pag. 687, 688. and by them also who despise the means of salvation in comparison of a small worldly trifle: and yet anger being once admitted doth overcome covetousness, as it is evident in the example of them, who to satisfie their furi∣ous anger by the death of their enemy, are content to forfeit their goods though they be never so covetous, besides the double hazard of their lives which they incurre, both in their private quarrell, and in satisfying by deserved punishment publique justice. The like also may be said of them who by anger being incited to revenge, are content to spend all their substance by prosecuting wrangling suits in Law, of little or no importance, to the end they may impoverish him also with whom they are offended: and so are content to pull down the house upon their own heads, that they may overwhelme another under the weight of the same ruine. Choler is worse then voluptuousness, for lusts make men to plunge themselves in particular pleasures; whereas Choler makes them of so bad a disposition, as he is delighted in another mans miseries. It is in some re∣spect much more wicked then envy: for that if envy desires to see any one mi∣serable, it is Choler which procures the misery. Fear is a cruell savage Tyrant, which oftentimes compelleth men to thrust themselves into imminent dangers, that they may avoid dangers, and to kill themselves for fear of greater torments: and yet anger vanquisheth fear, many times causing them who would tremble to see anothers wound contemn their own death, and so turneth the most cowardly face into most desperate rage and furious resolution. Anger is kindled by a just opposition, and by the knowledge of the little reason that a man hath to be angry; It is sharpened by silence and cold reply as gathering thereby that it pro∣ceeds from contempt; It will be both Judge and party; It carrieth us beyond our selves, so that we do things dangerous and scandalous; It is rash and incon∣siderate, and so casteth us into great mischiefs, like old ruines that burst them∣selves upon that which they fall. So that other affections lead a man, but this draws him; others intice him, but this compels him; others dazle the sight of reason, but this makes it starke blind; others make us prone unto evil, but this casts us headlong even into the gulfe of wickedness. The third is drawn from the manifold evil effects of Anger,Furor iraque mentem praeci∣pitant. Virg. En. l. 2. Prae iracundia Medenee non sum apud me. Ter. Plutarch. Initium insaniae. En. which it produceth of it self, or are caused from others. 1. It overshadoweth and blindeth the light of reason, and for the time maketh men as though they were distraught of their wits. And in this respect it may fitly be compared unto a cruel Tyrant, who having invaded the government of the Commonwealth, doth overthrow Counsel, Law and order, and over-ruleth all by force and fury: so Anger having obtained soveraignty over the mind, taketh away all judgment, counsel and reason, and overswayeth all by foolish affection and raging passion. Anger is a short madness, saving that herein it is farre worse, in that he who is posses∣sed with madness, is necessarily, will he, nill he, subject to that fury: but this passion is entred into, willingly and wittingly. Madness is the evil of punish∣ment, but Anger the evil of sin also: madness as it were thrusts reason from its imperial throne; but anger abuseth reason, by forcing it with all violence to
be a slave to passion. It is true the Philosopher saith,Eth. lib. 6. Peregr. de ir. that Choler doth in some sort give ear to reason: but that must be understood touching the report which she makes of the injury received, wherein she takes a singular content; but she gives no ear unto her, but rejects her advertisements in the measure and moderation which she ought to hold in the revenge. So as in truth there must be some kind of reason to provoke choler; for that men which are stupid and dull are not capable of these motions; but when this passion is fully enflamed, then she doth wholly darken reason. Anger then perverteth judgment, overthrow∣eth counsel, and pulleth out the eyes of reason, making the slave of passion, fit to execute those works of darkness, in which rage employeth it,Gen. 34 2 1 am. 22.9. 1 Sam. 25.3, 22. Theodr. li. 5. Ag. de civ. lib 5. cap. 26. Nam cur quae laedunt oculos, festinas demere: si quid est, ani∣mum, differs curandi tempus in annum? Hor. lib. Epist. . Ep. 2. Examples hereof we have in Simeon and Levi, in Saul, in David, in Theodosius, other∣wise a good Emperour, who upon occasion of a seditious tumult, wherein a few of his Officers were slain, called all the Citizens of Thessalonica into the Theatre, as though he had had to shew them some solemnity: and there com∣manded his Souldiers to fall upon them, and slew of them both innocent and guilty. If therefore we avoid those things most carefully which hurt the eyes; or if they be hurt, use such medicines as are fit to cure them, because the eye is the light and guide of the whole body: with how much more attentive care ought we avoid anger that blindeth reason, seeing it is the light and guid of the soul? If men abhorre drunkenness (and that worthily, because it maketh them differ from brute beasts only in shape of the body; why should they not for the same cause hate this vice of Anger, which like a burning Ague doth so distemper and disturb the minde, that while the fit lasteth, it uttereth nothing but raving. 2. As it springeth from, so it causeth infidelity and fretting against God. Moses is so provoked at the waters of Meribah with the rebellion of Israel, that he begins to doubt of the gracious promise of God towards them: Hear O ye rebels, must we fetch you water out of the rock?Numb. 20.10, 11, 12. The word of grace setleth in a quiet heart, but an unquiet spirit casteth forth nothing but boyling thoughts of distrust and discontent against God.ov. 19.3. Isa. 59.11. Apoc. 16 21. 2 Sam. 6.8. 1 Joh. 4 20. 3. It extinguisheth the love of God: for how should the love of God kindle in such an unquiet breast? how can we delight in him so long as we be transported with private desire of re∣venge? or how should we love God whom we have not seen, if we do not love our neighbour whom we have seen? And how do we love our neighbour, if upon no cause or every trifling cause, we be incensed to injust anger against him. 4. It is an hindrance of holy prayer; an angry man cannot call upon God, for his heart is carnal, earthly, poisoned with self-love; nor will God hear if they call upon him. For if we would compass the Altar, and there offer up the Sa∣crifice of prayer and thanksgiving, we must first wash our hands in innocency.Psal. 26.. 1 Tim. 2.8. And this the Apostle Paul requireth, That we lift up pure hands without anger. And our Saviour Christ commandeth, that before we offer any gift unto the Lord, we first seek to be reconciled: So long therefore as we continue in anger,Mat. 5.23. we are unfit to pray, as it most manifestly appeareth in the fift petition, where we desire to be forgiven as we forgive:Mat. 6.12. and because the Lord would have us deep∣ly consider thereof, he thinketh it not sufficient to set it down in the Lords Pray∣er, but he again doth single this out of all other the petitions, and inculcates it the second time: If you forgive men their trespasses,ver. 14, 15. your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you will not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your Father forgive your trespasses.1 Pet. 3.7. The Apostle Peter exhorteth man and wife to live together in love, that their prayers be not interrupted. 5. Anger causeth that the word of God becometh unprofitable. It is to the truth of the word of life, as wind in the stomack to wholsome meat, that will not suffer it to enter. James requireth of a good hearer, that he be slow to wrath.Iam. 1.19. Anger hardens the heart, that the seed of life cannot take root, or leave impression: yea, it makes resistance to the work of grace. 6. It swelleth the mind so high, and so full,
as there is no room for good motions and meditations to dwell by it. When An∣ger possesseth the room, the thoughts run all of wrong received, meditation of revenge, secret fighing, repining, fretting and discontent. Thus it stoppeth communion with God, and disturbs that sweet and heavenly disposition of soul, which ought to be in every Christian, and is in every one that walketh in peace and fellowship with God. For in true peace of conscience there is required, as reconciliation with God and the sence of his love, so freedom from the hurry of boisterous passions, and calmness of spirit, which is a necessary qualification in the subject capable to receive the beams of his favour. 8. The angry man is impatient of admonition: which is ordained of God as one means of his re∣covery from sinne. If Abner be reproved of Ishbosheth King of Israel, for going in boldly into his Fathers Concubines, you shall hear him take on, Am I a doggs head,2 Sam. 3.8. that thou shouldst say thus unto me? and yet every man saw the unrighteousness of the action before himself.Eph. 4.30, 31.27. vers. 9. It grieves the Spirit of God, and lets in the divel into the hearts of men, to whose image they are conformed by unjust anger. For he is the spirit of dissention, wrath and revenge, as God is a spirit of love and peace. 10. Anger disables a man for society: for it is Gods commandement or advice,Prov. 22.24, 25. that we should make no friendship with an angry man, nor goe with a furious man: and as for other reasons, least we learne his wayes, and receive destruction to our own souls. 11. It doth macerate and vex the soul with fury:Ira consternati∣onis affectus ple∣nus, ac nunquam sine tormenta sui violentus, quia dolorem cum inferre vult, patitur. Val. Max. l 9. c. 3. Iratus nil nisi crimina loqui∣tur. Sen. in Thy. trag. 2. Val lib 9. cap. 3. Melanct. de ani∣ma tr. 3. cap. 12 Galen. lib. 5. de loc. affect. Peregr. de ira. cap. 3. Kecker Alt. art. Log. ubi supra. Chrom. de reb. polon. lib. 18. for what greater torment can we imagin, than to have the mind distracted upon the rack of rage? As therefore we would account him a mad man, who with his own hands should set his house on fire and consume it: so alike mad is he to be thought, who will set his soul on fire with the raging flames of anger, wherein it is not only tormented in this life, but also (without repentance) in the life to come, it shall be tormented everlastingly. Rage and fury tortures more than wrong or injury. 12. Anger exposeth to infinite dan∣gers, by provoking men to enter into private frayes and needless quarrels with such desperate resolutions, that they wholly neglect themselves that they may hurt their enemy. Like to the Wasp or Bee, which venture their own lives, that they may but sting those that anger them: so they, that they may satifie their fury by revenging a small injury, are ready to receive a greater. And not thus only, but Choler ruines the body wholly: for some being extraordinarily moved, have broken their veins, and vomited out their soul with the blood. Others have fallen into fearfull diseases, as melancholy, phrensie, madness, ap∣oplexity, palzy, and the falling-sickness. These are the effects of anger in respect of our selves, now in respect of our neighbour, it knoweth no justice, love, nor moderation. First, It overthroweth sound friendship: for there was never friendship so inviolable but anger (if it were admitted) hath violated it. Se∣condly, It provokes to offer all indignities and wrongs to a mans neighbour; as also to revenge the smallest injuries without all proportion. For men incensed with anger, will willingly and wittingly revenge those injuries, which have un∣wittingly and unwillingly been offered; for angry words they will give blows, for blows wounds, and for wounds death. And therefore the wise man saith; That anger is cruell,Prov. 27.4. Impatiens ani∣mus, dirae, blas∣phemia, probri∣um. Ʋltio, rixa, minae, sunt irae pignora septem. and wrath raging. Yea, it provoketh men not onely to revenge small injuries, but also no injuries; for anger rageth against the inno∣cent, and that oftentimes because they are innocent, and but too vertuous, as the furious man imagineth. But as anger causeth men to be hurtfull to all o∣thers, so especially to those whom they should most love, and cherish, and de∣fend, that is, they who are of a mans own family: who because they are ne∣cessarily conversant with them, are continually subject, and even exposed to their rage and fury. The effects of anger are thus couched by one out of an Heathen;Peregr. ubi upra. In jesting it changeth friendship into hatred, in disputations, the study of the truth into lust of contention, in judgment it addeth insolency to
power, in liberall institution it poures sadness and hatred of discipline into the mind; in prosperity it increaseth envy; in adversity it excludes it self from mercy. Thirdly, In generall anger is the door or gate of vice, and therefore the Psalmist saith, Cease from Anger, leave off wrath,Psal. 37.8. fret not thy self also to do evil, as if he would imply, that to abound in anger, is to abound in sinne. And it cannot be, but a man must be guilty of much sinne, that lives in fretting and passion and inward unrest: for Solomon saith plainly, That a furious man aboundeth in transgressions;Prov. 29.22. Jam. 1.20. and the Appostle James, that the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God. These are the mischiefs that come from anger in private persons: but if this plague find place in them that be of power or authority, then the evils which spring from anger are multiplied an hundred-fold. For what revenge a private man meditateth in his heart, that a Prince can execute in a moment, in so many,Cum ille cuipiam malum dare cupit, hic jam de∣derit. so great, and obvious occasions of wrong and injury. For he hath under his feet whom he may tread upon, under his blow whom he may strike, in his jaws whom he may devoure, in his pawes whom he may rend and tear. No man can governe the multitude stirred with anger. It wholly rageth with seditions; tur∣neth the edge of the sword one against another; armeth the souldiers against the Captain. Destruction soon overtaketh Cities and Towns if they begin to be angry: Families breath nothing but mutuall blood. All humane covenants are broken, and all thought of equity clean cast away. This is the cause of all tumults and uproares, seditions and conspiracies, massacres and bloody Warres, yea, the confusion of most famous and flourishing Kingdoms: and that not only upon weighty causes, but also upon trifling occasions. For as to make a furi∣ous and unquenchable flame, it is not materiall how small the fire is that kindleth it, so the matter be apt to receive it, wherein it is kindled; for one coale is enough to burn a whole City, if it fall among flax, and one sparke if it light in Tinder or Gunpowder: so it mattereth not how small the cause is which infla∣meth anger, for if the mind which receiveth it be subject to be inflamed,Gen. 34. Judg. 9. 1 Sam. 22. Est. 3. it is sufficient to set on fire and consume whole Kingdoms and Common-wealths, especially if power be correspondent to the violence of the affection. The effects of anger which are caused by others, as a deserved punishment of it are these. 1. It subjecteth a man to the wrath of God, and bringeth his curse upon him: for as we forgive others, so doth God forgive us.Mat. 6.14, 15. If therefore we retain our anger towards our Brethren, God will retain his anger towards us. We know by common experience, that he who is appointed an Arbitratour or Daisman to reconcile neighbours, is oftentimes by the froward behaviour and obstinate stiffness of the one party so offended and displeased, that whereas he was indifferent he is made an adversary: so the Lord playeth the part of an Um∣pire or Arbitrator, to work reconciliation between Brethren, but if either of them be so stiff and contentious that he will not be reconciled, what doth he else but by refusing the Lords arbitrement and determination make God his enemy. Job saith, Anger slayeth the foolish man:Iob. 5.2. Prov. 19.19. It bringeth many times great and sud∣dain judgments: for as Solomon observes, A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment, and if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it again. Hence it is that our Saviour Christ denounceth judgment both temporall and eternall against un∣advised anger. He that is angry with his Brother without cause,Mat. 5.22. is in danger of judgment. 2. A furious angry person is the prey of Satan: for this raging pas∣sion, having put out the eye of reason, makes him a fit instrument for his own business; that is, in plotting and devising that revenge wich is pleasing and ac∣ceptable unto him. Whereby it evidently appeareth; that unadvised anger is a notable means which Satan useth to work our destruction. For, when once by rage he hath blinded the eye of reason, he can easily lead us into a gulfe of all wickedness. In respect whereof, Satan is compared to a carion Crow, which
intending to make the carcass of some silly Lamb his greedy prey, doth first pick out the eyes, that it may not be able by flight to prevent a further mischief: so he indeavouring to make a prey of our bodies and souls, doth first seek to blind reason, which is the eye of the soul, with the fury of passion, that so not having judgment to discerne his sleights, nor wisdom to avoid them, he may the more easily lead us into the Pit of perdition. Or he may be likened to a cunning Fisher-man, who troubleth the water that the Fish may not descry his net: so Satan blindeth our reason with this turbulent affection, that we should not di∣scerne the sinnes which like nets he hath laid to intangle us, before we be fallen into them. For, anger casting a mist of perturbation before the sight of rea∣son, maketh men unable to judge of good and evil, right or wrong; and whereas reason in its own nature judgeth that which is right, anger maketh that seem right which it judgeth. 3. It is recompensed with contempt: for howso∣ever they are therefore angry, because they would not be despised, yet nothing in truth doth sooner work base esteeme and disregard in the minds, not only of strangers, but also of a mans own Children and Servants, then unjust anger. For it notably blazeth abroad and discovereth their shame and folly; which occasioneth contempt, as wisdom causeth honour and respect. Again, when their anger and the fruits thereof, clamorous brawling and fighting, are usuall and common, as well for trifles as weighty matters, men desperately contemn both, when they have hope to prevent neither: They therefore who desire that these bitter drugs of correction should have any effectuall operation in the minds of inferiours, for the purging away of their faults and vices, must use them like Physick, which if it be ordinary will work no extraordinary effect. If thunder and lightning were as common as the Sun-shine, though they be ter∣rible in themselves, yet who would regard them being so usuall? And how much less then the impotent brawlings of an angry man? In like manner men of impotent spirits, that will not let pass any rumour or report that is spred of them,Convitia, si irascare, agnita videntur, spreta exoleri so, Tac. Anual. 4. Prov. 16.32. Prov. 25.38. without reasoning and stirre, they expose themselves to more reproach: for disgraces, if thou be angry, seem to be acknowledged, but despised, do weare away. Be it that a Captain hath triumphed over his enemies, and led them captive; be it that he be of great valour and manhood; yet if he cannot rule his own spirit, what respect doth he deserve? 4. An angry man lyeth open to the malice, fraud, and violence of his adversary: for having no power over his passion, when he is provoked, he will rush himself headlong into danger, and in fury not spare to say or do what doth greatly tend to the prejudice of his cause, and the advantage of the adversary. The fourth Motive may be taken from that high account the Lord makes of an heart well mortified and purged from the dross and superfluity of lusts and con∣cupiscence which it is stuffed withall. In the Law the Nazarites were enjoyned not so much actuall worship, as a straight restraint of the flesh from all unlaw∣full excess, which was shadowed out by their diet and decking the body, and abstinence in both. Doubtless, if it were possible for a man to equall the An∣gels in obedience, and cheerfulness, readiness and integrity of service, yet if it were possible again, that the old man with his desires and lusts and passions might still remain alive with them, as wrath, malice, pride, uncharitableness, an unruly tongue, &c. the religion of this man were altogether vain. The Lord saith,Prov. 23.26. My Sonne give me thy heart. He meaneth not a rotten heart and corrupt, but an heart well searched, and well drained from sinfull affections and lusts: such an heart he calleth for and chuseth. For he knows, that where a mortified heart is, there also is an heart quickned to the life of God, and the more fit for du∣ty, both within and without. The chief service of God is inward, which cannot be performed, till the evil habits and qualities of the soul be changed, and new ut i. For no man grafteth upon a rotten stock; nor put new Wine into old
Vessels. A Christian may fetch surer evidence from hence of his reformation, then from any particular duty to the affirmative commandements of the moral Law: and more soundly distinguish himself from an hypocrite. I separate not the parts of repentance, but divide the false from the sound by this rule: for look how much a man profiteth in this piece of Religion, so much he groweth truly religious. Wherefore they that have chosen the easier course of service, I mean, to do good duties, must be admonished to tend better that other part of Christianity, which hath been less regarded by them; and that they travell in denying themselves, overcoming their passions, abstaining from, and crucify∣ing their corrupt nature, where it is strongest in them, and so shall their Religion prosper, and better beseem them. For though it be the harder part of the two, yet time bestowed therein, will countervaile the labour most plentifully. And for a good man to be a debtor to any lust, is most unseemly; but to be a ser∣ver, fulfiller, and obeyer thereof, and to have the weapons of sinne still unmortified, and fighting in him against righteousness, is mon∣strous. Q. I am of a very hasty and cholerick nature, and cannot leave it. A. This vain excuse is no better then Adams Fig-leaves to hide the nakedness of sinne, which may be as a fit vizour to disguise even the most ugly vices, as this of anger. The murtherer by as great shew of reason might excuse his mur∣ther, because he is by nature cruell: and so the Traytour, Theef, Adulterer, &c. It will not be admitted for a just excuse before a temporall Judge, to say I am prone by nature to such a crime, and cannot leave it; nor will the Judge of Heaven and Earth hold us excused, if we make any such plea before him. If we be prone to anger, we had not this nature by creation, for we were created ac∣cording to Gods Image, who is slow to anger: but this corruption hath taken hold of us by reason of Original sinne: and therefore we are not to excuse one sinne by another, but rather earnestly to labour that this pollution may be washed away with the water of Gods Spirit, who by his grace doth reforme na∣ture. If we be of such a wicked disposition, that we cannot but be angry, our sinne is the more hainous, our state the more dangerous. For rooted sickness is much worse then new bred, an old sore then a green wound. The sinnes that are set most deep in nature, are most hatefull and perillous.Nemo adeo fe∣rus est ut non mitescere possit, si modo culturae patientem com∣modet aurem. Hor Ep. l. 1. Ep. 1. Isa. 11.6, 7. But what if we be hot by nature; grace, wherewith every Christian ought and must be reple∣nished in measure, is above nature, stronger then nature? Those who are re∣generate by the Holy Ghost, though naturally they be as ravenous and cruell as the Wolfe, and Leopard, they shall be made as mild and innocent as the Lamb and Kid: And though they be as fierce and furious as the Lyon or Bear, they shall become as tame and gentle as the Cow or Calf. Q. I am somewhat hot for the time, but it is quickly gone. A. Be not of an hasty spirit, for anger resteth in the bosom of fools.Eccl. 7.9. Prov. 14.7. He that is soon angry, wanteth no folly. Many are the mischiefs of suddain anger, which riseth hastily, and burneth vehemently for the time: as it be∣ginneth without reason, so it ends with shame or late repentance. He shall never want sorrow, that gives entertainment to such a guest. What is more unbeseeming, then for a Christian to be of a brittle spirit, apt to kindle, as Tinder or Gun-powder to take fire? For the Children of God should resemble their heavenly Father, who is slow to anger, and ready to forgive. Q. I say nothing, what would you have me to do? A. 1. Concealed anger, when as men nourish it in the heart, and hide it on∣ly that they may have the better opportunity of revenge, which they are pur∣posed to seek with full resolution; or dissemble it for their credit sake, because
to shew it would be some stain to their reputation: this hidden anger is farre worse then professed, both in respect of the party who is angry, and the o∣ther with whom he is angry. In respect of the party himself, because con∣taining in him this turbulent affection, it doth vex and torment him, like a raging fire which hath no passage, or a violent streame whose current is stopped. In respect of him also with whom he is angry, because it ma∣keth him less wary in preventing his malice, and therefore the more easily surprised. In regard whereof a secret enemy is more dangerous then one who professeth his enmity: for as a small company of men lying in an am∣bushment, will more easily overcome a greater force, then if they should march against them with Banners displayed: so a weak enemy hiding his an∣ger, and watching his best opportunity of revenge, is more like to circum∣vent and surprize one more mighty then himself,rofessa pr∣ut oia vin∣dictae locum. Sen. n Med. Prov 12.20. Pro. 4.17. then if he should pro∣fess his malice. Deceit is in the heart of him that imagineth evil. He that plotteth mischief is hated; that is, he that dissembling his displeasure, in∣tendeth revenge, and setteth his thoughts on work how to effect it, is ab∣horred of God, and detested by those that find out his malitious practises. Examples of this covert anger we have in Scripture;Gen. 4.8. as in Cain, who tal∣ked familiarly with his Brother, when he sought to murther him; of Ab∣solon,2 am. 13.22, 23. who concealed deadly malice two years together against his Brother Ammon, that not being suspected, he might with more ease take his life away. The like we have in Joab,2 Sam. 20.9. Luk. 22.47. and the Traytour Judas, who betrayed his Master with a Kiss. 2. Anger is professed by stubborn silence, when we will not speak, or at least very covertly, as well as by spitefull words and evil deeds. Q. He hath often trespassed against me, I can forbear no longer. Pro 1.22A. Love covereth a multitude of sinnes. A Christian man must forgive not one or two,Math 18.22. but many offences. If thy brother sin against thee, not seven times, but seventy times seventy times, thou shalt forgive him. Nor doth love cover the light and small, but all transgressions, and that either by voluntary forget∣fulness, or by lessening them so far as truth will give leave. David is forget∣full of all injuries done unto him by Saul, doth take punishment upon him that said he killed him, and sheweth great courtesie and favour to his posterity. Joseph never spake to his brethren of their selling him into Egypt, but when he was compelled unto it; and then, as farre as truth would bear, he referred it to the providence of God. Q. But every man hath not this gift of patience: God must give it, or we of our selves cannot bear and put up injuries contentedly. A. Men can binde heavy burdens upon the Lords shoulders, which themselves will not take up with the least of their fingers. And that appears by the slight account they make hereof, and their dealing so carelesly in so weighty a matter. For although he can change and renew their hearts into the obedience of his blessed will; yet if this were the thing they desired, they would first apply themselves to that grace of his, which is able to work this effect in them, and then put over and commend the blessing of their labour to God: which while they neglect to do, they have that within them which shall witness against them, to be the wilfull causes of their own desolation. The Lord is not bound to them in the least respect, to minister means of the word, in afflictions, benefits, ex∣amples, help by others, much less grace to be humbled and repent. Therefore in that they use none of these Ordinances of his, to the wholesome ends to which they are appointed, the sin is theirs: he is guiltless, in that he hath offer∣ed them more fair, than themselves were willing to accept of. Never did the Lord leave any to himself, hardened and impenitent, who desired to profit un∣der his doctrine and discipline. Therefore let men beware they overreach not
themselves in their subtilty: for as bold as they are in speech here, yet when they come to answer the Lord face to face, they shall be dumb; and out of their own mouthes shall the Lord condemn them. CHAP. XIII. Of the means whereby corrupt Anger is to be bridled, subdued and con∣quered. Question, BY what means is corrupt Anger to be subdued and bridled? A. 1. Faith seasoneth, moveth and moderateth all passions, and this of Anger in particular. The Acts of faith are, 1. It stamps the image of Gods goodness, mercy, long-suffering and patience upon the soul. A man cannot walk in the Sun, but he shall be tanned: nor can we have fellowship with God by faith, and not be like unto him. The effects of Gods bounty, gentleness and love to the believer, is the producing of like affections. And as faith worketh pa∣tience, so it effectually perswades unto it from this ground. For thus it goeth to work: God is mercifull, gracious, slow to anger,Exod. 34.6. Psal. 103.8, 9. and abundant in kind∣ness: and as he is not easily provoked to anger, so being provoked his anger lasteth not long, for he will not alway chide, nor keep his anger for ever. But children should resemble their parents in vertue, as they succeed them in honour. The Lord with much lenity suffereth vessels ordained unto destruction. How long did he suffer the old world? how loath was he to strike,1 Pet. 3.19. Ezek. 4.5. if in an hundred and twenty years he could have reclaimed them? The measure of his grace and mercy towards us daily, is boundless, and exceeding all measure. He forgiveth us every moment much more, than we can possibly be wronged of men:Col. 3.12. He for∣giveth to that man which injureth us much more than we can. And if we be the children of God, must we not labour to express his vertues? shall we stand in need of forgiveness, and not forgive? Shall God forgive infinite sins, and shall not we pass by one offence? Shall we stand in need of a sea of mercy, for the washing of so many foul offences, and shall we not let one drop fall upon our brother, to forbear and forgive in trifling wrongs? How meekly did our Lord and Saviour carry himself amongst men? His voice was not heard in the streets;Es. 40. a bruised reed he would not break. How long bare he with Judas, being no better than a devil within his family? that even when he was meditating his sinne, he was loath to discover him plainly to be the man! What indignity did he suffer of his own people, and that for our sins, never opening his mouth? And must not the lively members of his body, be conformable to their Head? must not the sheep of Christ hear his voice, follow his steps? 2. It acknowledgeth the providence of God, without which not the least grief or injury could befall us: for even the least is a portion of that cup which Gods hand reacheth unto us to drink of. Job looked not at the Sabeans and theeves,Job 1.21. but the Lord hath taken [saith he,] blessed be his Name. Joseph accuseth not his brethren, but comfort∣eth them after their fathers death, and said, The Lord sent me into Egypt before you And this observation is as water to quench this inflammation, as may be seen in David, when Shimei railed on him; Suffer him to curse,1 Sam. 16.10, 11. Psal 39.9. for God hath bid him raile. I should have been dumb, and said nothing, because thou didst it. This perswasion, that all the wrongs we suffer do come from God, is many wayes forcible to move unto patience. First, It constraineth us to confess, that all our chastisements are just, even farre less than by our sins we have deserved: for they are but light, or if not light, yet momentanie, but our sins have deser∣ved
infinite and eternal punishments. If therefore the Lord use these earthly rods to correct our sins, we are rather to admire his mercy than to be angry at so gentle chastisement. Secondly, It teacheth, that the manner of the Lords dealing is exceeding tender and compassionate.Psal. 25.10. All the waies of the Lord are mercy and truth, to them that fear him and keep his testimonies. When we deserve to be cut down root and branches, and cast into unquenchable fire, he doth only lop and prune to make us more fruitfull. Therefore if the matter be well weighed, we have more cause to be thankfull, than to be offended. Is the Patient discontented with the Pils that are prescribed by his learned Physician, because they purge the body of that sick matter which would impair his health? 3. It assures that God in his infinite wisdome will dispose of every thing for our good.Rom. 8.18. Why then should we vex our selves with anger, seeing God will turn the injuries of men into blessings? let us rather when any wrong is offered us, which we cannot by just and lawfull means avoid, say with our Saviour Christ,Joh. 18.11. Should I not drink of the cup which my Father hath provided for me? should I be angry with the cup, because the physick is bitter? or with the hand whereby it is conveyed unto me? My heavenly Father correcteth me for my good and amendment, I will not therefore be angry with the rod wherewith I am beaten, but rather look to the principal hand that layeth the chastise∣ment upon me, and the happy fruit that it brings with it. Fourthly, It acknowledgeth the present course that God holdeth to be best, most behovefull for us: for God is wisest, his prescriptions most safe and healthfull. Now therefore there is good cause why we should cease to be angry for crosses, wrongs and injuries, unless we will be fighters against God, resist our own profit, and choose rather to please the palate though to our great torment afterwards, than to preserve health and peace. These potent arguments of faith well setled in the heart, cannot but quiet and pacifie the soul in the midst of manifold provocations. Fifthly, It looketh up to Christ, and imprinteth the vertues of his death upon the soul. Look as the Seal applied to the wax, leaveth its stamp and Image upon the wax: so the death of Christ being close set unto the heart by a lively faith, engraveth the vertues of it upon the soul. He that believeth in Christ crucified, is made like unto Christ in love, meekness, and all other graces that he manifesteth in his death. Thus the heart is framed to meekness, and by invincible arguments taken from the same grounds, faith perswades to patience. For thus it pleadeth; Christ indured scoffs and reproaches, rayling and reviling, buffeting and scourging, yea death it self, and the anger of God, more grievous then death, not for any demerit of his, but for our sakes: And shall we grudge to suffer small injuries that are offered un∣to us by men, at our Saviour Christs request, seeing we have deserved far greater? The man that duely considereth the sufferings of Christ, and certainly believeth that he deserveth what Christ suffered, cannot possibly give deniall to this reason. 4. It submitteth to the absolute sovereignty of the Lord,Rom. 12.19. and will not encroach upon his Prerogative Royal. Now all revenge is Gods right, and he hath not given it unto man. Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord. It is not permitted a private man in the Common-wealth, that he take the place of a Judge; nor of a servant in the family, that he usurpe the authority of the Master: And shall a Christian, by revenging his own quarrell in word and deed, intrude himself into the Office, and usurpe upon the Prerogative of the Al∣mighty God? 5. Faith worketh humility and lowliness, banisheth self-love and loftiness of mind: for it minds a man of his sinne and wickedness of his spirituall foolishness, impotency, nakedness, and due desert of sinne. What good soever is enjoyed, it receiveth and holdeth as an Almes of grace; what misery is felt and suffered, it acknowledgeth to be the true desert of sinne, or the just chastisement of love. It admireth the excellent Majesty of God, and
freely submitteth to his wisdom and will. Faith emptieth a man of all high con∣ceits of self-sufficiency, goodness, and worth, makes him most base and vile in his own eyes; as that which receiveth all things of favour and courtesie, cha∣lengeth nothing by way of recompence or desert.Quiqui estis, definite putare vos esse aliquid, continuo mie∣scetis. Si te inferiorem non majorem duxe∣ris, defines comoveri. Pac. virt. & vit. c 19. Gen. 1.17. Psal. 22.6. Jo 17.4. Wherefore it is no hard matter for a sound Believer to put up reproach, disgrace, and wrong patiently. For if that arrogant conceit which we have of our selves, and the overweening opinion of our own excellencies be laid aside; if we esteem our selves to be but dust and ashes, wormes and no men; if in sincerity we can say unto corruption, thou art my Father, and unto the worme, thou art my Mother and my Sister: If we did truly judge that by our sinnes committed against God and our neigh∣bour, we have deserved not onely contumelies and wrongs, but also eternall death of body and soul; we could not be easily provoked to anger upon every trifling occasion, nor think it any great disparagement to endure lesser injuries, seeing we have deserved farre greater. 6 It raiseth the heart to an earnest desire of spirituall and heavenly things, and treadeth under feet all vain and transitory things which concern this life. The treasures that faith discovereth are more excellent and durable then any this world affordeth; the preferment it gapes after is not of any earthly nature, the riches it coveteth are above. As for the things of this life, it doth not desire much, it delighteth not in much: and consequently the Believer is not much disturbed with unquietness, nor incensed with anger, when he is crossed in them. He will not trouble himself needlesly to intermeddle with every domesticall trifle; and if any thing miscarry, he will not so much look to the means, as to the supream cause,Psal. 127.1. the providence of God, considering that if he build not the house, they labour in vain that build it, if he bless not their labours, they cannot prosper. It is reported that some hils are never molested with Wind, Haile, Snow, Rain, or Tempest, because they are above the Clouds: sure I am the heavenly-minded Christian is lifted far above these sublunary things, and cannot be afflicted with them. 7. Faith be∣getteth soundness of spirit, aad Christian hardiness. For, inordinate lusts, which are as Ulcers in the flesh, it subdueth, and diffuseth the saving vertue of the Word into every power of the soul. But a sound mind is not easily distempe∣red with wrongs that are offered, no more then sound flesh will ake to be hand∣led. 8. It seeketh the approbation of God, but is not vainly inquisitive what others think, speak, or do. For, who so believeth, shall find most sweetness in familiarity and communion with God, which draweth the heart from the love of needless curiosity. And the abandoning of this troublesome companion vain curiosity, is of speciall use to the subduing of unjust anger. For many things will neither grieve nor hurt us, if we never see nor hear them. Whereas he that busily enquireth what is said against him in every company, he that listneth at every door, and under every wall, he that rubbeth up ill words spoken against him in secret, doth both disquiet himself with anger, and make his own faults more publique. Antigonus when he heard two of his subjects speaking evil of him in the night near his Tent, called unto them, willing them to go further off least the King should hear them. Whose example if we would follow, our anger would not so much vex our selves, nor trouble others. 9. It acquainteth us with the common frailties of all mankind, the temptations whereunto they lie open, and the particular sinnes, wants, and infirmities of our own souls. Faith discovereth the filthienss of Original sinne, which hath so generally infect∣ed all the Sonnes of Adam, that there remaineth nothing in us but pollution and filthiness. It putteth us in mind, how often we have provoked God to anger by our sinnes, how many and great injuries we have offered to our Brethren: the remembrance whereof is a great curbe and bridle to carnall anger. If he that hireth a servant, would think with himself, that he hireth one who is not free from faults; if he that chooseth a friend, would then consider that he hath
his wants and imperfections: If he that marrieth a Wife, would remember that he marrieth a woman,Tela provisa minus nocent. Praesume ani∣mo multa tibi esse patienda. Sen. lib. 3. cap. 37. No man is offended that he is cold in Winter, or that he doth vomit in the Sea. Tit. 3.1, 2, 3. Eccl 7.24. Aequum est, peccatis veni∣am poscentem, reddere rursus. Horat. ser. lib. 1. Satyr. 3. Irasceris Patri tuo, & peccas: irascere tibi ip∣si, ne peces. Aug. Sen. de ira. lib. 3. cap. 29. and therefore one subject to infirmities: neither the small faults of his servants, nor the imperfections of his friends, nor infirmities of his Wife would easily provoke him to choler and fury, seeing he did not come short of his reckoning. If when we have received injury from another, we would aske our consciences, am I clear from offering the like injuries or greater to my Brethren? How many times have I offended God much more? Thus if we would speak unto our consciences in the presence of God, we would not so easily be incited to anger and revenge, seeing we our selves do ma∣ny things which need pardon, and our greater faults might serve to excuse those that are less in others, if we would but look upon them: for no man without blushing could extreamly punish those faults in his neighbour, for which he shall need to crave pardon himself. 10. It kindleth just indignation against the sinne of our own souls, which curbeth and restraineth carnall anger from breaking forth against others. For whosoever is zealous against the errors and aberrations of his own life, he shall not find time to jarre and contend with o∣ther men for petty injuries and wrongs. Experience sheweth, that the greatest heat abroad is accompanied with least heat at home. 11. Faith dealeth with counsell and deliberation: It considereth before it judge, and judgeth before it proceed to execution. The Heathen man saith, We shall acquit many, if we will not be angry before we judge: which order is observed by faith, for it defer∣reth to censure, till time have revealed the truth. It is the nature of men, to be most desirous of hearing that which most displeaseth them, and willingly to be∣lieve those things which they are most sorry to hear: But faith leadeth in another course, it weigheth all things in the balance of truth, and moveth according to her direction. 12. Faith worketh by love, which is of more force to restrain us from revenge,1 Cor. 13.4.7. then injury to provoke unto anger: For, love suffereth long, and suffereth all things, is not provoked to anger. It considereth the condition of him with whom we are angry, namely, that he is a Brother created in the I∣mage of God: It calleth to mind the equity which we look for at the hands of all men, and causeth a man to set himself in the place of him with whom we are pro∣voked. If we wrong any man, we desire that he would forgive us: and there∣fore we must forgive him the injury that he doth unto us, without unjust anger. These considerations will keep men that they shall not aggravate those injuries which are offered them, nor extenuate those they offer others. 13. It is the pro∣perty of faith to receive the whole Word, and to diffuse the saving vertue there∣of into every power of the soul; which changeth us into the nature of it self. But the Word of God requireth meekness, long-suffering, and patience. The Word of the Kingdom is compared to Leaven, which leaveneth the whole lump: which word commandeth meekness, and so farre as it is embraced, doth change us into the nature of it. 14. Faith obtaineth by prayer, and receiveth the spirit of meekness, whereby our nature is renewed according to the Image of God, and our affections sanctified that they may be fit and serviceable for the setting forth of Gods glory, the good of our Brethren, and the furthering of our own salvation. Lastly, It sheweth the danger of retaining wrath, which is an high degree of murther. It perswadeth in this wife; Thou prayest to be forgiven,Mat. 6. as thou forgivest: the promise is, forgive, and it shall be forgiven you: the threatning is,Mat. 18.23. Mat. 7.2. that judgment merciless shall be to him that sheweth no mercy: and be sure that what measure thou meetest unto others, shall be measured unto thee again, and returned into thine own bosome. While thou remainest in an∣ger, thou canst have no assurance that thy prayers are acceptably heard of God, or that thou art his Child by grace and adoption. What Christian, that knoweth the comfort of prayer, and dignity of adoption, would not be terrified from un∣advised anger by such like rebukes and threatnings?
Q. What meanes further should a Christian use to subdue Anger? A. 1. We must fly all affairs that are above our reach, lest that finding our selves opprest, as with an unsupportable burden, grief kindle our wayward∣ness and choler. 2. It is good to abstain from multitude of business, because not onely the mind is distracted and disturbed therewith, and so made a fit Inne for anger to lodge in, but also because in such abundance of business, some things of necessity will miscarry, and among such a multitude of Irons, some will burn, and so inflame the mind to anger. 3. Another meanes to pre∣vent anger, is to avoid the company of those who are angry and cholerick, lest by a certain contagion they poyson us with their passions. And this Solomon teacheth us. Make no friendship with an angry man,Prov. 22.24. neither go with the furious man, lest thou learn his waies, and receive destruction to thy soul. Drunkards provoke to drink, voluptuous men mollifie the most couragious, and avarice poysons those that haunt the covetous. In like manner, cho∣lerick men infuse into us their troublesome humour, or at least in frequen∣ting them we expose our selves to the dangers of quarrels with them. For as one stick of wood being set on fire, doth kindle that which is next unto it: So one man being inflamed with anger, inflameth them also who are near about him, with his provocations. 4. If we would subdue anger,Vitiae facilius repelluntur, quam expellunter. Sen. we must avoid con∣tentious controversies: for howsoever it be very easie to abstein from them be∣fore they are begun, yet after a man is entred into them, he cannot easily give them over. Because he thinketh that it will derogate from his wit and judge∣ment, if he be forced to yeeld though it be to a truth: and besides men natural∣ly desire to bring others to be of their opinion, and therefore they will use great earnestness to perswade, and oftentimes burst out into anger and fury, if they cannot obtein their desire. 5. To prevent anger it is good to take heed of medling with the strife that belongs not to us:Prov. 26.17. Prov. 29.9. especially we should take heed of medling with foolish and indiscreet persons, for he that conten∣deth with the foolish, whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest. 6. The so∣vereign remedy of anger, is to cast our eyes upon the examples of patience which the servants of God and the Saints have taught us in this world. As of Abraham, who when just cause of offence was offered by Lot and his Shepherds, was rather content to part from his right,Gen. 13.8. then he would any way discord and dissent. Of Moses, who then was ready to pray for the people, when they were ready to stone him. Of.Exo. 17 4 11. 2 Sam. 16.10. David who having re∣venge in his own hand, when he was provoked by the outragious inju∣ries of Shimei, did notwithstanding contein himself: and of Steven,Act. 7.60. who when the Stones flew about his eares, prayed for his enemies that threw them at him.1 et. 2.22. But especially we should fix our eyes upon the example of our Saviour Christ, who being outraged by men did not curse them; being persecuted, he did not threaten his executioners; being crucified, he prayed for his enemies; and who in the end by a Philosophy farre diffe∣rent from that of the world, hath put our salvation in his Cross, our Triumphs in his reproaches, and our glory in his punishments. The look∣ing upon green colours is not more sovereign for those who are troubled with inflamation of the eyes, then the beholding of the clemency and pati∣ence of others, is for those whose hearts are enflamed with anger. 7. If the examples will not move us to the love of mildness and patience, let us set before our eyes those men that abandon themselves to fury, so shall we easily discerne in others, what an ugly and bruitish vice it is in our selves. One saith, that if an angry man would look himself in the Glass in the midst of his fury, he would appear so horrible in his own sight, that it would be a notable meanes to work an hatred in his heart, of so deformed a vice. Doth not the furious man disrobe himself of all shame? lose all reason?
renounce all moderation and modesty? Is not his countenance disfigured and unseemly? Are not his words absurd, his actions rude? Can he refrain his tongue, or contain the other parts of his body in their duty? Wherefore as in seeing the shamefull motions of them that are drunk, we conceive a certain horror of the excess of Wine: so when we behold the deformity of choler in others, we should endeavour what we can not to be infected with a vice, which is as it were a reproach to humane nature. 8. We must fly jealousies and suspicions, which many times incense us, as well as the justest subjects of choler; for that taking in ill part a look, a smile, or some other light action, we conceive a despight and grow hot against the innocent, who had no desire to wrong us. 9. We must not lightly give credit to what we hear reported, considering the practises which are used at this day to abuse the most credulous. A flatterer will seek to insinuate himself into favour by accusing an innocent; he will suggest an outrage and make a bad discourse to perswade that he hath heard it with grief of mind; another will seek an occasion to dissolve the most sacred bonds of friendship. Another full of venome and poyson will desire to have the sport of a quarrell, and will be glad to be spectator of a combate which he hath kindled, so as he be none of the party. It is then a notable lightness to condemn a friend suddainly before he be heard, and without an exact knowledge of the matter whereof he is accused; and it is a prodigious in justice to be incenced against him before that he know who accuseth him, or what crime is imposed upon him. 10. As for those things whereof we our selves are witnesses, we must consider the dispo∣sition and will of those that have done us wrong. If it be a young man, let us impute it to his age, and bear with his youth. Is it a Father? Having received so many other benefits from him, it is reason we should endure, and that re∣membrance of things past should mollifi our present bitterness;As for the in∣jury, see it not, feele it not, over∣come it. Melius est non agnoscere, quam ignoscere and we must duely consider with our selves whether he hath not just cause to entreat us with that rigor, whereof we now complain. If they be persons subject to an higher power, it may be they have been forced, and being solicited by such as they could not disobey. Another may offend us after that he hath been outraged by us: And what wonder is it if he requite us with the like? If it be a good man, we should not think that he had any will to hurt us, being confident of his innocency. If he be a wicked man, why are we amazed if the effects resemble the cause? More∣over, if we think our selves wrongfully oppressed, let us remember that many times we think that unjust, which is not so in effect. In a word, we must remem∣ber that we know not his heart, nor his intention, it may be he meant better un∣to us: neither are we acquainted with the strength of his temptation, which per∣haps was such as would have overthrown us; nor the reason why the Lord suffereth him to be overcome, and fall by it. Those who find themselves by na∣ture prone to anger,Peregr. de ira. cap. 3. Ʋsu lenienda ira. Sen. de ira. lib. 2. cap. 13. are to labour earnestly with themselves, that they may contain their fury for a shorter time, as it were for one day, whatsoever occa∣sion shall be offered, and after that another, and a third, and so by little and lit∣tle they shall attain unto the habite of patience, and custome will alter nature. These are the meanes whereby unjust anger may be subdued and conquered. Last∣ly, The occasions of anger are to be removed. Cotys the King of Thracia, when one brought to him Vessels curiously wrought with the Pensill, that might easily be broken, he rejected them, or brake them, lest being hot by nature, he should rage against his servants in fury, when any things had hapened unto them.
CHAP. XIV. Shewing, how we are to behave our selves after Anger hath made an en∣trance, and taken place in us: And also what the Remedies are, where∣by we may cure Anger in others. Question: HOw are we to behave our selves after that anger hath made an entrance and taken place in us? A. If through infirmity we be fallen into injust anger,Eph 4.26. we must abandon this corrupt affection with all possible speed. Anger is as poyson, which with all speed must be purged out if it be taken unawares. All Philosophers advise us to entreat this passion as they do monsters and Serpents,Ira furor bre∣vis est: animum rege: qui nisi paret, Imperat: hunc franis, hunc tu compesce catena. Hor. Ep. 1. Ep. 2. Venienti occur∣rite morbo. Pers. Satyr. 3. Pharmaca nascenti sunt adhibenda malo. Theog. Opprimedum no∣vasunt subiti ma∣la semina morbi. Ovid. whom they strive to smo∣ther as soon as they are disclosed. The Apostle teacheth us to lay aside anger with all possible speed, Let not the Sun go down on your wrath. As the night doth cool the heat which in the day time the Sun hath made; so must it also quench the flames of anger kindled in our hearts. And as it is easie to quench a fire of straw in the beginning, but if we suffer it to take hold of more solid matter, it passeth all our labour and industry, and makes a pitifull ruin: even so, he that will observe choler from the beginning, seeing it begin to fume and kindle for some light quarrell and small offence; it is easie for him to suppress it, and to stay the course: but if it be once setled and begins to swell, and that he himself blowes the bellowes; that is to say, if he stirres it up and enflames it, it will be hard for him afterwares to quench it. A small spark if it be nourished, will quickly increase to a furious flame. As therefore when a house is newly set on fire, men labour earnestly, and with all speed to quench it, before it have taken hold of the main posts and great beams, otherwise it will be too late af∣terwards, when it is increased to its full strength: So when our hearts are first set on fire with anger, we are presently to quench it with the water of the spi∣rit; for after we are throughly enflamed, it will be too late to apply any reme∣dy till the flame have spent it self. But some will say, I fall into anger many times when I never mean it, and it hath overcome me before I am aware; how therefore should I prevent that which I do not foresee, or free my self from it, seeing it violently over-ruleth me? To which I answer, First, That if we care∣fully watch over our selves, we shall easily perceive when we are inclining to anger: for as there are many signs which go before a storm, and many symp∣toms which discover diseases before we fall into them; so we may easily discern in us many notes and signes of this tempestuous storm and raging fever of minde, unjust Anger, before it break forth and shew it self. Inward pain, swel∣ling of heart, discontent and bitterness of spirit appear before it. Secondly, Anger doth not presently as soon as it is entred into the heart over-rule us, be∣fore it be grown to greater strength than it hath at the first: for as the greatest fire hath but a small beginning, and when it is begun is easily quenched: so the most furious anger attaineth not his full strength at the first entrance, but by little and little encreaseth like a flame, by taking hold of new matter. And therefore howsoever after it hath wholly inflamed a man, it is most hardly quenched, yet in the beginning thereof, it is easily suppressed. The means to subdue Anger after it hath given the assault, are; First, Not to yeeld any obedience to her, nor to beleeve her in any thing she saith or doth, to inflame us to revenge. As they that are sick of the Falling-sickness, having any sign or beginning of their fit, retire themselves suddenly, and take all the remedies which may divert so trou∣blesome an accident, or at least, hide the shame: so they that see themselves transported with Choler, should retain themselves, and strive to moderate their
passion; and divert the infirmity which seeks to seize upon them. Pilots fore∣seeing a tempest, usually retire themselves into a road or under the Lee of some Rock, before the storm come: so he that feels the first motions of Choler, should have recourse to reason or faith rather, and oppose her perswasions to the passion, to controle the violence of it. We find in other passions, that the liberty we give them brings some ease: but Choler grows bitter, and is in∣censed by the liberty that we give her, and is enflamed the more in that we give way to her fury.Prov. 12.16. Prov. 20.3. & 16.32. Secondly, We must remember that it is a dishonest thing to requite an injury; for he that doth so hath part of the wickedness, and entangles himself in sinne, as he that embraceth a sooty person, and walloweth with him, shall be sooty himself. Ctesipho Pancratista is worthily derided, who was wont to kick his Mule, because she strook him with the heels. If another man vex me, shall I vex my self? We must rather imitate Champions, who sometimes give ground, that they may overcome. Thirdly, To subdue Anger we must withdraw the food wherewith it is nourished: for as the greatest fire, if new matter be not supplied, will of it self go out: so the most furious anger will soon be mitigated, if it be not continually nourished with a new supply of matter. The fewell of anger, is multiplying of words: for though the injury at the first be small, yet if either it be aggravated by him that suffereth it, or defended by him that offereth it, it incenseth men to great anger. As nothing sooner than winde, causeth a small spark to burst out into a furious flame; so nothing sooner doth cause a small spark of anger increase to a raging flame of revenge, than the wind of words. We are not therefore to imagin with some, that we can disgorge our stomacks of anger, by vomiting out spleen in bitter words; for they do not only in their own nature whet and sharpen our own affections, but also provoke the other, with whom we are offended, to requite us with the like, and so to add new matter to the old flame. As well therefore may we think to quench the fire with wood, as anger with words; for as wood is the nourishment of the fire, so words are the nourishment of anger. Let us rather in our anger imitate the wise Socrates, who when he was most angry, used most modesty, mildness of speech, and lowness of voice, and so withdrawing the nourishment from the fire of anger,Differ, habent parvae commoda magna morae. Natura ira est, ut prolata magis, ferveat: occul∣tata languescat. Glossa in Prov. Prov. 12.16. Valer. Max. lib. 4, cap. 1. Plutarch. de lib. Educ. Qui non mode∣rabitur irae, Infectum volet esse, dolor quod suaserit & meus, Dum paenas odio per vim fectinat in∣ulto. Horat. ibid. Post mihi non simili paena commissa luctis. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 1. it will soon of it self be extinguished. Fourthly, In thine anger make some delay, before thou speakest or doest any thing. Give not place to wrath, let it not have vent by sudden or unadvised words. Anger smothered will lan∣guish, but let out, will flame unto further mischief. Solomon makes it the pro∣perty of a wise man to conceal anger: A fools wrath is presently known; but a prudent man covereth shame. Memorable is that answer of Athenodorus to Augustus, who being requested at his departure to leave behind him some good instruction for the government of his Empire, gave him this advice; That he should do nothing in his anger, before he had numbred on his fingers the Letters of the Greek Alphabet. An example hereof we have in Socrates, who finding his anger incensed against his servant, deferred to take correction, saying, I would beat thee but that I am angry. And also in Plato, who being provoked to anger for some notable fault committed by his servant, took a cudgell into his hands, and held it over him a good space, as if he would have stroken; and being asked of his friend Speusippus, what he meant by such a kind of action; I said he, I take punishment of one who is angry; meaning of himself, by bridling his affection. And that we may the rather be moved to abstain from sudain and desperate resolutions when our anger is provoked, let us consider we are in great danger to do those things in a moment, which we shall repent our whole life. That in such shortness of time we cannot rightly examin the circum∣stances of the matter, which in such cases are most material; whereas truth is the daughter of time, and will bring all to light. That it is a foul shame, first to be angry, and then to judg: first to take punishment, and then to examine the
cause; that is to say, whether hath offended, he that taketh punishment, or he on whom it is inflicted: whereas in process of time the truth will appear, whether revenge may be more justly taken or omitted- And then if after due examination he inflict deserved punishment, it will be more effectuall for the reformation of the offender, when he seeth that it doth rather proceed from true judgment, than from the spleen. Fiftly, It is good to get out of the com∣pany of others, especially of them who have offended us; according to the example of Jonathan, who being justly provoked by his unjust and cruell Father,1 Sam. 20.34. rose from the table and departed, lest by his fathers provocations, he might have done or said that which did not beseem him: whose practise if we would wisely imitate, we should not only appease our anger, by removing out of our sight the object and cause thereof, and prevent further occasions of increasing it, but also cover our infirmities, which otherwise we should discover by the violence of the passion. For this affection is as fire; take the matter away from fire, and it will cease to burn; so let a man depart, and employ himself (for the time) some other way, and he shall soon cease to be angry. Sixthly, We are to con∣sider that we sinne again God, not once or twice, but often, yea every day, and therefore the course of our anger must be turned against our selves. Seventhly, Let the angry man think with himself, whether he is purposed ever or never to lay aside his anger. If ever, how much better were it that he should vanquish it, than that it should leave him? that he should vanquish it, than that it should be overcome of it self? that he should quench it with the water of the spirit, than that it should last untill it burn out? for not only this but all other passions in time tire themselves, and fall down with their own ruin. But if they purpose to live in perpetuall enmity, let them consider that they nourish in themselves a viper, which will fret out their own bowels. For who receiveth more vexation, grief, and disquietness by anger, than himself who is subject to the passion? and what doth sooner cut off the thread of life, than the sharpness of fretting grief? Lastly, Let him think with himself what good time he spendeth in a bad matter, which being so short and precious, should be more esteemed and better employed. Eighthly, The chief means to subdue anger after it hath taken hold of us, is earnest and hearty prayer unto God, that he would vouchsafe us the gracious assistance of his holy Spirit, whereby our affections may be so ruled and sanctified, that they being freed from naturall corruption, may be made fit and serviceable for the setting forth of his glory, the good of our brethren, and the furthering of our own salvation. For it is only the water of the Spirit and the shield of faith, which is able to quench the fury of our passions; and prayer is a chief means to obtain these spirituall graces at Gods hands. Ninethly, Com∣miserate the state of him that provokes thee to anger; for he is a fool and mad, but the instrument of God to exercise thy patience. Q What are the remedies whereby we may cure Anger in others? A. 1. If we live with them that are furious,Prov. 16.7. the best means to winne them to love and kindness is serious, true and hearty repentance When the waies of a man please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him. It matters not how perversly they are bent, how farre their hearts are estranged from us; if we turn unto God, they shall be reconciled unto us, when it is for our good. The Spirit of God is that glue that joyneth together things most disagreeing: He can make that clay and iron, (that is things most unfit to be conjoyned) shall stick fast one to another.Esa. 11.6, 7, 8. He makes the Wolfe to feed with the Lamb, the Calf with the Bear, the Leopard with the Kid. The hearts of men are in the hands of God, and as the Rivers of waters, he turneth them at his pleasure;Gen. 32.9, 10 11. & 33.4, 5 as he changed the fierce and savage mind of Esau to be mild and gentle towards his Brother Jacob. Why should a good man fear to find favour of his most deadly enemy, if it be for the best unto him? They that be in league
with the Prince, have peace with the subjects: so they that upon true repen∣tance and hearty supplication be reconciled unto God, shall find the whole Ar∣my of Heaven and Earth favourable unto them. And be it that the subjects of men may hate him whom their prince affecteth: none of Gods subjects can move himself to hurt us without his will and pleasure. Why should we despair of living peaceably with them to whom we are linked, unless we be resolved to live impenitently, and not to seek the Lord? Doth not God rule the hearts of men? And hath he not given his Promise, that if we humble our selves speedi∣ly, sincerely before him, he will grant us compassion in the sight of them that hate us?2 Chro. 30.9. If ye turn unto the Lord, your Brethren and your Children shall find compassion before them that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this Land: And this is that which Solomon prayed at the dedication of the Temple: If they bethink themselves, and repent, and make supplication in the Land of them that carried them captive,1 King. 8.47, 48, 49, 50. 2 Chro. 7.11, 12, 13. saying, We have sinned, and have done per∣versely, we have committed wickedness; And so return unto thee with all their heart, and all their soul: Then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in Heaven thy dwelling place, and maintain their cause, And forgive thy people that have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have transgressed against thee, and give them compassion before them, who have carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them. When Jacob feared lest the bordering Inha∣bitants should set upon him in hostile manner,Gen 35.1, 2. by reason of that bloudy slaughter which his Sonnes had made amongst the Sichemits, he is commanded to go to Bethel, and performe his vows to the Lord, as the only remedy to free himself and his from that imminent danger.Favour com∣eth by forbear∣ing, not by rage. 2. To mitigate anger in another we must use silence: for, as the fire cannot long continue if the wood be taken from it, so anger cannot long endure, if words and cross answers be not multiplied: whereas on the other side, cross speeches and perverse replies, make the chole∣rick man proceed from anger to rage, from folly and fury to madness. And this the wise man teacheth us:Prov. 26.21. Jam. 3.5, 6. Prov. 30.33. As the coale maketh burning coales and wod a fire, so the contentious man is apt to kindle strife. Anger is as fire, and words as fewell. As he that wringeth his nose causeth blood to come out: so he that forceth wrath bringeth forth strife. By silent yeelding thou maist easily abate anothers anger, whereas cross answers make it ragingly violent. For as the Cannon-shot loseth his force, if it light in soft earth or wooll, but dasheth the stony wall in pieces: so the violence of the most furious anger is abated when it is not resisted, but fu∣riously rageth, where it findeth any opposition. And hence it is that the Hea∣then man calleth anger the nerves or sinews of the mind,Wild-fire is put out with Milk. Nothing quencheth Lime save Oyl. Homa iratus est velut olla ebul∣liens; cui a qua frigida super∣fundenda est. Prov. 15.1. Prov. 25.15. Gen. 49.14. Judg. 8.1, 2, 3. Non aliud ap∣tius est pharma∣cum, quam viri gravis oratio. Monander. which are intended and made stiffe, with sharpness and bitterness, but slack and easie, with courtesie and gentleness. 3. A soft and mild answer, either excusing their fault by shew∣ing their innocency, or in all humbleness confessing it, and craving pardon, is most fit physick to cure anger. Oftentimes angry men imagine that silence argu∣eth contempt, and proceedeth from sullenness, as though they were silent be∣cause they were discontented or scorned to return an answer. A soft answer (saith the wise Physician) putteth away wrath, but gievous words stirre up an∣ger. A Prince is pacified by staying anger, and a soft tongue breaketh the ones, or as it is in the Original, a man of bone, that is, such an one as is most stiffe and ob∣durate. An example hereof we have in Gidon, who by his mild repl pacified the proud Ephraimites, that contended with him without cause. And therefore iron which is red hot, being dipped in cold water, presently loseth all his heat, and returneth to his naturall coldness: so is the heat of the hottest anger soon mitigated with a cold and mild answer. 4. Grave and wholsome admonition, with good counsell and advice seasonably administred, is a notable remedy of unjust anger. Inordinate passion is better cured by accurate and sound speech joyned with truth, then with an hundred stripes. An example hereof we have
in Abigail, who by her mild and discreet speeches quickly appeased Davids fu∣rious anger. But admonition must be given in fit season, when anger is overpast.1 Sam. 25.24. Animo aegrotan∣ti medicus est oratio. Ille regit dictis animos, & pectora mulcet. Virg. En lib. 1. For as it is not fit to minister Physick to a sick Patient, while he is in a fit of an Ague, and therefore well-advised Physicians rather make choice of their Patients good day,: so it is in vain for a man to seek the curing of anger by good coun∣sell, unless he stay till the fit be passed over, and the heat of anger somewhat asswaged. For a man cannot, nor will not hearken to another mans reasons, while he is subject to his own passions. And as a man heareth nothing almost which is said, when is house is on fire, for the noise of the multitude, the crack∣ling of the flame, and the perturbation of his own mind: so the violence of this affection, and the fury of this passion, doth make a man while he is in a fit of rage, deaf to all reason. A Ship without a Pilote in a Tempest, will as soon receive a Governour from another place, as a man will admit the speech of a∣nother, whilest he is tossed to and fro with the waves of anger. And there∣fore they are to be admonished when the fury hath somewhat spent itself, and the great evils of anger both in respect of their souls and bodies, their neighbours and friends, the Church and Common-wealth, are as it were in one view, to be presented to their more sober meditations. But they who admonish are to re∣member, that they use all mildness and moderation in their admonition, lest while they go about to prevent anger for the time to come, they presently provoke it. For if they be too austere and rough in using too insolent invectives and bitter reprehensions, they do not onely commit themselves a great absurdi∣ty, while in reproving anger they shew their own spleen, but also make their admonition altogether unprofitable. Because the angry man (if he see them so sharp and severe) will rather think how he may defend his fault by aggrava∣vating the injuries which he hath received, then either confess it to such a cynick censurer, or labour to amend it. For as no man will suffer his wound to be searched by such a Surgeon as hath a rough hand, and an hard heart, neither will any Patient commit himself to the cure of a froward and merciless Physician: so man cannot abide (and therefore much less an angry man) to have his gauled faults too much rubbed, and the wounds and diseases of his mind healed and cu∣red with too sharp a corasive and loathsome potion of insolent and bitter words. As the fearfull Snake, when he hath no meanes to fly away, will turn again, and desperately leap into the face of him that pursueth him. And the Dog that is hardly pursued with a cudgell, will turn again when he cannot fly away. So the angry man being so hardly pursued with sharp invectives and bitter reprehensi∣ons, that he hath no evasion of excuse to cover his fault, nor hope of pity by confessing it, doth as it were fly into the face of the reprover, by objecting his greater faults, that they may serve to extenuate his, which are less. 5. Humble submission doth allay Choler. Anger ceaseth against them that behave them∣selves in lowly manner: because they seem to confess themselves inferiours. The Lyons tear not the beasts that prostrate themselves before them.Gen. 33.3, 4. Dogs bite not such as humble themselves and crouch before them. If Jacob bow before his Brother, and call him my Lord Esau, he will fall upon his neck and kiss him. They are monsters of men rather then men, that rage in fury against them that submit themselves under their hand. 6. Benefits and kindness asswage anger, and pacifie the unquiet spirit. Some raving in anger have been wonne to their deadly enemy, even by this, that they have not hurt them,1 Sam. 24.17. & 26.21. Prov. 25.21. when it was in their power. If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eate, and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink: for thou shalt heape coales of fire upon his head. Ma∣ny gifts and good turns are of great force to appease and reconcile the minds that are seperated by anger. As Founders or Casters of Mettall, by adding much fewel and making a great fire, do cause the hardest iron or steele at last to melt, and become liquid: so, many and great good-turns will mollifie and quiet an
imbittered heart, if there be any metall of ingenuity and good nature in them. Jacob knew this very well,Gen. 32.20. Prov. 21.14. and therefore he said with himself, I will appease my Brother Esau with the present that goeth before me. Lastly, We must diligent∣ly marke the disposition of angry persons, and by all lawfull means conform our selves unto them, shunning all occasions of offence, and carrying our selves towards them in all mildness and courtesie, as shall be fittest to winne them. Be not hasty to go out of his sight. If the spirit of the Ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place; for yeelding pacifieth great offences. A meek man, that in all things observeth how he may gaine his enemy unto him, is an healing man, who hath learned to cure the diseases of the soul.Eccl. 8.3. Eccl. 10.4. But let it be remembred, that if we prevaile not speedily by this course, we must not utterly despair, as if things would never be better: No, we must arm our selves with invincible patience, and labour with much kindness to overcome their frowardness. A small fire or little time will not melt the hard iron or steele: The soare is not cured as soon as the Plaster is applied: The sick Patient recovereth not upon receipt of the first Potion, yet there is no cause to cast off all hope of health. CHAP. XV. Reasons to perswade to the right Exercise of Mildness. When it is rightly Exercised. How Mildness and true Zeal may stand together. The Use and Benefit of Mildness. Motives to perswade us to the Practice thereof. And how it is to be stirred up in us, with the severall Kindes of inordinate Mildness that must be shunned. Question: MƲst not a Christian be carefull to order Gentleness or Mildness a∣right? Vid. Drus. lib. 6. pag. 254. Prov. 16.19.A. He must, and that for these Reasons. 1 Well ordered Mildness is ex∣cellent in all men, for that it is a bud of true humility, and a lively Character of the Children of God. But it hath a greater luster and a more eminent shew when it is found in the souls of Kings and Monarches of the earth. For what praise, what triumph, and what glory is it to a great Prince, to have the com∣mand of so many Millions of men, to be Arbitratour of their lives, to be Master of their goods and fortunes, to be able at an instant to leavy fearfull Ar∣mies, and in the twinkling of an eye to ruine Towns and Countries, without the fear of any Laws? And yet in this prodigious power, not to suffer his eyes to be dazled with so great a splendor, nor to be transported with Choler, and in offences not to use severity; to contein his passions, and to make it his whole glory to do good to those that are subject to his authority. Wherefore this bounty and clemency in Princes, makes them not onely to be beloved, but even to be adored by their subjects, who are ravished with a sweet excess of joy, when as they see themselves subject to a power which hath nothing insolent, but all things tend to their preservation, and propound to themselves no more glorious objects then their safety. Mildness and clemency, as a powerfull charm, bind the affections of the Subject unto the Prince, and purchase their love, which is the most powerfull bond and safest guard whereby Monarches may assure their Estates.1 Reg. 12.7. 2. We read in Scripture, that the Saints who are most commended for meekness, have been justly moved to anger, when they saw God to be highly dishonoured amongst men. Moses was very meek, above
all the men which were upon the face of the earth: but it is noted of him,Numb. 12.3. Exo. 11.8. & 16.20. & 32.19. Lev. 10.16. Numb. 16.15. Iob. 32.2, 3. that he was very angry sometimes, when the people by great transgression had provo∣ked the Lord. And so Elihu, his anger was kindled against Job, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job: from which examples we learn, that Mildness and anger must mutually give place to each other. He is not truly mild, that is not moved to indignation, when God is greatly dishonoured before his eyes: nor he rightly displeased with sinne, that leaveth not room for gen∣tleness to harbour in his breast. 3. The worth of Mildness is set forth unto us by comparison, that it might the more affect.Eccl. 7.8. The patient in spirit is better then the proud in spirit. Mildness with want and misery, is better then pride with plenty and abundance. He that is slow to anger, is better then the mighty:Prov. 6.22. and he that ruleth his spirit, then he that taketh a City. The greatest Victory is to conquer our passions; the most glorious Triumph to bear rule over our proper lusts. He which will not be provoked to anger without due cause, neither ha∣ving due cause to be angry, will pass the bounds of moderation and measure, is more to be commended for his strength and fortitude, then he that is boisterous and strong of body: and he who represseth and keepeth under his intemperate and violent affections, hath greater power, and doth a more worthy exploit, then he which by force of armes doth overcome and conquer whole Cities, Castles and Countries. A man of a coole spirit is of excellent understanding.Prov. 17.27. Prov. 24.29. He that is moderate and stayed in his affections, is both judicious and godly. Mildness is a thing very much approved of God,1 Pet. 3.4. very dear and pretious unto men: for the mild mans esteeme with others, is raised according to the lowly conceit he hath of himself. None more base in his own eyes, none more ho∣nourable in the judgment of others. 4. The blessings entayled unto right orde∣red Mildness, should move us to the exercise of it. (1.) Spirituall,Psal. 25.9. God will teach none but the meek, neither can any learn of the Lord but the meek: and therefore James willeth us, to hear with meekness the ingrafted Word.Iam. 1.21. Psal. 37.11. Mat. 5.5. Psal. 149.4. Psal. 147.6. Psal. 76.9. Zeph. 2.3. (2) Tem∣porall blessings, even all outward prosperity so far as God seeth good; for this is the blessedness of the meek, that they shall inherit the Land. And in daies of distress and times of straightness and affliction they shall be safe: for the Lord hath promised to hide them in the day of his wrath. (3.) Eternall, which was figured by the Land of Canaan, and given as an Inheritance to the Saints. 5. In∣ordinate gentleness or Mildness, when men carry one temper in all things, and be not much moved whatsoever happen, is the bane of zeal, the nurse of sinne, a dissolute lenity, then which nothing is more pernicious. Too much lenity in the Chyrurgion may undoe the Patient. If Physick be too gentle, it will not work. Exhortations, admonitions, reproofs, will not take effect in some hearts, if they be not mixed with severity, if they have not some spirituall tartness. Q. When is Mildness rightly Exercised? A. When it is informed, quickned and determined by faith, teaching us when, how, and in what things to shew forth all Mildness,Prov. 3.34. according to the example of our heavenly Father. The proper Acts of this Mildness are 1. To suffer the duties and threats of the Law to be pressed upon us without grudging or sto∣mack. 2. To calme and quiet the heart that it be not disturbed or troubled,1 Pet. 3.4. Psal. 37.1, 11. Jansen. Har. Cap. 39. Chem. Har. evang. Cap. 51. Col. 3.12. either for the prosperous success of the wicked, or the afflictions that are laid up∣on us of God. 3. To incline the affections unto a mild and courteous, loving and kind carriage towards our neighbour, not permitting the heart easily to be overcome with bitterness, not permitting the possessour hastily or violently, either to offer to another, or remove from himself such injuries. A mild man doth seldom think himself to be contemned or mocked. And if he be derided or disgraced, he beares it with an equall and quiet mind. Hence he becomes a more severe inquirer into himself, that if any thing be truly spoken, he might
seriously amend it. If it be false, he doth neither complain bitterly, nor grievously expostulate, but command himself the more strictly not to be lifted up with any desire of revenge. He is ever calme, quiet, enduring just and un∣just, patient of reproach, abstaining from all inward sedition. He is never puf∣fed up for those things which he hath, but ever humble in respect of those things which he hath not: whose mind is so appeased, qualified, sober and temperate, that he never preferres himself to any, all to himself. The next attendants or handmaids of it are; First, A sweet composed and quiet spirit. Secondly, Com∣passion or affliction of spirit in sight and sense of the afflicted.Prov. 11.12. 2 Tim. 2.24, 25. Thirdly, Re∣diness to forgive offences. Fourthly, Soft answers, such as those of Abigail which broke the wrath of David. Q. If Mildness must be shewed to all men, how may we warrant any anger against any man in any sinne or offence, or how may any severity be put on against any offender? A. Mildness is no enemy to true zeal; for both are graces of the Spirit, that cannot be cross to each other. Christians mistake this grace, when they dream it to be a bottomless charity, and under pretence of Mildness, can bear with any evil, which indeed is nothing else but an irreligious and mute approbation and association in the evil. He that commandeth to be angry, but not to sinne, maketh it a sin not to be angry sometimes: neither did the meekness of Moses hinder, but that he might be exceeding angry at the Calf they had made. Whence it followeth, that publique persons must publikely suppress, and reprove open sinnes, disturbing the publique proceedings of Religion or justice; so David put on zeal to weed the wicked out of the Land:Psal. 101.8. Tit. 1.13. and the Minister is taught, if he see beasts or slow bellies, to reprove them sharply. The private person must privately also, but yet plainly reprove his Brother, and not suffer his sinne upon him; or at least by shewing his indignation against sinne, he must free his own soul from the guilt of it, as also the punishment; yea, from the suspicion of it in such as may be present, who else may think him that holdeth his tongue a partner, or of conset with the sinner. Gentleness doth favour sinne no more then zeal or indignation; onely it moderateth passion, that it break not out in∣to revenge and fury. Q. What then is the Ʋse of Mildness? Jam. 3.13.A. To purifie our zeal, for so the Apostle James would have a wise man to shew forth his good conversation in meekness of wisdom. Which meekness of wisdom or wise Mildness, First, Causeth a man to put a difference between the person and the sin; and affecteth him with pity to the person, even in revenge of the sinne: so Joshua called Achan, my son, when yet presently he executed the judgment of death upon him. Secondly, Between sinne and sinne: for some are motes troubling the eye, some are beames putting out the eye: a mote may soon be blown away and removed, a beame requireth more strength: Wise Meekness will more shew it it self in the one, and more retire it self in the other. Again, Some sinnes are more directly injurious to men, and perhaps the party himself; others more injurious to God: Now this Meekness of wisdom will be Queen in the former, but giveth place to zeal in the latter. Thirdly, It discerneth be∣teween sinner and sinner: for all sinners are not of a suit; some sinne of igno∣rance, some against their light and knowledge; some of weakness, some of set purpose, and obstinate wickedness; some are leaders and setters of sinne, some are led and seduced: some seek excuses as ashamed of that they have done, o∣thers defences, as glorying in their iniquity. Now cometh this Meekness of wisdom, and putteth difference, shewing compassion on some, and others sa∣ving with fear. Fourthly, It omitteth no opportunity of saving and pardoning that may stand with justice; it blotteth out the fault, it lifteth up him that is fallen, it recalleth the wanderer from the Labyrinths of errours into
the way of innocency by mild perswasions, long forbearance, and gentle ad∣monitions. Q. What Motives may perswade us to the continuall and uniforme prastice of Mildness? A. 1. The mild person is subject, and well-affected to God in all things; pro∣fitable to all men, even his enemies; and hath obtained dominion over himself. 2. The Lord hath speciall care of the mild and humble:Psal. 9.12. Psal. 147.6. Psal. 149.4. when they cry he will hear their prayers, in distresses he will send them succour and deliverance. The Lord will lift up the meek, and beautifie them with salvation. 3. Well-ordered Mildness is the heap of all vertues, so that there can be the utter want of none where this appeareth: and though she boast not her self in any wise, yet she is most conspicuous in the renowned assembly of vertues; to whom God doth abundantly restore what she detracteth from her self. But he that is destitute of this grace, him God knoweth not, men hate; to him we attribute no sound grace, but onely the Images of grace which vanish. 4. Christian mildness is an Argument of a sound couragious mind. He is of a noble and generous spirit, that, as it is the manner of valiant wild beasts, doth securely hear the barking of Dogs. 5. A mild Christian is an healing man,Vid. Trem. Eccl. 10.4. Gal. 6.1. Eph. 4.2. 2 Cor. 6.6. 1 Thes. 2.7. Isa. 11.4. who is skilfull to cure the di∣seases of the mind, and to restore them to health that have wounded themselves by sinne. The Physician, who knoweth to cure the grievous maladies of the body, is much esteemed: but he is worthy more praise, who hath learned to heal the diseases of the soul. 6. Mildness is an evident testimony of Communi∣on with Christ, who, as it was foretold of him, doth gratiously governe the meek of the earth, that is, such as being humbled under the sense of their own misery, have thrown to the ground all high and proud conceit of themselves. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore hath the Lord anointed me:Isa. 61.1. he hath sent me to preach good tydings to the meek. 7. Light is sown for the meek, and joy for the mild in spirit. The meek also shall encrease their joy in the Lord;Isa. 29.19. and the poor among men shall rejoyce in the holy One of Israel. 8. The Lord Christ doth invite us to meekness by his own example.Mat. 21.5. Zach. 9.9. Isa. 53.7. Behold thy King cometh unto thee, meek. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. Q. How is meekness or gentleness to be stirred up in us? A. 1. We must cast away all overweening and proud conceits of our own worth, goodness, sufficiency; for humility is the mother of mildness. A quiet heart lodgeth with a base conceit of our selves. 2. It is necessary we should acquaint our selves with our weakness and misery, nakedness and sinne. What creature is more feeble than man? more exposed to divers and sundry chances? more easie to be cast down? In respect of his body, what is man but dust? in respect of soul, what more ignorant, more prone to error, vanity and base∣ness? How greedy in sinne? how averse to that which is good? Who can reckon up the manifold dangers to which he lies open by reason of his sinnes? Whomsoever truth hath brought to this confession of his own infirmity, he hath much profited. For by this descent we come to that ascent which leadeth to the highest of all things. He becomes good who first acknowledgeth himself not good. Pride that is fast riveted in the heart, is not drawn forth without great sense of grief: but the fruit that followeth upon it is most sweet. 3. Some wisdome begetteth mildness. The wisdome that is from above, is first pure,Jam. 3.17. Prov. 19.11. then peaceable, gentle, easie to be entreated. The prudence of a man deferreth his anger. For every understanding man considereth, that in the thing wherein he is hurt he hath more offended God, and that it is the chastisement of God: which perswasion allayeth all bitterness of spirit, and calmeth the heart quietly to undergo what God shall measure out unto him. 4. By faith look upon Jesus
Christ, and seriously meditate on his death, till thou be changed into the simi∣litude of it.Qui laesos spectant oculos, laedunter & ip∣si. He that often and earnestly looketh upon the blear eye, shall be blear-eyed himself. By great and much familiarity we learn the manners of our friends. And thus it is in things spirituall; by faith in Christ we come to be made like unto him. 5. Faith in the promises of mercy and remission of sinnes,Col. 3.12. doth bridle all boisterous passions. Be courteous one to another (saith the Apostle) and tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ his sake forgave you. Seeing the Lord hath sent his Sonne, and the Sonne hath given his bloud, and the Holy Ghost hath sprinkled the same upon your hearts, for the washing away of all your iniquities, stand not with men for small petty injuries, but forgive and forget them. And assuredly whosoever hath the com∣fortable feeling of the pardon of his sinnes, cannot but be so minded. For faith in the bloud of Christ quieteth the conscience, pacifieth the heart, and humbleth him so much the more in his own sight, as he is advanced of God: which calm, peaceable, humble disposition of soul, is the proper seat of mildness He that beleeveth for the pardon of his offences, is sensible of his own wants and the riches of Gods grace, which causeth self-deniall, and enflames the heart with love, whence issueth gentleness. When Steven saw Christ sitting at the right hand of God in Heaven, and was assured that he had saved him from his sinnes, and that he should forth-with go unto him, he could kneel down, and with all meekness pray for his most bitter enemies, that in rage and fury were moved to take away his life: neither were they so mad against him to do him hurt, as he was earnest with God for them to procure their good.Gal 5.22.23. Luk. 1.13. 6. Meekness is a su∣pernaturall grace of the Spirit, which is given to them that ask it by earnest and faithfull prayer. What the Apostle saith of wisdome is true of meekness; If any man lack meekness, let him ask it of God, who giveth liberally to all, and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him. Q What are the severall kinds of inordinate Mildness? A. 1. There is a devillish Mildness, when men are mild and favourable to them that transgress the Commandements, but fierce and outragious against true godliness. To which head may be referred, the lenity that is shewed to scuh as be notoriously prophane, when the infirmities of the godly be pursued with all bitterness and rigour. For in this case godliness is persecuted, not sinne. 2. Dis∣solute lenity or stupidity, when men are stirred with nothing that befalleth, com∣eth under the name of mildness. This issueth from want of zeal and Christian feeling, whose effects appear not so much in committing any thing against ho∣nesty and right, as in omitting or forsaking the offices which concern men in their places.1 Sam 2 23, 24. Prov. 10 8. Jam. 5.9. Herein Eli offended. 3. Hypocriticall mildness, when men pre∣tend peace and quietness, but plot and meditate revenge, as Absolom did against his hrother Ammon. He that hideth hatred with lying lips, and he that uttereth a slander is a fool. 4. Carnall sottishness, when men are cool and remiss in whatsoever concerns the glory and worship of God, but hot and fiery in that which toucheth their state or name, is abusively called mildness, but more truly irreligiousness. Matters of wrong or injury are hardly digested: but abuses committed against God are swallowed with ease.Act. 18.17. Gallio cares for none of these things. 5. Partiall mildness, when men are calm in some things not directly cross to their projects or inclinations, but hot and fiery in others of no greater consequence; or gentle and quiet in some presence, for fear or desire of praise, but ragaing mad with them that be under their government; is the fruit of na∣turall corrupt disposition, not of lively faith. 6. Superficiall or sleighty mildness, which doth not hold out in weighty and great occasions, is the fruit of a temporary, ill-rooted faith. This therefore is to be corrected and better ordered. Q Should I so abase my self, as to yeeld in such or such things?
A. Nay, why should we be so base minded, as to yeeld unto the divel? for whosoever giveth place unto anger and wrath, giveth place unto the divel.Eph. 4.6, 27. Christ is the Prince of peace, whose subjects after the example of their Lord and Master, must be lowly and live peaceably. It is for doggs and swine to bark and bite one another: but for Sheep or Lambs to rent and tear each other, all men would wonder at it. If then we profess that Christ is our Shepheard, and we his sheep, how can we with any honesty look him in the face, when we so farre differ from the nature and properties of his sheep in eating up our own hearts with griefs, and ministring continuall vexation unto others. 2. If we esteem it baseness to yeeld unto our brother, we must know it is rebellion to strive against God, who is our most absolute Sovereign, able to save or destroy. But if we give place to wrath, we fight against God, who is the principall author of our sufferings, man being the instrument by which he worketh. Q. I have been prvoked many waies? A. Who can provoke a Sheep to bark or bite?1 Cor. 13.5. True Christian love is not pro∣voked: so that it is not the provocation without, but want of true love within and abundance of self-love that causeth passion: Our own disstempered lusts are the cause of all contention and strife. Christ Jesus had as great wrongs as ever man in this world had, yet was he never in any passion or distemper: And why? because he was quite void of all carnall affections. Before his conversion Paul was very boisterous and full of rage, but after that he had spent the heat of his anger upon his own great sinnes, he that had been very froward, became very meek, and was able with patience to undergo imprisonment, whipping, stoning, reviling, with any the like indignities. We never hear this from him, What? shall I bear this? a man of my education, of my learning, of my gifts? No, no, these thoughts were farre from Paul: he was content to suffer any thing, yea, to lay down his life for the Name of the Lord Jesus, and that because his lusts were subdued, and the venome thereof re∣moved. Q. Have I not cause to be offended, just reason to be moved? A. What sound reason can there be against Gods reason, who saith, Re∣venge not, for vengeance is mine, I will repay. It is his Office which he hath ap∣propriated unto himself, and they are intruders, yea, tratours that will go about to thrust God out of his Judgment Seate. And therefore let not the Divel delude us with this conceit, that we have reason for our bitter thoughts or se∣cret grutchings: for the best that can be said for it, is this, that it is beastly and fleshly reason, such as the Lord esteemeth folly and frensie, and enmity against his Majesty, which will bring with it death and destruction of body and soul, if we yeeld unto it, and be led by it. All sound reason teacheth us quietly to sub∣mit our selves to the providence of God, whose hand must be acknowledged in every thing that hapneth unto us. A. Should not a man be angry at sinne? A. Sinne is the proper object of just and lawfull anger: but many times this excuse is made to cover and hide the deformity of unjust and carnall anger. Let us examine the matter a little First, Do you hate your own sins? Have they caused you as often to break your sleep▪ as the injuries of others? Are you as much displeased with your selves for offences committed against God or man, as with your neighbour, wife or child, for the supposed wrong he hath done unto you? To preend grief for anothers sinne, when you have little or none for your own, is nothing else but plain dissimulation. Secondly, such as grieve for the faults of others, and are desirous to reform them, will use a good and discreet order in dealing with the parties, observing all circumstances for that end. As namely, the circumstance of time, that they will not presently upon the committing of the offence fly in their faces in the view of all the standers by, seeking to dis∣grace
them to the utmost, but will waite the fittest opportunity, when with most benefit and least blemish to the party, they may cure him of his corrupti∣on. Then as every sinne is greater, so they will be more incensed against it. And herein doth the sinne of many appear, that they will be more moved at some small offence, wherein they themselves are touched, then at a farre greater matter, that nothing concernes their credit and commodity, though it do never so much concerne Gods glory. Thirdly, If any be displeased at sinne, he will use all good means for the healing thereof: he will reprove and admonish, and exhort, and all from a loving and mercifull heart, yea, he will joyn unto these hearty prayer for a blessing upon his endeavours. This we see in Mo∣ses: he was very angry against the sinne of the Israelites in making the golden Calf, and shewed his just anger in executing judgment upon the ring-leaders in that hanious offence: but withall we must note that he was never more fervent in prayer for them,Exo. 32.11. then at that time. Those therefore that are so far moved, that they cannot speak unto the offenders in giving them good and loving advice, nor speak for them unto God in putting up hearty and earnest requests, such may be assured that their anger is not the zeal of the spirit, but the heat of the flesh, which they can have no comfort in, but must be humbled for it. The End of the Third Book.
THE FOURTH BOOK, I. Of the Spiritual Combate. II. Of the Government of the Tongue. CHAP. I. From whence the Spiritual Combate proceedeth. What we are to un∣derstand by the flesh, and what by the Spirit. How these two can be said to fight together. The Properties of these enemies. Rea∣sons to shew that the flesh is a most dangerous enemy, with sundry Encouragements to undertake this Combate. Question: THe Saints of God that are sanctified in every part, are sanctified but in part, and not able to exercise their mind, will and affections as they ought: let us therefore consider the fruit of their imperfection in grace, and what followeth thereupon? A. From this, that every Child of God is truly renewed, not perfectly sanctified, followeth that Spiritual Combate or Warfare between the flesh and Spirit, which only the regenerate, and every regenerate man feels in himself more or less, according to the measure of grace received, and care to exercise himself in all things according to the Word of God. The enemies which thus fight with one another are the flesh and the Spirit, with an innumerable Army of their motions and lusts: Both which with all their forces dwell in every true Christian, making mutuall opposition, the one nilling what the other willeth, and hindering and destroying what the other furthereth and advanceth. This plainly appeareth by the Scriptures, which both discover this hostile dis∣sention and contrary faction in the same man,Ioh. 3.6. Gal. 5.17. 1 Pet. 2.11. and opposition and conflict which ariseth from their enmity and cohabitation; their naturall division and locall union. Q. What are we to understand by the flesh? A. To omit many acceptations of it not pertinent to this purpose: First, It is taken for all mankind; In which sense it is said,Gen. 6 12. Isa. 40.6. Ioel 2.28. Psal. 145.21. Psal. 78.39. that all flesh had corrup∣ted his way upon the earth; that all flesh is grass, that is, all mankind is frail and momentain; that God would poure his Spirit upon all flesh, that is, upon all men of all sorts and conditions: who are so called in respect of their frailty.
And in the same sense, or much like it is taken for the whole man, consisting of soul and body.Ioh. 1.14. 1 Pet. 3.18. Eph 6.12. sal. 56.4. Thus it is said, The word became flesh, that is, did assume our humane nature; Christ was put to death concerning the flesh, that is, his humane nature, his body being severed from his soul; We wrestle not with flesh and blood, that is, only or principally with men; The Psalmist having said, that he would not fear what flesh could do unto him; expoundeth himself in the verses following, I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.vers. 11. Rom. 2.8. 2 Cor. .1. Psal. 79.2. Secondly, It is taken for the body of man alone consisting of many members. Cleanse your selves from all filthi∣ness of the flesh, and of our spirit; that is, body and soul. The flesh of thy Saints have they given to the beasts of the field, that is, the dead bodies of thy servants. To live in the flesh, is to live in the body. Phil. 1.24. 1 Pet. 4.2. The signification is somewhat more restrained in that of our Saviour;Luk. 24.39. Handle me, and see me, for a Spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. Thirdly, This word signifieth the whole nature of man, as it is born in corruption, and polluted with sinne.Gen. 6 3. Ioh. 3.6. My Spirit shall no longer contend with man, for he is flesh; that is, corrupt, walking after his lusts; That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; that is, if the Parents be defiled with sinne, then needs must the children be pol∣luted with their corruption;Rom. 8.8. They who are in the flesh, (that is, remain in that corrupt and sinfull condition in which they were born) cannot please God. Fourthly, It is taken for that quality of corruption, frailty and infirmity of the humane nature, which is not sinne, but rather the effect and punishment which attendeth and waiteth upon it.Psal. 78.39. Ier. 17.5. 1 Cor. 15.50. He remembred that they were but flesh, that is, weak and frail; Cursed is he that maketh flesh his arm, that is, who placeth his strength and safety in weak and vain man. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the King∣dom of God; and what this flesh and blood is, he expoundeth in the next words, neither doth corruption inherit incoruption. Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. Thus the Apostle saith, that though he walked in the flesh, yet he did not warre after the flesh, not with weak and car∣nall, but with strong and mighty weapons, which were able to cast down all that opposed against them; And in this sense may that speech of our Saviour be un∣derstood,Mat. 26.41. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. Fifthly, The flesh is taken for the whole corruption of nature, or for that Original sinne, where∣by the whole nature of man, with all the faculties and powers of his soul, are defiled. In which sense it noteth that mass of corruption and sinke of filthiness which dwelleth in all men till they be renewed by grace; or those reliques and remainders of sinne which abide still in the regenerate. In the former signifi∣cation we are to understand all those places where unregenerate and wicked men are called flesh;Ioh. 3.6. Rom 7.5. Rom. 8.8. as where the Apostle saith, that when we were in the flesh, the motions of sinne which were by the Law did work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death. In the latter we are to understand it, when it is applied unto the faithfull, who are but in part regenerate, to signifie the vitious quality of sinne, which still abideth and remaineth in them unmortified and unsubdued. So the Apostle would have the incestuous person delivered to Satan,1 Cor. 5.5. for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. But most plain and distinct is that of the same Apostle to this purpose.Gal. 5.15. The flesh lusteth a∣gainst the Spirit. Q. By what Reasons may it be shewed, that the body or sensitive faculties are not meant by the flesh? A. First, In the whole course and current of the Scriptures we may observe, that there is much more spoken of the sinfull corruption of the soul, then of the body, and in the soul, not only of the inferiour, sensitive and animall faculties, but also of the superiour and intellectuall, as of the corruption and depravation of the mind,2 Cor. 7.1. understanding, reason, wisdom and will. Having therefore (saith the Apostle) these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit: Where he necessarily implieth, that both in himself, and in those
beloved Saints to whom he writeth, there was remaining corruption and filthi∣ness of nature, which was to be purged away, not only in the body which is here signified by the flesh, but also in the soul,Rom. 8.7. Eph. 2.3. Tit. 1.15. which is here understood by the Spi∣rit: Ʋnto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbe∣lieving is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled. And this is taught in those Exhortations,Rom. 12.1. Eph. 4.23. wherein we are called upon to labor after the reno∣vation of the mind: for it implies that not only the body and sensitive faculties are naturally corrupted, but also the mind the chief part of man, and hereof the spirit, that is, the prime vigour, and chief faculty of the mind.Eph. 1.17, 18. 1 Thes. 5.23. Eph 4.18. And when the Apostle prayeth unto God that the minds of the faithfull might be renewed, Doth he not intimate that they were by nature blind, ignorant, corrupt and fil∣thy? 2. The names, acts and sinnes which are attributed to the flesh, shew plainly that the corruption of soul is meant. It is called the old Adam, and the old man; it is called sinne, which hath not its seate in the body, but in the soul;Ezek. 18.4. Heb. 12.1. Gal. 5.17. It is called the sinning sinne, the sinne that easily besetteth us, the Law of sinne and death. It is said to covet, desire, or lust: And the fruits of the flesh, are not only adultery, uncleanness, murthers, drunkenness and such like; but foolishness,1 Cor. 2.14. Ier. 17.10. Gen. 6.5. Gal. 5.19, 20. 2 Cor. 3.5. doubting, infidelity, perverseness, idolatry, witch-craft, heresie, and evil cogita∣tions, which are sinnes of the soul and mind, and not properly and immediately of the body. 3. The flesh and the Spirit are contrary one to the other, and like mortall enemies in hostile manner they fight together, seeking one anothers ruine and destruction; but such enmity is not between the soul and body, for then they would seek one anothers overthrow, whereas contrariwise they mu∣tually love and cherish the one the other,Eph. 5.28, 29. and are much grieved when they must part asunder. 4. The soul chiefly sinneth, and in it the mind and will. It is the Divels forge, wherein he first hammereth and fashioneth his sinfull tem∣ptations; It is the spring-head from which all the streames of sinne do runne and flow, and therefore the Divel first poysoneth it The mind first con∣ceiveth mischief, or entertaineth the temptation, then the judgment alloweth it, if not simply, yet in respect of some circumstance, and so then the will chooseth, and the heart affecteth it. So that if the mind were bound to the good behaviour, and either would not think on wickedness, or at least would vilifie or contemn it, our peace with God, and our own consciences would be kept,Rom. 3.11, 12. Eph. 6.12. Col. 1.13. 1 Pet. 1.4. Rom. 13.14. and we should have no sinfull seditions, and tumultuous uproares in the inferi∣our parts and members. The body is but the servant of the soul in acting sinne, which can or dare do nothing but by the Masters appointment. Yea, so farre is it off that our bodies should be chiefly corrupted, and the principall authours of sinne, that if we speak properly the soul only sinneth,Bell. de am. grat. lib. 5. cap. 10. & 15. and the corruption of the soul alone is sinfull, and as for the corruption of the body, it is rather the punishment of sinne then sinne it self. Lastly, Even the faithfull and regenerate are tempted, not only to sinnes wherewith the inferiour faculties of the soul are delighted, as lust, wantonness, intemperance, and the like, but also unto such sinnes as properly belong to the understanding and will, as errors, heresies, in∣fidelity, doubting of Gods mercy, truth, providence, security, impenitency and hardness of heart. Now of what are they thus tempted, but as the Apostle telleth us, of their own concupiscence? And therefore this concupiscence exten∣deth as well to the superiour, as the inferiour faculties of the soul. Yea, not only are they tempted, but often foyled by yeelding to the tentation; of which we need no other proof, but that experience which every Christian may have in himself, if without partiality he will examine his own conscience. And though the actions of eating, drinking, lusting, and committing uncleanness, are im∣mediately from the sensuall concupiscence, yet the corruption and sinfulness of these actions, is from the mind and reason. Either because it bridleth not the appetite, or pricketh it forward to excess, because it taketh delight in these vo∣luptuous
pleasures; for not the body it self, but the soul by the body taketh pleasure in eating, drinking, &c. Q. What are we to understand by the Spirit in this matter? A. The word Spirit is diversly taken in the Scriptures. First, For all spiri∣tual and incorporeal substances,Ioh. 4.24. Ioh. 6.63. 1 Ioh. 5 6, 7. Eccl. 12.7. Act 7.59. 2 Cor. .1. Psal. 31.5. 1 Thes. 5.22. 1 Cor. 2.11. Rom. 12.2. Luk. 1 47. and sometimes more specially for some one of them. Secondly, It signifies the soul of man, even as the flesh is taken for the body; but these are not opposites and enemies but dear friends, who so intirely love, that they sear nothing more then to be separated and to part company. Thirdly, It is taken for that chief and excellent intellectual faculty of the soul, called the mind, and particularly for reason and understanding; but neither can it here be taken in this sense; because this spirit it self is corrupt and sensual, and this natural reason and wisdom is enmity against God, and against this Spirit, which opposeth and fighteth against it, as against his chiefest enemy. Fourthly, It signifieth the vigour and efficacy of the understanding: as where the Apostle exhorteth the Ephesians,Eph 4.22. Luk. 1.15. Gal 3.2. Act. 2.18. to be renewed in the spirit of their mind. Fifthly, By the Spirit, we understand the gifts and graces of the Spirit, as faith, love, hope, joy, and the rest; which being fruits of the Spirit, do stand in opposition to the lusts of the flesh, and in some sort do fight against them, they being contrary the one to the other. Lastly, The Spirit signifieth a new quality of holiness, created and wrought in us by the Spirit of God, whereby all the powers and faculties of the soul are renewed according to the Image of God, in wisdom, holiness and righteousness, which continually fighteth against the flesh with the lusts thereof. In this sense we are to understand it in this matter. And this is the other Champion in this Spiritual Combate, which is described unto us in the Scriptures by divers names.Io. 3.6. Rom. 7.6. Eph 4.22. Col. 3.10. Gal. 6.1. Ioh. 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.23. Gal 6.15. 2 Cor. 5.17. Rom. 8.2. It is called the Spirit, the new man, the Spiritual man, the regenerate man, a new creature, the Law of the Spirit of Life. Q. How can those twain, the flesh and the Spirit fight together, being two meer qualities? A. 1. We must know, that they are not severed asunder, as though the flesh were placed in one part of the soul, and the Spirit in another; but they are joyned and mingled together in all the faculties of the soul. The mind or un∣derstanding part, is not one part flesh, and another Spirit; but the whole mind is flesh, and the whole mind is Spirit, partly one, and partly the other. The whole will is partly flesh, and partly Spirit; the flesh and the Spirit, that is, grace and corruption not severed in place, but in nature and reason to be distinguished. As the ayr in the dawning of the day, is not wholly light or wholly dark, as at midnight and at noon-day; neither is it in one part light, in another part dark: but the whole ayr is partly light and partly drak throughout. In a Vessel of luke-warme water, the water it self is not only hot or only cold; or in one part hot, and in another part cold: but heat and cold are mixt togerher in every part of the water: So is the flesh and the Spirit mingled together in the soul of man; and this is the cause why these two contrary qua∣lities fight together. 2. We are not so to understand it, as though this Com∣bate were only maintained by bare and naked qualities of renewed purity, and old corruption, but that they are also backed and upheld by those Spirits which are the causes and authours of them; namely, the holy Spirit of God, and the impure and wicked Spirit Satan, the authour of al sinne and wickedness. For whilst men remain in the state of infidelity, the strong man Satan keepeth possession and dwelleth in them, though not after a gross and sensible manner, yet invisibly and spiritually, ruling and reigning in them. In which his regi∣ment and government, he imployeth the flesh and our carnal concupiscence as his Deputy and chief Instrument, to lead sinfull men into all wickedness, the which he continually strengtheneth, enrageth, animateth unto all evil.
But when a stronger then he cometh, even the good Spirit of God, he casteth him out, and taking possession, dwelleth, reigneth, and ruleth in our souls and bodies, creating in us that quality of holiness, and righteousness called the Spi∣rit, which he substituteth a his Vicegerent and chief Deputy in the regenerate man. Nor doth the Spirit of God leave the spiritual man to himself, but con∣tinually sendeth unto him fresh aides of renewed graces whereby he is enabled to overcome. Q. What is the Property of these Enemies? A. They are irreconcilable, and can never be accorded, till the one or the other be utterly subdued; yea, till the flesh be abolished, for the Spirit cannot be o∣vercome. But though the flesh cannot prevaile against the Spirit, yet we are to know, that it is not an enemy to be contemned, but exceeding pernicious and dangerous, the mightiest and chiefest Captain under the Prince of darkness, with∣out whose help he could do little. For though he should assault us with a huge Army of his temptations, and have his strength re-enforceed, and even twice doubled with the aides of all worldly enemies, yet they could do nothing if we did not yeeld unto their assaults, or the inbred enemy did not betray us into their hands. This is apparent in the example of our Saviour Christ, who being free from the inward corruption of the flesh, was not at all endangered with the out∣ward temptations of the Divel. And whereas the hellish sparks of his suggesti∣ons fall into our corrupt hearts (as it were) into tinder or gun-powder, by which they are nourished and much increased in their strength and violence; they did no more work upon our blessed Saviour, whose pure nature was no jot tainted with carnall corruption, then a weak Dart that lighteth upon an impene∣trable Armour, or a small spark of fire that should fall into a Sea of water. Needs then must the flesh be a dangerous enemy, seeing all danger is by and through it; needs must it above all be most pernicious, seeing it exposeth unto all mischief, and nothing without it were able to hurt us, if we be not greatly wanting to our selves, as were our first Parents. Q. How may it appear that the flesh is a most dangerous enemy? A. 1. It is most malicious, which appears in divers respects. First, That it is wholly evil, the fountain of all evil, the poysonous puddle from which do flow the stinking waters of all evils. And this our Saviour noteth, whereas he saith, That which cometh out of the man, defileth him.Mark. 7.18: So the Apostle James maketh this carnall lust the Mother, as the Divel is the Father of all sin and wickedness. From the inward concupiscence of the heart proceed evil thoughts.Jam. 1.14, 15. And so farre off is the Law of God from stopping this flood of wickedness, that it swelleth so much the higher, and the opposition of Gods will taketh occasion of greater re∣bellion, breaking down all the bounds and banks that should stay and keep it in. And as a wild beast or curst ban-dog groweth more fierce and enraged when they ar rsisted, or when they are curbed in and tied up:Rom. 7. So this savage flesh and sinfull corruption takes occasion by the knowledge of the Law the more to trans∣gress it, and the more that it is checked and restrained, the more violent it grow∣eth in its wicked rage. Secondly, It is in deadly hatred with the spiritual man, continually disturbeth his peace, undermineth his safety, and is still plotting his ruine and destruction. Neither is it possible to conceive a more bitter opposition in all things, then between the flesh and the spirit; for what the spirit under∣taketh, the flesh crosseth, what that furthereth, this hindereth, and at all times and upon all occasions the one nilleth, what the other willeth. In which respect it may easily be said that these two cannot reign and flourish in the same man at once, for the prosperity of the one, is the ruine of the other, the kindling of fleshly lusts is the quenching of spiritual, the nourishing of carnal concupi∣scence after earthly things, is the choaking of spiritual concupiscence after that which is divine and heavenly. Thirdly, The flesh is most tyrannous if it get
dominion: for it subjecteth us unto most miserable bondage and servitude, not suffering us to take any rest night nor day. There is no estate so vile and abject as the state of a bond-slave; nor no bondage comparable to the bondage of our lusts, for what lust commandeth, be it never so base, hurtful, dishonourable, (as sin ever is) it must be done. If unjust anger provoke to revenge, they must kill and slay; if filthy lust impose never so hard a task, they must under∣take it, though it directly tend to the dishonour of God, the ruine of their estates, the staining of their fame, the hazard of their lives, and damnation of their souls. If covetousness command the campassing of some wealth, they must make no question of right or wrong; of hurting other men or their own persons. If ambition would have them to aspire to preferment, they must not stick to tread all under foot that stand in the way, they must lie and dissemble, swear and forswear. The gally-slave hath some rest in the night season, but the flesh will not suffer men to be quiet at any time; it solliciteth to sin continually, sleeping and waking, upon all occasions, in all companies. Nature must have refreshing, sin will never tire. But what is the wages of this toylsome life? None,Rom. 8 8. but the displeasure and curse of God, guilt of conscience, hardness of heart, and destruction of soul and body. Dearely beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstein from fleshly lusts,1 Pet. 2.11. which warre against the soul. The end of which warre is not only to get the victory, and to keep us in sub∣jection, but to cast all that are conquered into the prison of hell, and to plunge them into everlasting condemnation of soul and body. When we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the Law did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.Rom. 7.5. Rom. 8.6.13. Gal. 6 8. 2 et. 2.10. Rom. 6 12. & 7.4. If we live after the flesh, we shall die. 2. The flesh is a mighty and powerfull enemy: for in the unregenerate it reigneth as a mighty Monarch or cruel Tyrant, in the little world of man, holding every faculty, power and part of soul and body in subjection; from whose force and power, the sonnes of men are not able by any outward means afforded by nature, or offered by grace, to free themselves: Nay, they neither can nor dare to attempt their liberty, be∣cause their wils are no less captivated, then their other parts and faculties, and it is their chief delight to live in this slavery. In the regenerate it is exceeding strong, though not so puissant as in them that remain in their natural corruption. For it maketh warre against the spirit, doth often foyl and overcome the godly, and carry them captive into the Law of sinne. When the godly resolve with themselves to keep the Commandements of God, what strong and manifold re∣sistance do they find from the flesh! 3. The policy of the flesh is more perni∣cious then its strength.Jer. 17.9. The heart of man is deceitfull above all things, and desperately wicked. Howsoever Satan the old Serpent in respect of his natural abilities and long experience, may be more cunning and politike in himself, yet his deceit is not so great in abusing and wronging us, as is the deceit of our own flesh. For this being a part of our selves, it is of the privy councill of our thoughts, and knowing our most hidden imaginations, and secret intentions, it can take advantage of them to work to our overthrow. Now this fraud and policy of the flesh,Rom. 7.11. is most pernicious, in that it often prevaileth and much deceiveth us, which tendeth unto our exceeding hurt, even utter destruction. Moreover the danger of this deceit is so much the greater, because it is so subtill and secret, so deep and disguised, that it can hardly be discerned and found out. Our longest line cannot sound the bottom of this gulf, our quickest and most piercing sight can∣not discerne the multitude and strength of these subtile enemies. 4. The flesh is a domesticall enemy, that dwelleth with us, yea in us; it keepeth possession in the strong forts and castles of our minds and wils, our hearts and affections, where our chief strength and treasure lyeth. It adhereth and inseparably cleaveth unto us, as being a part, and the greater part of our selves. Whereby the dangerousness of this enemy appeareth, for he is near at hand, that we can have no leasure and
opportunity to fit and prepare our selves for the conflict, before his approach: the warre he maketh is domesticall and intestine, in our own bowels. Nay more, here one person doth not fight against another, nor the body against the soul of the same man, nor yet one faculty alone against another of a different nature, the sensitive against the reasonable, and the will and affections against the judgment and conscience; but also the self-same faculties against themselves, reason against reason, will against will, the same affection against the same, love against love, fear against fear, hope against hope. This enemy cleaving unto us in all places and at all times, is ready to watch all occasions, and to take all opportunities of doing us mischief, laying traps and snares for us in all our enterprises. Do we undertake the performance of holy and religious duties? Why then it dogs and followes us to the exercises, and distracts us with wordly cogitations and wande∣ring thoughts, and oppresses our minds with dulness, drowsiness and carnal wea∣riness. Are we imployed in the duties of our callings? It will make us negligent and lazy, and carry us away with carnal pleasures, or so wholly and earnestly intent on them, that we shall spare no time for Gods service, nor for the enrich∣ing of our soules with spiritual treasure. Do we eat and drink to relieve and sustain our bodies? It is ready to make our Table a snare, turning sufficiency in∣to superfluity, and necessary food into excess and belly-chear, surfetting and drunkenness. Do we intend to refresh our selves with honest recreations? It doth attend and wait on us, moving us to consume a great part of our time in them, which should be allotted to better exercises, and even spend our strength and spirits in the immoderate use of them, whereby instead of being refreshed and cheared, we are disabled and made utterly unfit for the duties of Christianity and of our callings, and are so wholly taken up in the means, that we neglect the main end for which we use them. Yea, Do we after our labours betake our selves to our rest? When we lock our Chamber doors, we cannot shut out this enemy, but whether we will or no, it will be our bed-fellow, and is alwaies ready at our lying down to distract us from any good meditations or serious examination of what we have done or omitted the day past, to fill our minds with vain dreams and wicked imaginations, and to oppress our nature instead of refreshing it, whilst we give our selves to too much drowsiness. 5. It is indefatigable and ne∣ver wearied, whereof it is that it is so impudently importunate, that though it hath many repulses yet it will take no denial, though in the conflict it be often beaten back and put to flight, yet it will never quite leave the field: but unite its scattered forces, and receiving new aids and encouragements from the divell and the world, it will afresh assault us and renew the fight; herein resembling an hunger-starved Dog who will by no means leave the house where he hath often been relieved; but no sooner is beaten out of one door, then he re-entreth in∣to another. Yea, oftentimes the more these fleshly lusts are resisted, the more enraged and violent for the time they grow,Psal. 2.3. Rom. 7.8. and the means and medicines which God hath appointed to cure them, make the disease but the more desperate. 6. And lastly, This Combate between the flesh and the Spirit, is fought in a place of great disadvantage, namely, this world, where the worser part hath many friends and strong aides, even millions of wicked men, and whole Legions of Divels, and contrariwise the better part hath few friends, many enemies. Q. What equality is there between these two Combaters, the flesh and the Spirit? A. The flesh usually is more in measure then the Spirit. The flesh is like the mighty Gyant Goliah, and the Spirit is little and small like young David. The speech which is used of some Divines, that the regenerate man hath but the reliques of sin in him, must be understood warily, or it may admit an un∣truth: for the measure of grace it can be but small in respect of coruption, we
receive but the first fruits of the Spirit in this life,Rom. 8.23. (which is but as a sheaf or two in comparison of the whole harvest) and must wait for the accomplishment of our redemption till the life to come. None can come to be tall men in Christ, according to the age of the fulness of Christ, till after this life. Q. What encouragements have we then to undertake this Combate? A. 1. The power and efficacy of the Spirit is such, that it is able to prevail ordinarily against the flesh. For the flesh receives its deadly wound at the first instant of a mans conversion, and continually dieth after by little and little: and therefore it fights but as a maimed souldier. But the Spirit is continually confirmed and encreased by the holy Ghost: also it is lively and stirring, and the vertue of it is like musk; one grain whereof will give a stronger smell, then many ounces of other perfumes. Some may say, that the godly man doth more feele the flesh then the Spirit; and therefore that the flesh is every way more then the Spirit. We may answer, that we must not measure our estate by feel∣ing, which may easily deceive us. A man shall feele a paine which is but in the top of his finger more sensibly then the health of the body: yet the health of the whole body, is more then the paine of a finger. To say nothing, that the clear sight and sense of corruption, is not attained by corruption, but by grace. In the state of corruption, by the light of nature and externall instruction, we may discerne many things to be out of order: but the poyson of corruption and depth of sinne engraved in our flesh, cannot be known without the light of grace. 2. Our grand Captain Jesus Christ hath by his death overcome, and led it captive upon the Cross, triumphing gloriously over it together with the rest of our spiritual enemies, so as none of them shall be able to hurt us. There∣fore when we are weak and tired in the fight, let us fly to the standard and fight under the Shield of Christ our Saviour, who is so mighty and omnipotent that he is able to vanquish and overcome all our enemies alone,Rom. 7.23. only he would have us to fight with him in the battell, that so we might accompany him in his glori∣ous Triumph. 3. We fight the Lords Battels, and therefore he being on our side, we are sure, (if we will but fight) to obtain the Victory in the end. 4. Though our spiritual part be but the first fruits, yet it is an earnest of the whole Harvest; though small in quantity, yet of greater power then the flesh. Greater is he that is in you,1 Joh. 4.4. then he that is in the world. The flesh indeed is a Gyant in bigness and strength, but such an one as being in a deadly consumption, pineth away by little and little till it be wholly abolished. 5. We have a wise∣dom to direct us in this fight, in comparison whereof all the depth and craft of the flesh is but childish folly. The Lord hath given us his Word to be our line, which if we follow, we shall find every creek and corner in our deceit∣full hearts, and discover by its light all their subtilties and crafty policies, and prevent and disappoint them by the power of grace. 6. As we are assured of Victory if we will fight, so of a glorious Crown when we have overcome; which should encourage us to suffer a little while the paines of this spiritual Warfare. When we are weary in running the Christian race, let us comfort and refresh our selves by having continually in our eye the Goale and Garland that is prepared for us.Heb. 12.2. 7. Unless we fight against the flesh, we shall be led cap∣tive of it and kept in bondage: nay, we shall utterly perish in it. Joab encou∣rageth his Souldiers to fight against the Syrians thus, Be of good courage, and let us play the men,2 Sam. 10.12. for our people, and for the Cities of our God: Much greater cause hath each Christian to bid battell to the flesh for the liberty of his soul, and eternal salvation. If we fight not, we die; if we make not resistance, we shall go into captivity; if we be at one with the flesh, we are at enmity with God; if we spare the flesh, we destroy our souls. But if we would prevaile, we must be couragious, vigilant, circumspect, and fervant in prayer for the assistance of the holy Spirit in this conflict, to strengthen us in the Combate,
and to renew and repair our wearied, fainting and decayed graces, that so re∣ceiving new life, vigour and strength from him, we may thereby be enabled to hold out unto the end. 8. The rage of the flesh when we deal sharply with it, is but like the fury of an enemy, who hath received a mortal wound, which if for the present he be resisted, the blaze of his choler quickly goeth out, and fain∣ting in his strength, he will fall at our feet. It is but like the reluctation and re∣sistance of a base-minded slave, who by a few and small stripes is so enraged that he is ready to catch his Master by the throat, but if he be throughly hampered and soundly beaten, he will fall down at his feet and bear what stripes he plea∣seth to give him without resistance. And therefore let us make this use of the rage of the flesh, to be moved thereby to unite our forces, and redouble our blows, and then though it make never so many gallant bravadoes, it will quickly yeeld, and we shall be sure of an happy Victory. CHAP. II. Concerning the Subject of this Combate, in whom it is fought; And how the flesh and the Spirit being contrary, can be said to consist in the same Subject. What this Conflict is, and whether it be in all the regenerate after the same manner. The Causes there∣of, with the manner of the Fight in our severall faculties and parts. Question: WHat is the Subject of this Conflict, in whom it is fought? A. The Subject of this Combate are such persons as are regene∣rate, and the faithfull only, that be of age and discretion, whilst they live: for in them only is the cause of this Conflict, which is the cohabitation of these e∣nemies which assault and resist one another. 1. They that are perfectly sancti∣fied feel no strife; as there can be no such Combate in the glorified Saints, be∣cause they are perfectly cleansed from sinne, and have no reliques of the flesh, or sinfull corruption remaining in them, nor in Adam in the state of inno∣cency being perfectly holy. If it be objected that there was a Conflict in our Saviour, who was perfectly holy, when in his agony he prayed to have the Cup pass from him. The answer is, that this was not the Conflict be∣tween the flesh and the Spirit, but the fight of two desires in different respects, and both just; or it was the Combate between the superiour and inferour will, the will of reason, and the sensitive appetite. So a man by his sensitive appe∣tite may desire to eat and drink, and in his superiour will may desire rather to abstain, that it may be conformable to Gods revealed will. And thus our Saviour being man, and in all things like unto, sinne only excepted, desired that the Cup of his passion might pass from him in his inferour will or natural appetite, which shunneth death and seeketh the preservation of it self: but in his reasonable will, considering the end why he came into the world, which was by his death to glorifie God in perfecting the work of our redemption, he over-ruled the natural appetite, and did wholly submit himself to the will of his Father. Neither is the sensual appetite sinfull and unlawfull, when it is sub∣jected to the reasonable, as it was most perfectly in Christ: but when it goeth about, of a subject to become a Sovereign, and to resist and over-rule that un∣to which it should yeeld obedience, 2. This Conflict is not at all in those who are unregenerate and unsanctified, for in these one of the Combatants,
which is the sanctifying spirit of grace, is wanting, and they are ruled by the flesh under their chief Commander Satan, whose Kingdom is not divied in the carnal man, but he quietly reigneth and possesseth all in peace. Neither is there in him any power of saving effectual opposition, for he is not only sick,Eph. 2.1. 2 Cor. 4.4. Jam. 3.15. Rom. 8.7. Eph. 2.3. Rom. 6.17, 19. but starke dead in trespasses and sinnes Their mind and understading is blind, dark, foolish; their wisdom is earthly, carnal, and divelish, standing in direct opposition against the wisdom of God; their desires are corrupt, ac∣cording to the sinfull inclination of their froward will. Howbeit we are to know, that there is even in the carnal man another fight or skirmish, which having some seeming shew and similitude of the spiritual Conflict, is by world∣ly and civil men mistaken for it: But these Combats do much differ, and how they are to be distinguished we shall see hereafter, when we have spoken of the manner of this Combate. 3. This Conflict between the flesh and the Spirit is in all the regenerate, who have received spiritual illumination, and have the use of their reason and understanding, being possessed of Gods sanctifying graces, not only in their habits, but also in their acts and operations; not in the faculties alone,Gal. 5.17. but also in their functions and exercises. This is proved by the testi∣monies of Scripture, and common experience of all men regenerate. Neither is it possible that this mortal Combate should be fought in any, but that they must easily feel the terrible encounters and cruel blowes given on either side. Not between divers faculties, as the conscience and the will, the mind and judgment against the affections and several fculties: but the self-same facul∣ties, as they are regenerate, fighting against themselves as they are unregene∣rate; as error against truth, and truth against error in the same mind and un∣derstanding, faith against doubting, and doubting against faith in the same heart, willing against nilling, and nilling against willing, about the choosing and re∣fusing of good and evil in the same will; the love of God conflicting and combating with the love of the world, the fear of God with the fear of men. All which doth plainly prove that their whole man is divided, and part-takings in all their faculties and powers of body and mind, the one adhering and cleaving to God, the other drawing to Satan and the world, the which is more feelingly discerned, and experimentally felt by every true Christian, then it can be demon∣strated and evidenced by any mans writing. Finally, the contrary effects which every Christian may observe in himself do sufficiently argue and demonstrate that there are contrary causes in him from which they proceed. For who findeth not, after his regeneration and conversion, himself to be a Kingdom divided, and that as in his spiritual and renewed part, he hath a great desire to serve his Lord and Redeemer, so in his fleshly part, he is inclinable unto the service of sinne and Satan for the base hire of worldly vanities? And from this contrariety in affection and disposition, the Christian may discern the like contrariety in all his actions, which arise and spring from them. For one while the Spirit lifteth him aloft in heavenly meditations, and another while the flesh pulleth down his thoughts, and fixeth them upon earthly vanities; Now with posting speed he runneth in the waies of God, and sayleth with full sailes, having the wind and tide to help him forward, and soon after the flesh diverteth him into the by-paths of sinne, or maketh him sit still, or to return unto his old courses. These things sufficiently manifest to every sanctified man, that the flesh and Spirit do continu∣ally war one against another. And howsoever our chief Commander may some∣time sound a retreait, and give us some intermissions for the renewing of our forces and recovery of our breath, yet utter dismissions we shall not have from this warlike service, till having overcome all our enemies by death, we shall receive the Crown of Glory. Q. The Intellectual nature is individuall, not capable of contrary quali∣ties.
A. It is false that the Intellectual nature is individuall, in which there is so manifest a contemperation of flesh and Spirit, that we do not what we would,Aug. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 5. Mat. 16.17. and yet we can do nothing, which we will not. Was not the will divided in Peter? wherein there was something for which it was said to him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in Heaven; and yet there was something for which it was said unto him,vers. 23. Contraria fibi adhuc erant in Petro, veritas & mendacum Orig. in Mat. Tract. 3. Mat. 9.24. Greg. in Ez. Hom. 15. Idem. Moral. lib. 10. cap. 8. Aug. Con. li 8. cap. 8. Omne quod lo∣quimur, agi∣mus, cogitamus, in dubus sei∣natur agris, car∣ne & spiritu. Hieron. in Gal. 6. 1 Joh. 5.18. Get thee behind me Satan; for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. And who seeth not that the heart of the poor man was divided, when he cryeth out, I believe Lord; but addeth presently, Help mine unbelief? At one and the same time, he who did not yet perfectly believe, did both be∣lieve, and was incredulous. And alwaies in the Warfare of this present life, the will is distracted betwixt good and evil, striving in the part ascending with the part falling, the sale now hanging on this side, now on that, that we must ne∣cessarily understand it to be divided in it self, whose effect is so divided. And yet we cannot inferre that the regenerate do serve God and the Divel: for with the heart they properly serve God, and yet the will hath something of its own, whereby it comes to pass that it cannot serve God perfectly; and by accident some thing comes between now and then which is not of God, which happens by humane frailty in them whom the wicked cannot touch. Q. The flesh and the Spirit are contrary, how then can they consist in the same Subject? A. It is impossible that contraries should stand together in the highest de∣grees, because they mutually expell one another. So it is impossible that the flesh and the Spirit should both reign in the same man: for as grace entreth, corruption is expelled. But in remiss degrees, contraries may consist together, though not without strife: So the flesh and the Spirit do dwell to∣gether in the regenerate, as under one roof, in remiss degrees, but not without Combate: in which one while this, another while that doth prevail or give place. Q. What is this Conflict? A. It is a continuall Conflict between the unregenerate part of the flesh, with the lusts thereof, and the part regenerate, the Spirit with all the holy qua∣lities, graces and motions thereof, by reason of their contrariety in nature and conjunction in place, whereby they mutually lust and strive one against another, the flesh willing and embracing that evil which the Spirit nilleth and hateth, and nilling and shunning that good which it willeth and effecteth, and contrariwise. For in this Conflict they mutually assault one another with unreconcilable enmi∣ty and unplaable contrariety; so that as the one getteth, the other loseth, as the one gathereth strength, the other is weakned; and look how much this prevaileth and triumpheth: so much his enemy and opposite is foyled and de∣jected. Like herein to a pair of Scales, in which the rising of the one is alwaies joyned with the going down of the other; or like the Spleen in the body, the swelling whereof is joyned with the others Consumption. Q. Is this Combate in all the regenerate after the same manner? A. This Conflict between the flesh and the Spirit is not in all the faithfull after the same manner, nor in the same measure, but diversly as it pleaseth the Lord to glorifie himself in the manifestation of his wisdom, goodness, and omnipo∣tency, either by giving unto his servants a great measure of strength and spiri∣tual grace by which they obtain an easie Victory, wherein the bounty of his goodness clearly shineth; or a less or scanter proportion, by which nowith∣standing they are enabled as certainly, though not so speedily to overcome, hereby magnifying the all-sufficiency of his power, which more manifestly appeares in our greatest weakness.2 Cor. 12.9. For according as the measure of our spiri∣tual strength and riches of Gods grace, as also of carnal corruption differ in
respect of their divers proportions, such is the difference of this Christian Com∣bate between one faithfull man and another. Some receive but a small measure of spiritual grace, and these through their weakness, commonly make warre a∣gainst the assaults and encounters of the flesh but weakly; though the Lord performing to them his gracious promise, will not suffer them to be tempted a∣bove their strength. Sometimes there is in the regenerate less reformation of their corrupt natures, by the restraining grace of God and the common gifts of the Spirit, by reason whereof the flesh is of greater strength, and the cor∣ruptions thereof are much more malignant: So that though they have a great measure of strength and spiritual grace, yet they cannot with any ease, or in short time get the upper-hand, but there is much strugling and wrestling, sharp and fierce assaults on both sides. Finally, the Lord to shew the riches of his bounty, doth somtimes give unto his servants such a large measure of grace, spiritual strength, knowledge, faith, love, Christian magnanimity and the rest, that none of their spiritual enemies are able to withstand them, but in the first encounters after this strength received, they foyl, wound, and vanquish them, either leading them captive without any great resistance, or else putting them to a shamefull flight. But this Christian Champion doth not thus prevail by vertue of any natural strength, but through the gifts of the Spirit. Q. What are the Causes of this Conflict? A. 1. The remote Cause is the will of God appointing this Fight; and to this purpose, not perfecting our sanctification in this life, but in part regene∣rating, and in part leaving us unregenerate. Of this Counsell of God divers Reasons may be yeelded. 1. It is profitable for the setting forth of his glory. It doth most manifest and magnifie the glory of Gods power; for the weaker we are in our regenerate part, the more clearly his power and wisdom shineth, which so strengtheneth this weak part, that it is able to stand in the day of Battell, and in the end obtaineth a full and perfect Victory. Again, God is glorified, when we are moved hereby to attribute the whole glory and praise of our salva∣tion to the alone mercy of God,2 Cor. 12.9. both in respect of the beginning and perfect∣ing thereof. Moreover, the wisdom and power of God is more manifested and glorified, when he doth his great works by contrary means and causes, which in their own nature would rather hinder them; as to preserve his graces by temptations. Lastly, We are hereby made more thankfull unto the Lord, and more cheerfull in singing to his praise. For the more sensible we are of Gods Benefits, the better we esteem them, and consequently receive them with greater thankfulness: but the more we have found the want of them, the more sensibly do we apprehend their excellency when we enjoy them. Our restoring out of a state of imperfection unto perfection, is much more acceptable, then if we had alwaies been preserved in it,Rom. 7.24, 25. even as it gives us more contentment, having been poor to be made, then to be born rich. The more free our graces received do appear unto us, the more are we affected with them: But our growth in sanctification is manifested to be the free gift of grace by the opposition of the flesh. 2. It is profitable for our good, and the furthering of our happi∣ness. It is effectual to make us deny our selves, and a notable means to train us up in humility, which is a grace most acceptable unto God, and to subdue our pride, and all vain-glorious conceit, which above all vices is most odious and hatefull. We are hereby moved to abhorue sinne, which God hateth, with greater detestation, when as by our own experience we find the venom and poyson of it working in our selves; and to bewaile and forsake it with more earnest endeavour, when we discerne and see what miserable effects it produceth, and what bitter and cursed fruits it bringeth forth in us. By the sight and sense of these sinfull corruptions still dwelling in us, we are occasioned to fly oftner unto God by fervant prayers, acknowledging and bewailing them before the
Throne of Grace, earnestly craving the remission of them, and the assistance of Gods grace and holy Spirit, whereby we may be enabled to mortifie our cor∣ruptions, and to fly all sinne for the time to come. We have also through these corruptions dwelling in us, the benefit of spiritual exercise, whilst we make warre against them, withstand their assaults, prepare our selves for the Conflict, watch over our own hearts that we be not surprized at unawares, mortifie and subdue them with the Sword of the Spirit, exercise the spiritual graces received from God, and our selves in all holy duties which God requireth for the obtain∣ing of Victory. It may serve to make us go on in our pilgrimage with content∣ment, and to bear all afflictions which are laid upon us with meekness and pa∣tience, not only because we have deserved them by sinne, but also because we know and have experience that these corrections are necessary to bridle and mortifie the flesh with the lusts thereof, and serve as drawing salves to draw out the coar of our corruptions. It is also profitable for the weaning of our hearts and affections from the world, and to make us long after our heavenly happiness, when as we find our selves tired and wearied in fighting, not onely with forreign foes, but with these secret intestine in our own bowels. The Crown of Glory and eternal rest will be the more welcome, and the graces of the Spi∣rit the more glorious, as our Conflicts in this life are the more sharp and difficult.2 Tim. 4.8. The shade is comfortable to the weary Traveller. The Guord pleased Jonah well, when the Sunne beat upon him that he was ready to faint. 3. It is suitable and seasonable to the time and place wherein we live, that these reliques of sin should remain in us. For it is appointed by God that we should not in this life attain unto perfection, but that we should only labour after it and attain unto it in the life to come. The immediate formall cause of this Combate is two-fold.Gal. 5.17. The one is the contrariety which is between the flesh and the spirit, which is exceeding hostile, and full of all enmity and opposition: for in nature they are directly oppsite, as heat and cold, light and darkness, health and sickness. What is the Spirit infused into us, but the quality of holiness and righteousness renewed according to Gods Image? What is the flesh, but the defaceing of this Image, the deprivation of this Original righteousness, and the stain of natural corruption which hath overspred and defiled all the powers and parts of our souls and bodies? The other is their cohabitation and dwelling toge∣ther in the same place and subject, the same room and faculty, which mini∣streth unto them, mutually occasion, and imposeth a necessity of their con∣tinuall opposition, even as when fire and water, heat and cold meet to∣gether. Q. What is the manner of this Fight? A. As the enemies are spiritual, so is the manner of the Fight spiritual, by inward lusting and concupiscence, whereby motions and inclinations, either good or evil are stirred up in the soul and heart.Gal. 5.17. And thus there is a contrary lusting between the flesh and the spirit, the one lusting against the other. In which their contrary lusting, they both of them mainly aime at two general ends. The first aim of the flesh, is to stirre up and incline us unto such lusts, desires and motions as are sinfull and contrary to the Law of God; as to infidelity, impenitency, pride, self-love, hatred, envy, uncleanness, covetousness and such like: Or to speak more distinctly, it endeavoureth to beget and stirre up, preserve and nourish evil cogitations in the mind, wicked inclinations in the will, and sinfull affections and desires in the heart; in which respect it is fitly com∣pared to a fiery Furnace or boyling Pot,Hos. 7.4. Iam. 1.14, 15. which continually sendeth up sparks and smoak; and by the Apostle James it is likened to a filthy Harlot, which by her alluring baits inticeth to commit folly with her, upon which followeth the conception and birth of sinne, causing death. And our Saviour Christ telleth us, that from within, even in the heart, (that is, the sinfull flesh and natural
corruption which resideth in the heart) proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, for∣nications,Mat. 15.18, 19 murthers, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, laciviousness, an evil eye, plasphemy, pride, foolishness. The second action or aim of the flesh is, either to repress and smother the good motions and inclinations which the Spirit exciteth and stirreth up in us, or else to poison and corrupt them, that they may become unprofitable and turned into sinne. So when the Spirit moveth us to perform some good duty of Gods service, of justice or mercy, it will labour to quench this motion, and to withdraw us from it, either by alluring us utterly to neglect it, or to spend our time rather in pursuing worldly vanities, or by perswading us, that there is such difficulty in it, that we shall not be possibly able to compass or atchieve it; that it is very irkesome and unpleasant, or un∣profitable and not worth our labour; that the loss we shall sustain by it is present, the gain uncertain. But if it cannot wholly pervert, then it inticeth us to use delaies, because we may be fitter or have better opportunity to perform it hereafter, then at this present; It also hangeth dulness and sloth upon us, that we are loath to stirre about the work of God, or at least undertake it as men do things by half-chare, unto which they bear no hearty affection. Finally, it endeavoureth to interrupt or distract us in them, and to stain them with our im∣perfections and corruptions, that they may not be acceptable. As when we set our selves to pray or hear the Word, it will put into our minds worldly cogita∣tions and wandering thoughts, that so we may not attend those holy exercises, or else oppress our hearts with drowsie dulness, deadness of Spirit and carnal weariness, so as we cannot perform them with any cheerfulness. The Spirit aimeth at a two-fold end also. First, It endeavoureth to stirre up and preserve good motions and inclinations in us, as good meditations in the mind, good re∣solutions in the will, good desires and affections in the heart, which are con∣formable and agreeable to the holy will and Word of God. Thus the Apostle saith,1 Joh. 2.20. That we have received an unction from the holy One whereby we know all things. And St Paul exhorteth us not to quench the Spirit, that is, the good motions which arise from it,1 Thes. 5.19. Psal. 16.7. as it were sparks from the fire. So David: I will bless the Lord who hath given me counsell; my reines also instruct me in the night season; that is, those sweet meditations and motions which the Spirit secretly in the night season putteth into our minds and hearts.Esa. 30.21. And the Prophet Esay saith, that the ears of the faithfull shall hear a voice behind them, saying, This is the way walk ye in it, when they turned to the right hand, and when they turned to the left: Which is to be understood not only of the voice of Gods Ministers outwardly speaking unto us in the Ministery of the Word, but also of the voice of the Spirit secretly by the good motions thereof leading us into all truth. For so our Saviour promiseth accordingly,Ioh. 16.8, 13. that he would send his Spirit the Comfor∣ter, who should convince the world of sinne, righteousness and judgment; and that when he was come, he should lead the faithfull into all truth; and reveale unto them things to come. The second action of the Spirit is, to labour and endeavour the suppression and subduing those evil motions which the flesh raiseth in us, and still moveth us to take the first and best opportunity of serving God and doing his will. So also it purifieth the heart by faith from all our sinfull cor∣ruptions, and maketh us to labour and strive against our infirmities and imper∣fections, that we may with fervency of Spirit and cheerfulness of heart perform all holy duties and service unto God; and when in these endeavours we come short of our desires, through this sinfull flesh which doth so easily compass us, it moveth us to bewaile our imperfections, and still more and more to labour in the use of all good means, whereby we may attain unto more perfection, as we see in the example of the Apostle Paul, who kept under this body of corruption, beating it,2 Cor. 9.27. as it were, black and blew, that he might hold it with the lusts there∣of in subjection; whereof when he failed, and was either hindred from doing
good, or led captive unto sinne, he makes lamentable complaints of these re∣bellious lusts; and not contenting himself with that portion of grace and godli∣ness unto which he had attained, he forgat what was past, and still did labour and strive to attain unto more perfection And thus the Spirit mastereth and subdueth the flesh, so as it cannot have full liberty, and take its full swing in sinne, as it desireth: according to that of the Apostle,1 Joh. 3.9. Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sinne, for his seed remaineth in him; that is, grace wrought in the heart by the Holy Ghost, which resisteth the rebellious desires of the flesh; and he cannot sin, (namely like the unregenerate with full swing and consent of will) because he is born of God. Q. Let us consider the manner of this Fight between the flesh and the Spirit in our severall faculties and parts? A. 1. The understanding being in part regenerate and sanctified, and in part unregenerate and corrupt, partly enlightned with spiritual, sound and saving knowledge, and partly obscured with the reliques of ignorance; and not onely so, but also much defiled and depraved with curiosity, dulness, negligence, presumption or conceit of knowledge, there is a continuall Combate maintained in it, between sound knowledge on the one side, and palpable ignorance, gross dulness, vain presumption which make resistance. In the mind there is a Con∣flict between the knowledge of the truth and natural blindness or ignorance. For seeing in this life we know but in part,1 Cor. 13.12. therefore knowledge of the truth must needs be joyned with ignorance in all that are enlightned: and one of them being contrary to another, they strive to over-shadow and over-cast each other. And this is the cause of this Conflict, whilst ignorance striving to keep its place in the understanding, raiseth thick mists and dark fogs to obscure the light of truth, and to put out or dazle the eyes of the mind; and on the other side saving knowledg doth endeavour with the Sun-shine of truth shining clearly in Gods Word, to dispell and scatter these misty fogs by little and little, untill it shine forth brightly unto perfect day. Again, carnal curiosity neglecting those things that are profitable, necessary, and revealed to be known of us, la∣boureth after nice and idle speculations and curious questions, which as they are useless and vain, so also abstruse and secret; or else diveth into Gods hidden counsels which he hath forbidden us to search and prie into. But saving know∣ledge not only leaveth secret things as belonging to the Lord our God,Deut. 29.29. but also represseth and mortifieth our curiosity as much as may be; and restraining us from going about to understand above that which is meet, it understandeth in sobriety, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith.Rom. 12.3. It ap∣prehendeth things revealed as belonging unto us, and aimeth more at the use and fruit in practice, then in the theory and speculation, and to have feeling and experience of a little, rather then a bare conceipt and ability to discourse of much. And yet it resteth not in a small measure, yea in truth not in the greatest proportion, but still laboureth after spiritual growth, and encrease daily more and more untill it come to perfection in Jesus Christ. But as the mind enlight∣ned is quick to apprehend, and carefull to encrease in the knowledge of spiritual things; so it is unapt to conceive, and sluggish to search after the understanding of heavenly misteries. Our sight is dimme and old, to which great things appear small, and small things none at all. Our best endeavoures after the knowledge of Gods Word, are not unfitly resembled to the motions of a man sick of a Fever, whose labour is mixt with much sloth and feebleness. By nature we are not more blind then self-conceited, knowing nothing, and yet vainly puffed up as if we understood all things; which poison is partly abated, not utterly ex∣pelled by the power of grace; so that in the renewed mind, there is a continuall Conflict between the conceit of knowledge and soundness of truth, these two both residing in the same power of the soul, and yet being directly opposite the
one to the other. Emptiness breedeth a desire of encrease; conceit of fulness cloyeth the appetite. Thus it fareth with the most holy in this life, though not with all men in the same measure and degree; from whence these conclusions follow. 1. All Christians endued with the saving and sanctifying Spirit of God are illightned soundly, distnctly, certainly to understand the things that be of God:Prov. 30.2. but the most holy are ignorant of many things, know nothing for mea∣sure, clearness, and certainty as they ought to do. 2. The assent that is given to the truth of God is imperfect, mixed with much doubting; as the man in the Gospel saith,Mar. 9.24. Lord, I believe, help my unbelief. The righteous do firmely give credit to the Scriptures, as the undoubted, infallible Word of life, and Rule of Religion: but this belief is not grown to perfect strength, nor freed from assaults of unbelief. 3. The righteous are in part acquainted with their natural blindness and corruption, but their darkness and corruption is far deeper then they can prie into. Every man is ignorant of much more then he knoweth by himself, and guilty of more sinnes then he can discerne in himself. 4. The godly man desires to encrease in knowledge of things profitable, but through infirmity he is prone to seek to know much, ra∣ther than what is behovefull, and tends to the furtherance of his salvation. 5. The Church of God was never so happy, that all godly and religious lear∣ned Divines should be of one mind in all points of Religion. The reason of it is, because natural blindness yet remaining, prevails more or less. Men that are dim-sighted and cannot discerne without Spectacles, if they be set to discry a thing a farre off, the most of them would be of divers opinions of it. The reliques of ignorance still possessing the mind of the regenerate, is the cause why they know but in part, and see the truth of God through a glass darkly; the which imperfection of their spiritual sight and knowledg, worketh in them only a probable opinion in some things, and not a well-setled, resolved judgment, which maketh them to take that way which their conceipt apprehendeth as the most likely: like divers men intending to travell towards the same City, who being uncertain and doubtfull of the direct way in every point and turning, do in that particular choose divers paths, all leading to the same place, though some more direct, others much about. 6. These contrary qualities do fight continually one with another, and interchangeably both prevaile sometimes, and sometimes are again foiled and get the worst. As for example, knowledge in the regenerate part of the mind, assaulteth ignorance that is mixed with it, and with the light of Gods truth, scattereth and dispelleth the dark mists of ignorance; and soon after, ignorance through the neglect of reading, meditation, hearing the Word, prayer and holy conferences gathereth strength, and bleareth again the eyes of the understanding, that it cannot so clearly at least after a saving, feeling, and experimentall manner discerne the things of God. And when ig∣norance prevailes, men otherwise godly and religious, may leave the way of truth and fall into errours, after their understandings have been truly enlightned, the flesh dazling the eyes of their mind, whilst with its mists and fogs it darkneth the light which formerly did shine unto them. The which befalleth them some∣times, not only in the knowledge of those points of Religion which are of less consequence, but also exceeding weighty and fundamentall, as we see in the example of the Corintheans and the Galathians, even after the truth of the Gospel had been preached unto them. And as one man may erre, so may an hundred; yea, a whole particular Church. For in respect of this Combate, the estate and condition of all men is alike: that which is the state of every man, is the case of all, the same reason being of the whole and all the parts. Whence it appears, that the Church militant upon earth is subject to errour. But yet as the diseases of the body be of two sorts; some curable, and some incurable which are to death; so likewise errours are. And the Church though it be sub∣ject
to sundry fals, yet it cannot erre in foundation to death: the errours of Gods Children be curable. Some may here say, If all men and Churches be subject to errour, then it shall not be good to joyn with any of them, but to separate from them all. I answer, though they may and do erre, yet we must not separate from them, so long as they do not separate from Christ. Though the visible Church offend, yet may we not forsake her untill Christ sue a Bill of Divorce against her.An pudebit eos illic dis cum∣bere, ubi vident Christum non pudere? Au illo sacti∣ores & mndi∣ores erant? Bright. Apoc 3.20. We need not fear infection amongst them by Communion and society, that sup with Christ and enjoy his presence in his holy Ordinances. But seeing through the flesh remaining in us, we are subject to ignorance and errour: this should make us to conform our opinion to the analogy of faith, and as to hold fast those Doctrines which are manifestly grounded upon the Scrip∣tures, so to be modest and sober in maintaining such points as are doubtfull and controversall, when as other of our Brethren differ from us; Because we may erre by reason of these reliques of ignorance abiding in us; and they may erre also out of humane frailty. Finally, seeing the reliques of ignorance and error will never leave us till death divide us, this must make us labour continually in the use of all good means, whereby our minds may be more and more illightned. And especially we are to hear the Word, study and meditate in the Scriptures, and call often and earnestly by fervant prayers for the assistance and illumination of Gods holy Spirit, whereby we may be preserved from errour, and led into all truth. For if David who was wiser then his Ancients, had need to make that prayer; Open mine eyes, O Lord, that I may see the Wonders of thy Law;Psal. 119.18. And if the Apostle Paul who was immediately taught by Christ, desired above all things still more and more to know Christ, then how much more should we,Phil. 3.10. who come farre short of their perfection? Again, constant, clear and firm assent to the Word of truth is opposite to unbelief, and is opposed by it. These two contraries do warre continually in the soul, and sometimes the worst part doth get the upper-hand: In which temptation the godly have greatly staggered at the truth of Gods Promises, and questioned what the Lord hath spoken. David confesseth of himself, I said in my haste all men are lyars;Psal. 116.11. Psal. 77.9. Luk. 24.25. Luk. 1.20. The Disciples hear from Christ, O fools and slow of heart, to believe those things that are spoken by the Prophets: Zachary is striken dumb, because he believed not what was spoken unto him by the Angel of the Lord. Abraham is much commended in Scripture for his constant belief in the Promises of grace: but many tokens of unbelief are noted in him. Thus we see that the assent which men give to the words of truth, is often shaken through the infirmity of the flesh. Moreover, sound knowledge is assaulted with vain curiosity and conceit of self-sufficiency, which so prevailes in the godly now and then, that neglecting the search of things necessary, sound and comfortable, they give themselves to vain and idle speculations, matters of doubtfull disputation, distracting contro∣versies, genealogies and such like. The Apostles Exhortation is not causeless, Give not heed to Jewish Fables,1 Tim. 1.4. Tit. 2.1. Ioh 9.2. Luk. 13.23. but speak the things which become sound doctrine. The Disciples are more forward to enquire, whether the blind man or his Father had sinned, than to be informed what use they should make of that visitation: to be resolved of the number of them that should be saved, than to strive to make their calling and election sure. This is an he∣reditary disease which we derived from our first parents, and in some measure more or less doth hang upon all the sonnes of God, so long as they carry about with them this body of sinne. Lastly, Sound and sanctified knowledge doth encounter that spirituall laziness and deceit of minde, whereby we are apt to rest in the superficiall and sleight apprehension of truth, not possessing the fruit and comfort of it: But this deceit prevails with us many times to the great prejudice of our spirituall welfare. Many times good Christians forget∣ting themselves, and giving place to sloth and security, do rest in this, that
they hear the word, pray, can repeat what they have heard, be able to confer of matters of religion, but labour not to be well-grounded in the true religion, to possess the word as their own, and to be throughly changed into the nature of it. 2. The faculty of thinking, studying, devising, is partly re∣newed by grace, partly corrupted by the flesh, partly spirituall, and partly carnall, from which cohabitation of grace and corruption, followeth a con∣tinuall strife and fight of thoughts and cogitations, imaginations and motions, devices, meditations and purposes, which labour mutually to expell one ano∣ther, and to keep the minde in their sole possession. For when the spirit lifteth up the minde in divine contemplation, and causeth it to think and meditate on heavenly things as the end of our hopes, or on the service of God, the duties of Christianity, or of our lawfull callings, as the means whereby we may attain unto them; then the flesh depresseth and pulleth it down, and by suggesting such thoughts as be simply worldly and wicked, or at least impertinent, vain and unseasonable in respect of present imployment, do cause it to stoop unto earthly vanity. But the spirit finding it self thus defeated of those spirituall excellencies, which so earnestly it desireth, doth not rest thus dejected and de∣pressed, but shaking off the thoughts of sinfull vanities and sensuall delights, it leaveth the earth and up again it mounteth in spirituall and heavenly thoughts. In respect of this combate it fareth thus with the spirituall man.Phil. 3.20. Col 3.1. First, He doth earnestly and with intention minde the things that are above, devise honest things, and bend his thoughts to that which is most excellent: but he is so clogged with the flesh that he cannot sore aloft, nor walk with God in heavenly con∣templation, as he desireth. Secondly, It is his chief delight to commune with the Lord in secret, and in all his thoughts to acknowledge him: but by reason of the flesh he finds it tedious and irksome to keep his heart attentively to things above; as labour is wearisome to them that love idleness, follow liberty. Thirdly, The thought of evil is distastfull, odious, and yet he feels wicked mo∣tions issuing continually from the stinking puddle of original corruption, which he cannot dry up. Fourthly, The main study and set resolution of the godly man is to pursue that which is approved in the sight of God: but the flesh in∣terrupteth these holy determinations, and suggesteth many devices of sinne, which oft times finde too great harbour in the soul. What good soul is not pestered with thoughts of pride, covetousness, vanity, voluptuousness, devices of revenge, cosenage, fraud, revenge, injustice, and how to lessen or excuse sinne? 3. The faculty of judging is in part renewed by grace to discern the things that differ, and to approve the things that are excellent, but in part remains corrupt with errour, vanity and folly: from which ariseth a conflict between the judgement of the flesh and of the spirit. For so farre forth as the minde is enlightened to discern between truth and falshood, right and wrong, good and evil, it doth allow and approve, esteem and prize the one simply and in comparison, and disallow, reject and vilifie the other; but so farre forth as it still remaineth erroneous, vain and foolish, it mistaketh errour for truth, wrong for right,Psal. 73.13, 15 and evil for good. So David himself being ignorant of the state of the godly and wicked in this life in respect of prosperity and adversity, and that these things happen alike to all, was ready by a false judgement to condemn the generation of Gods children, but that after going into the Sanctuary his mind was enlightened with the knowledge of the truth, and his judgement gave right evidence.Act. 10.14, 34, 35, And the Apostle Peter being ignorant of the abrogating of the cermonial Law after the death of Christ, and of the breaking down of the par∣tition wall between the Jews and Gentiles, judgeth the creatures of God unclean which he had sanctified, and that he was so confined within the Land of Jury, that he might not preach unto the Gentiles: but when God by vision had in∣lightened his minde with the knowledge of the truth, he reformed also the errour
of his judgement. The case standing thus with the man regeneate, it fol∣loweth: First, That a man renewed by grace doth truly judg his state by nature to be miserable and vile, sinne to be abhominable and filthy; but he cannot sufficiently discover the depth of his misery, or the multitude and hainousness of his transgressions. The best men sinne many times when they know it not: and every mans sinne is greater than he doth account it. Secondly, A sancti∣fied heart doth highly prize the favour of God, and the joys of Heaven, as farre to be preferred above the pleasures of sinne, and all transitory vanities of this life: but his capacity is too shallow to comprehend the worth of heavenly things in their due measure. The things of God are infinitely more excellent than our esteem of them. Thirdly, The Spirit of God opening the eyes of a man regenerate to see and discern the incomprehensible value of spiritual things, he doth resolve to seek after them, though it be with the loss of all earthly con∣tentments, and to persist immoveably in the pursuit of them, notwithstanding all occurrences which might divert or turn him aside: But when the judgment of the flesh prevaileth, a good man may preferre the less good before the greater, and disallow that in comparison which he esteemed in it self considered. Thus Peter denied his Master to save his life; and he that in a general and constant de∣termination hath chosen God for his portion, in some particular acts may ap∣prove vanity rather than affliction. Fourthly, By reason of this mixture of grace and corruption in the faculty of discerning, the most wise and judicious do often erre, taking evil for good, and good for evil, wrong for right, and right for wrong. And hereby we easily perceive that the wisdom of the world which is earthly, sensuall, and divelish, doth abide in the heart renewed with spiritual wisdom from above, which two mutually oppose each other with might and main. For the one is wholly taken up and exercised in spiritual and heaven∣ly things, which it seeth, knoweth, and esteemeth as most excellent, and doth contemn worldly vanities as dross and dung, yea, loss in comparison of them: but the other is wholly devoted to earthly things and transitory trifles; looketh only downward, and not able to discerne the glorious beauty of those divine excellencies, it is only delighted in beholding those things whose beauty is subject to the senses and natural reason: about which it is continually exercised. Peter may be an example for this matter, in whom we may see our own faces: for in that notable confession of faith in Christ, which he made in the name of all the Disciples, he shewed that in his mind he savoured the things of God,Mat. 16.16. Mat. 16.23. who a little after is reprehended by our Saviour for his carnal counsel, as not savouring the things of God. And thus it standeth with Christians in this world, whiles the wisdom of the Spirit doth exercise her sovereignty, and is preserved, nourished, and kept, they are wise to do good, couragious for the truth, forward in the practice of piety and godliness: But when carnal wisdom getteth the start, and dimmeth the sight of sound judgment with the mists of errour, shews of vanities, and policies of the flesh, then they take counsel and follow courses prejudiciall to their peace and safety. 4. The reliques of corruption still remain in the re∣newed faculty of remembring, which causeth a continuall sight in that power of the soul. For the memory so farre as it is spiritual, laboureth to blot out and deface all worldly, wicked and sinfull impressions, and to have imprinted in it, those heavenly and spiritual documents and instructions which have been en∣trusted unto it by the sanctified understanding, that it might call them to mind seasonably and with due effect. Contrariwise the flesh and unregenerate part standeth in direct opposition to the spirit, labouring to reprint and repeate those lessons of impiety and prophaneness which before our conversion especially, and since also we have learned in the School of the Divel and of the world; and to work in us oblivion and forgetfulness of all good things, whereby those heavenly Treasures and spiritual Jewels are presently cast out of doors, as soon
as they are received; or if the understanding of them be kept in the brain for discourse, their vigour is lost in the heart. The aim of the Spirit is to trea∣sure up and hide the Word of God in the heart, that it might effectually and with fruit be recalled as occasion requireth. The action of the flesh is to race out all remembrance of what is truly good and acceptable, by causing utter forgetfulness of what hath been taught or done, or besotting men to rest in the bare, fruitless, dead repetition of it without life or power. For that is for∣gotten, which affecteth not according to the nature and quality of the thing. Again, the Spirit endeavoureth to cast out the rubbish of impiety, prophaness, scurrility, filthiness, ribaldry, malitiousness, that it might never be remembred without hatred or detestation. But the flesh solliciteth to the delightfull remem∣brance of wickedness past, that by the pleasure of it the soul might be defiled. Thus it standeth with the regenerate: First, He doth truly and effectually re∣member the things that concern his peace, and the glory of God: but is not able to recall them when occasion is offered, as he ought. Secondly, He doth look back upon sinnes past with grief and hatred, but cannot at all times detest the thought of them, never loath their remembrance in that measure as is fit. Thirdly, When the flesh prevails through the laziness, security, and infirmity of the faithfull, then they stain themselves with the delightfull remembrance of evil, or the slight remembrance of what is seriously to be minded. 5. The faculty of willing and nilling, choosing, refusing, and prosecuting, is in part re∣newed, and in part remains corrupt; which two contrary factions war together without ceasing: for the regenerate part willeth and enforceth that which is good, and nilleth and rejecteth all evil: but the part unregenerate willeth and chooseth that which is evil in it self, or at least some inferiour good in place of the chief, and nilleth and refuseth that which is truly, absolutely, univer∣sally good. As for example, the spiritual part being guided by the under∣standing, enlightned with saving knowledge, chooseth and embraceth God as the chief good, his Kingdom and righteousness as the chief happiness, and refuseth and contemneth the world and earthly vanities, the service of Satan, and the momentanie pleasures of sinne, which in the end bring death and de∣struction; though they for the present be bitter to the flesh, and much more imbittered by afflictions, and these be sweet and delightfull to the carnal appe∣tite. But contrariwise that part of the will which remaineth unregenerate, being directed by that wisdom which is worldly, sensul and divelish, neglecteth and refuseth the present comforts of grace which it relisheth not, and the future hopes of heavenly happiness which it knoweth not, as being out of sight and beyond the apprehension of sense, uncertain, and not to be compassed without great difficulty; and it chooseth and embraceth this present world with the vain honours, uncertain riches, and sinfull pleasures of it; because they are subject to the senses and may be had in present possession. First, A man sanctified by the Spirit, is enabled to will and choose that which is spiritually good, in truth, order, and sincerity: but he cannot will it in perfection and measure as he ought, according as the goodness of the thing deserves. Secondly, He doth truly nill all evil, and refuse, contemn, and tread under-feet the base vanities of this world, which sollicite to draw the heart from God: but he cannot turn from evil, nor despise vanity in that exactness the Word requireth. Thirdly, As the will of the regenerate is corrupt in part, so are the motions, wishes and desires which arise from it: which ordinarily are mastered by grace, but now and then prevail against the Spirit and get ground of it. From this Com∣bate in the intellectual nature springeth another betwixt faith and the contrary extreams, infidelity and presumption, which continually assault one another, sometimes the one, sometimes the other getting the better in the particular skirmish, although in conclusion and end of the fight, faith alwaies overcometh
and obtaineth a full and final Victory. In the mean time, even after that by faith we have laid hold on the Promises, and have grown to a great measure of strength and to an high degree of perswasion; doubting and infidelity, taking the opportunity of some grievous temptation, do give unto our faith many wounds and foils,Heb. 11.11. Rom. 4.19. Mat. 14.30. Psal. 42.6. & 73.13. & 77.10. of which notwithstanding it recovereth upon the renewing of our Covenant with God. Contrariwise our faith is assaulted with presumpti∣on, whereby the flesh moveth us falsly to apply the Promises, and to presume of Gods love and our own salvation. For though these do potentially belong to all the faithful, yet they cannot actually be applied unto them, so long as they live and lie securely in some known sins without repentance. But against these also faith prevaileth, when as it purifieth the heart, bringeth to a sight and sense of sinne, to a loathing and detestation of them, with constant reso∣lution and earnest endeavour to leave and forsake them. Thus the case stands in this particular: First, The strongest faith is imperfect, and mixt with the contrary unbelief, doubting, presumption. Secondly, Faith is an uniform, universall, constant adherence to the whole truth of God in habite, though the act be often interrupted Thirdly, By reason of this fight, when unbelief prevailes, the very child of God may fall into fits and pangs of despair. Yea, this despair may be so extream, that it shall weaken the body and consume it, more than any sickness. Fourthly, Though the faithfull man be brought to despair of his election and salvation in Christ, yet his desparation is neither totall nor finall. It is not totall, because he doth not despair with his whole heart, faith even at that instant lusting against despair. It is not finall, because he shall recover before the end of this life. The affections are subordinate to the will, in which the conflict is not more dangerous, but more turbulent and violent. Poyson in the brain is as mortall and pernicious as any other, but in the stomack much more raging and violent: so the corruption of minde and will is no less perillous, but that of the affections more sensible and grievous. The hard stone in the heart striveth with the soft flesh, rebellion with obedience, corruption with grace, and whilest the spirit draweth the heart unto God, and spiritual and heavenly things, that it may inseparably cleave and adhere unto them, the flesh pulleth it back and with-draweth it from them, and laboureth to keep it still fixed and fastned upon earthly and worldly vanities. There is a coninuall conflict between the affections, wherein the same affections divided (as it were) between grace and corruption do fight and strive against them∣selves; and sometimes being cross matched, do mutually oppose and encounter other affections and passions which are contrary and opposite unto them; the former combate being exercised in contrary, the latter about the same subjects. Thus the love of God, and of spirituall and heavenly things is assaulted with self-love, love of the world, and hatred of those Divine excellencies; Affiance in God, his providence and promises, with confidence in the creatures, and diffi∣dence in the all-sufficient creatour; zeal of Gods glory with carnall blind zeal, coldness and lukewarmness; the fear of God which is ingenuous and filiall, with fear of men, and fear of God which is slavish and servile; Hope in God, with earthly hopes, and also with presumption and despair; Sorrow for sinne, with worldly sorrow which causeth death, and also with wretchlesness and carnal security: Joy in the holy Ghost and spiritual rejoycing in God, with carnal joy in the pleasures of sinne, and desperate grief for worldly losses, Alacrity and chearfulness in Gods service, with carnal chearfulness in pursuing our sen∣sual and sinfull delights, and also with lumpish heaviness, dullness, deadness of heart and carnall weariness. In which conflict though the spirit receive many foyles through the raging violence of these wild heasts and rebellious passions, and is oftentimes so wounded, that in outward appearance there seemeth to be no life remaining, yet it proveth to be but a dangerous swound, out of which
recovering with redoubled valour, it reneweth the combate and getteth the victory. Though it seem but a small spark remaining of a great fire, almost ex∣tinguished with a flood of passions, and so covered under the ashes of corrup∣tions that it scarce appeareth, yet when the Spirit of God doth blow upon it, it increaseth in strength to a great flame. In respect of this mixture of grace and corruption in the whole soul and every faculty of it, a man regenerate is like him that hath one legge sound, the other lame; who in every step which he makes doth not wholly halt or wholly go upright, but partly halt, and partly go upright. At the same time he is inclined to contraries, affecteth things that cannot stand together▪ like a man in a boat on the water, who goeth upward because he is carried upward by the vessel; and at the same time goes downward, because he walks downward in the same vessel at the same instant. But when cor∣ruption getteth the better against grace, there ariseth in the godly a certain deadness or hardness of heart, of which they complain with great bitterness. Lastly, If there be a combate in the whole soul, it must needs take place in the renewed conscience, which is the reflection of the soul upon it self. For as it is regenerate it is so inlightned and rectified by the spirit of grace, that like a true witness it giveth an infallible testimony between God and us, excusing us when we do well, that we may proceed in well-doing, and accusing us when we have done evil, that we may forsake it and recover our selves by unfained repentance; yea before the doing of either of them both, it giveth testimony and approba∣tion unto that which is good, that we may embrace and practise it, and also discovereth that which is wickedf and sinfull, that we may shunne and avoid it. Neither doth it only play the part o a witness, but also of a Judg, and according to this true evidence, it either justifieth us, or pronounceth the sentence of condem∣nation against us. From the former whereof ariseth peace, joy and comfort, whereby we are encouraged to proceed in all holy duties; and from the other, either fear whereby we are restrained from falling into sinne, or sorrow and repentance not to be repented of, causing salvation, after that we have fallen. But on the contrary, as the conscience is unregenerate it remaineth blinded with ignorance, and corrupted with benummedness, superstition, maliciousness, and therefore is continually ready to play the part of a false witness, either dawbing or colouring over our sinne with deceitfull colours, that we may ignorantly fall into it, or excusing it being committed, as though it were light and trivial, that we may continue in it without repentance; or on the other side it is ready to accuse us when we do well; and in the service of God, or the use of Christian liberty to raise in our minds superstitious fears and causeless doubts; that so being afrighted we may be hindred from Christian duties, or discouraged after we have done them. And so answerably it playeth the false Judge, condemning where God and a good conscience justifie, and justifying where they condemn. The which false sentence is the cause of carnal security when we continue in sin, and of causeless terrrours and needless fears when we are carefull to perform our duty. But the carnal conscience which lyeth asleep in security, being once awakened filleth the soul with deep doubts, grievous fears, and horrible de∣spair of mercy and forgiveness, untill it be allayed and quieted by faith in the blood of Jesus Christ, which is sufficient to purge it from all pollutions. Thus the conscience of the regenerate is in part lightsome, pure, peaceable and live∣ly, directing in holiness, curbing from sinne, witnessing their reconciliation with God, testifying of their uprightness, inciting and comforting them in weldoing: But [in] part it is darksome, impure, superstitious, scrupulous, unquiet, benummed, and erroneous. From which it followeth, First, That a Christian can neither perfectly understand the multitude of his sinnes, nor the measure of his grace exactly. Secondly, His peace is mixed with unquietness, and his assurance dimmely apprehended, assaulted with doubtings. Thirdly,
The godly are subject to be loose in many things where in they should be strict, and to be scrupulous in some cases, wherein they may take liberty; to run too fast now and then, and anon to grow slack and lazy. Fourthly, When the flesh prevails they may fall into a great fit of security and benummedness, out of which they are ordinarily awakened with fears and terrours. CHAP. III. Of the divers kindes of Combate that be in unregenerate men; And how they differ from that Combate which is proper to the Regenerate. The issue, or event of the Spiritual Com∣bate. The Meanes to be used for the weakening of the flesh, and strengthening of the spirit unto this Combate. The effect of the Combate, with the Properties thereof. Question: IS there no Combate in unregenerate men? A. There be divers kinds of Combates: First, Of divers desires in diffe∣rent respects, or of the reasonable will and sensitive appetite in sundry conside∣rations. This may be found in good and bad, innocent and corrupt in this life. Secondly, Of divers faculties, as of the mind or conscience with the will, reason with appetite leading to things evil, vain or hurtfull. This is to be found only in subjects corrupted with sinne, but is common to the godly and ungodly. Thirdly, Of the remainders of Gods Image, with the power of corruption in the same faculty, mind or will. This hath place in civil honest men, who continue in their natural stock, and be not changed by grace. Fourthly, Of the temporary graces of the Spirit with the strength of corruption in some sort repressed, but not mortified. This is proper to them that be in part enlightned with the knowledge of the truth, and are partakers of some common graces of the spirit, though not such as accompany salvation. Fifthly, Of the flesh and the Spirit: This is peculiar to the Saints in this life, whose graces be true, but imperfect: for where this Combate is, there is soundness of grace mixed with corruption. Q. How doth the Combate between the flesh and the spirit differ from that of the conscience and will or affections? A. 1. They differ in their ground or cause: for whereas the spiritual Conflict ariseth from the grace of regeneration, whereby the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, being infused into all our powers and faculties, do make us warre against our carnal corruptions and fleshly lusts; the Conflict which is in the unregene∣rate ariseth from that light which shineth into the mind, and ransacketh the heart, and discovereth to the conscience what is right or wrong, good or evil. Thus the understanding by the light of nature or common grace discerning in particular actions what is good and to be embraced, and what is evil to be shun∣ned, informeth the conscience accordingly, and leaveth it to her censure and de∣termination, either to approve us for the doing of good and forsaking of evil, or to condemn us for the doing of evil, and neglecting of good. But the will being transported by its own sinfull corruption, and sometime overswaied with the violence of the sensitive appetite and affections, it hearkeneth unto them, and stoppeth the ears to reason and conscience. For example, the understanding informeth us that God is to be honoured above all, that our Parents are to be
reverenced and obeyed, that we must love our enemies, do good to all men: But the will perverted with the baits of worldly vanities,Exo. 9.27.35. 1 Sam. 24.17. Voluptas mag¦na me invitam subit. Sen. Med. Act. 5. doth rise up in open rebellion against reason and conscience, and resolveth that it will do what it list∣eth; and go on in its own course. 2. They are differenced by the manner of Conflict: for the one is free and voluntary, the other forced and constrained. The will of the regenerate freely chooseth good, refuseth evil, and laboureth the expulsion of inhabiting corruption: but the will of the unregenerate is bent upon evil, and liketh not, willingly admitteth not any thing that makes against it. In all this Conflict between Conscience and Affection, Reason and Appetite, there is no enmity and contrariety between them in their natures, neither is there more grace or less corruption in the reason and conscience, then in the will and affections:Cautus enim metuit foveam lupus, accipiter∣que suspectos la∣queos, & oper∣tum milvius baemum Horat. Ep. lib. 1.16. for they as well as these do like and love sinne with the pleasures and profits of it in its own nature, if they were not deterred with the fearfull con∣sequences of Gods judgments and punishments, which they see will necessarily follow upon such sinfull premises. Others propound the difference thus; The spirit is moved to assault the flesh by the true love of God, which causeth it to make warre against carnal lusts, because they are odious unto him, as being enemies to his grace, and contrary to his holy will; and by a filial fear of his Majesty which maketh the man regenerate loath to yeeld unto any motions of sinne, least he should thereby displease and offend him: but the Combate be∣tween the conscience and affections ariseth from self-love and servile fear, which make the man unregenerate to withstand the motions of sinne in the will and affections, for fear of those punishments, which will accompany his sinnes, as horrour of conscience, shame, corporall paine, eternal death and hellish con∣demnation. 3. There is a difference between these Conflicts in respect of the Combatants: for in the Combate between the flesh and the spirit, there is a Conflict between grace and corruption, in the same faculties, not arising from discourse upon outward grounds of ensuing mischiefs, but from a reall change of their nature wrought by Gods Spirit, which yet is but imperfect. But in the Combate which is in the unregenerate, the Conflict is between divers fa∣culties, which are all carnal and corrupted, fighting one of them against a∣nother, not out of hatred of sinne or love of goodness, but from the ap∣prehension of outward things that may follow upon the committing of sinne, whereby the heart is not moved at all to turn unto God, but notwithstanding all danger continueth stiffe and obstinate. 4. Where there is only a Combate between conscience and affection, there usually follows one of these two things; either policy to rock conscience asleep, and subtilty to deceive it with carnal pretences or despair if it cannot be deluded: But the will that is truly renewed by grace, as it abhorres the evil whereunto it is inticed, so it useth all gracious means to avoid it, and declineth whatsoever might allure unto the practice of evil. 5. These Combates are distinguished in their effects. First, The unregenerate conscience gainsayeth sinne, but prevaileth not against it, and usually this is the occasion to hasten the committing of it: be∣cause the more we are restrained, the more desperatly we rebell a∣gainst the Law; corruption being too strong for reason unsanctfied. But the sanctified will, as it is assisted by grace to hate sinne as sinne, so it is enabled thereby in the use of holy means to withstand the assaults of the flesh: or if through violence of tentation or neglect of means it be overtaken, this proves a gracious occasion to prevent further evils of security, pride, &c. and drives unto Christ for further sanctification. Secondly, The warre between the spirit, and the flesh causeth unto us the most secure peace, even peace with God who hath given us his Spirit to assure us of his favour and strengthen us in this spiritual Fight, against his and our ene∣mies; peace between the faculties of our souls, when as the inferiour faculties
are in quiet subjection to the superiour. It bringeth also with it unspeakable joy, spiritual comfort, and sound refreshing: because it is an evidence of our rege∣neration, a pledge of Gods love, an assurance of full and final Victory over all our enemies. But the Conflict of conscience in the unregenerate, causeth continuall garboyls and hot dissention, tyranny in the superiour faculties ruling only by servile fear, and rebellion in the inferiour, when they have power to break the yoke of government; horrour and anguish of mind, disconsolate sorrow and hellish despair, when the affright of conscience beareth sway; or the mad and tumultuous joy of frantick men, when the wild affections and disordered passions do silence conscience and get the upper-hand. Finally, that Conflict between the flesh and the spirit, makes the man regenerate with more care and diligence to observe his own heart, carefully to renew his repentance, and conscionably to watch over all his waies. But the Conflict of conscience is commonly joyned with secure wretchlessness, whereby the unregenerate man doth carelesly neglect the causes and occasions of this bitter Conflict, untill he be overtaken with them, and only avoideth the punishment and not the sinne which causeth it; or the sinne only, when he is sensible of the punishment, and that in respect of the outward act for servile fear of paine and smart, not with a free and willing heart. 6. The spirit and flesh doth in all things oppose against one another: the spirit the flesh in all that is evil, the flesh the spirit in all that is good. For there is no good action which the spiritual man performeth, but the flesh interposing, hindereth and interrupted it: and contrariwise there is no evil known to the spirit and done by the flesh, wherein the spirit doth not cross and oppose it. But the Conflict of conscience extendeth not to the whole course of life, but only to some particular actions, and yeelding unto the will in ordinary, common, and lesser sinnes, it only contendeth with them about the committing of such sinnes as are hanious and outragious, and especially against the second Table. 7. The last difference between these divers Conflicts is in respect of time; for the Combate between the flesh and the spirit begins at the time of re∣generation, and not before: and being begun it is continual and constant to the very end of our lives, though it may have some intermissions in respect of our sense and feeling. But the Combate of conscience doth begin oftentimes long before conversion, even as soon as we have the use of reason and un∣derstanding, but it is neither constant nor continuall, but onely by pangs and fits, upon occasion of some sinne already acted, or about to be com∣mitted. Q. Is this Combate of Conscience in all unregenerate men? A. It is not in them only, nor yet in all. For this Combate may also be in the faithfull and regenerate, yet not in the part regenerate: for the sanctified will and affections do not oppose the sanctified conscience and reason. But in the unregenerate part even the faithfull themselves do feel this Conflict in them, between conscience accusing for fear of judgment and punishment, and carnal concupiscence drawing them to sinne. The which is more weak on that side of passion, because their corruption is much abated and subdued, but stronger on the side of conscience, because it is excited with a greater illumination, discover∣ing more manifestly the odiousness of sinne, and fearfulness of those punish∣ments which it diserveth. Howsoever in another respect the violence of it is abated, namely, as it terrifieth with servile fear.Rom. 1.21.31. Eph. 4.17, 18. 1 Tim. 4.2. Nor is this Combate in all unregenerate persons; as in men extreamly ignorant or outragious wicked, who have blotted out the Law of nature, and are given up into a reprobate sense. This Conflict is seldom in simple people, that know not the Law; subtile wits, that are cunning to daube over sinne;Luk. 16.15. Mat. 19.20. proud justitiaries that place holi∣ness in external acts only; nor in those that are transported with violent and outragious passion, who cannot hear the voice of conscience or the suggestion of reason.
Q. How differs this Combate between the flesh and the spirit from that between the remainders of Gods Image, and the power of corruption in the same faculty? A. The will of a natural man retaineth some kind of liberty in natural, civil and mora hings,Odrunt peccare boni virtutis a∣more. Hor. Ep. lib. 1. Ep. 16. though it be very weak, corrupt and defective: therefore a man continuing in the state of nature, may sinne with reluctation, feel some Conflict against it in will, and as Judas had, have his after-grief for it. But this Combate differs from the spiritual, whereof we intreat in many things. 1. The natural man hath a reluctation betwixt the remnants of natural light, and moral inclination of the will on the one side, and the enormous aberration of his sensual wilfulness on the other: But the godly mans resistance is be∣tween a new divine quality in judgment, will and affections wrought by the Spirit of God on the one side, and the remainders of our native corruption on the other. 2. This Combate between the remainders of Gods Image and the power and reign of sinne, is only in things natural or moral, which may be di∣scerned to be good or evil by the light of nature: But the Conflict between the flesh and the spirit is general, specially in things spiritual and supernatural. The natural man sinneth with reluctation in grosser crimes, such as the world doth note; but the righteous man in lesser, such as no man can challenge him for. He hath after-grief, but it is in such crimes, as nature her self, less corrupted, judgeth reproachfull:Fieri non potest, qu ut qualis quisque fit, ta∣la operetur. Znch in Eph. 5.15. whereas the godly mans grief is even in good duties, that sinne will not let him do them, as he would. For all acts be in nature answerable to the qualities from which they flow, and correspondent to the power and will of the worker. But there is no liberty of will in spiritual things remaining in the natural man, untill he be renewed by grace; he hath no ability to will or choose what is truly good and acceptable. And having no power to any thing supernatural, how can there be any Combate in him touching them? With the regenerate it fareth better, for by the infusion of grace he is set at liberty to will, desire, choose and prosecute the things that belong unto his peace, in which he is mightily opposed by the flesh. 3. The natural man, though he purpose not this or that particular sinne, yet to follow his own unre∣newed mind and will, he alwaies purposeth and resolveth with full consent: But he that hath a contrary spirit cannot be resolute and intire in following his own will, but intendeth and setteth down with himself to walk uprightly before God. If he offend in any thing it is besides his purpose. When the naturalist standeth firme, he is fast in bondage: but when the regenerate slippeth, he is but half in sinne. For as he cannot so resolutely do the good he would, be∣cause sinne lusteth against grace: so he cannot fully consent to sinne, because the Spirit of grace lusteth against sinne in him. But the unregenerate hath set down with himself to persist in a sinfull course, even when he contendeth a∣gainst the breaking forth of some evil that stirreth in him. 4. In this Combate betwixt the remainders of Gods Image and power of corruption, men follow their natural disposition, are indulgent to their corrupt inclination, aim at si∣nister ends and by-respects, as pleasure, profit, praise and reputation; at least, intend not the glory of God, or the mortification of the body of sinne: But the regenerate labour to crucifie and weaken the law of sinne, to kill the lusts of the flesh, that with more freedom of spirit they might serve God in righteousness and true holiness. The civil honest man detesteth theft, murder, adultery, gross and disgracefull cosenage, because he is not bent to such practises: but as for putting off of lusts, to which naturally his heart enclines, he thinks it needless, and that God who hath made, and knoweth our natures, doth not expect we should be freed from that, which is by nature in us. The re∣newed Christian is of another mind, for having put on Christ, he hath put off the willing service of all sinfull lusts, and studies daily to approve himself unto
God in well-doing. 5. The remainders of Gods Image in the natural man are weak and feeble, easily overborn with the violent rage of corruption. Small occasions thrust men into the committing of that evil, which they dislike, and condemn in others; as fear of loss, shame, disgrace; hope of gain, favour, or such like. But in the regenerate the power of grace is more lively and strong, and the force of corruption in part subdued, that they be not ordinarily foiled, or drawn to live after the flesh. Yet here it is to be noted, that inordinate lusts are not utterly banished by the spirit of sanctification, that we should not be molested with them: onely they exercise not their tyranny over us, as in the daies when we were in subjection to the flesh. It is one thing to have sin mortified, another not to feel the stirring and moving of it in us. It is said truly then to be killed, when that is done upon it, which will make it die in time, though it take on a while: as a wound will ake and tingle after it is dressed with a healing Plaister. He that feeleth it a burthen, wherewith he is unwilling to be laden: He that desireth to be set free from it: He that reneweth his faith toward Christ, who is made of God his sanctified, and resteth on him to see these works of the Devil utterly dissolved, he hath mortified his sinne, though the Devil and sinne should rage and continue to tyrannze in him. The voluntary sub∣jection to it, mortification presently causeth to cease: the involuntary suf∣fering of it, is successively diminished, but never till death totally re∣moved. Q. What difference is there betwixt the Combate which is to be found in the tem∣porary, and that which is proper to the regenerate? A. Besides the remainders of Gods Image, the temporary believer is endu∣ed with the common graces of the spirit, for substance not counterfeit, though ineffectual to sanctification. He is illightned with the knowledge of Divine Mysteries, grounded upon the Scripture, which is not altogether idle and ine∣fectual: He is drawn to believe in some sort, and with confidence to receive the Word of the Kingdom both as true and good. He may reform himself in such sort, that it may be said, Satan is cast out of him: and all this not in hypocri∣sie, or for fear of punishment, but freely and according to the word of grace, whereby he is moved to affect things that are above. From whence followeth a Combate in him farre greater and of another nature then that betwixt reason and appètite, conscience and affection, or the reliques of Gods Image with the power of sinne; even of the common graces of the spirit with the power of corruption repressed, not mortified or killed. But the graces of the Spirit are not soundly planted, the Word of the Kingdom is not kindly received into the heart, so as to rule with universall sovereignty, and to season throughout the powers of the soul. Temporary Christians make some account of Gods fa∣vour and the joys of Heaven in an inferiour place: but their desire of happiness is subordinate to the things of this world; in particular estimation, which is joyned with choice of heart, they preferre their special delights before Christ, and will rather leave him than leave the world, if the one of necessity must be parted with. Wherefore the will of the best unregenerate man, is still in cap∣tivity under the dominion of sinne, and his heart of an earthly temper, though it be somewhat changed by the superficial receipt of the Word of Life, which it tasteth, but digesteth not. In which respect the motions of the unregenerate in the waies of godliness may be said to be dead and accidentall; because the soul is not enlivened by the Spirit of grace: but the motion of the regenerate is lively and natural, proceeding from the Spirit of grace that dwelleth in them, whereby they are quickned in the inner man. Hereby we may gather the diffe∣rence of these Combates: First, The Spirit lusteth against all evil and corrupti∣on, as against the ignorance, vanity and folly of mind, the frowardness and perversness of will, whereby it is drawn from the chief good to esteem, admire,
affect, approve and follow after things transitory, that perish with the use; and to shrink, draw back, and turn from the pursuit of things spiritual and super∣natural, when it is accompanied with manifold crosses and aflictions. But the temporary Christian doth voluntarily allow himself in the esteem and particular approbation of things pertaining to this life, as in themselves most usefull, and to us most necessary and excellent. His interest in them he will not intirely for∣go, his title to them he will not deliberatly renounce, no not that he might gain an eternal Mansion promised in the Word, and in general esteemed by himself an excellent. If at any time the light of truth rush in and convince the con∣science, specially when in practice it is made evident, that comparatively he preferreth the lesser inferiour good; he studieth not by hearty repentance to reform what is out of order, but to cover the matter with shifts and devices, distinctions and evasions, that please himself, and bleare conscience for a time. Secondly, The Spirit that quickneth the regenerate, doth rule in them, curbing and commanding all unruly passions and desires, with authority and power. Rom. 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of sinne and death. 11 Vers. 10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sinne; but the Spirit is life, because of righteousness. But the tem∣porary believer, even in the good things he doth, is maimly led by his unsound and corrupt affections, unto which the graces of the spirit be subordinate in him. Thirdly, In the Conflict betwixt the flesh and the spirit, the better part doth ordinarily prevail and get the better, that the regenerate cannot fulfill the lusts of the flesh, nor walk according to the flesh. For whosoever is born of God, overcometh the world, and this is the Victory whereby we overcome the world, even our faith, 1 Joh. 5.4. Greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the world, 1 Joh. 4.4. Sinne shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the Law, but under grace, Rom. 6.14. They that are Christs, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 6.24. But the unregenerate man is ever in∣dulgent to his carnal and corrupt affections, favoureth himself in his projects, and willingly yeeldeth to be overcome in that course which is according to his inclination. For he never setteth himself with any determined resolution to seek the subduing and crucifying of his speciall sinnes, as earthlymind∣edness, love of ease, fear of trouble or persecution, inordinate passion; at all times he is favourable to them, and when he is tryed in the particulars, he will discover what he is. Q. Do not the godly offend in many things? 1 Reg. 8.46. 1 Joh. 1.8. Iam 3.2. Eccl. 7.20. Ioh. 9.3. Psal. 66.18. Psal. 143.2.A. If any man say he hath no sinne, he deceives himself; There is none just that sinneth not. But the godly sinne not in that manner as they do, who by a pecu∣liar name are called sinners. God heareth not sinners, that is, such as regard wickedness in their heart, that look upon it with delight: but he heareth them that have sinne abiding in them, else it should be in vain for any man living to make supplication. They are said to be blessed, who do not stand in the way of sinners; which blessednese were none at all, if all who sinne should be esteemed sinners, and so excluded from it. The Scripture maketh mention of the pure in heart;Mat. 5.8. Psal. 24.4. Prov. 20.9. Aug Cont. Julian. l. 2. Hil. in Psal. 118. and yet the wise man saith, Who can say, I have cleansed my heart? perfectly none, but they in part that are sanctified by the Spirit. If God should despise sinners, he should despise all men, because no man is without sinne: And yet there are some of whom it is said in speciall manner. The sinners shall not stand in the assembly of the just, Psal. 1.5. The arms of sinners shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the righteous, Psal. 37.17. Let sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more, Psal. 104.35. The wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it, Prov. 2.22. Though a sinner live an hundred years, it shall not go well with the wicked, Eccl. 8.12. & 9.2. Sinners love those that love them, Luk. 6.32. A distinction must be
made betwixt these two, having sinne and being a sinner in Gods account. Such have sinne in whom corruption abideth and bringeth forth some fruits, either hindering good, or quenching the motions of the spirit, or drawing them unto evil. They are sinners, who live in bondage and thraldom unto sinne, and are taken captive of their lusts. Secondly, The godly fall into sinne through frailty and infirmity, when they be prevented of the temptation before they be aware,2 Chro. 32.31. or grow weary of making resistance, or be left of God to try and humble them: but they be not workers of iniquity, committers of sinne in the phrase of Scripture. He that is born of God doth not commit sinne, 1 Joh. 3.8, 9. They do no iniquity, Psal. 119.3. Simply to sinne, is more general then to do or commit sinne: every man that committeth sinne, is truly said to sinne, but not every man that sinneth, to commit or do sinne. As these speeches, to him it is sinne,Jam. 4 17. Joh. 9.41. or, ye have sinne, are taken emphatically, and note the being, cleaving, re∣maining of sinne in speciall and peculiar sort: so do the other of doing or com∣mitting sinne, which import as much as to sinne without strife and wrestling, with delight and indulgence, specially in lesser things. The Apostle John thus expoundeth the phrase of doing sinne: Whosoever (saith he) doth sinne,Joh. 8.34. Rom. 8.16. 1 Pet. 2.19. the same is the servant of sinne: that is to say, one that is commanded of sinne, and tyrannized over by sinne, as a drudge who cannot but do whatsoever his Master commandeth him. Whereby it is evident, that by sinning is meant, no one sin how great and grievous soever it be (that excepted which is against the Holy Ghost) but continuance with pleasure and indulgence,Joh. 3.5.8. in whose minds sinnes are incorporated by impenitency, who dwell and wallow in that filthiness. When Christ shall say, I know ye not; depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Mat. 7.23. He meaneth not only that iniquity was committed by them,sal. 10.3. Psal. 28.3. but he signifieth that it was studiously committed, as a man studieth or useth his art or occupation. And this is manifest in very many Texts of Scripture, where it speaketh of the workers of iniquity: There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, Job 34.22. Thou hatest all the workers of iniquity, Psal. 5.5. Fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity, Psal. 37.1. Be not mercifull to any wicked transgressours, Psal. 59.5. All the workers of iniquity shall be scat∣tered, Psal. 92.7. When the righteous man turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doth according to all the abhominations that the wicked man doth, Ezek. 18.24. The Angels shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend; and them which do iniquity, Mat. 13.41. In all which places not only the act but the mind and affection is noted: hence it is that we read in the Pro∣phet, His heart will work iniquity, Isa. 32.6. Finally, they that are in Christ do sinne, but they walk not according to the flesh; Put on the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, Eph. 6.11. Resist the Devil, and he will fly, Jam. 4.7. I am able to do all things through Christ that strengtheneth me, Phil. 4 13. If ye through the Spirit do mortifie the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live, Rom. 8.13. But they walk according to the flesh, not who through infirmity do slip into that which is evil, but to whom the flesh or the things of the flesh, is the principle and chief scope of life. But they in whose mind and purpose the Spirit doth flourish, that the purpose and institution of life should depend upon, they are said to walk according to the Spirit, though now and then some things happen, which do more resemble the na∣ture of the flesh then of the Spirit. Yea, sometime it falleth out in this in∣firmity, that in the regenerate themselves, the flesh doth more shew it self then the spirit, and though by a certain general motion of true faith the mind bend unto God, yet there is something in particular causes that hin∣ds its light, whereby he becomes too indulgent to his affections. But if all things be referred to the flesh, they are said to walk according
to the flesh, although they occasionally do many things which seem to pertain to the Spirit. Q. Is it not a note of the Child of God, that his conscience checketh him for sinne? A. This work of conscience is to be found in unbelievers, even in all them who are touched with any sense of right and wrong, just and unjust. For in them the conscience doth not cease to strive against the flesh, untill it be seared and past all sense. But the resistance of conscience doth not hinder the full consent of will in sinning, rather it aggravates the sinne, and declareth the proneness of the will to be so strong, that it cannot be hindered from consent by the work of conscience. But this is not the Combate which we require and describe: for in that there is some thing, from which there is respect towards God, as to hate sinne for God, to hunger and thirst after righteousness, to afflict the flesh, seriously to be displeased, to ask pardon, and make supplication for grace. And though in this Conflict sin be not evermore prevented, yet it ever succeedeth to true repentance, and causeth to profit daily to a setled will not to offend. Q. When the godly consent to sinne, doth the spirit lust against the flesh? A. 2. Concerning the act of sinne it is true, that the will being overcome by the occasion doth give back, not without the grief of the holy spirit, but yet so that the spirit doth soon resume its rule and government, and casts forth the enemy let in, and by how much the greater breach hath been made, by so much it taketh care to fortifie all entrances that it invade not again. 2. In the act of sinning after a wonderfull manner that is committed against the will, which yet cannot be committed but by the will: for there is in the will of man regenerate something mixt, that it both willeth good with godly affection, and desires it, but being not perfectly regenerate it lusteth after evil which is contrary to good. To imagin that the will is not capable of spiritual gifts is most absurd: for the Scripture attributing purity,Mat. 5.8. Luk. 8.15. Psal. 32.11. Psal. 51.10. Ezek. 11.19. Phil. 2.13. Ezek. 36.26. goodness, uprightness to the heart, doth evi∣dently convince that supernatural graces are infused into the will, unless we will place the most excellent gifts of Divine grace in the unreasonable part of the soul. Moreover, the habituall aversion and turning of the soul from the lust of playing the adulteress with carnal things, is it not a wonderfull change? In like manner, an infused free-given habituall goodness, is to be acknowledged in the will, which is presupposed to all godly actions. For seeing the Scripture teacheth, that God doth circumcise the heart, take away the stony heart, and give an heart of flesh, and incline the heart to walk in his waies; How can we imagine that the mind should be enlightned and the affections healed, when the will is naked and destitute of Divine grace? Now seeing the will is in part re∣newed and in part corrupted, what absurdity is it, that there should be contrary wishes in it at one and the same time, as there be contrary inclinations? though when the one prevails, the other gives place. When the heart consents to evil, the regenerate man shall find cause to accuse himself of sloth and negli∣gence, in not stirring up the graces of Gods Spirit, and seeking aid from above: but hence it doth not follow, that the will doth fully a∣gree to that which is evil, or that the renewed part doth wholly cease to make resistance. Q. What is the Issue or Event of this Fight? A. The Issue of it is to prevail against the flesh, but not without much mo∣lestation, and some foils. In all these things we are more then Conquerours, through him that loved us, Rom. 8.37. Resist the Devil, and he will fly, Jam. 4.7. Take unto you the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil,Gal. 5.16, 17. Eph. 6.13. Walk in the Spirit, and fulfill not (or ye shall not fulfill) the lusts of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh: and these are contr ary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. The Exhortation of the Apostle is in the 16th verse, which for the ambiguity of the Greek word may be read two waies,Beza annot in Gal. 5.16. ful∣fill ye, or, ye shall fulfill. If it be read after the first manner, then the Exhor∣tation stands of two parts, of which the one teacheth what is to be done, the o∣ther what is to be omitted: to wit, we must walk in the spirit, and not fufill the lusts of the flesh. But if we read them after the second manner, then it contains an Exhortation in these words: Walk in the Spirit;Paraeus in Gal. 5.10. and a Consectary adjoyned to the Exhortation: and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. And this reading seemes most agreeable to the mind of the Apostle, to the scope and circumstances of the place. The scope is, to prescribe an Antidote to carnal liberty. For in the 13th verse he exhorted the Galatians, that they would not abuse their Christian Liberty for an occasion to the flesh: Now in this verse, he bringeth a remedy, how they might repress and bridle the rage and violence of the flesh. If ye walk in the spirit, then it shall come to pass that we shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. And the reason following in the 17th verse, doth more confirm, that the flesh is tamed and bridled of the spirit, as of the con∣trary: because contraries are expelled and cured by contraries, By this it ap∣pears, that the later reading is most fit to the sense of the Apostle; and so is it best approved of by learned and judicious Authors. The end or event of that combate is described in these words, and these two are contrary, that ye cannot do the things that ye would: which if it be referred to the words immediatly going before, then it may be interpreted of the will regenerate and unregenerate, which mutually lust one against another, and hinder each other that they cannot do what they would. But if it be referred to the exhortation before-going, then it must necessarily be understood of the regenerate power of the soul, which doth curb and bridle the desires of the flesh, that they break not forth into action. This sense the scope of the Apostle, and the reason alledged by him, doth evidently require: For how doth it follow from the contrariety between the flesh and the spirit, that we shall not follow the lusts of the flesh, if we walk in the Spirit, unless in event the spirit get the victory? Touching the prevailing of the spirit these rules are to be observed. 1. The spirit prevails not in one in∣stant, but in the generall whole course of a mans life. So the Apostle John saith, He that is born of God sinneth not, for he preserveth himself:1 Joh. 5.18, 19 the grace of God in his heart ordinarily prevailing in him. And Paul makes it the property of the regenerate man, to walk according to the spirit,Rom. 8.2, 13. which is not now and then to make a step forward, but to keep his ordinary course in the way of godliness. As in going from Barwicke to London, it may be, a man now and then will go amiss: but he speedily returns to the way again, and his generall course shall be right. The man that is led by the spirit doth for the most part walk in the perfect undefiled way, though now and then he may go astray, and slip aside. 2. The spirit prevails not without much striving, resistance, pain and difficulty. This conflict of the regenerate resembleth the practice of a sick man, who being recovered of some grievous disease, walks a turn or twain about his chamber, saying, ah, I would fain walk up and down, but I cannot: meaning, not that he cannot walk at all, but signifying that he cannot walk as h would, being soon wearied through faintness. The graces of the spirit be im∣perfect in degree, as is the strength of the sick person, which causeth wearisom∣ness in the Christian course. The effect of this weakness is, that it stirreth up earnest longings and desires of more perfect recovery and fuller strength: for as the feeling of bodily weariness causeth desire of perfect health and ability to stirre with more ease and speed; so doth the sense of spirituall infirmity. 3. This prevailing of the spirit, causeth not that all concupiscence doth utterly cease, or is altogether extinguished in the faithfull, that none vex or trouble them: but
that it exercise not dominion over them, and draw them at pleasure whether it will. The Apostle saith not, the lusts of the flesh shall not entice, annoy or trou∣ble you; but ye shall not be in subjection unto it, it shall not hale and draw you to fulfill the desires of it, it shall not tyrannize in you, as it doth over the unre∣generate. The power of corruption is abated by little and little through the prevailing of the spirit: but corruption doth still abide, and the motions of it will still arise in the soul, so long as we live in this world. 4. This prevailing is not without some foyls, when God is pleased to leave them to themselves, that they might know what is in them;2 Chro. 32.3. or the temptation rusheth violently upon them before they be aware; or else they grow weary of the fight, and cast down their weapons. This happeneth through the ignorance, infirmity, negligence, and sometimes security of the best of Gods servants that live in this world. The best learned are ignorant of many things, know nothing for measure as they ought: and experience witnesseth, that many things fall out of our minds by tentation, and come into forgetfulness, which would have been of great use then, and were known before. Besides, whatsoever we are, we are imperfect; hard and slow to understand, apt and prone to forget, slack heavy and weak in will, changeable and uncertain in affections, in all which, imbred pravity doth cause, that in this mortal body we carry about with us daily an army of vices, with which we must Conflict at all times in every moment. But in what things soever we are imperfect, in them also we are weak. Therefore when we cannot be sufficiently attent amidst these warres, nor sufficiently fenced for all purposes, we must needs fall sometimes, nor can the occasions of sinne that creep suddainly upon us, altogether be prevented, and wholly overcome. But if by the cor∣rupt disposition of nature we commit so many things not well, what shall be done when force of tentation, and vehement motion of passions shall be added to it? What servant of God is there living upon earth, who doth not feel the motions of the flesh urging to that which is evil, and forcing him to complain? O miserable man that I am! Who is not interrupted in his best duties with vain, unseasonable, roving thoughts; base, filthy and wicked? Who is not hindered with unbelief, clogged with sloth, deadness, hardness of heart; distracted with vain pleasures and worldly cares? Who do not runne in∣to no small offences, being darkned with the clouds of ignorance? Who doth not offend in many things every day by negligence, sloth, idleness, disregard and want of watchfulness, of which he repents at evening, and in which there is cause he should repent again in the morning? Yea, no doubt some deal more boldly, and by reason of infirmity presume of infirmity, and grow too indul∣gent to themselves in many things because they are weak. Certainly as it hap∣neth in a civil Common-wealth the Kingdom standing, that some parts are mo∣lested by in-rodes and incursions of the enemies, and can hardly fortifie them∣selves so strongly, that they should not be compelled to bear spoyles and rob∣beries with their great damage: so it falleth out in our spiritual state, the Kingdom of Christ being confirmed in us, that to our great loss we suffer the invasion of the enemy. Thus we may see some faithfull men to be overgrown with earthli∣mindedness, rusted with idleness, carried away with vanity, puffed up with pride, distempered with anger, inclined to rash censuring. And which is more to be lamented, sometimes through heedlesseness, security and presumption, the god∣ly are overtaken and fall into some gross or notorious offences. In this case, the spirit for the time being vanquished and subdued by the flesh, not quite ex∣tinguished, the man regenerate is like a Souldier, that with a blow hath his brain-pan cracked, so as he lies groveling astonished, not able to fight: or like him that hath a fit of the falling-sickness, who for a time lies like a dead man. How farre the Child of God may fall, is to be handled in more fit place here∣after: here it is sufficient to note, that a man soundly regenerate and born anew,
can never sin so as to be wholly cut off from Christ. In respect of inward comfort, fellow ship and communion he may be cut off from Christ, but not in respect of union and conjunction with him. A mans arm taken with the dead palsie, hangs by, and receives no heat, life or sense, from the rest of the members, or from the head, yet for all this it remains still united and coupled to the body, and may again be recovered by Plaisters and Physick: so after a grievous fall the Child of God feels no inward peace and comfort, but is smitten in consci∣ence with the trembling of a spiritual palsie for his offence: and yet indeed still remains before God a member of Christ in respect of conjunction with him, and shall be restored to his former estate after serious repentance. When the Believer falleth into gross notorious sinne, he is not cast from the state of justification and adoption, the seed of grace perisheth not utterly, faith is not clean extinguished: but for the present he hath cast himself into a damnable con∣dition, lyeth under the Fatherly wrath of God, and hath made himself unapt immediately to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Immediately unapt,Psal. 32.3, 4. 1 Ioh. 1.8, 9. Ezek. 18.21. 1 Cor. 6.9. Apoc. 21. I say, for God hath instituted this order, that the act of repentance should go before the benefit of pardon; and in his holy Word ordained, that no unclean thing should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nor is this Doctrine any way prejudicial to the grace of God, as if the flesh were stronger than the spirit. For the grace of God shall certainly uphold and lead the Elect and faithfull to the participation of eternal life, in which work the Lord doth take away all will of actual resisting his blessed Spirit: but the principall acts without which the salvation of the Elect cannot stand, must be distinguished from other sub∣sequent acts in themselves not absolutely necessary to salvation, as to avoid this or that sinne, to omit the doing of this or that particular good. For the producing of the former, grace doth so work, that it gives to the Elect in due time both to be able, and to will and to do: to the other the guidance of the Spirit is not wanting to us,Eph. 4.30. but we may be and are oft wanting to the grace of God. The Spirit is able to sanctifie us throughout, and to uphold us from falling; but he worketh as he pleaseth, not as he is able; as he knowes it to be for the glory of God, and the good of the Elect, not ever to the producing of this or that particular good, or the hindering of this or that particular evil: be∣cause the Lord in his infinite wisdom knowes it not to be expedient. Besides, God is not wanting to us in any thing necessary to salvation, or that he hath promised in the Covenant of grace: but when we are foyled, we are wanting to our selves, and must bear the blame of our transgression. But what we do evilly, that God ordereth by his surpassing wisdom to a most excellent end. For God permits these foyles for weighty causes: First, That men might be abased and confounded in themselves with the consideration of their vile natures, and learn not to swell with pride; because of Gods grace. Paul saith,2 Cor. 12.7, 8. that after he had been rapt up into the third Heaven, the messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, and (as we say) to beat him black and blew, that he might not be exalted out of measure. Secondly, That we may learn to deny our selves, and cleave unto the Lord from the bottom of our hearts. Paul saith,2 Cor. 1.9. that he was sick to death, that he might not trust in himself, but in God who raiseth the dead The effects following upon the foyles of the part regenerate are these. First, Unfeigned and bitter sorrow for our slips and fals. Of this we have example in the Church, who finding her failings and fals into sinne,Esa. 63.17. pitifully complaineth and cryeth out unto God for help. O Lord, why hast thou made us to erre from thy waies? And hardned our hearts from thy fear? Return for thy servants sake; the Tribes of thine Inheritance. Secondly,Rom 7.24. An earnest and vehement desire to be freed from the slavery of sinne, and to serve the Lord in the duties of holiness and righteousness. For as the needle in the Dial which is touched with a Loadstone may by a forcible motion turn
and wind to and fro, but will never stand fixed and stedfast till it bend unto its own proper point: so the heart of the regenerate touched with Gods Spirit, howsoever through the violence of the flesh, and strength of Satans tentations, it may be averted from God, and turn this way and that way after the vanities of this world, yet it never resteth till it be again returned and inclined towards him, from whom it had first motion and being. Thirdly, There followeth an uncessant care to use all means for the encrease of grace, and to take all oppor∣tunities to subdue and crucifie the flesh; As Souldiers that have once felt the force of enemies, do labour afterwards to withstand their fury by taking all occasions and advantages to weaken their might and power. The fourth Rule is, That the Spirit doth get full Victory at the end of mans life: For then the flesh is ut∣terly abolished, and sanctification accomplished: because no unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Q. What means must be used for the weakning of the flesh? A. 1. We must not feed our flesh with sinfull pleasures and carnal delights, nor give it ease and contentment by satisfying and glutting it with all worldly superfluities, ease and delicacy, immoderate use of lawfull recreations and volup∣tuous delights. For though this might go for good policie between Nation and Nation, to help forward their enemy in their voluptuous delights, because hereby they are weakned and made effeminate; yet it is not so in this conflict with the flesh, seeing the more it is effeminated and pampered with carnal de∣lights, the more it is strengthened against the spirit. To feed often liberally, not refraining any thing to which ones appetite leadeth, to be gratifying carnal desire, now with one thing, now with another, alas, what doth it? It distemper∣eth the flesh with lust, it doth make the very soul fleshly affected, it indisposeth us to those exercises which are performed by the mind; it makes us fit to be kindled with anger or any such like passion. Finally, it taketh up the minde with thought what it shall next be served with in this kinde. 2. By all holy means we must restrain and withhold from the flesh whatsoever might nourish, stirre up, or strengthen sinne. For example, we must use our best endeavour to shut forth of the minde all sinfull cogitations, vain imaginations, wicked deliberations, ungodly counsels, pernicious errours, false opinions, the delightfull remem∣brance of sinfull pleasures. We must preserve our hearts from all unlawfull lusts, wicked desires, unruly passions, and ungodly affections, especially from cove∣tuousness, ambition and carnal voluptuousness. We must preserve our tongues from all corrupt communication, our eyes from wanton and wicked objects, our ears from dishonest and ungodly discourses, and our mind and body from sloth, idleness, excessive delight and looseness. Finally, We must not fulfill our inordinate desires in things lawfull, but cross and curb them; as David would not drink of the waters of Bethel, which he so wonderfully desired. But if we cannot prevent the rising of evil thoughts and corrupt motions, then it must be our wisdome to quench them with all speed, and to watch against all things that might kindle and enflame them; specially we must wath over our senses, which being the gates of our souls, do either let in or keep out friends and enemies. 3. The flesh must be resisted in the first beginnings of sinne, and in all occasions which it taketh.Heb 3.13. If we give sinne an inch, it will take an ell; it knoweth better how not to begin, than having begun to make an end. Give the waters no passage. It is most safe to encounter the enemy before he hath set foot upon our borders; or if he have made entrance before we were aware, to drive him out before he be entrenched. And as we must resist the first motions, so must we shunne all occasions of sinne. He that feareth death, if he be wise, he will not drink poyson, nor thrust himself into needless and dangerous quar∣rels, nor expose his person to any perils which threaten destruction. He that would preserve his riches which he loveth, will not entertain occasions of need∣less
expences, much less suffer his doors to stand wide open in the night, or invite known thieves to lodge with him. 4. We must neglect no sinne, as though we were in no danger of falling into it, nor esteem any sin so small as that we may willingly or negligently commit it. We are prone to all sinne, if God leave us to our selves: and the hurt of the least sinne is exceeding dangerous. The smal∣lest sinne is an aversion from God, the transgression of his law, the violater of his justice; it defileth the soul, woundeth conscience, weakneth the power of grace, grieveth the Spirit, hardneth the heart, makes entrance for greater, and disinableth to fight manfully against the most notorious offences. And here let us be warned, that we excuse not our selves in any slip or oversight, though it appear little or small: for sin will harbour where it is defended and countenanced. And if we plead for it by way of excusing, we cannot set against it in good ear∣nest, nor will slight dislike be of force to keep it under. 5. Our mortification must be without stint or restraint, extending it self in respect of the object, unto all our lusts, and not unto some only; in respect of the time it must be continu∣all, even to the very end of our lives; and in respect of degree, we must not content our selves to have overcome and mortified all our sinfull lusts in some small measure, but we must labour and strive after perfection.2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Thes. 5.23. Q. What means must be used for the cheering and strengthening of the Spirit un∣to this Conflict? A. 1. We must earnestly desire to have the spirit more strengthened, and the gifts and graces thereof enlarged and multiplied. For as we have Gods Pro∣mise, that if wanting the Spirit, we do desire and pray for it,Luk. 11.13. he will give him unto us: so also when having it, we desire to have all graces encreased,Psal. 145.18. the Lord will satisfie our desires. 2. We must nourish the good motions of the Spirit, neither quenching them, nor delaying to practice them. For it much cheereth and delighteth this heavenly Counsellour, when as we hearken to his Counsels, and be advised by him in our courses. 3. Serious care to maintain peace with God, is a speciall means to strengthen the Spirit. For if God be of∣fended how shall his Spirit be well pleased with us? How shall he be willing to renew our strength? to send unto us new supplies of his graces, and to assist us against our spiritual enemies? 4. Continuall exercise is necessary to preserve and strengthen the graces of the Spirit. We find by experience that the sight is bettered by seeing, and much weakned when it is deprived of fit objects. The habituall memory is much strengthened by the practicall, and made feeble and unfaithfull when as it hath no exercise or imployment. Sloth and remisseness is a great enemy to bodily health and thrift; so is it to spiritual growth and increase; Use grace, and increase in grace. Husband thy stock, and thy store shall be mul∣tiplied. (Other means I will spare to mention at this present, because they come to be handled in their place hereafter.) Q What are the Effects of this Combate? A. 1. From this Conflict between the flesh and the spirit, arising from the imperfection of our regeneration, this effect is wrought and caused in the man regenerate, that he can neither perfectly will good, nor hate evil. For when the will, as it is regenerate, would do that which is good, or avoid and shun that which is evil, that part which remaineth unregenerate struggleth and hindereth, and when this would embrace the evil or refuse the good, the regenerate part re∣sisteth and opposeth. 2. The best acts of the regenerate fall short of perfection required: for the action cannot exceed the habite from which it springeth: if the one be defective, the other is faulty. The cause of works in man are the mind, will and affections sanctified: in which the flesh and the spirit are mixt to∣gether: therefore works of grace, even the best of them, are mixt works, partly holy, partly sinfull. If any reply, that good works are the works of the holy Spirit, and for that cause perfectly righteous. I answer, it is true indeed, they
come from the Holy Ghost that cannot sin, but not only or immediately, for they come from the mind and will of man, which are regenerate only in part, and have much of the old man remaining in them, and thereupon must nees infuse some uncleanness into the effects produced by them. 3. The regenerate cannot do the evil which the flesh lusteth after.Gal. 5.17. 1 Joh. 3 8, 9. First, He cannot commit sin at what time soever the flesh would. He that is born of God sinneth not, neither can he sin, because he is born of God. This Joseph intimateth in his deniall of the wicked suit which his Mistress made unto him:Gen. 39.9. Hew can I do this great wickedness and sinne against God? And what restrained him? surely the fear of God and his holy Spi∣rit, which would not suffer him to fall into so great wickedness. Secondly, He cannot commit sin as the wicked do with full, intire, perfect resolution: for sin being deposed from its regency, cannot reign and rule in the whole man as in times past. So much grace as is wrought in the mind, will, affections; so much is abated proportionally of the strength of the flesh.Abbat. in Thomson dia∣trib. cap. 21. p. 06. 1 Joh. 5.19. But some Divines do use this distinction, that the full will to sin may be understood two waies. For either it is so expounded as when it is said the whole World, and so the whole man, ly∣eth in sin, and the whole will is addicted to nothing but sin; or that it should be carried with all its force into this or that act of sin, without any reluctancy and resistance. In the former sense the regenerate cannot sin with full consent: but in the latter they may, not only in lesser, but even in greater trespasses, that for the time there be felt no resistance. Thirdly, He cannot walk in the way of sinners, but propoundeth unto himself to worship God in holiness and righte∣ousness; in which course though sometime he slippeth and falleth, yet by the grace of the Spirit he recovereth again, and returneth into the right way. Fourth∣ly, By reason of this Conflict the man regenerate cannot do the good the Spirit willeth, nor yeeld that perfect obedience to the Law of God which it requireth and he desireth. For when he would runne the Christian race, the sinne that compasseth him doth cling about his neck, and either maketh him for weariness to sit down, or to runne forward slowly and with great difficulty. It is true, that in this Conflict the flesh doth not wholly hinder and withdraw the regene∣rate man from performing of his duty, nor alienate his mind and heart from the study and embracing of goodness and righteousness, but yet still it endeavoureth to do it; and though it cannot make him to stand still or turn back again, yet like an heavy burden it presseth him down, and hindereth him in his journey. The consideration whereof should move every Christian to be humbled in the sight of his own frailty, wants and imperfections, to deny himself and his own righte∣ousness, that he may wholly rest upon the grace and mercy of God in Jesus Christ. It should also move us to watch and pray;Prov. 4.25. Heb. 3.13. & 13.13. Phil. 2.12. to mourn for remainders of sin that war within us, and strive forward towards perfection; to lift up the feeble hands that hang down, and to work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Q What are the Properties of this Combate? A. 1. This Combate is against the root of evil and the first motions of it, not only against notorious sinnes or the gross outward acts. 2. It is continuall in the whole course of the regenerate mans life, though it be less sensible at one te then at another. 3. In this Conflict the Spirit is the Conquerour and doth prevail; as hath been shewed.
PART 2. Of the Government of the Tongue. CHAP. I. Divers Reasons to perswade us to govern our Tongue aright. The spring, or root of a well ordered Tongue. That no man of himself is able to govern his Tongue aright. I Should now come to Treat of the right ordering of the outward man, but I shall speak only to the Government of the Tongue, because he that can govern his Tongue, will be able to bridle his whole body, Jam. 3.2. And to order his conversation aright. Q. Why is the Tongue to be governed aright? A. God requireth it, and so bindeth us to this duty upon our allegiance un∣to him; according to that of the Psalmist,Psal. 34.13. Prov. 4.24. 1 Tim. 4.12. Keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile; Where is required not only that we do not speak evil, but that we keep our Tongues under a narrow watch, that we do not speak it The Reasons to force this duty are many. 1. The Tongue is of great power and potency to draw us to good or evil, life or death, according to that of the wise man, Death and life are in the power of the Tongue,Prov. 18.21. & 10.19. Lingua conti∣net pharmacum vitae, & phar∣macum mortis. lib. Mus. 105.2. Anacharsis be∣ing asked wha was worst, and best in a man, answered, The Tongue; if it be not ruled, it is the worst, if well ruled, it is the best. Prov. 13.3. Prov. 21.23. Psal. 52.4. Rom 3.13. Prov 30.14. Psal. 57.4. Jer.  8. Psal. 64.3, 4. Iam. 3.5, 6, 7, 8. Eccl. 10.13. Prov. 12 18. Psal. 140.3. Psal. 120.4. Prov. 11.9. Est. 3. Calu∣mnia injuria afficit absentem, & non senticuti ictum seu plgam infert. Herod. in Polum. and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof. It is a tree of life to them that use it well: a tree of death to them that abuse it. It is fitly compared to the gates of a besieged City, whose safety or destruction stands much in their carefull or loose custody. As a Master of the Family cals upon his Servants to look well to the fire: so doth Solomon to keep the Tongue. In regard whereof he saith in another place, that he who keepeth his mouth, keepeth his life: but he that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction: And again, Who so keepeth his mouth and his Tongue, keepeth his soul from troubles. 2. The malitiousness of this little member should make us to watch over it with great care, for as the Psalmist, and the Apostle Paul, describe the effects and fruits of it. It deviseth mischief, and like a sharpe razor worketh deceitfully; It speaketh deceit, and loveth to lie rather then to speak righteousness; It delighteth in devouring words, it cutteth as a sword, and the poy∣son of Aspes is under the lips. So the Apostle James telleth us, that the Tongue as much needeth restraint, as an unruly Horse the bridle; and compareth it to the Helm of a Ship which being little turneth about the whole body, and to a fire inflamed by hell, and setting on fire a whole world with wickedness. A man of an evil Tongue, is a Beast in the form of a man; for his Tongue is the Tongue of a Serpent, under whch lyeth nothing but venom and poyson: nay, he is worse then a Serpent: for it cannot hurt, unless it be present to see a man, or to bite him, or to strike him with his tayl: but he which hath not the rule of
his Tongue, hurteth men as well absent as present; neither Sea nor Land nor any thing can hinder him. Against the biting of a Sycophant there is no remedy, but prayer to God to be delred from it.Psal. 120.2. 3. The gift of speech is a rare and wonderfull blessing, of great cellency and use, above all that we are able to comprehend:Psal. 16.9. Psal. 10.13. & 57.8. & 108.1. Gen. 49.6. Prov. 15.2. Eccl. 10.14. rov. 0.31, 32. & 16.23. Zeph 3.9. Jam. 1.26. As the man is, such is his speech. Prov. 10.20 Psal. 140.3. Prov. 10.31. Job. 15.5. Eccl. 10.12 Prov. 10.31. The Tongue is the glory of man, ordained to celeberate and set forth the praises of God. Therefore we shall be inexcusable, if we abuse an Instrument of such price and worth to vanity and sinne. 4. A good man can∣not be an evil speaker; he walkes not wisely, that talkes not wisely; neither may he be accounted an honest man in heart or life, that is an evil man in speech. If God make us new creatures, he gives us new Tongues, and if he turn the people to him by true repentance, he doth return unto them a pure language. If a man seem to be religious, and restrain not his Tongue, he deceiveth himself, and his religion is in vain. The Tongue, what is it but the interpreter of the heart? if it be vain and idle, the heart is barren and empty of a better matter. The Tongue of the Just is as choice silver, because his heart is pretious; but the heart of the wicked is little worth, and his Tongue is dross, vain or hurtfull. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. The carnal mans words are much after the humour and infection of his mind. Hereunto may be added, that the wicked are described by their false, deceitfull, pernicious Tongue. 5. Gratious speech is one argument of a good heart, as a clear stream of a pure Fountain. The mouth of the Just bringeth forth wisdom. This is one commendation that is given of the vertuous woman,Prov. 31.20. She openeth her mouth with wisdom, and under her Tongue is the law of kindness. And which is yet more, the Apostle makes Christian perfection to consist in the well ordering of the Tongue.Jam. 3.2. If any man offend not in Word, the same is a perfect man, and is able to bridle the whole body. 6. Watching of good speech keeps out evil, which ingendereth to evil. I said,sal. 39.1, 2. I will take heed to my waies, that I offend not with my Tongue; I will keep my mouth bridled, while the wicked is in my sight. 7. Great is the be∣nefit of a well ordered Tongue:Prov. 10, 11. 20, vers. Prov. 12.14. & 13.2. & 10.21. Prov. 12.18. Prov. 15 4. Isa. 57.19. It is compared to a Well of living Water, to refined Silver, to a Tree of life, to an wholsome medicine. The profit of it reacheth to many others, but the refreshing and comfort returns into a mans own bosome. Trees bring forth fruit for others, not for themselves: but he that useth his Tongue and speech lawfully, shall reap the fruit which he beareth. Trees are often planted and dressed by one, when another enjoyeth the fruit: but he that governeth his Tongue well, shall possess that fruit which none can take from him. Trees bring forth fruit once in the year: but the due use of the Tongue is continually fruitfull, for the comfort of him that useth it. The fruit of Trees is one and the same: but the fruit of the Tongue rightly exercised is diverse, amongst which the special is Eternal Life. 8. The mo∣derating of the Tongue is a matter of great difficulty. James saith, The nature of Beasts and of Birds,Jam. 3.7, 8. and of creeping things, is tamed, and hath been tamed of mankinde: but the Tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil. Pambu, one without learning, came to a certain man to be taught a Psalm, who when he had heard the first Verse of the 39 Psalm, I said, I will keep my waies that I offend not in my Tongue, would not suffer the next Verse to be read, saying, this Verse is enough, if I could practice it: And when his Teacher blamed him, because he saw him not in six moneths after, he answered, that he had not yet done the Verse. And one that knew him many years after, asked him whether he had yet learned the Verse, I am forty years old (saith he) and have not yet learned to fulfill it. Now then, the harder it is to rule the Tongue, the more care is to be had therein. 9. What light account soever men make of their speeches, they must give a reckoning of them before the Tribu∣nall Seat of God.Psal. 50.20, 21 Thou sittest and speakest against thy Brother: thou slanderest thine own Mothers Sonne. These things hast thou done, and I kept silence: thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Every idle word that men shall speak,Mat. 12.36. they shall give account thereof in the day of Judgment. Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophecied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thou∣sands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all,Jud. 14, 15, v. and to convince all that are ungod∣ly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodlily commit∣ted, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Q. What is the spring or root of a well-ordered Tongue? A. An heart pure, just, gratious, and well-seasoned, stored with wisdom, and replenished with mildness. Such as the heart is, such must the speech be,Prov. 10.22. Prov. 22.11. Prov. 15.2. Prov. 16.3. Psal. 45.1. Psal. 7.30, 31 Prov. 10.13, 14. sound or rotten, according to the quality of the Fountain whence it riseth. The heart of the wise guideth his mouth wisely. If the heart endite a good matter, the Tongue will be the pen of a ready Writer. The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom, and his Tongue talketh of judgment. The Law of his God is in his heart. In the lips of of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding. Wise men lay up knowledge. What Treasure men store up in their Chests, that they bring forth as occasion requireth. He that hath filled his Granaries with Corne, may fetch thence for use at pleasure: if wisdom dwell in the heart, it will appear in the speech.Prov. 16.21. Prov. 17.27. The wise in heart shall be called prudent, and the sweetness of the lips encreaseth learning. He that hath knowledge spareth his words: and a man of coole spirit is of excellent understanding. Q. Is any man able of himself to order his tongue aright?Psal. 39.1, 2, 3. Prov. 16.1. A. Not of himself without the speciall grace of God. David purposed that his tongue should not offend; but when the fire kindled, he spake unadvisedly. The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord. And this is manifest by the prayers of the Saints, asking of God the opening of their mouthes,Eph. 6.19. Ezek. 3.27. sal. 55.9. that they might be able to utter the misteries of godliness as be∣came them, and intreating him to destroy and divide the tongues of the wicked. Whence we learn two things; First, That we are wisely to consider and pre∣meditate what we are to speak The heart of the righteous studieth to answer.Prov. 15.28. Quicquid dictur es, pri∣us cum animo tuo reputa. Isoc. ad Demon. Diu considera quid loquendum fit, & adhuc tacens provide, ne quid dixisse paniteat. Psal 143.3. Psal 51.15. We may not rashly powre forth whatsoever comes into the thought: but seriously ponder what doth proceed from us. Secondly, It is not for us to trust in our wisdome and discretion, as if we had ability to open our mouthes as we ought: but God is to be sought unto by earnest and hearty prayer, that he would direct and guide us by his blessed Spirit. Man must first be able and carefull to talk with God, before he can be able wisely to talk with man. For this cause when men are to have communication one with another, they are first of all to be carefull that they often make their prayers to God, that he would guid and bless them in their speeches, as David did, Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. And again, O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Where we may see, that the mouth is as it were locked up from speaking any good thing, untill the Lord open it.
CHAP. II. Shewing, 1. Wherein the right government of the Tongue consists. What the Matter and Manner of our Speech must be; as also the Season, Measure, and End thereof; together with the course that a Christian should take to prevent rash and hasty Speeches. 2. Of holy Silence: Reasons to perswade thereunto: The Cause, and kindes of lawfull Silence, and what things are to be concealed. The Persons before whom Silence is to be used, with divers Rules to be observed therein. Question. WHerein stands the right government of the Tongue? Sermoni prae∣stat interdum silentium. Sermo sed inter∣dum praestat silentio. Eurip. in Ost. Ʋt diversa si∣bi vicinaqe culpa est multa loqui, & Auson, cuncta silere Sapientis est, & in loco tace¦re, & in loco loqui. Maen. Col. 4.6. Eph. 5 3, 4. Mat. 12.36. Ps. 40.8, 9, 10. Psal. 78.5, 6. Psal. 71.24. Iob. 36.24. Iud. 20. vers. Heb. 3.13. 1 Thes. 5.14. Lev. 19.2. Heb. 10.24. Mal. 3.14, 15.A. 1. In holy Speech. 2. In seasonable, wise befitting silence. Q. What things are to be observed in Speech? A. The matter, manner, season, measure, and end. Q. What must be the Matter of our Speech? A. In generall the Matter of our Speech must be lawfull, good, honest and wholesome, not vain, superfluous or sinfull. Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt. But fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness, let it not once be named amongst you, as becometh Saints: Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient. Of every idle word that men shall speak, they must give an account at the day of judgment. And the rule is here generall, that it is a point of wisdome to make choice of the best matters to be the object of our communication, matters of religion, faith, hope, repentance, sanctification, the priviledges of a Christian, and the way to salvation. Of things left to free election, what wise man will not preferre the most excellent, usefull and comfortable? More particularly, the matter of our Speech is either concerning God and his works, our neighbour and things pertaining to him, and our persons and occasions. God hath made known his Name that we might publish his praise, and talk of his wondrous works. He established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their children; that the generation to come might know them. And Christians are commanded to exhort, admonish, rbuke, comfort and build up one another in their most holy faith; which they cannot do, unless they speak one to another, to encourage in grace and godliness. But these caveats must be remembred: First, That the honourable titles of the glorious God be never taken into our mouthes, unless it be upon a weighty and just occasion, that glory may redound to him thereby: At which time we should finde our hearts lively affected with due consideration of that great Majesty before whom we speak,Lev. 19.12. Deut. 28.58. whose glorious and fearfull Name we mention. The precept is, Thou shalt not defile the Name of the Lord, but fear his glorious Name. But the Name of God is polluted, when it is tossed to and fro in mens ordinary speech, without due respect of his incomprehensible greatness. Secondly, If the matter of our speech concern the person of our brother, the rule is, to speak of the good thou knowest by him, readily, truly, chearfully, behind his back rather than in his presence, and that indifferently, wheter he be friend or fo; as St John writeth of Demetrius;3 Ioh. 12. Demetrius (saith he) hath good report of all men, and of the truth it self: yea, and we our selves bear record, and ye know that our testimony is true. But of evil, whether it be infirmity or gross sinne, saying or deed, we must not speak without a calling, without grief, according to our knowledge; not by hear-say,Tit. 3.2. and that as little as may be. Warne them that they speak evil of no man, but be soft, and shewing all meekness to all men. When we are lawfully
called before a Magistrate to bear witness of the truth, we may testifie our know∣ledge; when hurt or danger may arise to others by evil, if it be not prevented, we may wisely intimate our knowledge; when the evil is common and notorious we may complain to them that have authority to redress it, that further mis∣chief might be prevented: In these and such like cases it is lawfull to speak of the evil which we know by our neighbour, but not otherwise. To this end they of the house of Cloe certified Paul of the disorders in Corinth.1 Cor. 1.11. Joseph enformed his Father of the evil carriage of his brethren, which brought an ill report upon them. Elisha revealed the secrets of the King of Syria. But upon no occasion,Gen. 37.. 2 King. 6.8. Gen. 9.22. without a just calling, to uncover the nakedness of our Brethren, (as Cain did his Fathers,) is a thing very unlawfull, marvellous pernicious. The root of it, self-love, or self-admiration; the effect is hatred and contention. He that is an admirer of himself, desirous of vain-glory, laboureth to rear his own praise out of the ashes of another mans disgrace. And by the just judgment of God, when men take liberty to talk broadly of other mens courses, acts, and manner of living, they runne into hatred and contempt: For what is spoken, by one means or other cometh to be known, and then, what heart-burnings and secret boylings of passions may we see amongst Brethren? Concerning things that are secret in our neighbour, we are not to be suspicious, but either to suspend both speech and judgment, or to construe all things in the best sense.1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, untill the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest. Love suspecteth no evil.1 Cor. 13.7. As for sinnes in our neighbour, we must deal plainly and truly with him. Thou shalt not hate thy Brother, but shalt plainly rebuke him,Lev. 19.17. and not suffer his sinne upon him; that is, thou shalt freely and soundly rebuke him with conviction of Arguments, shewing what is right, and reselling the contrary.Iob. 13.3. Esa. 1.18. Iob. 32.12. Esa. 1.4. Luk. 17.3. Psal. 141.5. Prov. 9.8. & 28.23. Prov. 19.25. Prov. 24.25. Prov. 27.2. 1 Cor. 15.9. If thy Brother sinne against thee, reprove him, and if he repent, forgive him. This David desired, saying, Let the just smite me, let him rebuke me: and it is the means both to nourish love amongst the wise, and to encrease knowledge among the prudent, and to procure a good blessing. 3. If the matter of our speech concern our selves, it must be modest without vanity or boasting. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own lips. Nay, we should rather extenuate and lessen the good in us, if we must needs speak of it, as Paul, I am the least of the Apostles. It is a very unseemly thing for a man to applaud his own doing, seeing to seek praise from others is damnable, and worthily taxed of our Savi∣our in the Pharisees: much more absurd it is to give commendations of him∣self vauntingly, and to sound out his own praises. We say of them (that com∣mend their own course,) by way of reproof, He dwelleth by ill neighbours. Nevertheless it is necessary for a man in some cases to testifie his graces and his actions: as in defence of his innocency, when he is unjustly traduced, as Paul was: or when the hiding or concealing of ones goodness, may urn to the hinderance of the truth, or to the hurt of the Church, or impairing of Gods glory. Again, a Christian is not to dispraise himself or speak of things ten∣ding to his disgrace, unless the glory of God, the edification of the godly,2 Cor. 1.4. and the satisfaction of the Church and Congregation require it. Q. What ought to be the manner of our speech? A. In general it must be gracious, and powdered with salt;Col. 4.6. Prov. 22.11. Imago animi sermo est. Sen. It must proceed from grace in the heart: the matter or subject must be good and wholesome; and the manner of speech, such as may picture and paint forth the graces of the mind: for speech is the very Image of the heart. And by this it appeareth, that no vice can be named but with disliking. More particularly.Eph. 5.3. 1. It must be in faith, that what is spoken be known to be a thing both just and lawfull to be spoken, and that we be affected according as the nature of the thing requireth. As in mentioning the Titles of God, we must exercise faith to believe what
they import, and be affected with fear, reverence, love and confidence in the living God before whom we stand. The like may be said of the works of God, his mercies, judgments, favours or chastisements wherewith he doth bless or correct the sonnes of men.A wise man carries his mouth in his heart. Prov. 10.31. Prov. 16.23. 2. It must be in wisdom and discretion, that is, it must issue from a wise and understanding heart, duely considering what and how to speak, that it may turn to the profit of him that speaketh, and them that hear. The mouth of the wise bringeth forth wisdom. The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning unto his lips. As he looketh on his meat before he eateth: so he pondereth the matter of his words before he speaketh. The mind is the guid of the Tongue: therefore premeditation and good advice must go before words. The Tongue is the Messenger of the heart, and therefore as oft as we speak without meditation, so oft the Messenger runneth without his errand.Jam. 1.19. rov. 18.13. St James requireth that men should be slow to speak, and swift to hear. Solomon saith, He that answereth a matter before he hear it, it is folly and shame unto him. 3. Our speech must be faithfull. This is alwaies required in all our Doctrines, Accusations, Defences, Testimonies, Promises, Bargaines, Counsels, Relations.Down. in Ram. lib. 2. cap. 3. Scult. Ethi. lib. 2. cap. 31. Rainold cens. Apoc. Prae. 46. 1 Joh. 1.6, 8. 1 Tim. 2.7. Psal 15.2. Prov. 12.22. Zech. 3.6. Eph. 4.25. Mentiri serile est digum q pud omnes homines odio. Plut. Iob 13.7, 8, 9.10. Heb. 6.18. Rom. 3.7, 8. Three things are implied herein. 1. Truth, whereby a man speaketh as he knoweth things to be, or according to the trule of truth. It is made the note of a righteous man, to speak the truth from the heart, and they that deal truly are the Lords delight. Speak ye every man the truth to his neigh∣bour. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour. The end of all good ends, the glory of God, cannot priviledge any mans lie. The friends of Job disputed against him, though ignorantly, thinking him to be an Hypocrite; and their whole scope was to magnifie the justice of God upon him: but Job, holding nothing to be more dishonourable to God then to plead for him by a lie, stands at defiance with them that sought to plead after that manner; answering with detestation of that errour, Will you speak wickedly for God; and talk deceitfully for him? Will you accept his person? Will you yet contend for God? Do you so mock him? Shall not his excellency make you afraid? What refutation can be more emphaticall, or yet more just? for it is written, It is impossible for God to lie; and as impossible must we think it, for God to approve or justifie any lie, how much less wilfull lying? If the verity of God (saith the Appostle) hath more abounded through my lie unto his glory; Why yet am I also judged as a sinner? And not rather as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil, that good may come; whose dam∣nation is just. The Argument of the Apostle is this: though it be most in the verity of God, that mans unrighteousness (as for example a lie,) doth redound to the glory of Gods grace in pardoning of the same unrighteousness of man by Jesus Christ, according to the truth of the Gospel of remission of sinne: yet God forbid that any man should therefore multiply unrighteousness in sin∣ning (as for example lying) that Gods glory might be magnified in forgiving. Shewing that it were blasphemy to teach that it is lawfull for any to lie, although it would establish and advance the glory of God in that wherein God is most glorified, even the glory of his grace in pardoning sinne by Jesus Christ. I love the truth,Verum amo, verum mibi dici volo. Plaut. saith he in the Comicall Poet, I would have the truth told me. 2. Sincerity, which is a vertue, whereby we deal plainly, and speak according to the conceit of the mind without deceit or doubling. Words are signes of things, and notes of the sense of our mind. As the conceits of the mind must consent with the truth of the thing: so must the words of our mouth with the conceits of the mind. He that speaketh otherwise then the thing is, telleth an untruth;Phil. 2.15. Psal. 28.3. Prov. 17.20. Psal. 1.1. 2 Cor. 1.17. and he that speaketh a thing contrary to his mind, useth deceit. He that hath a froward heart, findeth no good; and he that hath a perverse Tongue, falleth into mischief. 3. Constancy or fidelity in all our lawfull sayings and promises. When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness? Or the things
that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea yea, and nay nay? 4. A fourth vertue required in speech is reverence to God and man. Reverence to God is when we so speak of God, his Word, Titles and Works, that we shew reverence our selves, and move reverence in others. If thou wilt not keep (saith the Lord) and do all the words of his Law [that are written in this Book] and fear the glorious and fearfull Name of the Lord thy God, then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderfull. Reverence to man is,Deut. 28.58. either because he is created after the Image of God, or because he is above us in age, gifts, authority: in which respect we must give fit speeches to all men, and use due titles of reverence to our superiours.1 Pet. 3.6. uk. 1.3. Psal. 15.4. Act. 26.25. Sarah is commended in Scripture for obeying her Husband, and calling him sir. Luke writing to Theo∣philus dignifieth him with the title of most excellent; Paul pleading before the Governour, calleth him most Noble Festus. A wicked man may be outwardly honourable, and thou maist not rob him without, because he is already robbed within. Thou maist cast him down from spiritual judgments, but not degrade him from his temporal dignity. 5. Modesty is an Ornament of speech, and must be manifested in sundry Particulars. First, If a man speak any thing of himself that sounds to his own commendation, let him alter the person, and speak of himself as of another. I knew a man (saith Paul,2 Cor. 12.2. speaking of himself) above fourteen years ago, which was taken up into Paradise, and heard words which can∣not be spoken. And John saith of himself: when Jesus saw his Mother,Ioh. 19.26. and the Disciple whom he loved standing by. Secondly, When a man shall have occa∣sion to speak of his own faults or corruptions,1 Tim. 1.13, 15. let him speak the uttermost a∣gainst himself, as Paul called himself the chief of sinners. Thirdly,Gen. 4.1. Psal. 51.1. 1 Sam. 14.4. Tit 3.2, 3. 1 Pet. 3.3. Nihil ita dig∣num est odio, ut eorum mores qui compellant∣bus se difficiles praebent. Plutarch. de puer educ. Rom. 16.3. Jud. 6.12. Ruth 2.4. Luk. 1.28. Prov. 15.21. Judg. 8.3. 1 Sam. 25.7. Rom. 12.14. 1 Pet. 5.9. Psal. 109.4. 1 Sam. 1.5. Gen. 40.15. Joh. 8.8. Act. 23.1. Judg .3. Ridiculum acri, Fortius & me∣lius magnas plerunque secat res. Facilius penetrant verba quae mollia vadunt, quam quae astera. Sen. Tit. 3.2. 2 Tim. 2.24, 25. 1 Pet. 3.4. Gal. .1. Gen. 13.8, 9. 2 Tim 5.1. 2 Sam. 12 6. 1 Cor. 4.6. Hos. 4.1. 2 Cor. 2.20. 2 King. 5.13. Physicians give Pills rolled up in Sugar, that the Patient may the more easily swallow them. The King of Aegypts Daughter had an Imposthume in her Pap. she could suffer no Chyrurgion to touch it; one takes a water-spung, and demands whether or not she culd suffer the water-spung to touch the Pap: In the mean time he hath secretly a Pen-knife inclosed within it, and with that opeeth the corruption. Eph. 5 4. 2 Cor. 11.19. 1 Cor. 8.1. Job. 12.2. 1 Reg. 18.27. Eccl. 2.2. In menti∣oning of things which move blushing, we are to use as seemly words as may be chosen. Fourthly, Refuse the excessive and immoderate praises of others. 6. Affableness or meekness is required in comunication, when a man useth cour∣teous and fair speeches. This must be shewed in Salutations, Answers, Reproofes. Daily experience can testifie that it maketh much for the maintaining of love, to salute kindly and reverently by Name, Profession, Calling or Office, by way of Blessing. Our answers must be soft, that anger be neither kindled nor en∣creased. If we be railed on, our duty is not to rail again, but rather to bless and pray, and either to keep silence or to return a mild and gentle answer. And when a man hath so cleared himself, though his own word in his own behalf take no effect, yet he must patiently commit his cause to God, and rest in the testimony of a good conscience. Our Saviour makes answer to clear his inno∣cency, but when that canot take place, he keepeth silence and will not speak one word. Reproof must be with meekness and moderation, as Chyrurgions use to handle limmes that be out of joynt. This is done by request, Exhortation insinuating an oblique reproof; parable, joyning our selves with them and in our own person reproving their sinnes; prevention, wishing that such things be not found among them, testifying our love by some preface that might make way for the kindly receipt of admonition, and praising what is well done. In a word, we must shew our selves affable and gentle towards all men, for nothing is more odious then for a man to shew himself harsh to them that sue unto him and desire his fellowship. 7. It must be more earnest, joyfull, and comfortable when thou speakest of heavenly things, then of earthly: not jesting, or foolish talk∣ing, but rather giving of thanks. 8. Urbanity is a grace of speech very requi∣site,
whereby men in seemly manner use pleasantness in talk for recreation, or for such delight as is joyned with profit to themselves and others.Amos 6.5. Heb. 11.25. 2 Tim 3.4. Now this mirth must be joyned with the fear of God, with compassion and sorrow for Gods people in affliction and misery, void of the practice of sinne, in it self sparing and moderate. Pleasantness and mirth must be used as sleep and rest, when more grave and serious businesses are dispatched. And if we study to be pleasant,Cic. 1. Offic. Zenophon. Agesilao. Eph. 5.4. Prov. 22.1. we must endeavour to obtain it by manners, not by quips and taunts. Lastly, Our speech must be seasoned love and regard of our neighbours good name, which is farre better to him than great riches. Q. What is to be noted touching the season of our words? Sapiens enim non solum quod loquitur, sed & opportunita∣tem loci & temporis & personae, cum loquitur, studi∣ose inquirit. Isid. Isa. 50.4. Col. 3.16. Amos 5.13. Prov. 15.2. Eccl. 8.5. Mat. 13.36. Prov. 25.11. Act. 17.23, 24.  Sam. 14.12.A. All our words must be seasonable, fitted to the time, place, person, oc∣casion, as well as seasoned. Wisdom will seek a season for good words: for there is a season wherein the prudent will keep silence. Husbandmen observe seasons in sowing, and so must he that looks for an harvest of his speeches. Abi∣gail would not speak to her Husband Nabal in his drunkenness, but when he had slept on his Wine. Every man is not capable of every good speech, nor any man at all times alike. A word spoken in due season, how good is it? The fruit of the most generous Tree is unsavoury, if it be not ripe: unseasonable rain doth much hurt, as seasonable doth good: so is the speech, that in it self is good, if it be not fit. Therefore as Solomon saith, A wise mans heart discerneth both time and judgment. A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver. Two things adde grace to our words; the one that they be true, just and discreet; the other that they be opportunely fitted to the circumstances of time, place and person. Thus Paul being at Athens, and seeing an Altar dedicated to the Ʋn∣known God, took occasion to informe them in the knowledge of the truth. When Joab perceived the heart of David to be somewhat inclined towards bsalom his Sonne, he suborned a wise woman to plead his cause before his Father. To the Jews (sath the Apostle) I became a Jew,1 Cor. 9 20, 21, 22. Job. 33.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Isa. 50.4. that I might gaine the Jews: to them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gaine thm that are under the Law. If God open the ear by affliction, it is good to adjoyn exhortation, ad∣monition or comfort as occasion shall be offered: for at such times words carry the greatest weight, and sink deepest. If the soul be weary with the burden of sinne, and melteth with the apprehension of wrath, it is to be eased with sweet words of consolation.2 Chro. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. When God vouchsafeth to lade us with undeserved fa∣vours, it is a time to speak: because the sense of mercy makes way for good advice and counsell. To meet a man in the heat of his passion with good words, is to meet a Bear robbed of her whelps: but let the passion be calm, and then tell him how disguised and uncovered he was, he will perhaps be∣lieve it. Q. What is to be observed touching the measure of our Speech? A. 1 We must not speak too little, and omit gracious speeches when oc∣casion is offered; as many dry and barren hearts and mouthes, have not a word for God and goodness, that have words enough and more then enough in any other argument; like Idols in good things, that have mouthes, and speak not; or as if they were possessed with dumb spirits, and not suffered to speak any good. Tell such a one of a good Farme, or Bargain, or natural things, and they savour and relish them well enough: whereas a good motion strikes them dumb, and makes them as fishes out of their element. 2. Our words must not be to many: for in many words are many sins.Prov. 10 29. Prov. 9 13. 1 Tim. 6.20. The mind is the Fountain of words, and they must come out of the breast. Gell. lib. 1. cap. 15. Eccl. 5.3. Melior est indiscreta prudentia, quam stulta loquacitas. Gell. lib. 1. cap. 15. He that speaketh many words, speaketh either false things or superfluous, or both; as when a River overflowes, the water ga∣thereth much slim. A fools voice is known by multitude of words. When a Vessel being smitten makes a great noise, it is a token that it is empty: so the sound of
many words is the sign of an empty, vain heart. A fool is full of words.Eccl. 10.14. The Gentiles have said that God gave a man one tongue and two ears, that he might hear more and speak less. A fool uttereth all his mind;Prov. 29.11. Prov. 14.33. & 15.28. Prov. 12.23. & 15.2. Act. 20.7. Non sunt longa quibus nihil est, quod demere possis. Mart. Multum brevi srmoni inest sapientie. Sophoc. Eph. 4.29. Prov 10.21. 1 Cor. 10.31. but a wise man keepeth it in, till afterwards. Seest thou a man hasty in his words, there is more hope of a fool than of him? But if a man speak necessary things, though he continue his speech till midnight, as Paul did, it cannot be called immoderate or superfluous talk: The folly reprehended stands in this, that men lay on more words than the matter requireth; which argueth impotency of mind, and carries a shew or demonstration of passion, and excess of affection, or pride in speak∣ing. Q. What must be the end of our Speech? A. It must tend to edification, to feed many, and minister grace to the hearers. It must bend it self still for God, the defence of good men and actions, and the disgrace of sinne. That word is lost, which tends to no good purpose: and bet∣ter no speech, than to no end. He that commands us in all things great and small to seek the glory of God, will not permit us to speak one word, which aimes not at some lawfull end, tends not to some good use and profit: And yet many in their light and idle speeches say, Why I hope I do no harm? Yea, but what good doth it? What profiteth not, doth harm, because it is vain and idle, of which thou canst give no good acccount. If a fruitless thought be sin, an unprofitable word much more, which doth not only turn thy heart from God, but corrupt, at least, hinder others, from that which is good. Q. What course must a Christian take to prevent rash and hasty Speeches? A. First, He must go to God constantly by prayer, beseeching him to open his lips, and to set a watch before the door of his mouth. Secondly, He must not fail to mourn over his offences in speech, till he have subdued them, afflicting himself with voluntary sorrow for them in secret. Thirdly, He must truss up the loynes of his affections with the girdle of patience and moderation. The Apostle James exhorting to be slow to speak, immediately adjoyneth,Jam. 1.19. and slow to wrath. We shall find that not only the wicked, but even the most holy, have broken forth into unadvised speeches, when they have been transported with disordered passions. What should I speak of Rabshakeh, Nabal, Herod?Isa 36 4, 5. 1 Sam 2.10. Mat. 14.7. Numb. 20.0. Psal. 106.33. 1 Sam. 25.21. Job 3.1, 2. Mat. 17.4. Psal. 39.1, 2. Eph. 5.4. Even Moses and David overcome with anger, Job with grief, Peter with joy, spake things that were not fit, not consonant to the truth. Fourthly, He must reso∣lutely determine to watch over his wayes, that he offend not with his Tongue, and by long and serious meditation fortifie himself against all occasions of impatience and discontentment, which might move him to break out into incon∣siderate speeches. Fifthly, He must learn to be much in thanksgiving, and ac∣custome himself to good words and gracious speeches. Q What Reasons may perswade to desent and holy Silence? A. Wise and godly silence is as excellent a vertue as holy speech,Multum is pro∣fecisse dicendus est qui audire, tacere, ferre didicit. Mer. in Gn. 25.14. Tempestivum silentium res est sapiens. Plut. de puer. Plutarch. de educ. Prov. 10.19. Prov. 17.28. Job 13.5. Periculo vacat merces silentij. Plut. Est & fideli tuta silentio merces. Hor. lib. 3. cap. 2. Prov. 13 3. Eccl. 10.12. Prov. 26.4. for which cause, wise consideration must be had, whether the thing which we have in mind be for Gods glory and our neigbours good; which done, we are answerably to speak or to be silent. If thou affect the praise of wisdom, seasonable silence is a most wise thing, even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is wise, and he that shut∣teth his lips, is esteemed a man of understanding. If thou desire to avoid dangers of body, silence is ever without danger, but through liberty of Tongue many have fallen into most grievous calamities. He that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction. Wilt thou answer wisely? keep silence: silence to wise men is in∣stead of an answer. Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him. Wilt thou do that whereof thou shalt have no cause to repent?
Be silent, Seldom hath any man cause to repent that he held his peace, but often that he spoke.Qui tacere ne∣scit, loqui igno∣rat. Pittacus. Doctus fis lo∣qui, estavarus verbi; clausura namque quae raro aperitur est fortior, & lingua minus frequentata solidior; nam quod diu rectum tenetur, d fficilius obliquatur. Et semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum. Horat. Ep. lib 1. Ep. 18. Quod tacitum fuit, facile poteris eloqui: quod dictu, indictum fieri nullo modo potest. Plutar. de pur. educ. And why shouldst thou not keep silence, seeing he knoweth not how to speak, who knoweth not how to hold his tongue. They that give them∣selves to much babling do incurre the crime of folly or evil-speaking; of folly, for no fool can hold his Tongue; of evil-speaking, for they that speak much, speak many things amiss: To say nothing, that they deprive themselves of two special good things, that they neither hear others nor are heard of them. Nor is there cause thou shouldst fear, lest any thing through thy silence should be forgotten: for what is concealed may be spoken easily when thou wilt, but what is spoken, cannot be unsaid by any means. Q. What is the root or cause of silence? A. Wisdom, modesty, necessity, and patience. Wisdom when we prudent∣ly abstain from speech to prevent causeless danger and envy. Modesty when we keep silence,2 Reg. 18.36. Isa. 36.21. Prov. 30.32. Job. 32.4. at what time it is not meet for us to speak, either because we are forbidden of our superiours, or by reason of our age and reverence of others, or for some other just cause. Necessity, when we are silent before them, before whom it is not expedient to speak some things, as that which is forbidden of God, or is dangerous and unprofitable, or that which is committed to our trust, and connot be divulged without hurt to our selves and others.Act. 16.6. Joh. 2.24. There is an un∣advised openness, against which our Saviour by his example armes us: He would not commit himself to some, who are said to believe in him, because he knew what was in man. Patience, when the faithfull quietly submit themselves to the good pleasure of God,Amos 5.13. Lev. 10.3. Psal 38.13, 14 Psal. 39.1. approving his judgments as just and righteous, and contentedly bear the unjust calumnies of the wicked, neither making answer to their reproaches, nor complaining up and down as do the impatient, and they that study revenge. Q. What are the kinds of lawfull silence? A. The concealing of truth is either in whole, or in part. In whole, when the speaking of the least word is hurtfull: As for example, the Father and Son are both sick at once; the Son dieth first, the Father asketh whether his Son be dead or not; if it be said no, an untruth is told; if yea, then the Fathers grief is encreased, and his death hastened: therefore silence is best. In daies of persecution holy Martyrs have chosen rather to suffer death, then to reveale their Brethren, that have been of their private assemblies with them. And the rule is general, that Christians are not to reveale their Brethren in affliction, nor to betray them into the hands of persecutors, nor to be compelled thereunto by Oath. The concealing of a thing in part is, when a man speaketh a little of the truth, and concealeth the rest. Which is warranted in all good and lawfull pro∣ceedings, which manifestly tend to the glory of God. When Samuel is sent to anoint David,1 Sam. 16.2, 3. the Lord bids him answer to the people of that place, I am come to do sacrifice. When Jeremiah had shewed King Zedekiah how he might escape death,Jer. 38.4, 25, 26. then the King said unto him, Let no man know of these words, &c. But if the Princes understand that I have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto us what the King hath said unto thee; Then shalt thou say unto them, I humbly besought the King that he would not cause me to return to Jehonathans house to die there.Act. 23 6. The like was practised by Paul, when he perceived that one part of the Assembly were Pharisees, and the o∣ther Sadducees, he cried out, Men and Brethren, I am a Pharisee, the Son of a Pharisee. Q. What things are to be concealed?
A. 1. If any truth be to the hinderance of Gods glory, or of the good of our Neighbour, it must be concealed.Mat. 16.21. Rom. 14.1. &. 5.1. Mat. 7.6. Isa 40.1. Thus the disputation of deep Mysteries of faith must be forborn in the presence of them that be not able to bear them. The promises of mercy must not be abused to hearten the oftbinate sinner in his perverseness, nor his judgments to terrifie the dejected spirit. 2. If God bring any strange thing to pass, speak not boldly of it, but rather in silence wonder. Job at the consideration of Gods Majesty in his works, saith, Behold, I am vile,Job 40.4. or 39.34. what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Nadab and Abihu for offering Incense with strange fire, before the Lord, were both destroyed with fire: which being done, Moses told Aaron, that God would be sanctified in them that come near him, and be glorified before all the people: and then the Text saith, but Aaron held his peace. When Peter had taught the Gentiles,Lev. 10.3. Act. 11.18. and after retur∣ned to Hierusalem, they of the Circumcision contended with him: he then rendereth a reason of his fact, which being made, they were silent. And when Gods judgments befall men among us, if we speak any thing we must judg charitably. Blessed is he that wisely considereth of the poor,Psal. 40.1. Arcanum neque tu scrutaberis ullius un∣quam: Com∣missumque te∣ges, & vine tortua & ira Hor. Ep. lib. 1 Ep. 18. Gen. 49.6. Ier. 15.7. Prov. 11.13. Prov. 20.19. Percoatorem fugito, nam garrulus idem est. ibidem. 2 King. 6.11. Neh. 2.12, 16. L. 5. C. ad. l. Juliam. Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 2. Cut. li. 4. Valer. Max. lib. 2. cap. 2. Lips. Pol. lib. 3 cap. 5. Et in notis ad illud cap. Jun. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 2. Prov. 17.9. Prov. 19.11. Sicut parata est severita, peccata qua in∣venerit, vin∣dicare: ita non vulo cha∣ritas, quod vin∣dicet tuvenire, Aug. Epist. 109. Admonet Dom non negligere invicem peccata nostra, non quaerendo quod reprehendas, sed videndo quod corrigas. Aug. ser. 16. de ver. Do. Quam tua pervideas oculis mala lippus inunctis cur in amicorum vitijs tam cernis acutum, Quam aut aquila, aut serpens Epidaurius? at tibi contra evenio bquiran vitia ut tua rursus & illi. Horat. Ser. lib. 1. Satyr 3. Mat. 5.23, 24. Mat. 18.18. August. in haec verba. Jun. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 2. the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. 3. Enter not into the secrets of the wicked, but keep close the lawfull secrets of thy friend. He that goeth about as a tale-bearer dis∣covereth a secret, but he that is of a faithfull heart, concealeth a matter. With him that goeth about as a slanderer, disclosing a secret, and with him that flattereth with his lips, joyn not thy self. Magistrates must conceale things done in the Se∣nate, especially concerning warre, lest they be revealed to the enemy. A Coun∣sellour is the heart of the Prince, and a part of his body, and secrecy is the best and safest band of government: Neither can he sustain great matters, to whom it is grievous to keep silence. Amongst the Romans, in so great a num∣ber of Senatours, there was such silence in their Court, that thou wouldst think, I say not one, but none to have heard, what was committed to the ears of many. Let Ministers conceale the wants and sinnes that trouble such as are dying, or that are revealed unto them by the penitent that they might receive comfort and refreshing to their conscience. 4. The infirmities and sinnes of our neighbour are alwaies to be concealed, unless it be in case, that we find our selves called of God to speak. He that covereth a transgression seeketh love. If God in mercy cover his sinnes, why shouldst thou reveale them? Solomon saith, It is the glory of a man to pass by an infirmity. More distinctly. 1. If we be ig∣norant of the offence we must keep silence. For he that doth reprehend or cor∣rect another, ought to be certain of the crime. Nor doth it become private men to pry into the actions of others, that they might find matter to reprehend. For as we ought to behave our selves in giving alms, so also in reprehending our Brethren: But in giving alms we are not bound to enquire into certain men, to whom we might give; if so be we give to them that need our alms, we perform our duty: So also the matter goeth in brotherly correction: although repre∣hension be a debt, yet it is not a private debt which we owe to any certain per∣son, but publique, which we owe to all and every one; which is to be paid as occasion is offered without inquiry into certain men. 2. Secret sinnes known to thee only, are to be reprehended by thee in secret; but what thou must do by thy self, thou must not do by another; thou must not divulge his sinne, nor accuse him unto others, if it cannot be proved otherwise than by thy testimo∣ny alone. He that hath secretly sinned against thee, correct him secretly: for if thou only know it, and thou wilt correct him before others, thou art not so much a corrector, as a betrayer. That of Solomon, Open rebuke is better then
secret love, doth not weaken this Rule; for he doth not understand that rebuke which is before witnesses, but that private, whereby a Brother is plainly repre∣hended before his face, and not in deceit or privily: Not to adde, that some Divines think Solomon doth institute comparison betwixt perfidious love and professed hatred,Cartwr. in Prov. 27.5. preferring the open rebuke of an enemy before the profession of treacherous love. And as thou maist not divulge that which is secret, so maist thou not accuse thy neighbour of what thou canst not prove by other testi∣mony,Deut 19.15. Cod. lib. 4. Tit 20. Digest. li 22. Tit. 5. Decret. par. 2. cap. 4. q. 4. cap. 3. Jun. Anal. in Deu 17. Juu. Eccles. ubi. supra. & Polit. Mos. cap. 3 Zepper. de Tolit. Mos. lib. 5. cap. 5. Decret. par. . cap. 6. q. 2. Act. 23.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Est. 2.22, 23. Reprehension is an affirma∣tive duty, and bindes not to all times, but to that on∣ly, which in spiritual dis∣cretion shall be judged most fit, both to winne our Brother, and maintain his good Name. than thy own: for one witness is no witness. God will not, that credit be given to the testimony of one only. Nevertheless, if we be privy to the purpose or intention of men to commit any wickedness against the Church, Common-wealth, or person of our Neighbour or such like, we are wisely and seasonably to detect it, that it might be prevented. When Pauls Sisters sonne heard of the conspiracy of those wicked men, that had bound themselves by an Oath, neither to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul, he entred into the Castle, and told Paul: And Paul sent him not to admonish the conspiratours, but to inform the Centurion, that by his Authority that bloody counsell might be prevented. Mordechai told Ester, and she King Ahasuerus of the attempt of Bigthan and Teresh against the Kings person. 3. If the guilty person do tru∣ly repent, he is not to be reprehended at all, or at least but lightly. For the end of admonition is to call back the wanderer into the right way; if he be al∣ready recalled, there is none or little pace left for reproof: although the Ma∣gistrate for the publique good may and ought to correct and punish him. 4. When reproof may more fitly, and with greater fruit be deferred till another time, silence for the present is best. We must never sooth or incourage men in sinne, but we may forbear reprehension, if it be for more profit, even to watch a bet∣ter opportunity. Zeal is indiscreet when it will not wait for seasons and occa∣sions. In many cases we are advised to bear evil men patiently, and not to break out into a fury, if at such times as we would, they cannot break the snares of the Devil: but our patience is to expect, if at any time God will that they may repent, and to watch the season that we might profit them by admonition. Many there are that are impatient of evil men, and drive them away by terrour and despight, if they be not presently converted; yet it directly breaks this precept, and shews that they would be Masters and Authours of mens salvation, and not waiters upon God, that only gives the encrease. 5. If our hatred a∣gainst sinne proceed from complexion or disposition of nature, not from the work of the spirit, we must first correct our own errour, before we open our mouthes in rebuke against others. Pity it is to see, that many mens zeal in religion, is rather the motion of their irregular corrupt will, than the power∣full operation of grace: which is the cause of many sharp, unseasonable, hot censures and contentions, each one contradicting other according to his hu∣mour, and all resisting the motions of the Spirit. Therefore every Christian must be warned not to compare himself with himself, nor to measure himself by himself; for every man is as tall as his own measure: but he must judge himself to find out the exuberant, abounding, reigning complexion, and that being found, he must be farre from favouring and defending it in the things of God, which is the usuall manner of flesh and blood. But on the contrary, he must suspect and stop himself in that way to which his inclination over-hurries him, and condemn his errour when he goes astray, and having condemned it, re∣turn back into the true way. Now for direction in this case, it is good to set before our eyes for paterns, both the words and deeds of men truly sanctified, or rather the words and deeds of the Spirit speaking and living in them, even such whose unpartiall uprightness hath wholly given them up from the flesh to the Spirit. Again, we must remember that the motions of the Spi∣rit are free, universall, and uniform. Every Saint or Sonne of God, by the
aid of the Spirit inwardly freeing him, and outwardly teaching him, must strive to have an universall liberty of soul, free and inclinable to the approving of all truths, and to the love and practice of all goodness. This is the great and glorious Liberty of the Sonnes of God, and of them alone, that their souls being lifted up from the hinges of the flesh, and new fastened to the Spirit, there∣by they have a freedom to move whensoever the Spirit moves, and to love whatsoever the Spirit loves; all truths they gladly receive, all goodness they highly prize and esteem. This then is the thing that we must look unto in our selves, before we reprehend what is amiss in our Brother, that our disesteem of sinne be not measured by our disposition and inclination, but by the truth; else we shall but strive to correct sinne with sinne, which is unprofitable.Amb. de Offic. Monac. lib. . Objurget ami∣cus amicum, non jact antiae studie, sed affectu chari∣tatis. neque admonitio aspera fit, ne∣que objurgatio contumeliosa. Isid. de sum. bon. lib. 3. cap 91. Qui delinquen∣tem superbo, vel odioso a∣nimo corrigit, non emendat sed percutit. Lev. 19.17. Jam. 1.20. Nunquam aliens peccati suscipiendum negotium, nisi quam internis interrogationi∣bus examinan∣tes conscientiam nostram, liqui∣do nobis coram Deo responde∣mus, dilcti∣ono nos fcere. Quidque e∣nim lacerato amo dixeris, punientis est impetus, non charitas corrigentis. Dilige, & die quicquid volet. August. in Epist. ad Gal. Plus proficit amica correctio, quam accusatio curbulenta: Illa pudorem incurit, baec indignationem movet. Amb. in Luk. Perversum corrigere, nihil aliud est, quam stimulare insanum, quam olcum adhibere omino, & ven∣tis incendio superare. Prov. 9.8. Mat. 7.6. Aliu silere quod voles primum sile. Sen. Hyppol. Act. 3. lib. 2. Quod tacitum esse velis, nemini dixeris. Judg. 14. And not only so, but it will be hard to keep moderation, when we follow the bent of our complexion, and look more to what is pleasing unto us, than what should please indeed: which in admonition is specially to be looked unto. For the occasion and manner of reproving ofttimes makes the reproof effectual, and an especiall part of the manner is this, That it proceed from a visible charity. Splenatick and eager reproofes harden those affections, which they pretend to soften; because these reproofes look like a quarrell or revenge, and not like the incisions of love, which hurt only, that they may heal. Surely, the aim and end of admonitions should be, the good of the admonished; and those are most commendable which are most effectual to this end; and not those which fit most with the humour of the reprover. Moreover, when contrary complexions meet in contention, they mutually exasperate each other to be stiffe in their own courses: For the one re∣bukes in humour, not in love, the other conceits the admonition to proceed from distempered passion, blind choler, harshness of constitution, whereby he is the more hardened in his course, and stirred up to make opposition against counsell and advice. 6. If a man know assuredly that his admonition shall be in vain, or to no good effect, he is to forbear. For the end ceasing, all things tending to that end do cease also; If therefore no hope of reformation, which is the end of reproof, remains, rebuke it self is to be omitted: especially if it be found by experience, that the offender is so farre from amendment, that he is thereby made the worse, the more outragious. He that casteth the seed of wholesome admonitions into such accursed and unfruitfull ground, shall reape none other re∣ward of his labour, but the thornes of scorne and contempt. Rebuke not a scor∣ner, lest he hate thee. Give not that which is holy to dogs; cast not Pearles before swine. It is small wisdom to contend with a mad man, if thou want strength to bind him. 5. All unseemly matters, all things unknown, things which concern us not, things above our reach, are in silence to be buried. 6. Thou art to conceale thine own secrets. That which thou wouldst not have known, tell no man: for how should another keep thy counsell, when thou canst not do it. Sampson revealing his own secret, overthrew himself. If thou desire ease by revealing them, tell them but to few, and to such as are faithfull. Q. Before whom must we keep silence? A. The persons before whom silence must be used are these. 1. Malitious enemies of religion: Give not that which is holy unto dogs;Mat. .6. 2 Chro. 21.12. neither cast your pearls before swine. This was among the rest one cause of the silence of Christ before Caaiphas. 2. Before Magistrtes in their open courts; where such as come before them are not to speak till they be bidden or have obtained leave.
Then Paul after the Governour had beckned unto him that he should speak, answered.Act 24.10. 3. In the presence of our elders and betters, who must have liber∣ty and leave to speak first,Job 32.4. and must of others be heard with silence. And here all Children and Servants must remember, when they are justly reproved, to be silent, and not to answere any thing again: If unjustly they be taxed, their reply or defence must be sparing,Tit. 2.9. moderate, in due time, and with due reverence. Ser∣vants must not crossly and stubbornly reason and dispute matters with their Masters: but in silence and submission learn to sit down with the worst, even when they suffer wrong: and if they would clear themselves from unjust blame, they must have respect to all circumstances of time,1 Sam. 24 10. Job 31.1. Prov. 23.9. Prov. 26.4, 5. Mic. 7.5. place, persons, and do it with all submission and soft answers. 4. Fools and prat∣lers, tale-bearers and busy-inquirers are not to be answered, unless it be to let them see their folly. 5. In the presence of weak Christians we must forbear to dispute of questions and matters of doubt, that might turn them out of the way, nor weaken their faith. Q. What other Rules are to be observed in lawfull silence? A. 1. Decent silence doth not pre-occupate or snatch an answer, when another is asked because this is troublesome both to him that asketh and to him that is ask∣ed: To him that asketh the question, as if he knew not of whom to ask what he would: to him that is asked, as if he were not able to satisfie him that asketh. 2. This Vertue doth not speedily leap into speech: but observes diligently the manners and necessity of him that asketh the question. 3. If it perceive a mind desirous to learn in him that putteth forth the question, it represseth the an∣swer, that it may answer considerately, and the other adde whatsoever he plea∣seth. 4. If any question be to be dispatched, it circumscribeth the answer by the necessity and him that asketh the question,Non est ejusdem & multa & opportune di∣cere. but digresseth not upon every small occasion into the rehersall of those things, which are well known to the relater, and oftentimes are not unpleasant; but not fit for the present occasion. Q. Is not this silence opposite to Ingenuity and Boldness of Speech? Joh. 7.24. 1 Cor. 11.18, 19, 20. Ioh. 8 15, 16, Lev. 19.17. 1 Sam. 13.13, 14. Eph. 6.20.A. Silence and Boldness do well agree: for ingenuity and boldness is a vertue, whereby we do freely, without fear, according as our place, calling, time, occasion, and necessity requires, reprehend things to be reprehended, praise things to be praised, communicate things to be communicated, and profess things to be professed: But this liberty doth notably consent with decent silence. As no man knoweth how to speak, but he that can hold his peace: so none can keep silence as he ought, but he that is bold to speak as occasion is offered. Q. May a man make use of hope of happiness to encourage him to look well to his Tongue? A. Goodness and happiness being linked together, and wickedness and misery, the understanding and will more readily imploy and bend themselves to the good, and from the evil by reason of that union. And surely, happiness being tied to goodness by the chain of providence, we cannot but mend our pace to goodness, by the sight of annexed happiness: and it were folly not to look on that which may both delight and incourage us. Our will desires good, and therefore good being tied to goodness, gives more appetite to the will. And surely herein was the same kind of action in the Heathens, though by mistaking. For these did seek a sovereign good in vertue; and even for that sought it the more fervently. Now the ods is this, that we have a sovereign good with vertue, though not in vertue, conjoyned but not confounded. So vertue is lovely to us, but God the Foun∣tain of Vertue is farre more lovely, and to him we walk in the path of Vertue. Now there is no baseness in loving Vertue well for it self, neither in loving the Authour of Vertue better then it, neither in loving Vertue the more for leading us to the Authour of Vertue.
CHAP. III. Wherein the abuse of the Tongue consists, viz. in sinfull Speech, and unlawfull Silence. With the several Kindes of sinfull Speech, and unlawfull Silence that is to be avoided. Question: WHerein stands the abuse of the Tongue? A. In sinfull Speech, and unlawfull Silence. Q. What are the kindes of sinfull Speech? A. They are divers. 1. Wicked or devilish in respect of matter or manner,Esa 3.8. Act. 19.9. as when men speak against grace or gratious courses, or utter evil words which tend to destroy their own souls, or the souls of other men. To this Head are refer∣red. 1. Words that issue from infidelity and unbelief, when men give no cre∣dit to the threatnings, laugh at the promises, or question the truth of them, and disregard the Commandements of God. Thus the Israelites sinned in saying, Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? Moses spake unadvisedly, Hear,Psal. 79.18. Num. 20.11, 12. Gen. 18.12. Psal. 73.13. O rebellious people, shall I bring water out of the Rock? Sarah offended in that she laughed at the promise of God. Hereunto may be referred the opprobrious speeches which ignorant seduced persons belch out against the Gospel and true Religion. 2. Words of impatience and discontent; as that of the Isralites, O we wish we had died by the hand of the Lord, in the land of Aegypt,Exo. 16.3. 1 Cor. 10.10, 11. Numb. 14.2. Psal. 106.24, 25. when we sate by the flesh pots. And of David, Absolom, my Sonne, my Sonne, would God I had died for thee. The like we have mentioned of Job, Jeremiah, and other servants of God, who in perplexity of spirit, when the fire was kindled within their breasts, have let fall some distempered speeches. 3. Irreverent speeches respecting God or man. The Name of God is unreverently abused,Job 3.1, 2. Jer. 15.10. & 20.7, 8. Mat. 5.37. Jam. 5.12. 1 Cor. 10.10. Lev. 24.16. Num. 23.13. The word sig∣nifieth to pierce or strike through. Esa 36.6. Hab. 3.14. Zech. 5.2, 3, 4. Mal 3.5. Lev. 19.12. Exo. 30.31. when mn toss his Titles in their mouths without any respect or awe of his glorious Maje∣sty, by vain and customary swearing, and such like asseverations as I will give you my head, I will adventure my hand, in common talk; by hellish blasphe∣my, when men use such speeches of God or his works, as do either detract from his Majesty, or ascribe unto him things unbeseeming; by perjury or false-swear∣ing, when men call God to witness a lie: which is a strange sinne: for the per∣jured person doth not only sinne himself, but withall endeavoureth to intangle God in the same sinne with himself. In this kind also men sinne, when they make or recite jests which are contrived out of the Phrases of Scripture. The Oyl wherewith the Tabernacle, and the Arke of the Testament, and the Priests were annointed, was holy: and therefore no man might put it to any other use, as to annoint his own flesh therewith, or to make the like unto it. And the scoffing of Julian the Apostat is very fearfull, who was wont to reach Christi∣ans boxes on the ear, and withall bid them turn the other, and obey their Masters commandement. Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. And he denied pay and like reward to his souldiers that were Christi∣ans, because he said he would make them fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, consi∣dering that Christ had said, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the King∣dom of Heaven. To pray in sport, or to make men merry, is great presumpti∣on. To say, as some use, in play, God send me such a card, or such a cast, or I pray God I may winne this or that game, is too saucy and malapert behaviour for any, and will not stand with the reverent respect that each one of us oweth to Gods Majesty. The Rule then is here, that as we exclude not Gods presence in play, so we call not in his providence to further our play. Oathes are sacred, Prayers are holy, and the Name of God glorious, yet they must serve the re∣creation,
and man must be delighted, though God be blasphemed. A fearfull thing it is, for man to delight himself in that wherein God is dishonoured; If there were no other thing but the abuse of Gods Name, of Sentences of Scrip∣ture, and such holy things, this were enough to make players of this nature (and such are most) abhominable to every good Christian. For if thou be a Christian, thou art like unto Lot, and thy righteous soul will be vexed with the dishonour of thy God. Now if thou art vexed therewith, how canst thou go to be vexed? Canst thou take delight in vexation, and wilt thou give Money for it? And if thou be not vexed, then art thou no good Christian. Here also men must learn to take heed of all manner of charmes and enchantments, which commonly are nothing else but words of Scripture or such like, used for the curing of paines and diseases both in men and beasts. But such practises are devilish. For the Word used in holy manner, is the instrument of God to con∣vey unto us spiritual blessings, as faith, repentance, sanctification; but it doth not serve to bring unto us corporall health. Irreverent speeches against men are; 1. Scornfull nick-names cast upon the Ministers of the Gospel,Jer. 20.7. 2 Chro. 36.16. 2 King. 2.23. Eccl. 10.20. Exo. 22.28. Act. 23.5. 2 Pet. 2.10. rov. 14.21. Prov. 17.5. as the Chil∣dren that mocked the Prophet Elisha, crying, Go up thou bald-head. 2. Reviling, malapert, dishonourable words against or in the presence of our superiours, Magistrates, Parents, Masters, Ancients; This is forbidden in the Law, Thou shalt not speak evil of the Ruler of the people. 3. Contemptuous speeches of our Brethren, which argue vile esteem, though in themselves they be poor, lame, blind, or miserable. He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth: Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker. 4. Unfaithfull words are evil: and these of divers kindes.Prov. 14.5. First, Lying, when men speak not agreeable to the na∣ture of the thing, or the rule of faith; as Gehazi. after he had received mo∣ney and garments of Naaman the Syrian against Elisha's will, he went and stood before his Master, who said unto him, Whence comest thou, Gehazi? who ma∣king it nothing to lie for a vantage, smoothed it over finely, and said, thy ser∣vant went no whither.2 King. 5.25. Mic. 6.12. Gen. 34.13. 1 Sam. 28.1, 2. & 27.10, 11. Mat. 22.26. Prov. 21 6. & 12.19. Psal. 36.3. Job 15.5. Prov. 26.23, 24. Psal. 12.2. Psal. 10.7. Psal. 55.21. Isa. 13.12. Act 22.22. Prov. 27.14. This is a common sinne amongst most men, but utterly condemned as abhomination in the holy Scripture. Secondly, Deceit and co∣senage, when men speak contrary to their mind, or delude with fond equivoca∣tion, even of purpose to deceive. The men that give themselves to such language are double-tongued, having one thing in heart, speaking another with their lips. They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips, and a double heart do they speak, The wicked man is thus described, His mouth is full of cur∣sing, and deceit, and fraud; he speaketh friendly with his mouth, when warre is in his heart. Thirdly, Flattery, whereby for hope either of favour or gain, men, especially such as are of dignity and place, are soothed up in their sinnes, and extolled above measure, even to their faces. As when Herod arraied in Royal Apparell, and sitting on the Judgment Seat made an Oration, the people gave a shout, saying, The voice of God, and not of man. But marke what So∣lomon saith, He that praiseth his friend with a loud voice rising early in the mor∣ning, it shall be to him for a curse. One being asked which was the worst of all beasts, answered, Of wild beasts, the Tyrant: of tame beasts, the Flatterer. Another said, that Flatterers are worse then Crows; for they eat only dead carrion,Prov. 29.5. these feed on living men. A man that flattereth his neighbour, spread∣eth a net for his feet.Prov. 25.9. Fourthly, Rash and indiscreet discovery of secrets com∣mitted to our trust, being moved thereunto by pain, wrath, flattery, fear or levity: as to manifest unto persecutors when and where the Saints assemble to worship God.Prov. 11.13. He that is of a faithfull spirit, concealeth a matter. Fifthly, In∣constancy, when beside all reason men change and forsake the truth before testi∣fied:Eph. 4.14. for as the truth is one and the same, so should our testimony be. Sixthly, Pertinacy in defence of errour, when being convicted men will not cease to maintain their errour. 5. Words proceeding from obstinacy, arrogant and
impious stiffness against true piety and godliness;Exo. 5.2. Mal 1.13, 14. Mal. 3.13, 14. Psal. 4.6. as to snuff at the worship of God as irkesome and tedious; to say and maintain that no profit is to be gotten in the service of God; to scorn and mock at the poor that putteth his trust in God, calleth upon his Name, and walketh before him in holiness and purity of life;Jer. 6.16. and impudently to profess that they will not do what is spoken unto them in the Name of the Lord. These monsters of men set their mouth a∣gainst the Heavens; and their Tongue walketh through the earth.Psal. 3.9. Job 21.4. They say to God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy waies. 6. Immodest speeches, and these are. First, Rotten and filthy, when men without all re∣gard of honesty, vertue or shamefastness, delight themselves in ribauldry; ob∣scene, scurrilous, and beastly talk. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth. But now put ye off all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,Eph. 4.29. & 5.4. Col. 3.8. fil∣thy communication out of your mouth: for an unclean Tongue is the character of an heart empty of grace, poysoned with shamefull filthiness: It is a sign that men retain only the outward shape and proportion of men, but be in∣deed changed into beasts. Secondly, Lofty and boasting, when men brag of their wisdom, might, valour, bounty, credit and greatness: but most of all,Jud. 16. vers. Prov. 14.3. Psal. 12.2, 4. Act. 8.9. Jam. 3.5. 2 Tim. 3.2. Psal 52.1. Rom. 1.30. Luk. 18.11, 12. Psal. 73 8. Mat. 7.1. Job 1.9, 11. 1 Sam. 22.9. when they vaunt of their sinne, and glory in their shame. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man! It was the sinne of the Pharisee that he prayed thus, Lord, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tythes of all that I possess. It is one note of a proud ungodly man, that he speaketh loftily. Thirdly, Heady and rash judgment, whereby men take liber∣ty to censure and condemn others, without a calling, before they truly under∣stand the cause. Thus the Devil dealt with Job, saying, Doth Job fear God for nought? But stretch out thine hand now and touch all that he hath, to see if he will not plaspheme thee to thy face, Such was the dealing of Doeg with David, I saw the sonne of Ishai (saith he) when he came to Abimelech the son of Ahitub, who asked counsell of the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and he gave him also the sword of Goliah, insinuating that he had conspired with David against the King. Fourthly, Unseemly speaking by clamour, or rude undecent loudness and lifting up the voice. Let clamour and evil speaking be put away from us.Eph. 4.31. Prov. 25.24. It is better to dwell in a corner on the house top, than with a brawling woman in a wide house: They that upon every small occasion make their sound to be heard, and the house, yea, the street to ring again, must know they offend grievously, be their words in themselves considered never so just and true. 7. Revengefull words, which are of divers sorts and degrees. First, Rash and suddain, which proceed from unadvised anger; of which kind are all reproachfull termes, as fool, witless, shallow-brain; and all irefull upbraidings, whether of kindness received, or of sinne committed. He that saith to his Brother, Thou fool,Mat. 5.22. shall be in danger of hell-fire. Secondly, Tart and bitting quips and girds, that tend to vex and disgrace our Brethren. Let no uncleanness be once named amongst you,Eph. 5.4. non foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient. Thirdly, Mischievous and spitefull words which may do hurt.Prov. 12.21. Psal. 59.7. Psal. 50.19, 20. Psal. 10.7. 2 Sam. 25.10. There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword. Behold (saith David of his enemies) they beltch out with their mouth; swords are in their lips; under their Tongues are mischief and vanity. Fourthly, Contemptuous and vilifying words; as that of Nabal to the Messen∣gers of David, Who is David, and who is the sonne of Jesse? There be many ser∣vants now adaies that break away every man from his Master. Fifthly, Cursings or imprecations, either against men or other creatures. Curse not the King,Rom. 3.14. Rom. 12.14. Eccl. 10.20. Jer. 15.10. Lev. 19.14. Psal. 109.17, 18. Judg. 17.1, 2. Col. 3.8. 2 Tim. 3.2, 4. Rev. 13.6. Jam. 3.10. no not in thy conscience: and curse not the King in thy bed-chamber. When the Mo∣ther of Micah had lost her silver that she had dedicated to superstition and
idolatry, she fell to cursing for it: in whom as in a glass, we see the cursed nature that is in most people, that when any thing crosseth them, or befalls them other∣wise then they would, it drives God out of remembrance, and the considera∣tion of his providence, or of their own just desert which hath brought it upon them; and so they let pass their duty, which in such accidents God calls them to practice. That which is presentest with us, is wrath and revenge; which seeing we cannot have to the full upon the supposed wronger of us, therefore that toole which is readiest we draw; even a venomed arrow out of the quiver of a poysoned heart, cursing and banning. Thus men do when their goods are impaired by ill debtors, suretiship, cosenage, ill bargains, robbery, nay, even when Gods more immediate hand crosseth them, as in travell by Sea or Land,Job. 31.30. Prov. 20.20. & 30.11. in their Harvest and Commodities, by unseasonable weather, bad success or the like. And then they let the Arrow fly, light where it will, sometimes upon God himself (for he that curseth his lot, curseth God, and if he were within his reach, he would surely challenge him) and sometimes upon men, and sometimes upon the senseless creature it self wherein they are crossed, or which crosseth them, by the side whereof they wound God himself.Psal. 15.19, 20 Prov. 30.10. 8. Defamatory and slanderous words, which be raised by false accu∣sers, and carried up and down by make-bates and tale-bearers, are sinfull and un∣godly.Exo. 23.1. Thou shalt not take up a false report: that is, neither receive it of others, nor speak of it unto others; as taking up is for speaking or using any way. Thou shalt not walk a tale-bearer among thy people.Exo. 20.7. Lev. 19.16. 1 Sam. 22.9. 1 King. 10.15. Ezek. 27.15, 17, 22, 23. Cleaver in Prov. 11.13. & 20.19. Cartwright in Prov. ibid. Prov. 11.13. & 20.19. Ezek. 22.9. Jer. 9.4.5. 2 Tim. .3. 1 Tim. 3.11. Tit. 2.3. Aquila in Prov. 11.13. Dan. 6.24. Rev. 12.9, 10. Syriak in Mat. 4. 2 Cor. 12.20. Prov. 26.20. & 18.8. & 16.28. The Hebrew word Rokel properly signifieth a Merchant or Trafficker up and down with Spices or other things, whereupon Rakil (the word here used) is a tale-bearer or accuser, that maketh Merchandize as it were of words, uttering them as Wares, going from place to place, to hear, and to spread about criminations of other men. His property is described to be a revealer of secrets; his end, to shed blood; yet pretending friendship and good neighbourhood. Wherefore the Greek translateth it in Leviticus, Thou shalt not walk with guile: and in the Proverbs he is called in Greek, double-tongued The Holy Ghost in the New Testament seemeth to call him in Greek false accuser, caluminater, or make-bate: and so Aquila (an Ancient Greek Interpreter) translateth the Hebrew word. And to this the Chaldee version agreeth, saying, Thou shalt not divulge accusations, (or criminations) among thy people. Which phrase is used in Daniel, of those men which made accusation against Daniel, there translated in Greek, that made accusation. Hereupon the Devil hath his Name of caluminating and accu∣sing the Brethren: whom the Syriak calleth a divulger of accusations or crimi∣nations. They are also called whisperers, because they privily wound the credit of their neighbour, and traduce them in secret. They sow not their calumnies clearly and with a loud voice, but they do it in corners, when no witness is present. This tale-bearing is of divers sorts. 1. When men whisper abroad secretly the faults of another, whereas they should rather admonish the party; as Cham when he had seen his Fathers nakedness, ran straight and told his Brethren. For he only is not to be accounted a whisperer that rehearseth things forged of himself or others: but he that uncovereth things true, which ought not to be spoken, or to any other, than to whom he ought. 2. When they adde to or change the thing said or done, as it serveth for their purpose. Some of the wti∣nesses which came against Christ,Mat. 26.60, 61. charged him to say, I will destroy this Temple which is made with hands, and in three daies build another without hands. Where first they change his meaning; for Christ spake of the Tem∣ple of his body. Secondly, They adde to the words; For Christ said not I will destroy this Temple, but destroy ye this Temple. Therefore they are noted to be false-witness bearers. 3. When men surmise, and tell that upon suspicion or conjecture which was never done. When Jeremy was going out of Jerusalem
to the land of Benjamin, Irijah took him and said, Thou fliest to the Caldeans. Then said Jeremy, that is false, I fly not to the Caldeans,Jer. 37.13. but he would not hear him. The fourth is coloured tale-bearing, when one speaketh evill of another with fine prefaces and preambles, faining that he is very sorry that his neighbour had done such or such a thing: that he speaketh it not of malice, but of a good mind: that he is constrained to speak: that he speaketh not all he could speak: that the party to whom the tale is told must keep it secret. The fifth is worse then the former, when men out of envy and il-will, doe misconstrue the words and actions of men, and not only take things in the worst part, but also defame them for well-doing. Thus the Pharisees dealt,Mat. 11.19. John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, he hath a devil. The Son of man came eating and drink∣ing, and they say, Behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine, and a friend of Pub∣licans and sinners. The sixth, when men forge and devise false accusations to bring the righteous into disgrace, as David complaineth of his enemies, that they laid to his charge things he never knew. This abuse of the Tongue to be a most hatefull vice, appeareth, First, By the root whence it springeth, which is a naughty, froward heart. A naughty person, a wicked man,Prov. 6.12. walketh with a froward mouth. Secondly, By the effects, which are poverty and destruction to the party himself, hatred and contention amongst others.Prov. 14.23. Prov. 10.11. Prov. 12.13. Prov. 13.3. Prov. 16.20. vers. 30. Prov. 26.22. Jer. 6.28.30. Psal. 140.11. In all labour there is profit, but the talk of the lips tendeth only to poverty. Violence covereth the mouth of the wicked: The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips. He that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction. A froward man soweth strife, and a whisperer separateth chief friends. A violent man moving his lips, bringeth evil to pass. Thirdly, When the sinnes of the Tongue spread in Israel with other sinnes, that they walked as tale-bearers, they were called reprobate silver, because the Lord had rejected them. David prayeth thus against the wicked, Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth:Psal. 101.5, 7. evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him. And so he promiseth to cut off him that slandereth his neigh∣bour, and to expell out of his Family him that worketh deceit, and telleth lies. Fourthly, He that speaketh evil of his Brother, and judgeth his Brother,Iam. 4.12. speaketh evil of the Law, and judgeth the Law, because he doth what the Law condemneth. Fifthly, Memorable are the examples of Gods judgments upon the abusers of their Tongue, specially in swearing, perjury, blasphemy, scoffing at Religion, cursing and such like. Some few I will here set down, as they are related by good Authours worthy credit. In the time of King Edward,Fox Act & Mon. Vol. 2. Reign of Queen Mary. App. a young Gentleman of Cornewall being in company with other more Gentlemen together with their servants, being about the number of twenty horsemen, among whom this lusty younger entred into talk, and began withall to sweat outragiously, and to use ribauld speech; being gently reproved, the young Gentleman took snuffe, and said to the reprover, Why takest thou thought for me? take thou thought for thy winding-sheet. Well, quoth the other, Amend, for death giveth no warning: for as soon cometh a Lambs skin to the Market, as an old Sheep skin. But still he continued raging more and more in words and oathes, till at length passing on their journey, they came riding over a great Bridge, standing over a piece of an Arm of the Sea, upon which Bridg this Gentleman swearer, spurred his Horse in such sort, as he sprang clean over with the man on his back, who as he was going, cried saying, Horse and man and all to the Devil. Again, There was in Lincolnshire a Serving-man,Peter Stubs Book printed 1583. who had still in his mouth an use to swear Gods precious blood, and that for very trifles: being often warned by his friends to leave the taking the Lords Blood in vain, did notwithstanding still persist in his wickedness, untill at last it pleased God to visite him first with sickness, and then with death: during which time of the Lords visitation, no perswasion could move him to repent his foresaid plaspheming, but hearing the Bell to toll, did most hardly in the very anguish
of death, start up in his Bed, and swear his accustomend oath that the Bell tolled for him. Whereupon immeditatly the blood abundantly from all the joynts of his body, as if it were in streames, did issue out most fearfully from mouth, nose, wrests, knees, heels, and toes, with all other joynts, not one left free, and so died.Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 8. Three men conspired together against Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, a man that led a godly and blameless life, and they charged him with an hainous crime: all three confirm their accusation by oath, that it might seem the more probable. The first wisheth, if it were not so, that he might be burnt. The second, that he might die of a lothsome and grievous disease The third, that he might lose his eyes. Afterward in process of time, the first had his House set on fire in the night, and he with all his Family was burnt. The second was smitten with the same fearfull disease which he wished unto himself from the head to the sole of the foot, and died thereof. The third seeing what was be∣fallen these twain, repented, and confessed the conspiracy against Narcissus, and lost his eyes with lamentation.Anno 1444. Bonfiinius rex Hungar. Dec. 3 Lib. 6. When Ʋladislaus King of Pole and Hungary had made truce with the Turkes without consent of the Pope, or other his Allies: Eugenius pretending it unlawfull for him to make peace with a common enemy to the Name of Christian without the authority Papall, sent Cardinall Julian to solicite Ʋladislaus to renew warre upon the Turke notwithstanding his oath; which he pleaded to be frustrate: whereupon having ventured the war, according to the Cardinals instigation, after doubtfull Battell for three daies space, at length he drave Amurathes to hard shifts, and in a manner to despair: inso∣much that leaping out of the middest Camp, and pulling out of his bosome, and shewing openly the scrowle of the Oath, with a loud voice he cryeth; These be the Leagues, O Jesus Christ, which thy Christians have stricken with me. They have made an holy Oath by thy Godhead, and yet have broken the faith under thy Name given. Now therefore, O Christ, if thou be a God, as they say; and we erre in the knowledge of it; avenge, I beseech thee, thine own and my wrongs, and unto them that have not as yet known thy holy Name, shew punishment upon Truce-breakers. The event in the death of Ʋladislaus the King, and Julianus the perswader, and by that occasion of the Christian Army in that Conflict soon after falling out, declared an ear given to an Infidels complaint against the Christians, who by this doing had caused the Name of Christ, so much as in them lay,Fox ubi supra. to be amongst the Heathen evil spoken of. In the daies of Queen Mary, as James Abbes was led by the Sheriff to execution, divers poor people stood in the way, and asked their Almes: he then not having any money to give them, did put off all his Apparell, save his shirt, and gave it unto them, to some one thing to some another, in the giving whereof, he exhorted them to be strong in the Lord, and to stand stedfast in the truth of the Gospel. While he was thus instructing the people, a Servant of the Sheriffes going by, cryed out aloud, and plasphemously said: Believe him not good people, he is an Heretick, and a mad man out of his wit: believe him not, for it is Heresie that he saith And as the other continued in his godly admonition, so did this wicked wretch blow forth his plasphemous exclamations: untill they came unto the place where they should suffer. But immediatly after this Martyr was bound to the stake, and fire put to him, such was the fearfull stroke of Gods justice upon this blasphe∣mous railer, that he was there presently in the sight of all the people stricken with a frensie, wherewith he had before charged that good servant of God: who in his furious rage and madness, casting off his shooes, and the rest of his clothes, cryed out unto the people, and said, thus did James Abbes the true servant of God, who is saved, but I am damned: and thus ranne he about the Town of Bury, still crying, that James Abbes was a good man and saved, but I am damned. Again, Children sitting in company together, fell into communi∣cation of God, and to reason what God was. And some said one thing, some
another: among the rest, one said, He is a good old Father: to whom another, named Dennis Benfield, replied with a most outragious blasphemy not fit to be named. But shortly after this young girle was so striken, that all the one side of her was black, and she became speechless, and died. One Burton a Bayliff of Crowland in Lincolnshire, who made shew to be a great friend of the Gospel in King Edwards time, but in Queen Maries time, he moved the Parish to shew themselves the Queens friends, and set up Mass speedily, to which purpose he called upon them still in the Queens Name: and when he saw his words were not regarded, he got him to Church upon a Sunday morning, when the Cu∣rate began to say service according to the form used in King Edwards time: and coming to him he said, Syrrah, will you not say Mass, buckle your self to Mass you knave or (swearing a bloody oath) I will sheath my Dagger in your shoulders. But not long after, this Bayliff riding from home with one of his neighbours, as he returned home, a Crow flew over his head, singing after her wonted manner, Knave, Knave, and dunged upon his nose, which ranne down upon his mouth and beard: which so annoyed his stomack with a poysoned sa∣vour, that he never ceased vomiting untill he came home, whereof within few daies he died, without any token of repentance. One John Apowell, mocked one William Moulden, as he was reading an English Service-Book in a Winters Evening, deriding him at every word with contrary gauds and flouts: Where∣fore the said William checked him, saying, he mocked not him but God. But as the said William was reading these words, Lord have mercy upon us: The other with a start suddainly said, Lord have mercy upon me: Then William asked him wherefore he was afraid; He answered, when you read Lord have mercy upon us: me thought the hair of my head stood upright with a great fear that came upon me: The next day in the morning he fell mad, and after that he say night and day, and his tongue never ceased crying out of the Devil of Hell: Thus he lay six daies, that his Master and all the rest of the house were weary of the noise, and sent him to Bedlam. Two she Bears out of the Wood, devoured forty and two Children of them that mocked Elisha the Prophet.2 King. 2.24. Some being in Communication about Cramner, Ridley, and Latimer, in an House at Abingdon in Barkshire: One Lever a Ploughman dwelling at Brightwell, said that he saw that evil-favoured knave Latimer, when he was burned, and that he had teeth like a horse, at which time and houre, the sonne of the said Lever most wickedly hanged himself. The Jews at the arraignment of Christ cryed, saying,Mat. 27.25. His blood be upon us and our Children: which imprecation is verified upon them unto this day. At Newburge in Germany a certain Mother cursed her Sonne, saying, Get thee away, I would thou mightest never come again alive: the very same day he went into the water and was drowned. Again,Lonicerus. Theat. Hist. Praec. 4. a Mother brought her Child to the University at Wittenberge, by reason he was possessed with an unclean spirit: being demanded how it came to pass, she answered in the hearing of many, that in her anger she said, The Devil take thee, and thereupon presently the Child was possessed. The Lieutenant of the Tower,The Lieute∣nant of the Tower, his speech and repentance. who was executed upon Tower-Hill, on the 20th day of November 1615, at his last end confessed, that in his younger daies, (as well beyond the Seas, as in his own Countrey) he was much addicted to idle vain gaming, and being haunted with ill luck (as he called it) upon a time much displeased at his loss, clapping his hand upon his breast, If ever I play again, then let me be hanged: which he neglected to perform, and was payed home according to his wicked impre∣cation. 2. Vain and idle speech, that tends to no use or profit is to be shunned. Either speak something better then silence, (saith the Heathen man) or keep silence. Again, prescribe to thy self two times of speaking,Euripides. that either thou speak of things undoubtedly known, or of things necessary: for in these only
speech is better then silence:Isocrat. ad Democr. Aut oportet si∣lere, aut meli∣ora afferre si∣lentio. Mat. 12.36. but in other things we must rather hold our peace than speak. Use seasonable silence or profitable speech. Our Saviour hath told us plainly, that of every idle word that men shall speak they must give account at the day of judgment: Not only evil words, but frivolous, which are not be∣hovefull to speaker or hearer, are very dangerous, as which make men lyable to the judgment of God. Aul. Gellius. lib. 1. cap. 15. Illud sapientis est viri, paucis plurima posse vrbis, bene complecti. Optimus est homini linguae thesaurus, & ingens Gratia, quae parcis men∣surat singula verbis. Hesiod.3. Speech is then faulty, when it is immoderate and exceeds measure. Thou must shut up words with silence, and silence with seasonableness. It is the point of a wise man to speak much in few words, not to comprehend little in many. The weight of sentences is from the matter contained in them, not from the multitude of words wherewith they are stuffed: In this particular men offend, when they spinne out a little matter with length of words, and empty sounds. But that speech is not long, when words are fitted to the nature of things them∣selves. Think him long (saith the Heathen) who speaketh nothing fitly, though he pronounce only two syllables: But think not him long who speaketh well, although he shall say very much, and for a long time. Nor are thy fault∣less, who letting pass all discourse of serious matters, abound in mirth and jests, whereas it is to be used sparingly as salt to season and revive, not to wast the spirits, or consume time. In like manner to talk and conferre of earthly things copiously, and to go over the same things again and again, when they might be dispatched in few words at once, cannot be esteemed less then an incontinency of speech, the sign of an earthly heart. Aul. Gellius. lib. 1. cap. 2.4. Words as men say of fish, if unseasonable, do stink. It is better to say nothing, than to speak out of season. It behoveth us to know the manner of the occasion: for that is the point of wisdom. They that sing unseasonably, though they do it skilfully, they are not approved, but undergo the crime of folly. Thou dost but trifle, if thou play the Philosopher unseasonably. Here∣in they offend, who mispend the time that God hath consecrated to his service, in worldly conference about their own affairs. And they likewise that cast the Pearle of the Gospel before swine,Prov. 23.9. & 9.8. Mat. 10.14. 2 Sam. 25.36. 2 King. 18.36. and bestow admonition upon them that are not capable of it. Cleostratus to him who asked, Art thou not ashamed of drunkenness, answered, Art thou not ashamed to admonish a drunken man? For counsell given to men distempered, is clean cast away. 5. Rash speeches are evil. It is better to say nothing, than to speak without good advice and deliberation.Eccl. 5.2. Prov. 19.2. Be not rash with thy mouth. Both the mind with∣out knowledge is not good, and he that hasteneth with his feet sinneth. Two vices are here matched together, and reproved together, as dangerous and hurtfull, whereof the one is the cause of the other, which are ignorance and rashness. He that answereth a matter before he hath heard it,Prov. 18.13. it is a folly and shame to him. To make answer, or reply to a speech, or at all to speak of any matter before a man hath throughly heard, and fully informed himself therein, is a rash and indiscreet part, and the evil consequents thereof, cannot but redound much to his discredit. Silence for the most part is a note of wisdom, a means of safety. A fool (saith the Philosopher) cannot hold his peace at a Banquet: but yet silence is sometimes faulty. As 1. Hypocriticall silence, when a man continually holdeth his peace, because he thinketh the worship of God to consist therein. This was the gross error of the Pattolorinctists or Silentiarists.Dan. de haer. lib. 63. But the Scriptures which command mo∣deration of the Tongue, do never impose perpetuall silence. For by speech as well as by reason man differs from a beast, and he that takes away the use of speech from amongst men, doth not only deprive man of many profits per∣taining to this life, but also turn him into a bruit beast, yea, into a stock and stone. And certain it is, he sinneth against God and that grievously, who
speaketh not when he ought, no less then he that speaketh otherwise then he ought. 2. Forced silence, when the adversaries of truth and innocency being overcome with the light that they cannot but discern, are compelled to keep silence. As it is said of the Spies, that were sent forth of the Scribes and Pharisees to entangle our Saviour Christ, when they heard his answers,Mar. 3.4. Luk. 20.26. they marvelled at him, and held their peace. 3. Wicked and unseasonable silence, when men hold their peace being called of God, and having opportunity to speak. First, Thus it is unlaw∣full to keep silence, when the glory of God requireth that we speak. Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast ordained praise, Psal. 8.2. If these should hold their peace, the stones would immediatly cry out, Luk. 19.40. It belongeth to the Ministers of the Gospel with boldness to publish the message that God hath put into their mouthes, notwithstanding the world fret and rage against it. Sonne of man, go get thee to the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them, Ezek. 3.4 In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and thou shalt speak and be no more dumb, Ezek. 24.27. The Lord spake to Paul in the night by a Vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace, Act. 18.9. As the Preachers of the Gospel must publish the glad tidings of Salvation: so must Christians make profession of the Faith and true Religion. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, Rom. 10.10. I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak, 2 Cor. 4.13. Secondly, We must not hold our peace when the safety of the innocent requireth that we speak. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction, Prov. 13.8, 9. That is, speak in the behalf of the oppressed, who because they cannot, or dare not plead for themselves, may well be called dumb and yet have an equall, just, and righteous cause. Deliever them that are drawn to death, Prov. 24.11. For shouldst thou withdraw thy self from them that go down unto destruction? Job. 29.13, 14, 15, 16. If thou be a Magistrate, rescue by thy power such as being innocent are brought into the danger of death or undoing; or whosoever thou art, by all lawfull means seek the deliverance of them that without cause be drawn into danger. For if any be justly troubled, or condemned to die, it be∣longeth not to us to meddle with him, otherwise then by praying for him, or inciting him to repentance. But if might oppress right, or violence be offered to the poor afflicted, every one is bound to defend his neighbour, as much as in him lyeth. Governours must minister help to the oppres∣sed by vertue of their Authority; Inferiours by giving counsell, or testi∣fying the truth of the cause; or in petitioning to the Prince, or such as have power of delivering: as Ebedmelech for Jeremiah; and Ester for her peo∣ple: or by prayer to God in their behalf; as the Church in the time of the Apostles for Peter: and in the time of the Prophets, for other godly men who were destinated to the slaughter. Thirdly, In publique scandals, when we are called forth to bear witness, we must testifie our knowledge. Prov. 29.24. Who so is partner with a Thief, hateth his own soul, and who heareth cursing and bewaileth it not. Lev. 5.1. If any soul hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness, whether he hath seen it, or known of it, and do not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity. Silence then kept in such cases, causeth men to incurre the recompence that is due to other mens offences, as themselves by bearing with them, and winking at them, have intangled themselves with the guiltiness thereof, and so made themselves obnoxious unto them. Fourthly, If we be privy to any secret offence wherein our
neighbour liveth, we are to admonish him in private. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between him and thee alone. Mat. 18.16. Each man should be a Physician to his diseased neighbour, seeking the cure of his spiritual Maladies by grave and seasonable advice or reprehension. Thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thy heart, but re∣prove him plainly, and not suffer sinne to rest upon him, Lev. 19.17. Warn them that are unruly, 1 Thes. 5.14. Others save with fear, pulling them as brands out of the fire, Jud. vers. 23. Fifthly, In distress the Saints are to be refreshed with words of consolation. Comfort the feeble-minded, 1 Thes. 5.14. I also could speak as you do, (saith Job to his friends) if your soul were in my souls stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake my head at you: But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should asswage your grief, Job. 16.4, 5. To him that is afflicted, pity should be shewed from his friend, but he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty, Job. 6.14. Sixthly, If we know harm to be intended a∣gainst our neighbour, we are bound to reveale it wisely, that the mis∣chief might be prevented. Thus Johanan the Sonne of Kareah and all the Captains of the forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,Jer. 40.13, 14. And said unto him, Doest thou certainly know that Baalis the King of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the Sonne of Nethaniah to slay thee? But this must be done seasonably, that the evil might be avoided, and wisely, that we entangle not our selves in trouble. Seventh∣ly, In open and notorious cases, if we our selves be not fit to admo∣nish and rebuke, we must informe others who may be Physicians to the party delinquent, and minister unto him for the cure of the soul. As the house of Cloe informed Paul of the dissentions that were in the Church of Corinth,1 Cor. 1.11. that by his Authority he might seek re∣dress. 4. Sullen and passionate silence is to be condemned, when men re∣fuse to salute their enemies courteously, or out of stubbornness will scarce vouchsafe a quiet, free, gentle answer to their superiours, equals, companions, when they are crossed, vexed, disquieted. If the heart swell so big, as to stop the free passage and current of the Tongue in fit∣ting speech, it is farre too great to be good. Dogged silence is as much displeasing, as farre unbeseeming, as stubborn and saucy answering a∣gain. 5. Silence proceeding from want of delight in heavenly things or love to the glory of God, is vitious and to be condemned. All thy Works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee. They shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power. To make known unto the sonnes of men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his Kingdom, Psal. 145.10, 11. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth, Psal. 119.13. My Tongue shall speak of thy Word: for all thy Commandements are righteousness. My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy Sta∣tutes, Psal. 119.171, 172. 6. Silence is then faulty, when shame and fear of reproach drives men to keep silence from good words. We must neither expose Religion to contempt through unadvised speech, nor refrain altogether from good words, left we should be mocked. Princes did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in thy Statutes, Psal. 119.23. I will speak of thy Word before Kings, and will not be ashamed, Psal. 119.46. This faulty silence is a great offence. First, For that it robbeth God of his Glory, which is the highest sacriledge.Mat. 12.37. Secondly, If men shall be justified by their words; How shall they stand before Gods Tribunall of Grace, who have continually
kept from holy words. Thirdly, The Saints are commanded to exhort, ad∣monish, rebuke, comfort, and build up one another in their most holy Faith. But they cannot yeeld obedience to this Commandement, if they give way to continuall silence. Fourthly, It is the commendation of them that fear God, that they speak often one to another, Mal. 3.16. The Use of all is, That we seriously humble our selves for the errrour of our Tongues, take sorrow for it, and heartily pray for pardon and grace to reform and amend. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, Isa. 6.5. And this transgression is the rather to be watched against, because we have many provocations to sinne in this kind; and though the offence may seem less, yet oft failings may increase the measure of it. The End of the Fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK: Of PRAYER. CHAP. I. A Definition of Prayer. Every wish and desire is not Prayer. The Holy Ghost is the principal efficient Cause of Prayer. That Prayer is a principal Part of Gods Worship, and of necessary Use for us. Question: VVHat is Prayer? Quicunque orat, cum Deo collo∣quitur. Chrysost. de orat. lib. 2. Oras, loqueris ad sponsum. Hier. ad Eustoch. de custod. Virgin. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 50. Est Oratio col∣loquium mentis cum Deo. Nilus de orat cap. 2. Orans familiare cum Christo seris colloquium. Gilbert in Cant. Ser. 7. Psal. 19.14. Act. 10.4. Psal. 38.9. See Bellar. de oper. in part lib. 1. cap. 1. To Pray▪ doth import an holy speech or pouring out of the soul unto God Scudd. Key of Heaven. Orarc est animum ad Deum levare Chem Har. cap. 51. Oratio est ardens affectus ad Deum tendens. Duc. loc. 35. q. 2. Psal. 25.1. & 86.4. Lam 3.4.. 1 Sam. 2.15. Psal. 42.4. & 62.8. 1 Reg. 13.6. Psal. 27.8. Psal. 102.1. & 142.2. Isa. 37.4. 2 Reg. 19.4. Isa. 26.16. Jer. 7.16. Oratio est devota cordis intentio ad Deum pro malis amovendis & bonis adipiscndis. Bern. de scala claustrat.A. It is a religious calling upon God in the Name of Christ accor∣ding to his will: Or we may call it, an humble and familiar conference of the faithfull soul with the Lord his Redeemer, in Jesus Christ. For Prayer is an opening of the heart to God, in making requests and offering thanks through Christ. A desire no way expressed in thought or word, is not Prayer: but the motion of the soul in desire or thanksgiving, lifting up it self to God. In Scripture it is called, the lifting up of, or the rearing up of the soul. And they that Pray, are said to pour out their souls or hearts before God; to intreat the face of the Lord God; to seek the face of God; to pour out their complaint before him; to lift up a Prayer; to pour out a Prayer, and to lift up a cry. To desire is not to pray, but sheweth what we ap∣prove. H. Smith in Pilgr. Wish. Gataker of Lots. pag. 260, 261.Q. Are not all wishes and desires Prayers? A. Every desire is not by and by Prayer, albeit every Prayer (thanksgiving excepted) ordinarily imports some desire; neither is every lawfull desire a fit matter for Prayer. For Prayer is a wish or desire of the heart directed unto God: But many things we desire and may lawfully desire, which yet are not matters of that moment as may be fit to acquaint God in particular with our desire of them, or to direct our Petitions in special manner to him for them; much less to expect or require at Gods hand any special work or help of his for
the effecting of them. Thus in lawfull game a man may desire to winne rather then to lose, to overcome rather then to be conquered: but they are not such as it is seemly to acquaint God withall. Q. What is the efficient Cause of Prayer? A. The principal efficient is the Holy Ghost:Joel 2.28. Act. 2.17. Zeph. 3.9. Rom 8.15, 26. Gal. 4.6. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Zach. 12.10. Rom. 8.6. Mat 20.22. Luk. 9.55. Jam. 4.3: for desire to pray is not bred in us by nature, nor acquired by humane study or industry: but put into us by the Spirit of God, who doth lift up our hearts to God. Wherefore in special manner it is called the Spirit of Supplications: because by this heavenly fire, our affections are warmed with a desire of Praying, and our lips are opened to sing of the praise of God. Prayer is not a work of humane strength, art, wit or learning: for we of our selves know not what to pray. The Child is born before it cry. Faith and Prayer are both from one Fountain: But Faith is a supernaturall gift of God. The same Spirit that in∣fuseth the gift of Faith, doth teach, incite, direct, and inable to Pray. As every man hath more liberally received the graces of the Spirit, so is he more ardent and frequent in Prayers. As soon as the Holy Ghost doth possess the heart of man, he doth cast into it an ardent fire of Prayer, whose flames do mount up to the Habitations of God. The less principal efficient is the faithfull heart. Prayer is the gift of God, but the act of man. The Spirit giveth abi∣lity to Pray, and inciteth unto it: but it is man that Prayeth by the Spirit. A godly mind and fervent heart, that is, an understanding holily infor∣med, and a will moved with fervent zeal to perform this worship re∣ligiously and after a lawfull manner, is the less principal cause of Prayer. Q. By Prayer we obtain the Spirit, how is he then the Cause of Prayer? A. The Spirit of God is the Parent of Prayer: but the more full com∣munication of the Spirit is obtained by Prayer; as hath been shewed be∣fore. Q. Is Prayer any part of Gods Worship? A. It is a principal part of Divine service, which God requireth, and man is bound to perform. For first, When God is delighted with nothing so much as with our obedience: he hath most severely enjoyned this Office of Prayer,Hos. 14.2. Psal. 50.15. Joh. 16.24. Mat. 7.7. Luk. 11.9. Psal. 81.11. Psal. 105.1, 4. Isa. 55.6. 1 Thes. 5.17. Luk. 18.1. Rom. 12.12. Eph. 6.18. Col. 4.2. Phil. 4.6. Mar. 13 33. Isa. 65.24. Psal. 145.18. Act. 2 21. Luk. 19.46. Isa. 64.7. Psal. 14 4. Act. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.17. Isa. 56.7. Hos. 14.2. Rev. 5.8. Act. 10.4. Heb. 13.15. Psal. 141.2. Mal. 1.11. Psal. 116.17, 18. Hos. 14.3. Cant. 4.11. and by most sweet promises, and dreadfull comminations of punishments unless we obey, inviteth unto it. Secondly, Sith on God as the most High all inferiour causes in the world are dependent, and the higher any cause is, the more it co∣veteth to impart vertue unto things beneath it, how should any kind of ser∣vice we do or can do, find greater acceptance then Prayer, which sheweth our concurrence with him in desiring that wherewith his very nature doth most delight? Thirdly, The name of Prayer is usuall to signifie even all the service that ever we do unto God; and that perhaps to shew, that there is in Religion no acceptable duty, which devout Invocation of the Name of God doth not either presuppose or inferre. Fourthly, Prayers are those Calves of mens lips; those most gracious and sweet Odours; those rich Presents and Gifts which be∣ing carried up into Heaven, do best testifie our dutifull affection, and are for the purchasing of all favour at the hands of God, the most undoubted means we can use. Fifthly, Prayer is compared to Incense or sweet Perfumes, for that they are as acceptable to the Lord as Perfumes are to men; and to the drops of Honey, as it were dropping from the lips of the Church, as from a Hony∣combe. Milk and Hony are under her tongue. Sixthly, By Prayer we glorifie God, acknowledging him to be the Father of Lights, the Fountain of all good we have and would have; giving him the praise of his wisdom, goodness, mer∣cy, and power, as who knoweth our necessities, and is both willing and able
to help and succour us. As teaching bringeth us to know that God is our supream Truth: so Prayer testifieth that we acknowledge him our Sovereign good. Seventhly, The Heathen who were ignorant of the true God, and how he was to be worshipped,Plato Alcib. lib. 2. Cic. de nat. Deor. lib. 2. Jon. 1.6. Scult. thic. lib. 1. cap. 10, 12. Zanch. de red. lib. 1. in Praec. prim. de n∣voc. Thes. prima. did know by the light of nature, that God was to be called upon in all necessities. Arise thou sleeper, and call upon thy God. Q. Is it necessary that we should pray? A. Prayer is the Oblation of a free and willing heart; but yet it is necessary, not by necessity of co-action, but of Precept. We must aske, and that con∣tinually, that is at set times, without intermission, by the Commandement of Christ himself, bidding us ask, and we shall receive; seek, and we shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto us; wherein we should rest. For as God hath fore-appointed all necessaries to be given us: so hath he appointed the means whereby they should be brought to pass, whereof Prayer is a chief. As Children have no more compendious way to get any thing then to beg it at their Parents, no more have we then to beg it at the hand of our God;It is a com∣mon thing with men, though they be willing a man should pass through their ground, yet they will have leave asked, otherwise it would be take for a common high wa. So God, &c. Psal. 8.0. Psal 4.1 Psal. 31.15. Psal. 86.5. Plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon the. We glorifie God by Prayer, and he also glo¦rifieth us, vouchsfing unto us, who are but dust and ashes, this high and honourable Priviledge, to have free access unto him, and to have the ear of our great King and Sovereign. who, if Parents sinfull, give good things to their children that ask them, will much more give us the Spirit that desire it. Spare to speak, and spare to speed: Open thy mouth wide, and God will fill it. The grace of God is the Fountain of all blessings, but Gods hearing and our Prayers, as means do come betwixt the grace of God which is hidden in him∣self, and the effects of his grace, which are then perceived, when he heareth our Prayers. And of this Ordinance there are just reasons. 1. It is meet we should pray for the things we have need of, that having received them, we might be as∣sured we had them of God, and not by accident or fortune, as natural men speak. 2. God that bestoweth his gifts of grace freely, would have it appear that they are gratious, given without any desert: and this is done, when we beg to be re∣lieved of meer mercy, and praise the Lord for favours already vouchsafed of bounty and love. 3. What love or honour, should God receive at our hands for mercies given, if we did not call upon him in our necessities, and praise his Name for the love wherewith he hath respected us? The commanded necessary use of Prayer is three-fold. First, In respect of God, who is glorified by our Prayer and praise, as the wellspring of grace, the fountain of mercy, the giver of every good and perfect gift, from whom they come, and to whom all praise must be returned. By Prayer, the graces of the Spirit are exercised, and so in∣creased; we have communion with God, and grow into acquaintance with God, whereby our stock of grace and comfort is much augmented. Good company increaseth grace: communion with God much more. Secondly, In regard of men, the helping of them through love, by being suiters at the Throne of grace for them through Christ, and returning thanks with and for them unto the Lord. Thirdly, In regard of our selves, that we might obtain what is needfull, prevent what evil might befall, testifie the holiness of our desires before him, and pay our debt of thankfullness, having nothing else to return for all his mercies plenti∣fully reached forth unto us: and that use and experience might confirm the pro∣vidence of God unto us. Isa. 65.24.Q. Before they call I will answer (sath the Lord) therefore Prayers are needless. A. It followeth not, that we not need ask, because God is ready to give: for it is said in the next words, whilest they speak I will hear. Prayers are not needfull to stirre up mercy in God who is the bowels of mercy, nor to in∣form him who is the searcher of the heart:Psal. 34, 5. Luk 11.13. but they are necessary as means which God will have used, that we may receive the things which he of his free
mercy giveth. Isaac knew he should have seed before, yet he prayed. Da∣vid was assured God would build him an House, therefore he prayed. Elias knew,Gen. 25.21. 2 Sam. 7.27. 1 Reg. 18.42. Non qud o∣raclo fidem abroget, sed quod officij sui esse novit, &c. Calv. Psal. 2.8. Dan. 9.23. Cal. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 20. sect. 2. 1 Joh. 5.14. Exo. 32.10. Prayer is a Key to open the day, and the Barr to shut up the night. Calv. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 3. Tit. 2.3. 1 Tim. 4.5. Psal. 116.12, 13. What we winne by Prayer, that we wear with thankfullness. Psal. 145.1 and had told Ahab, God would certainly give rain: yet he prayed. To Christ himself, to whom the Father gave all things, it was said of the Father, Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance. Prayer is as a Key to open the Storehouses of all Gods Treasures unto us; as by knocking we enter into the place we desire to go to: so by Prayer we obtain those things we need. Prayer is as a Hook to reach those things that are above our reach, and to put by those things that stand in our way. If we pray not, we cannot hope to be supplied in our necessities, nor yet comfortably to use and enjoy the things we have: for as if we take any thing that is our neighbours without ask∣ing him leave, we are accounted Thieves; so to possess the things of God (whose all things are) without asking them at his hand, is felony. Prayers are means to prepare us holily and comfortably to enjoy the things received. The creature is sanctified by Prayer: and what we obtain by Prayer, we possess with greatest pleasure. Things received by Prayer encrease our love to God, our fervency in supplication, our faith in his Promises, our thankfulness to his Majesty: lift up the heart to the more earnest meditation of his bounty, and make us ready to part with them for Gods glory. Neither is there any fear least we should weary the Lord by continuall craving: for he is honoured, and not wearied by our Prayers. Q. Your heavenly Father knows what ye need.Mat. 6.32. Luk. 12.30. A. Therefore distrust is to be renounced, and distracting cares to be said aside, but Prayers not to be neglected. In nothing be carefull, but let your request be made known with supplications and thanksgiving.Mat. 6.8, 9. Phil. 4.6. But it must be re∣membred, that the laying open of our misery is neither the cause of obtaining, nor the end of our Prayers. The cause of obtaining is the free will and pleasure of God: but the manner of obtaining doth require Prayers.Psal. 91.15. & 145.18. The Lord of his meer pleasure was moved to make known to the Pro∣phet Jeremy, what favour he would vouchsafe to Jerusalem after the captivity: nevertheless he saith to him, Call upon me,Jer. 33.3. and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and hidden things, which thou knowest not. The Lord promised to bring back the captivity of Israel after seventy years, yet will he be sought unto; I know the thoughts that I think towards you,Jer. 29.10, 11.12. saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give an expected end. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. Christ knew the misery of the blind man, yet he saith;Luk. 18.41. What wilt thou that I do unto thee? But say they, we must not weary him that gives voluntarily: As though God were tired, and not honoured with our Prayers. To Christ himself, to whom the Father gave all things, we read it was said of the Father; Ask of me,Psal. 2.8. and I will give thee the Heathens for thine Inheritance. Q In that day (saith Christ) ye shall ask me nothing.John 16.23. A. To ask, signifieth not only to crave, beg, or intreat, but to question or move doubts: and so it is taken in this place. The Disciples should not need to question as they had done before, when they had the Spirit to lead them in∣to all Truth. This sense is manifest by the Text,Joh. 16.24, 26. for in the verses following our Saviour exhorts his Disciples to ask that their joy might be full. And in this speech without question he had reference to their former questionings,Joh. 13.6. Joh 16.18 Lord whi∣ther goest thou? What is this that he saith unto us? When the truth was fully mani∣fested, they should not need to ask in this sort. Q. Doth not God oftentimes bestow his benefits without Prayer?
Praevenire be∣nedictionibus, significat inge∣nere bonorum, ultrò & non petentem, & quidem gratuito cumu∣lare. Psal. 21.A. Yes: to the wicked many things, either to provoke them to repentance, or to make them inexcusable; and to his Children also, as a tender and loving Father, who respecteth more what they want, then what they ask. But the faithfull must and ought to pray, and the Lord heapeth upon them good things unasked, to encourage and quicken them to ask the more. But the wicked have these things uncertainly, they have no promise of them; they have them from his providence, not from his mercy in Christ: not with a blessing; and they are given unto them, not for their own sake, but for the Church. Isa. 45.4. CHAP. II. Motives and Encouragements to pray, and continue in Prayer. Divers Objections answered, and many necessary cases of Consci∣ence resolved. Question: WHat Motives and Encouragements have we to pray? A. 1. We have the examples of Christ, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and all Saints provoking us to pray. The whole life of our Saviour, what was it but a continuall Prayer?Mar. 1.35. Mat. 14 23. Luk. 9.18. & 11.1. Joh. 11.42. & 12.28. Luk. 3.21. & 9.29. & 22.44. Heb. 5.7. Mat. 27.46. Luk. 23.34. Dan. 6.10, 11. Act. 1.14, 24. & 2.43. & 3.1. & 4.24. &. 6.4, 6. & 7.56. & 8.15. & 10.4, 12. & 13.3, 10. & 20.36. Luk. 2.37. Act. 9.14. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Tim. 2.22. Job. 33.26. Luk. 23.42. 2 Chro. 33.12, 13. Act. 9.11. Hence we read that often he departed into a private place to pray, that he went up into the Mountain to pray. He would not touch a bit of bread without blessing and giving thanks. He prayed at his Baptisme, transfiguration, in the Garden, at his death. It were infinite to name the Saints of God, that alone and with others, in peace and trouble, have sought the Lord by hearty Prayer. Not to stand upon particular instances, the practice is so general, that to be a Christian, and to call upon the Name of the Lord, is in substance one thing. Ananias saith, Paul had authority to bind all that call on the Name of the Lord. Thus Paul describeth the Saints, they call upon the Name of Jesus Christ out of a pure heart. When babes are born, they say, they cry presently: but when men are conver∣ted and made new creatures by the work of the Spirit, they presently cry. The Thief upon the Cross prayed, when he was brought to repentance. Manasses when he sought the Lord, humbled himself greatly and prayed. Paul began newness of life with supplication. It is the note of an Atheist, that he calleth not upon God; of an Hypocrite, that he prayeth in some conditions only; of a sound Christian, that he will alwaies call upon God. Prayer is the first thing wherewith a righteous life beginneth, and the last wherewith it doth end. For Prayer is the breath of Faith, and as we believe, so we pray. A temporary faith bringeth forth temporary Prayer; sound Faith, unfeigned constant Prayer: if Faith languish, Prayer is feeble; when Faith reviveth, Prayer is lively and working 2. A second Motive is, The sweet and comfortable Promises made to them that make known their requests unto God with supplication and thanksgiving. Call upon me, and I will hear thee. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. Who is so dull, that is not quickned by these gracious allure∣ments? So stubborn as not to be wonne? So timerous, as not to be encouraged by them? Who will not ask, when his request is so graciously accepted,Psal. 14.4. & 53.4. Job 27.10. Deut. 4.7. Psal. 91.15. Isa. 65.24. Jer. 29.12. Psal. 81.10. Isa. 41.17. Joh. 14.13, 14. & 16.23. Luk. 11.10, 11. & 15.7. Mat. 7.8. & 21.22. Psal. 34.17. Isa. 30.19. & 58.9. Joel 2.32. Act. 2.21. Rom. 10.12, 13. 1 Joh. 3.21, 22. 1 Ioh. 5.14, 15. Iam. 5.15. Mar. 11.24. so easily granted? 3. Dreadfull threatnings are denounced against them that pray not, or pray idly, carelessly, without life and power; and God hath severely avenged the omission of Prayer in his own people. Wo to her that
is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing City. She obeyed not the voice:Zeph. 3.1, 2. Isa. 30.1. Dan. 9.13. Isa. 43.22. Hos. 7.14. Ezek. 22.30, 31. Isa. 64.7. she received not correction: she trusted not in the Lord: she drew not near to her God. If the Lord be angry with them that pray not, should not this encourage us to seek un∣to him with all our hearts? 4. The publike calamities that be upon the Church, the private crosses that afflict, the continuall want and danger wherein we live, the daily stratagems of Satan, whereby he seeks to destroy all these and many more, call upon us to seek unto the Lord in hearty Prayer with thanksgiving. What refuge against the temptations of Satan, but earnest Prayer?Psal. 25.16, 17. & 38.2. Psal. 38.1, 2, &c. Jam. 5.13. Hos. 6.1, 2. Judg. 10.0, 15. Psal. 107.6. Ex. 14.10, 15. Judg. 2.4. & 3.9. & 10.10, 15 & 4.3. & 20.23. What means to procure encrease of grace, freedom from judgments, the sanctified use of present afflictions, but Prayer? Is any tempted, afflicted, in danger, distressed, sick, weak in faith, beset with the snares of Satan and allurements of the world; let him pray? God fears us with danger, to drive us unto him: keeps us under with wants, to awaken from security; scourges us with rods of love, that we might cry aloud to be delivered. 5. In Christ Jesus God is become our merci∣full Father, and hath erected a Throne of Grace to which we might fly for suc∣cour. Let us come boldly unto the Throne of Grace. Mercy is the gate of Prayer, which being set open to the miserable and needy; How should this encourage them to sue for help and succour? 6. Christ is our Advocate and Intercessour, who doth plead our cause, and present our Prayers before the Father.Ezr. 8.23. Psal. 18.6. & 81.7. & 120.1. & 77.2. & 102.1, 2. & 1.8.5. & 16.2. Isa 26.16. Lam. 5.1. Jon. 1.6. Ps. 25.16, 17. & 86.1. Heb. 4.16. Eph. 3.12. Heb. 10.19, 22 1 Joh. 2.2. Psal. 3.5. & 4.1, 7. Act. 8.22. Luk. 18.13, 14 Mat. 26.41. Eph. 6.18. Psal. 18.3. & 25.15. Luk. 21.36. Zeph. 2.3. Exo. 17.11. Jer. 26.19. Jam. 5.18. Psal, 19.13. & 119.133. Luk. 11.13. Phil. 4.6. Jam. 5.17. Having such an High Priest, who is set over the house of God, Let us draw near with a true heart. Having such a friend in the Court of that authority and esteem, who will not ply the Throne with Petitions early and late? specially when we seek unto him that hath pleasure in our supplications. 7. The effects and benefits of Prayer, should put heart and courage into us. It is not a dead work that brings no pro∣fit with it: but most gainfull and commodious. By Prayer, we obtain pardon of sinnes, put Satan to flight, winne the day of enemies, spiritual and corporal, without striking a stroke, escape the calamities that shall come upon the world, It doth get us supply of strength if we come to the encounter. Look how Cap∣tains fighting abroad for their Countries, send their Letters, and so have men, munition, victuals, money, &c. So Prayer is the Messenger of a faithfull soul, and fetcheth every thing from God. Prayer doth strengthen us in faith and hope. For look as if we commune often and familiarly with a man, we have more con∣fidence towards him: so if we by often Prayer speak with our God, it doth im∣bolden us, and breed more liberty and confidence towards him, than if we were estranged. Let us pray, and God will give the Spirit to lead us into all truth and holiness, to support and strengthen in all tryals, to enable to all duties of piety or mercy. Pray, and the peace of God shall like a watch-tower keep our hearts Prayer getteth all our other Armour fitted about us; we being not able to buckle it on, further than our heavenly Father doth help us on with it. Prayer hath opened the Windows of Heaven, stopped the mouth of the Lyon, quenched the force of fire, loosed iron bands, and cast out Devils. It is a no∣table means for the strengthening of our faith and affiance, for the inflaming of our hearts with love. It increaseth our cummunion and fellowship with God, and maketh our minds to soare aloft in heavenly meditations. It assures us that we are the Children of God, and Heires of the heavenly Inheritance. In a word, he can want nothing that is good, no evil can come nigh his dwelling that doth sincerely call upon the Lord. Ask, and have in abun∣dance. Q. God will do that which shall seem good unto him; neither can his will be altered by my Prayers. A. But it must be remembred, that God, before he granteth any good thing unto his Elect, is wont usually to kindle their minds with an exceeding desire to obtin those things. Further, when he will do any thing, he stirreth up those that are his, to desire that, which otherwise he would have done; to the in∣tent
that for honour sake, he might attribute the same unto their Prayers. This also is another cause: for that Gods benefits are then the more acceptable, when they are craved and desired. Moreover, in praying our minds are more joyned unto God: yea, and those vows and holy desires seem to be nothing else, but ladders and degrees whereby we ascend up unto God, and certain waies and spaces, whereby we come to that which we earnestly desire. Finally, we pray not in any case to the intent we may change God, which thing we should attempt in vain, seeing he is immutable: but rather, that we our selves should be changed; for so much as in praying we are made capable of the benefits of God. A faith∣full and spiritual Prayer puts the heart in a better disposition, so that a man is now made ready to receive a blessing, which before he was not: So that when we think we draw God nearer by our arguments, indeed we draw nearer un∣to him. 2 Cor. 12.8.Q. Prayers do not alwaies speed, therefore they seem to be in vain. For this I besought the Lord thrice, saith Paul; yet he missed of that he sought: much more we in temporall things. A. That is not in vain, which doth not alwaies presently get the thing we would have: aboue which we must learn these things. First, that prayer doth often obtain what we would have, as Moses prayed for victory, and had it. Hannah for a sonne, and had him. Secondly, when it doth not obtain the things themselves, it gets something, that may be worth the seeking as though it doth not quite remove evils, yet it prevails so farre, as to have mercy mingled with judgments, our evils asswaged. Though we get not the things we wish,2 Cor. 12.7, 8. it getteth some grace proportionable; as in Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee. Thirdly, Though it get not deliverance according to desire, yet it alwaies procures issue for salvation. Fourthly, we must not alwayes ex∣pect, that God should straightway answer our petitions. And if he shall de∣fer them, we must thus comfort our selves; He hath not yet fulfilled our re∣quests, howbeit he will do the same in due time. In the mean while he will after this manner exercise our faith. It is not seldome, that God seemeth he would nothing less, then what he hath promised and threatned. He promised the kingdome to David, but with what miseries did he exercise him before he ful∣filled his promises? When our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ was to be born of the Virgin Mary, the Angel promised that he should have the Throne of his father David; and yet until the thirty year of his age, he lived in small shew of the world: After that he was envied of the high Priests, Pharisees and Scribes,Isa. 28.16. Heb. 10.36. and at the last hanged upon a tree; Therefore Esay doth very well admonish, that He which believeth, must not be hasty. For God will performe in due time those things which he hath promised: but in the mean time our part is to prescribe nothing unto him. The very same thing also must we say of the threatnings: God said, that he would overthrow the Babylonians; yet did they flourish and triumph, yea and led the people into captivity. Wherefore God would not fulfill his threatnings presently, yet did he performe them when he saw a time convenient. Q. What if my heart tell me, that God will not hear my Prayers, or I feel in∣wadly such an answer? Judg. 10.13.A. Yet must we not cease to pray, but stirre up our faith to believe, sharpen our desires, and encrease our repentance. The Lord saith, he will not be an help to the Israelites, not that he might drive them from him, but awaken them to a more serious consideration of their waies, and desire of mercy. The Lord said unto Moses;Exo. 32.10. Num. 14.12, 13. Mat. 15.23, 24 Suffer that my wrath may be kindled, and I will destroy them at once. This he said to inflame Moses desire in behalf of the people, and to set  edge on his Prayers, not that he determined to destroy them. The Woman of Chanaan cryed unto Christ, but he passed by in silence, as though he heard
her not. Afterward, she being instant in Prayer, he said; I am not sent, but unto the lost sheepe of the house of Israel: and when as she ceased not, he called her dog: And yet he was minded to help her, but first he would have her faith to come to light. And in another place, under the Parable of him that asked bread, he saith; Unto whom the good man of the house that was within, said;Luk. 11.7. I and my children be laid in bed. And when the other had made earnest suite, by his importunity, he obtaineth as many leaves as he would. Wherefore if our heart accuse us, let us convert our selves unto Christ, and stirre up our selves more confidently to seek for mercy in his name: this is that which God approveth. Q. I have asked long and not received: wherefore I fear it is in vain to pray. A. First, We must examine whether our continuing in some lust, do not hinder the effect of our Prayer. Ye ask and have not, because ye ask amiss.Jam. 4.3. If the angler stay long, and catch nothing, he takes up the bait, and amends it, then waits: so must we, &c. As for vain glory, ambition, delicateness, &c. and this may be known by the effect how these things are spent. And then if we amend our Prayers, God will a∣mend our speeding. Secondly, We must know that God doth deferre us, to try how we will persevere in Prayer; as a friend when he meaneth to do this or that, doth detract it at the first, to see if the other will importune him. Third∣ly, He doth not forthwith bestow what we crave, that we might know the worth of things, and have our joy doubled in receiving them. Fourthly, It is a token God will give us more abundantly, the longer he doth hold us in request. The wider one openeth any thing, it is a token he meaneth to put the more in. God intendeth not our hinderance, in causing us to wait: nor purposeth to weary us, by putting delaies. It is not in vain therefore to ask, though we be not presently answered; seeing God doth on so good occasions delay us in our suits. And let us be sure of this, that he that botleth up our teares, files up our Prayers, putting them on record before him,Mal. 3.6. Then spake they that feared the Lord, every one to his neighbour, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name. Q. I am unworthy to come before so glorious a Majesty.Hab. 1.13. Joh. 9.1. Psal. 66.18. God is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity. God heareth not sinners. If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my Prayer. A. No mans unworthiness should drive him from Prayer. The Commande∣ment is universall, Ask, seek, knock.Joel 2.32. Est. 4.11. Therefore as they might boldly come into the inner Court of the King of Persia, to whom he held forth the golden Scepter: so may we confidently speak unto God, having his allowance and Commande∣ment. David took hold of this Scepter in great distress of mind; Thou saidst,Psal. 27.8. Seek my face; this takes away all fear, and makes me bold. What if we be un∣unworthy? he is gracious, and loveth freely.Isa. 34.2. For mine own sake I will be favour∣able unto thee. Nor do we come as servants in our own names, to be respected of desert: but as sonnes in the Name of Christ, to be heard of grace. The Com∣mandement of God, his sweet Promises, bountifull Invitations, amiable Titles,Prov. 15 8. Prov. 28.9. Psal. 66.18. Isa. 59.. Job 27.9. Psal. 119.7. Jer. 11.11. Ezek 8.18. P. Martyr. par. 4. cap. 12. sect. 20. Psal. 79.8, 9. and effectual Intercession of Christ, must be opposed to the sense of our unwor∣thiness. 2. Sinners are of two sorts; weary, laden, and repentant, or careless and impenitent. They that love to live in sinne, or go on carelesly therein, and hate to be reformed, they shall not be heard when they cry: nay, their Prayers are abhomination and sinne: But the laden and penitent sinner is called to come, and shall be graciously accepted in Jesus Christ. He shall not be regarded, that looketh upon iniquity with favour, delight, or indulgence: he cannot pray for mercy, that doth not see many sinnes in him self to be bewailed. He needs not pardon, who knowes not himself guilty; he will not crave supply or increase of grace, who is not privy to his own weakness and imperfections: Were we not
unworthy, we could not beg to be relieved of meer grace and mercy. 3. Even temporary believers are accepted and heard in Prayer according to their repen∣tance. Their heart was not right with him (that is with God,) neither were they stedfast in his Covenant:Psal. 78.34, 37, 38. But he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not. Q. May not the faithfull by indulgence to some sinne, hinder the course of their Prayers for a time? A. They may, and often do; for being distempered or fallen into sinne, they cannot pray in faith actually or virtually till by repentance they set faith again in the Throne. Conscience of sinne doth stop our mouthes, stifle our Prayers, shake our confidence, and ecclipse our comfort: which Satan oft aimeth more at then the sinne it self unto which he tempteth us. The exhortation of the Apostle is this;1 Pet. 3.7. Psal. 34.15.16, 17. Prov. 15.9, 21. Likewise, ye Husbands dwell with your Wives, as men of knowledge, giving honour unto the Woman, as unto the weaker vessel, even as they which are heirs together of the grace of life, that your Prayers be not interrupted. For when the conscience is defiled, we are so pricked in the foot, that we cannot go to God in Prayer, and are not able comfortably to discharge it: we either neglect it, or prophane Gods name in rushing upon it. We must therefore take heed of sinne, as we would with comfort return to Prayer: But our failing in one thing, must not excuse us in another: when the duty lies on us, we have no di∣spensation to be negligent in it. Q I have been overtaken with infirmity, the time of Prayer draweth on, what shall I do? A. First, Thou must not neglect it, for this is to heap one sinne upon a∣nother.Mat. 5.24. Leave there thine offering before the Altar, and gothy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift. We have an absolute Commandement to pray, and the breach of one precept, will not excuse the neglect of another duty. A particular offence doth not offend so much, as if we grow strangers to God. As in a Child, it is worse to runne away from his Father, then to commit a particular trespass against him. It is dangerous to let the breach of conscience, which sin hath made, to lie open, for that is the way to bring in more sin, and let forth grace. To stay in this case is dangerous, for the heart growes more hard by continuance: The conscience is most tender immediatly after the sinne commited: and the heart sooner hardened if you take the advantage presently after the sinne is committed.Psal. 2.11. & 5.7. Heb. 12.28. 2 Tim. 2.8. Psal. 26.6. Lev. 10.2, 3. Josh. 24.19. Secondly, Thou must not, when thou hast offended God, rush boldly on him. Serve the Lord with fear. Lift up pure hands without wrath. This was Davids care, I will wash mine hands in innocency, and so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord. God will be sanctified in them that draw near unto him. Memorable is the saying of Joshua to the Children of Israel; Ye cannot serve the Lord: for he is an holy God, and there∣fore must be served after an holy manner. It is noted of the Israelites, They worshipped every man a farre off in the door of his Tent.Exo. 33.10. Numb. 12.4. If a mans Parent should be so offended, as to spet on him; durst he appear before him for seven daies? And shall we be so bold, having offended the Father of Spirits, presently to come into his sight without consideration? In the third place, A man must gather himself together,1 Reg. 8.47. We must come unto God with a disposition turned from sinne, and brought home to God. Job 11.13, 14. Isa. 1.15.1. 2 Chro. 30.19. and let his heart smite him in that he hath done; the rather to think what streights he hath brought himself into, either in neglecting his duty, or prophaning the Name of his God. They that by sinne have gone astray, must bethink themselves, and repent, and make supplications: If the party be at hand (as the man and wife) let there be mutuall confession; if otherwise, let their be a purpose of it: and having this purpose, and being in any measure touched, though nothing so well as we wish, and were meet; we may come to God, and he will accept us, and heal us.
Q. The Devil will labour to prevent us, or break us off in this duty by distracti∣ons; this thing, and that thing calling us away. A. We must be resolute against distractions.Mat. 6.33. First seek the Kingdom of Heaven. If we promise at this or that houre to meet a man, when the Clock smiteth, whosoever we are with, we crave pardon, we are to go. Make not more bold with God then you would with man. Is it not better to lose some sleep, or to cut short the time of daily repast, than to deprive our souls of communion with God in that holy duty? What shift will men make to spare some time for conference with a godly kind friend? Now to redeem time for Prayer, we must learn to be diligent in our callings, and go about our labours with heavenly-mindedness, spending no needless houres in thinking or speaking of earthly things, out of carnal affection that we bear unto them. He that takes no more work in hand then God allowes, is wise to order his affairs with discretion, delights not to think or speak of earthly businesses superfluously, and with diligence observe he season that offers it self for the dispatch of his work; he, if he will contend and wrestle against difficulties, shall find convenient time for Prayer. Q. Such mists of darkness, such swarmes of wandering idle thoughts come before our minds, that we are much discomforted. A. It is no doubt a great fault, and exceeding hindrance of Christian com∣fort, that the heart is wandering after vanity when it should be attent upon God. We cannot endure our Children should look up and down, here and there, when they speak unto us. And is it not a misery and sinne, that we should carry our selves more rudely in the presence of God, then we would or durst in civil converse with men? But for the thing it self; First, We must enquire whether letting loose our hearts all day, do not cause this unfitness at night: and if it be so, we must help the matter with watchfulness. If vanity possess the mind at our first awaking in the morning, and we suffer the heart to rove about idly all day long, and grow into distemper and earthly-mindedness, it will hardly be brought to attend upon God in the duty of Prayer and thanksgiving. A trifling fellow that wanders up and down, will not easily be tied to any sore work. It is death to the soul, after our roving fits, to be kept to any supernaturall work that is above it self. But daily custome makes that easie, which at first was tedious. If the heart be held to what is good, and kept within compass at all times: it will readily attend upon God in the time of Prayer. The best way to prevent ro∣ving, is to keep our heart in tune and rightly disposed: As when a man is to use his Horse, he will have him under bridle. It is good to meditate on that glori∣ous presence before whom we stand, the necessity, profit, and excellency of those gifts and graces we beg of God in Prayer. Secondly, We must know that the Saints have felt both these things, darkness and wandrings. For there is a double wandering of the mind: one of carelesness, negligence, and con∣tempt, when we intend not holy dutyes, come not unto them with carefulness: such as is in many in the Church, that pray and their minds are a wooll-gather∣ing; they say, Amen, but know not to what. There is another wandering of the mind, which is through infirmity and temptation of Satan. As a man that aims at a mark, may have a shaking hand, or be jogged by another, that he cannot shoot streight. Now this being felt, is grievous unto us, though we cannot overcome it. Thirdly, This is a Rule, We must not cease to do any Commandement, because of our imperfection in doing it. The frailties that cleave unto us must be striven against with all diligence: but the duty it self is not to be forborn. Q. God heareth not such as doubt of his mercy and love.Jam. 1.5, 6. But I am weak in faith? A. There is a reigning unbelief, and there is a doubting, or unbelief, which
is a weakness left in the Saints, for their exercise. The first is in Heathens and Unbelievers: the latter which is a doubting which is in the soul that would be rid of it, and fights against it by Prayer of Faith; this doth not hinder us from being heard.Mat. 9.22. Mat. 14.31. Psal. 31.22. But if thou canst do any thing, help us; Oh thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? I said in my haste I am clean cast off, never∣theless thou heardst my Prayer. If faith be weak, we must not cease to pray, but pray the more that we might be confirmed. For by earnest Prayer we come to be assured of Gods favour, and faith by asking obtaineth what she doth desire. Yea, say a man were destitute of that faith that justifieth, he is allow∣ed and bound to seek it of God by earnest Prayer, which is not altogether un∣acceptable; because it proceedeth from a faith that stirreth up desire of firm union and communion with Christ. As for the place alledged, by wavering or doubting, hypocriticall halting or division of heart, not doubting of Gods mer∣cy towards us by reason of our sin, or weakness of faith, seemeth to be un∣derstood. Q. I am kept under with dulness and dead-heartedness, that I am afraid to pray. A. There is a two-fold dulness; one of feebleness, which is accompanied with the abjectness of the heart, when the spirits are wasted with labour and sorrow; the other of sloth joyned with presumption. Both must be striven a∣gainst, but are not alike dangerous, nor to be remedied after one manner. If dulness arise from feebleness and wasting of the spirits, we must bring our selves into the sunne-shine of Gods love, and cheer up our souls with the remembrance of his free mercies, gracious promises and tender compassions: for the straightned spirit is reived with comfort, as joynts benummed with cold ga∣ther strength when they receive warmth. The best way to fit our selves for this du∣ty, is to fall presently to the duty: and the very doing of the duty doth fit to the duty. As all actions of the same kind increase the habits: so Prayer, makes us fit for Prayer. The way to godliness, is in the compass of godliness: the way to grow in grace, is the exercise of grace. By setting himself upon the work, he shall gather fitness, though he were unfit at the first. As joynts be∣nummed, get life, being used. If dulness proceed from the other extream, we must stirre up our spirits by calling to mind the charge that God hath laid upon us to pray, the threatnings denounced against them that neglect or con∣temn it, the judgments executed upon them that have not called upon the Name of God. We must also meditate, what brands of disgrace are fastened upon them that deal sluggishly in the service of God; what benefits they are justly deprived of by their own folly? and what indignity they offer to the Lord himself. Further, we must make our sloth odious, and shame our selves that we should deal with a slack hand in a matter of so high and excellent nature, whereby we might have reaped much profit and comfort to our souls. And having thus wrest∣led with our selves to shake off such chilness as we have caught by idleness, we must cry to him that is the quickning Spirit, not being quiet till we get some warmth into our spirits. Thus dulness is to be driven away by Prayer, and earnest contention; but we must not cease to pray because we are dull. Not∣withstanding any dulness of spirit, the duty is to be performed. We have never more need to pray, then when we are most indisposed: for then a man is exposed to temptation, apt to be overcome, fit for nothing. Again, all dulness doth not hinder the success of our Prayers, but that which is allowed, delighted in, or not striven against, as hath been mentioned. If thou spare no labour to get thy heart upon the wing, and do it as well as thou canst, it shall be ac∣cepted. Q. By what Arguments or Considerations should a man further strengthen him∣self, that he may constantly carry forth this duty?
A. First, If we might be familiarly admitted to the Kings presence, we would easily accept it. In faithfull Prayer thou maist commune with God. Secondly, How worthy are we to miss good things, that will not open our mouths for what we lack, nor return thanks for what is freely given? When God bids us ask and have, how unthankfull and unworthy wretches are we, that neglect such kindness, and will not prove him that is so gracious? When thank∣fulness for what is received, is crowned with second favours, how injurious are we to our selves, unmindfull of God, if we look not to him the giver of every good and perfect gift? Thirdly, There is no duty so acceptable to God: for that God being the chief good, and so ready to communicate hi blessings, we in Prayer desire what he specially delighteth in. And furthermore, Prayer is to Grace, as pouning is to sweet Spices; it maketh Grace, as Faith, Love, Reverence, Poverty of spirit, &c. cast a fra∣grant smell, as which (indeed) is nothing but the chafing of them. Fourthly,Psal. 65.2. It is good to muse often on the stile of God. He is a god that heareth Prayer. If Princes will not lose any part of their Royal Title, God will maintain his. Fifthly, It is our selves that gaine by Prayer: and if we lay it down,Job 35.7. we shall have the loss of it. If thou be righteous, what givest thou unto him? Yea, we must be so farre from being offended at Gods not answering, at our own want of comfort and liberty, that we must hold, even this,1 Chro. 29.14. that we are allowed to speak unto God, such a Priviledge as we are unworthy of. What am I, or my people, that we should offer thus? What are we that we should speak unto God, or have access to the Highest Majesty? Sixthly, To consider a∣gainst all want, that we are accepted according to that we have,2 Cor. 8.12. Mal. 3.17. when there is a ready mind. He spares as a Father doth his Children. They will hear with de∣light the lisping and stammering voice of their Children: Yea, because the soul is sick, the service is twice welcome. If a sick Child reach us up a thing, we count it more then to send another of laborious errands. Lastly, For all wants and discouragements, labour to see that thou canst not pray, if God by his Spirit help thee not: the more thou comest to be poor in spirit, the more freedom and strength thou shalt have in performing thy duty. Q. May a man rest in the work done? A. In no sort: for cursed is he that doth the work of the Lord negligently. Powerless Prayer is a prophanation of the great Name of God, and notorious abuse of his incomprehensible love. Neither let such as ask carelesly, think to ob∣tain any thing at the hands of God. He that asketh coldly, teacheth to deny. Men look to be sought unto by them that expect favour from them, and that in good earnest: they think a former kindness should not be forgotten, if a second be hoped for: How should we hope for good to come by our drowsie and sottish Prayers, which provoke his Highness, are no waies pleasing unto him? Prayer in a customary manner, warmes not the heart, amends not distempers, removes not sinne, weanes not from the world; pierces not the Heavens.
CHAP. III. Shewing that Liberty to pray is a singular and rare Privi∣ledge. Question: LEt us now hear in what respects Liberty to pray is a singular and rare Priviledge. A. 1. It is no small favour that the creature is allowed to commune with his Creatour, the redeemed with his Saviour. It is a liberty purchased by the blood of Christ. Men are glad of a faithfull friend, into whose bosome they might poure out their cares, with whom they might sweetly conferre upon occasion. Oh! what cause have we to rejoyce in this, that the Lord vouchsafeth us leave to talk with him, who of all friends is the most faithfull and constant? We can∣not pierce the secrets of mans heart, they are unsearchable. But we know the mind of God, that he is more loving, than love it self: more faithfull, than faith it self. Friends often lack wisdom to consider of our case, mercy to com∣passionate, power to help, judgment to weigh it, specially when we are not able to lay it open; and faithfulness to keep in mind or conceal what is committed to their trust; all which things diminish the comfort of their love and fellowship. But our God is most infinite in wisdom, rich in mercy, great in power; most ready to help, able to succour, exactly knowing our distress, our strength, when help is meet, what aid is fit, and what is good for us better than we our selves. 2. Other duties have their season, but Prayer is never out of season. Men cannot alwaies hear the Word, read the Scriptures, give Almes; they want ability and opportunity to these purposes. But Prayer may be used at any time, night or day, in any place, upon any occasion, nothing being required there∣unto but lifting up of the heart unto God,Rom. 1.9, 10. 1 Thes. 5.17. Luk. 18.1. which may be done in light or dark∣ness, alone or in company, at home or abroad. 3. This liberty is the greater, because perpetuall, at all times, and in every moment of time. Distance of place may hinder the communion of friends by speech or writing; necessary occasions and infirmities may interrupt it when they live together, that when the one needs, the other cannot afford his presence, or the comfort of it. But God is every where present, alwaies ready to be found if we seek unto him. A man may be driven into banishment, shut up close prisoner that no friend can have access unto him: The enemies may pluck out his eyes, that he shall not read; cut out his tongue, that he shall not speak; deprive him of the benefit of hearing the Word, and Assembly of the Saints: But liberty to pray can no man take from them; In banishment, imprisonment, trouble, they may cry unto God, and he will hear them. The malice of men may drive Christians with more speed and earnestness to cry unto the Lord, and him to send aid and help from above: But to hinder their Prayers for one mo∣ment, or to withhold succour from them, they are not able. 4. We cannot enjoy the presence and comfort of friends without travell and cost; and some∣times they are so distempered with passions, that they cannot or will not vouch∣safe that contentment which we expect and stand in need of. But in any distress we may go unto God without any trouble; it requires not motion of the body, but sending up the thoughts, which may be done in an instant: and coming to him, we shall ever find what we desire. He will never turn from us, if we depart not from his Testimonies. In the society of our best friends many things may fall out on their behalf, that minister occasion of grief: But with the Lord no∣thing is to be found, which offers not abundant matter of joy and comfort.
5. The knowledge is small which we have on earth, concerning things that are done in Heaven. Notwithstanding, thus much we know even of the Angels in Heaven, that they praise the Lord. And therefore Prayer being a work common unto men with Angels, what should we think but that so much of our lives is celestial and divine as we spend in the exercise of Prayer. For which cause we see that the most comfortable visitations, which God hath sent men from above, have taken especially the times of Prayer as their most natural opportunities.Dan. 9.20. Act. 10.13. Prov. 19.7. The friends of the poor go farre from him, &c. No man might enter into the Court of Aba∣sucrus clothed in Sack-cloth, Est. 4.2. but the gate of Heaven is wide open un∣to them. 6. This Royalty is common to all Believers, poor and rich, weak and strong, bond and free, in peace or trouble. Great men only have access into the presence-Chamber of Princes: but the gate of Heaven stands open for all of what sort or condition soever, if they be weary of their sin, and desire to be received into fa∣vour. There is none so weak and unworthy in his own eyes, who is not allowed to call God Father: the poor and needy shall find audience as soon as the rich and mighty. 7. If any man might be long and much conversant with a man en∣dued with vertues and knowledg, there is no doubt, but that he should become the better, and also the learneder. But how much more excellent a thing is it, to be conversant and to talk with the most excellent God? Surely the more we com∣mune with him by Prayer, the liker shall we be unto him in holiness and righte∣ousness. 8. On others, what more easie, and yet what more fruitfully bestow∣ed then our Prayers? If we give counsell, they are the simpler only that need it; if almes, the poorer only are relieved; but by Prayer we do good to all. When we are not able to do any other thing for mans behoof, when through malicious∣ness or unkindness they vouchsafe not to accept any other good at our hands, Prayer is that which we alwaies have in our power to bestow, and they never in theirs to refuse. Wherefore God forbid, saith Samuel,1 Sam. 12.23. speaking unto a most unthankfull people, a people weary of the benefit of his most vertuous Govern∣ment over them, God forbid that I should sinne against the Lord, and cease to pray for you. By Prayer the simple may benefit the wise, the weak the strong, the poor such as be rich in this world, the sick and feeble them that be healthfull and lusty: yea, thereby we may do good to our enemies, and winne their hearts, whether they will or no. Q. What followes from hence? A. He that can and doth pray, is a man of singular respect, honour and Au∣thority. 1. He is held to be the greatest favourite, that is most familiar with the Prince: How great is that man, who is in familiarity with the King of Kings? That Lawyer is in most request, who is most inward with the chief Judg of the Court. Doth not he deserve esteem with men, that is in account with God, who is the absolute and supream Judg of the whole world? 2. In Christ Jesus he is made a spiritual Priest to offer up the well-pleasing Sacrifice of suppli∣cation and thanksgiving; which is no small dignity, if things be weighed according to their worth. 3. If men be to preferre a Petition to the High Court of Parlia∣ment, the Prince or supream Governour, they will use the advice of some lear∣ned man to direct how it should be framed. The chiefest Oratours are chosen to give entertainment to great Nobles, Ambassadours, or such like. How excellent are his gifts who can draw Petitions, frame Meditations acceptable to God, plea∣sing to the Highest Majesty! 4. The excellency of a man that can pray is further manifested in this, that he may prevail with God for others, the Family, Country, and Kingdom wherein he liveth. A wise man is had in honour,Psal. 106.12. because of the good he may do to the Church or Common-wealth: but herein the most politick must give place to him that doth pray with an honest heart.
CHAP. IV. Shewing to whom we must pray. Who can or may pray. That Prayer is a work of the inner man. Touching the length of our Prayers. What things are required in Prayer. The especiall furtherance of Prayer, and whether it be lawfull to use the Voice therein. Question: TO whom must we Pray? Phil. 4.6. Eph. 5.20. Col. 3.17.A. To God alone in the Name of Christ Jesus. In every thing by Prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God; Giving thanks alwaies for all things unto God, and the Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Look as nature teacheth our Children to come to their Pa∣rents for every thing, and to give thanks to them, not to servants in house with them: so grace teacheth Gods Children to cry Abba Father, to resort to him in all necessity, and return praise to him for every blessing. All other persons, are persons rather praying to God, then persons to be prayed to, as God. God is the Authour of every good gift; to seek it religiously of any other is flat Ido∣latry; and to give the praise thereof to any but the Lord, is sacriledge. Look as it is one of the Royalties of the King, to be petitioned unto, as a common Parent for grace in sundry cases: so this is a Divine Royalty of God, that all flesh should come to him in their severall necessities, abasing themselves in con∣fessing their indigency, exalting him as with whom is fulness of good things, and uncontrolable power to effect for us whatever is good according to his own pleasure. And as he is to be sought unto for supply of our wants, so to be magnified for his mercies freely vouchsafed. Now we must come to God only through Christ: for he is our only Mediatour, the great Master of all Requests which are any way made to God, and Presenter of all praises that are offered to his Highness. Neither can Mediatour like Authority be given to any Angel or Saint departed: for they are not called to this honour, neither are they capable of it, as unable to perform that satisfactory obedience, in which as a foundation the impetrative force of Christs intercession leaneth. For all kind of power to impetrate all ministeriall Offices about us, all power of secondary executing things for us, all perfection of holiness, which things are for degree in Saints living, cannot be foundations which may bear this Office of Mediation twixt us and God. But of this more in the parts of Prayer. Q. Who can or may Pray? A. All persons that stand in need of mercy, to whom any promise of help is made, and all that have received any favour from God, are bound to pray: but the Prayer of the just and righteous only is acceptable unto the Lord.Psal. 34.15. Psal. 103.20. Psal. 145.19. Jam. 5.16. Prov. 15.9, 29. Psal. 21.2. Psal. 36 4. & 62.8. Psal. 119.58. Psal. 19.14. Psal 143.8. Rom. 1.9. Isa. 26.8, 9. The Angels in Heaven bless the Lord; the Saints on earth call upon his Name, and sing of his praise. But as for the impenitent, unbelievers, and ungodly, they are neither excused in not praying, nor can they be heard if they should pray. The distinct handling of this question, must be referred to the special Parts of Prayer. Q Is Prayer a work of the heart, or a labour of the lips? A. It is a work of the inner man: for the intire nature of Prayer stands in lifting up the soul unto God in an holy manner. In all our service we should say with the Apostle, That we serve God with our spirits: but chiefly in Prayer, it being not the warbling of the words, but the yearning and panting of the heart
after God, and the things of our peace. The Spirit it self maketh intercession for us with groanings, sc: of heart, that cannot be expressed.Rom. 8.26. 1 Cor. 14.1 Eph. 6.18. Heb 5.7. I will pray with the Spirit, I will sing with the Spirit. Praying alwaies with all Prayer and suppli∣cation in the Spirit. Such was Christs Prayer, who in the daies of his flesh did offer up Prayers and strong cries unto him, &c. From his soul they came: for they were offer'd up with loud cryes, and many tears. And the ardent desire is the thing that God heareth, though there be no voice annexed, as appeareth in Moses, Why cryest thou unto me? It is said of Hannah, She spake in her heart.Exo. 14.1. 1 Sam 1.13. Lam. 2.18. Gen. 24.45. Eccl 5.2. Lam. 3.41. Psal 25.1. Hos. 7.14. Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8. 2 Tim. 2.22. Col. 3.16. Eph. 5.19. Pal. 57.7. & 108.1. Psal. 103.1. & 119.7. Psal. 17.1. Joh. 4.23. Prov. 23.26. Psal 10.17. Psal. 119.58. Psal. 119.145. Rom. 8.26. Jer. 29.12, 13. Est enim spiritus, anima orationis, sicut & anima, forma & vita est corporis. Corpus sine anima, putidum est cadaver. Oratio sine spiritu & mente in Deum per fidem, per Spiritum sanctum sublevata, fatet in conspectu Dei. And the Caveat is, Let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. The wicked are challenged, that they pray not with their heart, when thy houle upon their beds. The Prayer outward, of the lips, without the request of the heart, is an empty thing which God regardeth not; nay, an abhominable mockery, which he detesteth. Cursed is he that draweth near with his lips, when his heart is farre from me. The spirit is the true rise of Prayer; it is the travell of the heart which pleaseth God. Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord, making melody in your heart to the Lord. My heart is fixed (saith David) my heart is fixed, I will sing, and give praise. And so he calleth upon himself, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Again, intreating audience, he sath, Give ear unto my Prayer that proceedeth not from feigned lips. For God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth. The cry of the lips doth not pierce the clouds: but the sighes of the heart enter into the ears of the Lord of Hosts, who dwelleth in the Heavens. And this maketh Prayer laborious, because the spirit is to travell in it: and the Saints in this regard, can endure better to hear an houre, than to pray a quarter: whereas the world, they cry for praying rather than for preaching, because they think the outward re∣peating of words with a general intention will suffice, not knowing or conside∣ring in truth what it is to pray or hear. Q. What direction may we take from hence touching the length of our Prayers? A. Prayer is an exercise of the soul,Eccl. 5.2. to be continued according to the strength of livelihood and spirit that God hath given. The rule of direction is, that we must fit and proportion our words to our matter, and both matter and words to our minds and hearts, our faith and fervency, devotion and attention. In this holy duty it is not good ordinarily to exceed to tiredness, which breedeth both deadness and discomfort. If dulness proceed from sloth, it is necessary to wrestle, till it be overcome: but if thou have life and power, it is dangerous to out-spend natural ability: for when the spirits are wasted, our desires will cool, and dulness creep on, which doth not a little disquiet the tender conscience. In publique Prayer, the Minister in respect of length must have regard to the ability of the Congregation: In Prayer with the Family, the Master may continue so long, as the power and strength of them that live therein, will bear. They that pray with others, must have regard to the vigour and livelihood of them that joyn with them. The Prayers of the sick and feeble should be short and frequent: because weakness of body and mind will not endure length of me∣ditations without tedious wearisomeness. The like may be said of them, that are infeebled with sorrow and distress of conscience, or vehemency of temp∣tation. Q. What things are required in Prayer? A. First, Knowledg of God in Christ, and of his will and Word,1 Chro. 28.9. 1 Cor. 14.15. Psal. 47.7. accor∣ding to which we ought to pray. Blind devotion cannot please God. I will pray
with understanding; and I will sing with understanding. Knowledg is the stirrer and guide of good desires, without which the heart cannot rightly lift up it self to God. There can be no sight without some visible object presenting it self to the eye; nor can he pray truly that doth not rightly conceive of God in Christ. Again, How can he pray with affection that knoweth not the goodness of the thing for which he maketh request or offereth praise? unless we understand what is good and pleasing to God,1 Joh. 5.15. profitable to our selves and others, we can never pray or praise God as we ought. Secondly, Humility, when in conscience of our own wants and unworthiness, we abase our selves in the sight of God, wil∣lingly submit to his good pleasure,Deut. 8.11. Ezek. 36.31. Act. 2.22. Gen. 18.27. Gen. 19.19. Luk. 15.21. Gen. 32.10. Psal. 22.6. Isa. 6.2. 2 Sam. 7.18. Isa. 66.2. Psal. 34.18. Isa. 57.27. Psal. 51.17. Psal. 9.12. & 10.17. Rom. 10.14. Jam. 1.5, 6, 7. 1 Tim. 2.8. Psal. 62.10. 1 Joh. 5.14, 15 Psal. 56.4. and ascribe whatsoever we enjoy or hope for to his meer grace and mercy: use it to his glory, and do whatsoever he will. I am but dust and ashes, saith Abraham; Thou hast magnified thy mercy towards thy servant, saith Lot; I am not worthy the least of all thy mercies, saith Jacob: Who am I, saith David, and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? What is more odious then a proud begger? Are not favours bestowed upon a proud man clean cast away? The self-conceited doth neither see his wants, nor can seek supply with sense and feeling of misery, nor return praise to God for the good things already vouchsafed unto him. Thirdly, Confidence in the truth, power, and goodness of God. Trust is the spring of Prayer, and by Prayer affiance is quickned. Trust in the Lord at all times, ye people, poure out your hearts before him. In God I will praise his Word, in God I have put my trust. What greater wrong can be done to his Highness, then to pray unto him, and not hope in his grace and undeserved mercy? Fourthly, Attention and devotion, that we have our thoughts earnestly fastened upon him to whom, and that for which we make suit or give thanks. We like it not in our Children, that when they come to crave what they desire, or to give thanks for what they have re∣ceived, they should look here and there, this way and that way, without all regard of us or the thing they are about: and shall we think that God will be pleased with such behaviour? Cold requests are of no esteem with God: cold praises are like a raw Feast, distastfull to the guest. It is the holy servour of soul that God requireth, and is well-pleased with in all his services. Fervency puts the heart into an holy and spiritual diposition, whereby we are more fitted to ceive mercy. In Prayer all the graces of the Spirit are set on work, and the more fervent the Prayer is, the more they are intended. And this fervency stands in this, that a man put forth all his strength in Prayer, though he have many difficulties, and continue constant though he seem not to prevail, but to be denied. These two things make up fervency in Prayer, sense of need, and hope of mercy. Need puts stickes on the fire to make our fervency the more: but faith is the ground of Prayer. Fifthly, Prayer must be made in obedience, that we holily ask what is agreeable to the will of God, and unfeignedly purpose to use blessings obtained to the glory of his Name, furtherance of our salvation, and good of our Brethren. As he that calleth God to witness an untruth, maketh him the Authour of a lie, so farre as in him lyeth: so he that prayeth with a purpose to abuse the mercies of God to sinne and wicked∣ness, doth what in him is, to make God the abetter, maintainer and upholder of iniquity. Q. What special furtherance of Prayer is there? Heb. 13.17.A. Watchfulness, or Christian heedfulness and observation is a notable fur∣therance of Prayer. Not that we should sit up late, as in Nocturnes; or awake before day,Luk. 21.36. Mat. 27.14. Col. 4.2. Mar. 13.37. 1 Pet. 4.7. Psal. 57.8. as in morning Mattens: But we must all day long have a wakening soul, that carrieth the duty of Prayer in remembrance. Watch and pray. Con∣tinue in Prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. The end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and watching in Prayer. Where we may see it is the minds waking that is principally meant, though this will keep the body
from drowsiness in performing the exercise▪ The primitive Christians, this is recorded of them, that they did eat their meat, as remembring they were to call on God by the night season. More particularly, there must be watchfulness, before Prayer, In it, After it. Now our watchfulness before, stands in pre∣venting the impediments, taking the opportunities, and marking that in the course of the day, which may fit us for Prayer. For the first, this watchful∣ness will make a man so cast, and make such riddance of business, that he may not have hinderances when he shall go to his duty. God prefixeth a Memento before the Sabboth; teaching that if one do not lift up his mind to it, and in the six daies dispatch his business, he cannot keep it when it cometh: so there is a mindfulness to be had of him that will not this way be encumbred with distracti∣ons. Again, we must watchfully keep our selves from sinne. Let him that calleth on the Name of the Lord depart from iniquity. For if we let our hearts wander and rove after vanity, if we be overgrown with earthly cares and de∣lights, if indulgent to our lusts, it will be a damp to our Prayers: and when we yeeld to sinne it is a sign our watch is down; we think not of Prayer. For if we meant to make suit to a man at night, we would be watchfull in the day nor to lose his favour, by giving him offence, lest he should refuse us in our request. Did we remember that we are to seek unto God every day for the blessings of the day, and every night for the comforts of the night, we should not neglect his pleasure, nor be regardless of his presence, either day or night. For the second, a watchfull heart will not omit his seasons of communing with God. When I awake, I am still with thee. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto thee,Psal. 139.18. Psal. 119.62. because of thy righteous judgments. As touching the third, we must observe our wants in the day time; as how prone we are to entertain vain thoughts, to run into earthly-mindedness, in wrath, in voluptuousness, in foolish and unfruit∣full speaking: and therefore what need we have to cry, Lord keep the door of our lips. We must also mark diligently the sleights of Satan, whereby he seeks to ensnare and turn us out of the right way, and what cause we have to pray con∣tinually to be defended against him. Nor may the chastisements of God be neg∣lected, whereby he intends to awaken us from security, and stirre to a more serious inquisition of our heart and way. God corrects to quicken in Prayer. And lastly, we must labour, as to have a sense of wants, so to have a feeling of the good things God giveth, of the evils he keepeth from us: for without the one we cannot be poor in spirit, nor beg unfeignedly; without the other we cannot be truly thankfull, nor offer up our praise heartily. Now we must watch in Prayer against indevotion and wandrings, &c. So Esay complaineth.Isa. 64.7. And there is none that calleth on thy Name, neither that stirreth up himself to take hold on thee. My Sonne (saith God) give me, (not thy body,Prov. 23.26. Lam. 2.18. Psal. 51.17. tongue and voice only, but) thy heart, that is, the thoughts, desires and affections of thy heart. And the Prophet saith, The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit. After Prayer we must marke how God hath answered us in this or that we have entreated. Early in the morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will wait;Psal. 5.3. stand as in a watch-tower, and see how the Lord will deal with me, and remember me in my requests. But of this last more in the parts of Prayer: because it properly belongs to petition or request. And this checketh many; such as when their watch hath been down rush upon Prayer, even from pots to Prayer: when they have supped and given thanks, though they have let their hearts loose, eat, drunk without fear, sobriety; prophaned their mouthes with light unfruitfull speech, yet then before parting of friends, call for a Prayer. And many are so farre from remembring themselves all day, that they cannot keep their eyes open while they are a praying; they are so affected, as if it would cast them into an Ague to be kept a while in Prayer. In some places where Prayer is con∣stantly used twice a day, it is commonly gone about with little or no reverence
at all, some talking, some trifling, some working, some playing, till the very instant of Prayer: yea, till he that prayeth in the name of the rest be upon his knees, and have begun the Prayer that is offered up to God in all their names, as though they had their hearts at command in a moment to come before God with that confidence, reverence, humility, and fervency, that is required in holy Prayer. This want of watchfulness is a common evil, and doth us great hurt. This maketh us such poor Oratours, that when we come to God, we are barren of praise and request, because we do not observe in the day, matter for this pur∣pose; this causeth dulness and senslesness in Prayer; this maketh our Prayers powerless and of little fruit; this, though we know it not, doth make us com∣plain of such mists, roving thoughts, indisposition, because we walk all day long forgetfull, If one should eat Codlings, Goose-berries, Pease, would you wonder if at night he were wrung in his belly? Would you not bid him mend his diet if he meant to see it otherwise? So when we let our heart loose all day, feed upon earthly vanity, and rush hastily into Gods presence, how should they be heavenly-minded on a suddain, when bed-time calleth on us to Prayer? Wherefore let us stirre up our selves to keep this watch, that we may see and walk in the strength of our Prayers. Let us have a narrow care of our hearts at all times, to keep them in order, that they range nor after vanity; Let us as time and ability will permit, think with our selves, who we are, even dust and ashes; before whom we come, even before the highest Majesty in Heaven and Earth; what we go about, even the greatest and weightiest work in the world; what we want, what mercies we have received, what Petitions we are to make, with what Arguments they should be pressed, &c. If one be to make on Oration in the Schooles,Eccl. 5.12. Psal. 108.1. he will not venture ex tempo∣re: How much more should we meditate on the Orations we are to make before the Lord! Q Is it lawfull to use the voice in Prayer? A. There is a good and lawfull use of the voice, not only in publick Prayer in the Congregation, and family-Prayer with others; but also when we Pray by our selves alone. In Prayer with others, specially in the solemn assembly of the Saints, where the Minister is the mouth of the people, the use of the voice is necessary for the edification of the people: because they cannot yeeld consent or profit themselves, unless they understand what is prayed for. In solitary Prayer the voice and words are lawfull, but not of absolute necessity; Not necessary; because the lifting up of the soul is the soul of Prayer, which doth animate and give life unto it. A man may Pray fervently and speak never a word: but words are of no worth if the heart be absent. The speech of the sanctified heart is sweet and pleasant melody in the eares of God, though the Tongue keep silence: but let the outward frame of words be never so smooth and well polished,Psal. 5 2, 3. & 16.9. & 30.12. Psal. 51.14, 15 & 71.23, 24. Psal. 119.171. Psal. 54.2. Psal. 3.4. & 142.1. Psal. 141.1. Psal. 140.6. Psal. 26.7. Psal. 19.14. Psal. 17.1. Isa. 65.24. Zeph. 3 9. Hos. 4.2. the Prayer is not pleasing if read and uttered without under∣standing and intention of heart. The voice then is not necessary in solitary Prayer, yet is it lawfull: for we read that David an holy Prophet, and a man according to Gods own mind, did not content himself with mentall Prayer, but used his tongue and voice. The like may be said of Nehemiah, Hezekiah, Daniel, and other Saints mentioned in Scripture. In the book of God such like passages are very frequent; I cried unto the Lord with my voice, with my voice unto the Lord did I make my supplication; Give eare unto my voice, when I cry unto thee; Heare the voice of my supplications; Let the words of my mouth &c. be acceptable in thy sight; Give eare unto my Prayer that goeth not forth of fained lips. Before they call, I will answer; and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear. I will turn to the people a new language, that they may call upon the Name of the Lord. By these places the lawfull use of words and voice in Prayer is clearly confirmed. And hereof there is great use; for the voice is
a most effectuall meanes, both to quicken the affections to inflame devotion,Voce interdum nos ipsos ad de∣votionem acri excitamus. Aug. Ep. 121. ad prov. cap. 9. Ʋtilis quoque est quoniam ser∣vit devotioni jam excitatae, quae erumpere solet & redun∣dare in exire∣mum affectum. Mat. 20.39. Luk 22.41. Psal. 84.2. Expressa recita∣tio incutit ter∣rorem diabolis. Mol. in Psal. 54. vers. 4. 1 Sam. 1.13. Neh. 2.4. Mat. 6.6. and to keep the minde from wandring after by-matters. Lastly, Christ the sonne of David, though he were not subject to any such wandring of Mind, or faintness of affection as we be: Yet he used his voice, even when he prayed to God in solitariness. But touching the use of the voice in prayer, these rules must be observed. 1. If the uttering of words in solitariness do at any time trouble or hinder fervour and devotion, it must be forborn; for the use of voice is to help and further, not to distract and hinder fervency. 2. If opportunity of time and convenience of place be wanting, we must speak in heart, as Han∣nah did, that our voice be not heard. 3. When we have greatest liberty in these things, the voice is to be moderated that it be not heard of others: for some would brand it with the note of hypocrisie, and others take it as an oc∣casion to discover the secrets of our hearts, (which we desire to lay open to God only) and make a mock of it to our reproach. 4. If we Pray with others, and be as their mouth to God, the voice must be distinct and audible that they which joyn with us may understand it and be edified thereby. 5. In the use of the voice we must look to the heart, that it go along with it, and be not roving up and down about other matters: for the tongue bableth, if the heart indite not. CHAP. V. Rules to be observed touching the Externall Form of words in Prayer. The lawfull use of a set Form of Prayer in Publique or in Private. Also of Reading Prayer upon a Book, or using a stinted Form devised by Others. Question: WHat Rules are to be observed touching the Externall Form of words used in Prayer? A. 1. Greatest liberty may be taken in secret and solitary Prayer, because we are sure, that (if there be a beleeving, humble, and bleeding heart, with an upright affection) God will not upbraid any man for his method, order, words, or utterance: but yet irreverence, and over-great familiarity is to be avoided. 2. In private Prayer with others we may not take so great liberty: but have respect to the edification of others, and reverence of the Ordinance. For in this Light of the Gospel, where there is more knowledge than conscience, the youngest and simplest in a family (unless they be very babes and young chil∣dren indeed) will be ready to cavill and stumble at it: and it may justly be fear∣ed, that some Christians well affected, have been somewhat faulty and offensive in this behalf. 3. Special care must be had in the publique Congregation, that nothing be done but what is decent, orderly, and grave, suiting with the Ma∣jesty of Gods holy Ordinance: because there many eyes do see us, and many ears do hear us, and indecency may breed great offence, beget disregard of the pure worship of God. Wherefore in the publique Assemly especially, fit me∣thod and decent phrase of speech is in no sort to be neglected. To place de∣votion in words, is superstition; to hunt after queint termes, is foolish va∣nity; to soare above the reach and capacity of the people, is marvellous un∣profitable: to affect loftiness and obscurity which the hearers cannot understand, is in the speaker arrogancy, to them that hear fruitless, injurious, tedious: and on the contrary, to neglect a comely, grave, plain, significant and fitting
manner of speech is odious barbarism. It is good neither to be over-neat, nor obscure, nor too much affected, nor yet over-homely: but to use such a mean as doth most tend to the glory of God and the good of Gods people. Q. Is it lawfull to use a set Form of Prayer in publique or in pri∣vate? A. Seeing the use of words or voice is not of the essence of Prayer, no man of understanding will deny that to be an holy and acceptable Prayer, which proceeds from a sincere and upright heart, feeling its own or others wants, and craving supply of God, whether the request be put up in the self-same or in other words. But seeing this is a matter mistaken by many careless and secure persons, and a question moved betwixt us and our Brethren of the separation; it will not be amiss to note a few things touching the thing it self, the persons by whom, the time when, the place where, and the manner hw a set form of Prayer may be used. First, The controversie is not of this or that prescript form of Prayer in particular, much less of one for substance of matter faulty and erroneous: but of a prescript form in general, Whether it be lawfull to use any set form of Prayer, though for matter never so fit, sound and allow∣able, for externall form most grave and beyond all exception. Secondly, It is not questioned whether a man may ask things impertinent; as fair weather in time of drouth: for it is acknowledged that the matter of our Prayers must be according to the Word of God and the present occasions. Thirdly, A Prayer for matter and externall form both holy and fit, may be sinfull in the user by accident; viz. when it is repeated without understanding or intention of heart. Of this there is no question betwxit them and us. Fourthly, It is granted that no prescript form of Prayer is simply necessary either in publique or private, for then our Saviour Christ by his Apostles would have expressly set down such an one for an exact and unchangeable rule to all Christians and Churches. Not the necessity, but the lawfulness thereof is questioned. Fifthly, It was never held that a man should tie himself, or be slavishly tied to a set form of Prayer, in such sort as never to offer up any petition or thanksgiving, but what he meeteth with in his devised form: for scarce any day passeth over our heads, wherein there be not divers new occasions, either of rejoycing or thanksgiving, or else of mourning and craving pardon, or indeed of both. Such use there∣fore of a stinted form is not to be justified: for we know our requests must be framed, our praises rendred, according to the present occasion. Sixthly, It is to be considered that there be divers degrees and measures of gifts, both na∣tural (as wit, memory, and utterance) as also of grace, (as knowledge, saith, zeal,) given to divers men. Besides there be divers states and conditions of Christians; some weak, some strong, some novices, others trained up and better exercised in this holy duty; some in greater freedom, others perplexed with manifold temptations. Now they that are better gifted, either by nature, or else by grace and custom, may use the more liberty: others, if they con∣scionably use a stinted form before others, only inserting words and clauses ac∣cording to new occasions, must not be despised or condemned. Seventhly, In Prayer alone we may use more liberty both for methode and words: In pub∣lique or family-Prayer that must be done which tends to edification. Now for as much as weak and tender Christians are not so capable of that kind of Prayer which is called conceived or extemporall, varying every time in words and phrases, manner and order, though the matter and substance be the same; for their sakes it is not inexpedient to keep a constant form both of matter and words, adding new clauses in confession, petition, and thanksgiving, according to variety of occasions offered. Eighthly, Alwaies in Prayer, whether stinted or conceived, care must be taken that we ask not things impertinent, unfit;
watchfulness must be used to prevent dulness, security, customariness, slightness, and lip-labour; diligence must be had that no sinne lie upon our souls, families, or places of abode unlamented, nor no mercies be unthankfully passed over. Q. What say you of reading Prayer upon a Book, or using a stinted Form de∣vised by others? A. First, A publique set form of Prayer penned or printed, that is sound and pertinent for substance of matter; grave and simple for order and manner; not prejudicing, abridging, or hindering by length the preaching of the Word or Prayer fitted to special occasions, is lawfull to be used in the Congregation, whether it be read or rehearsed by memory. Secondly, If any Governour of a Family be so weak in knowledge and other graces of the spirit, that he be not able of himself to offer up the Morning and Evening Sacrifice in the behalf of his Family, let him (if it be possible, as labour and constancy will make it possible and easie) commit some wholesome formes of holy Prayers to memory (though they be the shorter) that he may not be troubled nor distracted with turning over leaves, nor poreing on a Book: which will be neither so comely in the eyes of others, nor so comfortable to himself. And let him do this constantly and with a good spirit, and he shall find by the blessing of God, that in a short time, his heart will be so enlarged, and his mouth so opened, that he shall be able according to the sundry occasions that shall be offered, both with comeli∣ness and edification to himself and others, to insert such clauses and words, as are profitable in that behalf. And as they who are desirous to swimme, by a little practice become so skilfull, that they have no need of any Corkes, Bladders, or Bul-rushes, but lay them aside as burdensome and hinderances: so they that be desirous to pray in the spirit, by use and practice, shall through the blessing of God become so skilfull, that they shall have no need of any penned or printed Prayers; but rather lay them aside as things they need not. Thirdly, If any new born babe be not able to go without this help, let him not rest in this estate, but labour and learn to pray according to his private necessities and occasions which vary daily, and be so many and divers, that no one mans condition in the world is in all things like unto anothers: otherwise, if he stand upon his stinted form, he shall deprive his soul of much peace and comfort, and never come to the knowledge, sight and consolation of innumerable things for which he is to pray and give thanks. To conclude then, penned or printed Prayers have their use, and may be commended to them, that by reason of weakness in grace and natural gifts, as knowledge, memory, wit, utterance; inexperience, heaviness of spiit, are not able to do any thing without these helps; not that they should stay in the use of them, but be led forward thereby to do it of themselves with more comfort and to greater edification. For out of them, by paines and labour a Christian may furnish himself with variety of matter, fit words, good method; which being rightly applied to particular occasions, do not a little quicken and revive and enlarge the heart. Fourthly, A penned or printed Prayer (so called, because the matter is delivered in form of petition or thanksgiving tendered to God) is not properly a Prayer as it is penned or printed, but as it is rehearsed as a Prayer with understanding, humility, confidence, love, &c. Q How may it be proved that any use of read Prayer is lawfull, publique or pri∣vate, in the Congregation, Family or Closet?Psal. 25.1, 2. Mar. 11.24, 25 Joh. 14.19. Heb. 11.4. Jam. 5.15. Psal. 45.18. 1 Tim. 1.. A. 1. That form of Prayer is just and lawfull, wherein all things necessarily required in the Word of God, or essentiall to Prayer may be observed. But all things necessarily required in the Word of God, or essentiall to Prayer may be observed in a set form read or rehearsed. In holy Prayer to God, what is required more then this, that the matter be approved and fit, the manner holy,
reverent, fervent and faithfull? And may not a Prayer holy and meet for matter,  read with knowledge, feeling, earnestness of desire, holiness of affection, and faith in Gods Promises? In reading the Scriptures the eye doth lead the heart; yet may they be read with judgment, reverence, meekness, and joy: Why may not the same or like affections be moved in reading Prayer? What necessity that the heart and eye should be at variance in this, when they may be conjoyned in the other? Asaph and his Brethren could praise God in a form of words set down by the Prophet David:1 Chro. 16.8. 1 Sam. 2.1, 2. Jon. 2.1, 2. And if a prescript form of words may be allowed in thanksgiving which is one part of Prayer, it cannot be condemned in petition. The matter of our requests must fit the occasion; so must the mat∣ter of thanks and praise: we must pray with the spirit, and we must praise with the heart. The spirit of grace teacheth us to pray: and the same spi∣rit moveth us to return praise for benefits received.1 Cor. 14.15. 2 Chro. 6.41, 42. Psal. 132.9. 2 Chro. 20, 21, 2. Eza 3.10, 11. 2 Chro. 29.30. 1 Cor. 14.15. Eph. 5.19. Col. 3 16. In the Dedication of the Temple, Solomon used the very words of the Psalm, which David vowed to use at the bringing in of the Ark into his house. Jehoshaphat in that execellent thanks∣giving which he made, appointed the Priests and Levites to recite a prescript form of words: So did Zerubbabel and Jehoshua. Our opposites themselves grant it lawfull to sing Psalms, in which the form of words is stinted and prescribed; and yet we must sing with the spirit, and with understanding, with feeling and joy of heart. The differences which some put betwixt praising God with a Psalm, and calling upon God in Prayer, are little to the purpose: do not at all weaken the force of this Argument. For thus we reason; In singing Psalms penned by the Prophet David, or any other holy man, the eye doth lead the heart, no less than it doth in reading a stinted form of Prayer; and yet they may be sung after an holy manner with grace in the heart. Therefore a stinted form of Prayer may be read or said without Book with that affection of heart which God requires in Prayer. Let them disagree in other things, herein they are like. This reason may be drawn into another form thus: Whatsoever hath the true matter and form of Prayer, that is truly and properly a Prayer, and may law∣fully be used as a Prayer. But a prescript form of Prayer, sound and fit for matter, grave for the manner of penning, said as a Prayer with knowledge, faith, reverence, and fervency of affection, hath the true matter and form of Prayer. For the matter of our Prayers is those common blessings and special good things, which according to the will and pleasure of God, we are to beg of him for our selves and others. The true form of Prayer (understand Prayer uttered with the voice) is that outward disposition and frame of words, and the inward ele∣vation or lifting up of the heart to God by the Holy Ghost. Will any man object, that all these things cannot be observed in a stinted form of Prayer? Common experience will confute him. Who knoweth not the matter of many prescript formes of Prayer to be good and necessary for all men? All our wants and particular occasions are not mentioned or laid open in the Prayers, which are conceived by the Minister or Governour o he Family, and yet no man judgeth them unlawfull, though they be imperfect. It is not prejudiciall then to the lawfull use of a prescript form, that many particulars which we stand in need of, are not therein mentioned. Can it not be read or uttered with a right disposition of heart? How then can we sing with joy, or praise God with cheerfulness in a stinted or set form of words? Is it not easier to cry for what we need with feeling, than to return praise with love and joyfulness for what we have received? He that will confess it possible to give thanks aright in a set form of words devised by others or invented of himself, cannot deny the same in request with any shew of truth or colour of reason. 2. There are certain common blessings which we and others daily stand in need of, and for which we are continually to give thanks; and these it is lawfull to ask daily in a set form of words, or for them to give thanks. Thus we may pray every day for
the encrease of faith, patience, meekness, love, &c. and the continuance of those outward blessings which we enjoy. For it is not the repetition of the same words in Prayer every day that displeaseth the Lord: but the ignorant, rash, cold, customary, superstitious and irreverent pouring forth of words before him. Variety of phrase doth not delight his Majesty: nor will he reject the desires of an humble and contrite heart,Mat. 26.42, 44. Mar. 14.39. Rom. 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.4. 2 Cor. 1 2. Gal. 1.3. Eph. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1 Thes. 1.1. 2 Thes. 1.2. Rom. 16.23. 1 Cor. 16.23. Phil. 4.23. 1 Thes. 5.28. 2 Thes. 3.18. Isa 59.21. Rom. 8.26. because they are tendred often in one and the same words. Paul writing at severall times upon divers occasions unto divers people, yet used the same form of Prayer, and the same words in his Salutations and Valedictions. The reason in brief is this, It is lawfull to ask common blessings of God daily in a set form of words: therefore it is not un∣lawfull to use a set form of Prayer. And if to pronounce it be lawfull, then to read it also: for reading in it self is not impure. As pronouncing cannot make an evil matter good, no more can reading make a good matter evil; pro∣nouncing and reading being adjuncts of Prayer both indifferent. 3. The spirit of grace inableth us to pray, and maketh requests for us: but it worketh by means: It instructeth us what to ask, not in what phrase of speech; it stirreth up in us holy desires, but gives not ability without help, suddainly to express and lay open our hearts in fit method and words significant. As the spirit doth perswade and assure the heart that the Scripture is the Word of God, not wit∣nessing of the Letters, Syllables and words, but of the matter and saving Truth therein contained: So the spirit instructeth us to pray by opening our eyes to see our misery, and enflaming our hearts with longing desire of mercy and relief: but ability to utter and express these our desires in decent phrase of speech it doth not ever give. Ability of speech is a common gift of the spirit, which is be∣stowed upon good and bad, wherein graceless persons are many times preferred before the most sincere and upright. Again, the Spirit acquainteth us with our particular miseries, and the good things that we are to crave, by the exercise of means, whereby we come to the more full and distinct understanding of both these. These things considered, I suppose all men will grant without contra∣diction: First, That it is lawfull for a man beforehand to meditate upon his par∣ticular wants, and the necessities of others, that he may more fully understand, and more sensibly be affected with them. Secondly, The better to stirre up confidence and affection, and to furnish himself with words and matter, it is not unlawfull nor unprofitable to read the Prayers of the godly registred in holy Writ, or in other godly Books, to observe the matter of their, Prayers, their ferventness in praying, and the Arguments wherewith they contended and pressed to be heard. Thirdly, After that by reading and meditation a Christian hath collected matter for Prayer, he may study to digest it into due order, and to express his requests in fit and comely words; and the same so conceived he may utter as a Prayer according as occasion shall offer it self. The reason may be thus contracted: If the Spirit of God doth work by means, and stirre up good desires, but gives not ability to express them in comely and significant words; then it is lawfull for us to use all godly means to quicken the graces of God in us, and to premeditate in what manner we might utter our Prayers, as might best serve for our own comfort, and the edification of others. And if the use of a premeditated form of words in Prayer do not stint the spirit, a set form of Prayer cannot be injurious to the spirit. Grant the one, and the other will follow. 4. When the matter and substance of Prayer is allowable and fit in respect of our occasions and the necessities of the Church; when the order of words and phrase of speech, in which that matter is expressed, is grave, plain, and simple, we desire to know why it should be a sinne to pronounce or use that form as a Prayer? Is it for that it is read or pronounced; or because a man cannot lift up his heart in faith unto God, when he uttereth his requests in a stinted form? To assign the former, is superstition; to pretend the later, is
to offend against common experience. A reason then cannot be given, why it should be unlawfull to pray after that manner. It will be objected, that stinted Prayer is in or Gods Ordinance. The answer is, That Prayer is the Ordinance of God, but whether our Prayer be only conceived in heart, or uttered by words; whether in our own, or others words; whether by pronouncing or reading, that is not appointed. God requires that we should lift up our hearts unto him, and ask in the name of Christ whatsoever we stand in need of, and is agreeable to his will: but when spake he one word of praying within Book or without, in this or that form of words? Can that be sinne, which he never forbade? Can that be unapproved worship which is conformable to the will of God? 5. This Reason draws on another,1 Joh. 3.4. Gal. 3.10. When ano∣ther prayeth that is a a set form to him that hears: for though his spirit be more enlarged, he is bound to keep his mind in∣tent upon the things prayed for by the o∣ther. Though he be limited for a time, at other times he is at liberty to pray as freely as he can. The largeness of the heart stands not so much in the multitude and variety of ex∣pressions, as in the extent of affection. Numb. 6.2, 23. Psal. 22.1. & 102.1. Hos. 14.2, 3. Joel 2.7. Deut. 26.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Psal. 92.1. Ezr. 3.10. Rev. 15.3. 2 Chro. 29.30. Isa. 12.1. See Ainsworth in Num. 6.22, 23. Bell. de paen. lib. 1. cap. 15. Maldonat. in Mat. 28.19. Piscat. ibid. which is this: That which is the breach of no Com∣mandement, which is no where disallowed in the Word of God, either in ex∣press words or by necessary consequence, that is no sinne. For sinne is the transgression of the Law; and where there is no law, there can be no sinne. But the use of a prescript or stinted form of Prayer, is the breach of no Commande∣ment, is no where disallowed in the Word of God. Our Brethren of the sepa∣ration tell us; It is a trensgression of the second Commandement, and a quenching of the spirit. But seeing the scope of the second Commandement is to teach the true and pure worship of God, how can a Prayer for matter and form, lawfull and pure, uttered and read with knowledge and intention of heart, be a breach of that holy Precept? The exposition of the Commandements is to be found in the Prophets and Apostles. First, Doth the Lord by his Pro∣phets or Apostles in any place restrain us to the use of conceived Prayer? As for the other, that quencheth the spirit, which is as water to allay, cool, or extinguish the heat of this holy fire: But by what reason or Scripture can this imputation be cast upon the use of a set form of Prayer? Secondly, Reading godly Books is profitable to stirre up and revive the graces of Gods spirit in us: Were it not a wonder if reading a godly Prayer should produce the contrary effect? Mr Smith cast reading of the Scriptures out of the Assemly: because in his opinion it quenched the spirit. Our Brethren are not gone so farre; but it is good for them to consider, how they can condemn the reading or ut∣tering of a godly Prayer, both in publique and private, as that which quen∣cheth the spirit; and not condemn withall the reading of godly Books, and studying for Sermons? But of this hereafter. 6. Set forms of Catechism are no more commanded of God, then set forms of Prayer: Christ our Saviour, the Prophets and Apostles have no more appointed the one then the other. Therefore if a set form of Prayer is to be disallowed, a prescript form of Cate∣chism must of necessity be condemned. But how absurd it is to censure the use of a prescript form of Catechism, he is starke blind that seeth not. The necessity antiquity, and excellency of catechizing is known to them, that know any thing touching the building and governing the house of God: the use and profit of a set form of Catechisme is by experience manifest to them, who have laboured to lay the foundation of Christian Religion, and train up their people in sound knowledge. Mr Robinson himself acknowledgeth thus much in his additions to Mr Perkins his six Principles, howsoever they judged of stinted Catechismes in former times. 7. In the Scriptures we find prescript formes of blessing, petition and thanksgiving, ordinary and extraordinary, appointed of the Lord. We say not that the Priests in blessing, or the Sanits in praying were necessarily bound to those very words and syllables: but they might use them lawfully and without sin, as we do warrantably retain the form of Baptism prescribed by our Saviour Christ, though we be not tied by an absolute necessity to rehearse the same words, in that very order and so many syllables. The argument from those places is this; If it be lawfull to use a prescript form of Blessing, Prayer, Thanksgiving and Baptizing, set down in the word of God, then all prescript
forms of Prayer are not to be condemned. What answer do our brethren re∣turne to this argument? They tell us, the Priests and Saints of God were not bound to use those very words set down, and none other or otherwise. Nor do we plead against them herein (though Mr Ainsworth in his Annotations upon Numbers out of the Jewish Rabbins, seems to deny this liberty) it sufficeth that these forms of blessing and Prayer might lawfully be used as a blessing and Prayer, though in conscience they were not tied necessarily to the use of them. The lawfull, not the necessary use of a prescript form of Prayer, is now in question, and that is proved by the places above recited.2 Chro. 5.13. with Psal. 136.1. For if the Saints in former times might pray in a stinted form of words, indited by others or in∣vented by themselves, as we find they might and did;Jer. 33.11. with Ezr. 3.10, 11. we also at this day may do the same. But they answer further; It followes not that a prescript form of Prayer invented by men is lawfull, because a form prescribed of God is good and to be allowed. A meer shift of no force at all. For the question is not of this or that form in particular, but of a prescript form in it self considered. The Lords Prayer was indited or prescribed by Christ himself; and yet they deny the use of it as a Prayer. And most of their reasons do conclude against the use of every prescript form of Prayer, as well as any one. Thus they dispute; If a set form of Prayer be lawfull, then a man may carry his Prayers in his pocket, buy them at a Book-binders shop, &c. Doth not this reasoning disallow all penned and printed forms, as well as one? But if it shall please them to hear with patience, the consequence of that Argument which they make for us, may easily be justified from their own grounds. For they teach that God hath not appointed in his Word any prescript form, which upon necessity we are tied to use at any time; That the matter of our Prayers is divers according to the severall occasions which happen and fall out: That the inward form is the ele∣vation of the soul to God in humility, love, fear, and confidence. From which premisses it will necessarily follow, that if one form of Prayer may be used lawfully, another fit for matter, and grave for order and phrase of speech, may be used also: for none is absolutely commanded, and all things essentially required in Prayer, may be observed in one no less then in another. Nay, if what they teach of stinted Prayer may pass for truth, sc: that it cannot be ut∣tered by the direction of the spirit, that is a lip-labour, &c. then it is more lawfull to use a set form devised by men, than that which is indited by the Holy Ghost: seeing the more holy the thing is, the greater sin is the abuse of it;Exo. 20.7. Numb. 4.15. and it is more hainous to pollute the words of the Holy Ghost, than the words of sin∣full men. 8. As in the ministry of the Word, the corruption of mans heart, and the hainousness of sin, may more lively and fully be discovered to the con∣science for humiliation, then a man of himself is able to set it forth: so in Prayer penned by a godly and well-experienced Christian, the case of a distressed soul may be more pithily and amply deciphered and anatomised, then he of himself can lay it open. And in such a case to deny him this lawfull help, is to take a crutch from the lame, bread from the hungry. In the very act of Prayer it is law∣full to use outward helps, whereby we may be inabled to pray better: and is it not lawfull for a perplexed heart burdened with sinne, and overwhelmed with bitter anguish, to use the help of a Book, that he might the better unfold and lay open his misery into the bosome of his heavenly Father? Sure he hath not felt those agonies and depths of sorrows which oppress many, that is so cruell and hard-hearted towards the afflicted, as to deny them this means of comfort. The Holy Ghost by his Prophet doth prescribe a form of Prayer for the afflicted, that they might learn to pour out their souls before the Throne of Grace;Psal. 102.1. Vise Vatabl. in Psal. 102. Calvin. ibid. as the Title of the 102 Psalm doth shew, which runneth thus: A Prayer of or for the afflicted when he is in distress. The ample and particular laying open of our necessities doth ease the heart and move affections, and when this may be done better by the
help of a Book than of our selves, is it not senseless to accuse the use thereof as a lip-labour and quenching of the spirit? It is the spirit indeed that doth help us in our infirmities: but we must use means to stirre up the graces of the spirit in us. He stinteth not the spirit who labours to blow the coales of grace, and useth all lawfull helps at hand, in most full, free, and particular manner to disburden his heart before God. He doth not substitute his Christian friend in place of the Word and Spirit, who not able to lift up his own soul to God by reason of straightness of heart and grievous pressure, doth crave his help and assistance in Prayer: And may not a good Book supply the defect of a Christian companion? When we are dull and out of order, we may joyn with others in Prayer for our relief and quickning; Why then should it be intolerable to make this use of a godly Book. 9. The Jews before the coming of Christ had a prescript form of Prayer and Thanksgiving in the celeberation of the Passeover: and that which they used, was (as it is very probable) approved by our Saviour himself. For the Evangelist saying,Mat. 26.30. See Paulus Burgens. in Psal. 112. Jos. Scalig. de Em. temp. lib. 6. Beza annot. in Mat. 26.20. Drus. Praet. lib. 1. in Mat. 26.30. Ainsworth in Exo. 12.8. Maldonat. in Mat. 26.30. Act. 15.22, 28. 1 Cor. 11.16. & 14.13. Isa. 29.13. Merc. in Gen. cap. 6.8. & cap. 1.6. & cap. 50.26. Sixt. Senens. Biblioth. lib. 3. meth. 4. Rainold. de Idololat. ad∣monit. ad lect. Ainsw. in Gen. 6.9. after they had sung a Psalm, they went forth to the Mount of Olives, doth seem to allude to their custom of finishing the Passeover with cer∣tain Psalms, which the Jews call the great Halleluja, beginning at the 113 and continuing to the end of the 118. Howsoever Hymnes and Psalms are such kinds of Prayer as are not wont to be conceived upon a suddain; but are framed by meditation before hand, or else by propheticall illumination are inspired, as at that time it appeareth they were when God by extraordinary gifts of the Spirits, inabled men to all parts of service necessary for the edifying of his Church. 10. All reformed Churches at this day do not only tollerate, but approve a set form of Prayer. I know not of what weight this reason is with our Brethren of the separation; but sure it hath been of great force with the godly in former times, otherwise the Apostles would never have alledged the practice and con∣sent of Churches, to confirm the faithfull and stop the mouthes of the conten∣tious. Q. Book-Prayer is an invention of men: therefore unlawfull. A. By this Argument all set forms of Catechismes, studied Sermons, Interpre∣tations of Scripture, and conceived Prayer it self may be disallowed. Reading the Scripture is Gods Ordinance: but the partition of the Law into 53 or 54 greater Sections is the device of man. Preaching is commanded of God, so is the Interpre∣tation of the Scripture: but the phrase and method of Sermons and Interpre∣tations is of men. The matter of Scripture is the immediate truth of God: but the words and phrases, which are as a vessel to convey this light unto us (I speak of Translations, not of the Original Text,) are humane, not of God by immediate inspiration. God commands us to call upon him both in publique and in private: but the words wherein we express our desires are our own, both in conceived and stinted Prayer. These two kinds of Prayer agree in their Author, Matter, Form, Object, end and common nature: and the one is no more a strange worship or invention of men than the other. We find direction in the Word of God, To whom, for what, with what heart and affections we ought to pray: but in what method or frame of speech we must be Petitioners, we find nothing prescribed in particular, nor do we judg any thing to be necessary, more then that order, fitness, decency and edification be regarded.
CHAP. VI. Prayer is to be made in a Language that we our selves understand, and those that joyn with us. How we are to address our selves unto God, and whether to begin our Prayers with Petition or Thanksgiving. Question: IN what Language must our Prayers be offered unto God? A. In a known Language that we understand: for if we joyn with others an unknown Language profiteth not: If we pray alone, what is more ridicu∣lous than to speak words which we understand not. Seeing the Scripture requi∣reth, that all that is within man should praise the Lord:Psal. 103.1. It followeth that as he committeth sacriledge, that withdraweth and stealeth away his affection from the exercise of Prayer, so doth he also, which hath not his understanding attending upon his Prayer. And so much the more the latter then the former, as the un∣derstanding may be perfect and full in a sort without the affection and devotion, whereas the affection roveth and wandereth uncertainly, when it hath not the light of understanding carried before it. Again, when God speaketh unto us, all the powers of our soul (both in understanding and affection,) ought to stand up, to receive that which is spoken: and so when we speak unto him, there is no faculty of the soul, which may withdraw it self from the attendance upon the service and gift that we present unto him.Deut. 6.9. Mat. 22.3. And therefore the Law in the whole worship of God, requireth it be done, with all the heart, with all the soul, with all the understanding. Against common Prayers in an unknown tongue, the Apostle reasoneth thus: All Prayers to which the hearers cannot say, Amen,1 Cor. 14.16. ought to be chased out of the Church: which general reason wipeth away all private Prayers, wherein a man knoweth not what he saith. For thereof it fol∣loweth, that not being able to understand what he saith, he is not able to say A∣men to his own Prayers. In like manner it may be said of him that prayeth in an unknown tongue, that he heareth not himself, that he is barbarous unto him∣self, speaketh in the ayr, not understanding himself, is more than childish, not only not understanding what others say, but not what he himself saith: hath the marke of Gods wrath upon him, in that in things belonging to his sal∣vation, he heareth a Language which he understandeth not. This may suffice to shew, that Prayer must be uttered in a known Language: the speciall reasons of this Point will come to be considered in the severall Kinds and Parts of Prayer. Q. If I pray with the tongue, my spirit, that is, my affection prayeth well,Cor. 14.14. but my understanding is without fruit. A. It is absurd to imagine the gift of tongues to be severed from his under∣standing, that by the gift of the Spirit did speak them. Was that gift (to the zealous pursuit whereof the Holy Ghost exhorteth) a rapping out of words without understanding? Is this the great bountifulness and largess of Christ to∣wards his (so highly commended of the Prophet) to inable them like a Popin∣gay to prattle, or like Balaams Asse to tumble out words without any know∣ledge? Finally, where ever was it read (either in prophane or holy Writer) that man should be said to have the gift of that tongue, the syllables whereof his mouth can speak, when his mind knoweth no signification of them? But this conceit is confuted of the Apostle, who affirmeth that every one of those that spake with tongues edified himself, and that in such sort,1 Cor. 14.4. as the Church is
edified by him that speaketh unto it, in a tongue which it understandeth. And in the 28th verseVers. 28. it is said, that he which speaketh with tongues, speaketh unto God and to himself: Seeing therefore he so speaketh unto himself, as he speaketh un∣to God, to deny that he understandeth himself when he speaketh with tongues, is to deny that God doth understand him which speaketh with tongues. And how sottish is it, that a man that understandeth not himself, should edifie himself in spirit and affection, when the affection is dead without know∣ledge? neither can a man desire or affect that which he understandeth not. And if speaking in a tongue which he understandeth not, he can edifie him∣self in spirit and affection, why may he not also edifie the Church in spi∣rit and affection which heareth the sound of the words as well as he? But the Apostle saith, that the Church heareth not him, that is, receiveth no more fruit by that speaker in a tongue which it understandeth not, than if it had not heard him at all. As for those words, my understanding is unfruitfull, they are not to be referred to him that speaketh, but to those which are spoken unto in an unknown tongue. This doth first appear by the adjunct of unfruitfulness, which is annexed unto understanding. For whereas it is a borrowed speech and similitude taken from Trees, which are called unfruitfull, not in regard that they bring not forth fruit to themselves, but in regard that they are barren and fruitless unto others, it is evident, that when the Apostle saith, My understanding is fruitless, he meaneth not in regard of the speaker with a tongue, but in regard of those which heard him. Secondly, This is evident by the 16th verse, where he saith,1 Cor. 14.16. that if thou praise God in the Spirit, an ideot cannot say Amen unto thy thanksgiving, because he knoweth not what thou sayest: he saith not, that thou canst not say Amen unto thy thanksgiving, or knowest not what thou speakest, which he ought to have said, if the In∣terpretation of our Adversaries had been true. Thirdly, In the 17th verseVers. 17. he saith of him that speaketh in the Spirit, Thou verily givest thanks, but another is not edified. And most evidently in the 19th verse,Vers. 19. where (saying that in the Church he would rather speak few words with his understanding, than ten thousand with the tongue) he noteth the effect of speaking with his understanding, namely, that he might instruct others. If therefore (in the Apostles language) speaking with a mans understanding be to instruct others, and not himself: it followeth, that to speak without his under∣standing, is to speak to others, with understanding and profit to himself, and without instruction and profit to others. Lastly, To pray in spirit, is not to pray with the affection, but in the strange language or tongue which is spoken: which (by a trope of the cause for the effect) the Apostle calleth Spirit: because that they who spake it, spake by the mi∣raculous gift of the Spirit: and so are those extraordinary gifts called Spi∣rits.Vers. 12. Vers. 1. And so (by another trope of one part put for the whole) they are called spiritual. So that to pray or to speak in or by the Spirit, is the same which Luke saith of them which had received the Holy Ghost at Pentecost,Act. 2.4. that they spake with strange tongues, even as the Spirit gave unto them to utter. This exposition also the Scholiast setteth forth. And that it cannot be understood of the affection or devotion of the soul, it is evident by the 16th verse, where he affirmeth that an unlear∣ned man cannot say Amen unto the thanksgiving that is made in or by the Spirit, yet we know that the affection or devotion hindereth not the under∣standing of the rude and unlearned, but the uttering of things in such language as he understandeth not. Q. Is it fittest in Prayer to say our God, or my God, our Father, or my Father?
A. In publique Prayer, or in Prayer with others, we must say Our God or Father: because we are the mouth of the rest, who stand in the same relation to God that we do. But in solitary Prayer it is law∣full to use either form of speech.Jer. 3.19. Job 34.36. Psal. 22.1. 1 Cor. 14.18. Jer. 3.4. Mat. 6.6. Ezra 9.6. When we would express our particu∣lar faith and dependance upon God, we may say, My Father, or My God. But as a Christian belongeth to the Communion of Saints, and prayeth as a member of the whole body, it is lawfull and convenient in his most retired and solitary Prayers, to say Our God and Father: where∣by he noteth that relation and respect of God to him, which is com∣mon with his Brethren. Thus Hezekiah useth it saying, O Lord our God,2 King. 19.19. Ezra .8, 10. Isa 37.20. Dan. 9 7. I beseech thee save us, &c. Ezra, O our God, what shall we say after this? Daniel praying alone, saith, Now therefore, O our God, hear the Prayer of thy servant. And so it is lawfull for a Christian in private Prayer to say Our Father, especially if before he begin, he use (as is most meet) some short meditation, and think of Wife, Children, Parents, Kinsfolks, Neighbours, yea of the whole Church. Q. Whether is it expedient to begin our Prayers with Petition or Thanks∣giving? with praise or complaint and confession of sinnes? A. Herein we may use our Christian Liberty, as God shall minister occasion by his providence, and move our hearts by his holy Spirit. We have Examples of both kindes in the holy Scripture, both in the Prophets and Apostles, and in Christ himself, who have sometimes begun with the one, and sometimes with the other. When God doth shew us any special mercy and favour, it will be most fit to begin with thanksgiving and ad∣miration of his goodness, as Peter did:Act. 12.11. and when he doth frown upon us, and bring us into danger and trouble,1 King. 22.23 it is most fit to begin with petition and request, as Jehoshaphat did: yet in our ordinary and usuall Prayers, and offering up of our Morning and Evening Sacrifice to God, we may begin indifferently with either. Abrahams Servant first makes his request to God, and seeing the success answerable to the desire of his heart, he returneth praise:Gen. 24.27. 1 Sam. 25.22, 33. Blessed be the Lord God of my Master Abraham. When David was stayed by the wise admonition of Abigail from shedding innocent blood, he had occasion to acknowledge his sinne, as his rashness and bloody resolution to have made a massacre of so many innocent persons: yet the mercy of God preventing him by his blessing, did so affect him, that it made him break out into thanksgiving, and put praise before petition.Luk. 1.68. The like may be said of Zachary the Fa∣ther of John the Baptist.
CHAP. VII. Shewing the common and general Impediments of Prayer. The end of Prayer. The Place, and Time thereof. Motives to frequent Prayer. Gesture to be used therein. Question: WHat are the most common and general Impediments of Prayer? A. The principal are these. First, Since the fall the soul naturally loveth to spend and scatter it self about these present sensible things, and cannot without some strife gather it self together, and fix upon heavenly things. Now this talking with God requires an actuall bent of the mind, and carrieth up the whole soul into Heaven, and exerciseth as all the parts, so all the graces of the soul, faith especially, Prayer being nothing else but the flame of faith. And Satan knowing, that when we send up our Prayers to God, it is to fetch supply against him, troubleth the soul, weak of it self, with a world of distracti∣ons. Secondly, Self-sufficiency whereby men dwell too much in themselves, is one main cause of the neglect of this entercourse and dealing with God by Prayer. He that hath nothing at home will seek abroad; the hungry belly will ask ear∣nestly, and thankfully receive an Almes. The poor man speaketh supplications, and returneth thanks. If we were poor in spirit, and saw our own emptiness, it would force us out of our selves to seek supply, and raise mindfulness of what we have received. Thirdly, Mindlesness of what we want, and what mercies God hath freely vouchsafed unto us, is one speciall cause of slackness in Prayer. How can he crave to be relieved, that feels no lack of any good? How should he be fervent in praises, that considereth not in what he is beholding for invalu∣able benefits heaped upon him? 4. A mind drowned in the enticements or baits of sensual delights and pleasures, can think of nothing that is above, can savour no∣thing that pertains to the Kingdom of Heaven.Luk. 21.34, 36 Surfeting, drunkenness, and cares of this life do overcharge and weigh down the heart, that it cannot take its flight on high,1 Pet. 4.7. Mat. 20.41. or walk with God. Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto Prayer. Fifthly, Inordinate passion is the stop of Prayer. He that burneth with the heate of anger, wrath, hatred or such like, he dareth not expect, much less ask any thing of him, who causeth the beames of his bounty to shine upon the just and unjust.Mat. 5.24. 1 Pet. 3.7. Riot and contention are the two plagues as of Common-wealths so of Prayers. Q. What is the end of Prayer? Psal. 50 23. & 80.18. Psal. 116.7. 2 Cor. 1.11. Joh. 14.13.A. 1. The glory of God: for therefore we pray, that we may perform unto God that worship which is due unto him, by testifying obedience in exe∣cuting his Commandement, and giving to him the praise of his goodness, that he will; of his power, that he can; and of his bounteous mercy and faithfull promise, that he hath succoured us in our affliction. The prime care of them that pray is, that the glory of God our Almighty Creatour and most bountifull Re∣deemer might be manifested to the whole world. The second is the salvation of themselves and of their neighbour. For we ask to obtain of God things tempo∣rall and eternall for our selves and others;Heb. 4.16. and we render thanks for mercies re∣ceived, that things needfull may be supplied. Mat. 4 23. & 26.39. Luk 3 21. & 23.34.Q. What is the Place of Prayer? A. Every private place was free for private Prayer both in the Old and New Testament. This the examples of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles do plenti∣fully confirm. Christ prayed in a Mountain, by the Rivers side, upon the
Cross: Isaac in the Field, Jacob in his Bed, Moses at the Red Sea,Gen. 24.63. & 49.18. Exo. 2.23. & 14.15. & 15.25. Josh. 5.14. 1 Reg. 17.20. 2 Reg. 20.3. Lam. 3.55. Jon. 2.1, 2. Dan. 6.11. Mat. 8.25. Act. 1.13. & 12.12. Josh. 18.1. 1 Sam. 1.3. Jer. 7.12. Psal. 78.60. Deut. 12 13, 14. Exo. 25.22. & 30.36. Psal 27.8. 1 Sam. 7.1. Vers. 5, 6. 1 Mac. 3.46 Psal. 5.7. 2 Sam. 6.2. 1 Par. 13.6. 2 Sam. 6.12. 1 ar. 13.6. Elias in Mount Carmel, Jonas in the Whales belly, the Disciples in a Ship, the Apostles in an upper-Chamber, &c. But under the Law God appointed a certain Place, in which he would be publiquely worshipped. This Place before the building of the Temple, was wheresoever the Ark of God did remain; as in the dayes of the Judges, and Samuel at Shiloh: whence Elkanah did worship every year at Shiloh. For God commanded that they should worship him in the Place which he should choose, and promised to be present with them that seek his face, that is, which worship before the Arke, which is called the face of God, because it was a testimony of his presence. Although I dare not affirm, that this was evermore strictly observed: yet sure I am, when the Arke did reside in Kiriath-jearim, all the people, by the direction of Samuel, assembled at Mizpeh, and poured out Prayers and teares before the Lord: whose example the Jews imitated in the time of the Maccabees, when the City of Jerusalem was destitute of Inhabitant, and the Sanctuary of God troden under-foot. But commonly God was worshipped towards the Arke; whence it is described from that adjunct, that it is the Arke of God, whose Name is called by the Name of the Lord of Hosts, that dwelleth between the Cherubims. And because David translated the Sanctuary or Tabernacle of the Covenant, wherein the Arke was, into Mount Zion, therefore he makes mention of Zion so often, and desires to be heard out of Zion. And this manner of praying was retained afterwards, although the Temple, in which the Arke was placed of Solomon, was not built in Zion, but in Mount Moriah. When Solomon bare rule, the Temple which he builded, was the place of publique worship, and so continued till the time of reformation. For God himself chose and consecrated that House that his Name should be there for ever. Whence every where in the Prophets, the City of Jerusalem is said to be chosen of God,Psal. 3.4. & 20.2. 1 Reg. 9 3. Luk. 19.46. Dan. 6.10. 1 Reg 8.4. and the Temple is named the House of Prayer. The captives that lived in another Land, when they prayed, did turn themselves towards Jerusalem, where was the Tabernacle of the Covenant, which David calleth the Sanctuary, that is, an holy place, in which was the Propitiatory. Besides the Temple, the Jews had their ynagogues in severall Cities, which the Rabbins call Bath Midrascht: later Writers Pro∣seuchae; because they met together there to pray Touching their Original there be divers conjectures. Some thinking, that there is no mention of them in the History of the Judges or Kings, do suspect that it is a new device or late insti∣tution, never in use before the Babylonish captivity;Psal. 20.2. 1 Reg. 8.10. at what time the Jews de∣stitute of a Temple, did build Synagogues wheresoever it was fit. But their opinion is nearer truth, who think that there were such places for Prayer in the Cities appointed for the Habitation of the Levites, which from their situation are commonly called Gebaboth or Ramoth: Hills or high Places.Lev. 16.2. Tilen. Synt. pag. 2. cap. 52 See Jun. an∣not. in Gen. 8.4. which is confuted by Fuller. Miscell. lib. 2. cap. 1. Josh. 24.33. Jug 7.1. 1 am. 10.5. Gen. 28.17. 1 Tim. 2.8. Joh. 4.21.22, 23, 24. Of the Ae∣gyptians Labaroth, Lubrae, and corruptly Laurai: Hence the Hill of Phinehas, the Hill of More, the Hill of God. See Jun. An. in 1 Sam. 10.5. Before the Law the publique Place of Prayer was that, which the Fathers either for the fit∣ness of assembling, or for some extraordinary apparition of God, had consecra∣ted to his woriship, building Altars. But by the coming of Christ, the holy ceremonies of place are all taken away: for now we are commanded to pray every where lifting up pure hands. All adoration towards Temples, Altars, I∣mages, is idolatrous. Hezekias in great distress entred into the Temple, trusting in the Commandement and Promise of God, for which the Arke of the Cove∣nant, and for the Arke also, the Temple, was a Symbole of Divine presence and audience to them that prayed. But at this day we have neither Commandement nor Promise. And though it be necessary for Christians to assemble to pray in the publique Congregation, yet such Prayers are not approved for the place, as though Prayers there, did more please God, and were heard: but for the Eccle∣siasticall
Assembly with whom we must joyn in Prayer, both because God re∣quireth it of us,1 Tim. 2.1, 2, 3. Mat. 18.20. and hath promised to be present with them that call upon him in the Congregation. But of the Original of Temples when they began, and of their use, in fit place hereafter. Q. What is the Time of Prayer? Luk. 18.1. 1 Thes. 5.17. Col. 4.2. Phil. 4.6. Rom. 12.12. Eph. 6.18. 2 Tim. 1.3. Luk. 21.36. 1 Thes. 5.16. 2 Sam. 9.7. Exo. 29.42. Numb. 4.16. & 28.3. Rom. 1.9. Col. 1.3. Eph. 1.16. 1 Reg. 10.8. Eph. 5.20. Lev. 16.21, 22, 24. Exo. 29.41. Numb. 28.4. Act. 3.1. Psal. 119.147.A. We are commanded to pray alwaies, to pray continually, to pray without ceasing, and never to waxe idle: which is not so to be understood, as if we were to do nothing but pray: but that day by day, when it shall be most fitting our condition and occasion, we must return to this duty. That we are said to do alwaies or continually, which we are said to do at fit times daily; as that was a continuall Sacrifice which was daily offer'd, morning and evening only. But in respect of the time, Prayer is setled or occasionall. Occasionall, when we are moved to pray upon every occasion. Setled, when we pray at a certain time appointed and determined. And this is either publique or private. Pub∣lique, when a certain time is prescribed for the Prayers of the Assembly, and that diverse according to the diversity of people, and necessity of the time. So the Priests are commanded once in the year to make supplication for all the sinnes of the children of Israel. So the Israelites whiles Samuel lived, did worship every year at Mizpah; and the Temple being erected, they appeared thrice every year before the Lord. The Lord also had instituted in his Law, that the Jews should offer a morning and evening Sacrifice. Private Prayer is that which every man doth make unto God in private. And as in the Law God had consecrated the morning and evening for Sacrifice, Prayers, and Hymns: so the Saints being to pray privately, did observe the morning and evening season, though the morning principally, both because their minds are fitter for Prayer, and they did rejoyce to fit themselves to the publique institution of God. Hence are these sayings of David;Psal. 5.3. Psal. 57.8, 9. Psal. 8.13. Psal. 90.14. Psal. 143.8. Psal. 55.17. Gen 2.. Dan. 6.10. Act. 10.3. Psal. 92.2. & 96.2. & 145.2. Psal. 119.62. Psal. 119.55. Psal. 6.6. Psal. 22.2. & 77.2. & 88.1. Psal. 134.1. Lam. 2.19. Isa. 26.9. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord. In the morning my Prayer shall prevent thee. O satisfie us early with thy mercies. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning. Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray and cry aloud. Thus it is noted of Isaac, that in evening he went forth to pray or meditate; Of Daniel, that he prayed three times a day. It is good (saith the Psalmist) to shew forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night. Yea, the Servants of God have not ceased in the night season to commune with the Lord. I will rise at midnight to praise the Lord; I have remembred thy Name in the night. I have cried day and night before thee. By this it sufficiently appears, that we are daily and often to take up this exercise of Prayer. And that may be further proved by many rea∣sons: for our decayes of grace when it is not renewed: our sundry wants and new appearances of evil which daily shew themselves, before not discovered; the daily malice of Satan against us; the continuall favours that God vouchsafeth, do call for the daily exercise of holy Prayer, when we rise and lie down, go about our business, or take repast. We must pray daily, that we might wor∣ship God, use his blessings aright in a sanctified manner, keep the heart in or∣der, sue out our pardon for daily sinnes. And if God daily remember us with his blessings, we should remember and think upon him in our Prayers. Q What are the Motives to frequent Prayer? A. 1. It is a Priviledge purchased by the Blood of Christ. 2. The Lord hath commanded us to pray at all times: And if we make conscience of one Commandement, why not of another? 3. When God remembers us daily, lading us with his benefits,Jam. 5.15. Neh. 1 Phil. 4.6, 7. Joh. 16.24. and setting the creature on work to do us service, is it not unreasonable that we should forget him? 4. A praying Christian is po∣tent and prevalent with God. 5. It is the best way to preserve and establish peace, and to fill the heart with joy. 6. Prayer is the Helmet and Buckler that
keeps us safe. 7. If we love Christ, we shall express our selves in calling upon his Name. 8. The omission of Prayer doth disadvantage men in outward and spiritual things. For they are deprived of the blessing of what they enjoy. Grace decayeth, the soul is barren and comfortless,Job 15.4. the heart hardened and distempered. Q. What think you of Canonicall houres for Prayer? A. We allow appointed hours both in publique and in private Prayers, ac∣cording as either the comeliness and commodity, either of the Church, or of eve∣ry special person, doth require. But a religious observation of one hour more than another, we account with the Apostle,Gal. 4.9.10, 12. Rom. 14.2, 5. Joh. 4.23, 24. 1 Tim. 2.8. Act. 12.12. & 16.25. & 10.36. Act. 1.24. & 2.42. & 4.24. & 8.15. & 9.11. to be a beggarly ceremony or ele∣ment; and those who are so perswaded, are either fallen from the faith, or at least weaklings in faith. And if the simplicity and sincerity of the Gospel re∣quire that we should forget the religious observation of the places, it cannot suffer us to place holiness or religion in devised times. Nor do those phrases of praying continually, or whout ceasing, enjoyn us those Canonicall houres: for besides that their institution was not in the Apostles time, these precepts tie all Christians; whereas their houres of Prayer bind their Clergy only, who of Office are to pray. Our Adversaries in their Canonicall houres do erre many waies. First, In this, that they make laws for all times, of some example which particular men did freely upon some occasion extraordinary. Secondly, That they multiply their ferials and houres abundantly, above that the Church of God can attend unto. Yea, contrary to Gods institution; who hath, that we might keep his worship on the Sabboth, given us six daies. Thirdly, That they make them publique Prayers of the Church, which are performed by the Clergy. Whereas the Clergy are not the Church, but the Ministers with the people to whom it is ministred. But the superstition and errour of our Adversaries set aside, it is not inexpedient to appoint certain times of the day for private Prayer, and constantly to observe them so far as fitness and conveniency will give leave. Ob. Men cannot spare time. Sol. 1. The time spent in Prayer seemeth to take from, but indeed it addeth to the heap. Mal. 3. The baiting of the Horse hinders not the Journey: not the whetting of the sith the work. 2. This is the greatest work, and most profitable, whereby the Image of God is repaired and encreased. 3. Shall we offer that to God which costs us nought. 4. The more import our business, the more need to implore Gods blessing by hearty Prayer. 5. Consider what time thou spendest idly every day, or worse then doing nothing. 6. Consider the unweary watchful∣ness of the Saints of God in all ages, in attending upon this duty. Q. What Gesture is to be used in Prayer? A. The Spture hath nor prescribed any certain gesture as necessary: We shall find the Saints of God have prayed kneeling, standing, &c. But of this more particularly in the Parts of Prayer.
CHAP. VIII. Of Petition. What it is. The Necessity, and unspeakable Bene∣fits thereof. Divers Reasons to shew that we must pray to God a∣lone. How we are to conceive of God in our minds, in Prayer. The Rules to be observed in our calling upon God. Question: WHat are the Parts of Prayer? Psal. 105.1. Isa 12 4. Moller. in hunc. loc. 1 Sam. 2.1. Jon. 2.1, 2. Psal. 90.1. 2 Sam. 7.27. Phil. 4.6. 1 Thes. 5.17, 18. Psal. 4.8. Psal. 50.15. Gen. 17.18. & 24.12. & 28.3. & 32.11. 1 Reg 8.15. Psal. 4.1. Psal. 19.14. Psal. 5.1, 2. Psal. 142.1, 2. & 143.1. & 140.7. Psal. 141.2. Psal. 79.11. Psal. 39.12. & 38.7. Psal. 21.2. Deut. 1.45. Mat. 26.38. Numb. 16.45. & 20 .A. Petition and Thanksgiving. Q. What is Petition? A. It is a Prayer, wherein we crave of God the preventing or removing of things hurtful, and the obtaining of things needfull, either for this life or the life to come, and that of meer grace through Jesus Christ. This duty is known by the name of Prayer, Request, Meditation, Deprecation, Complaint, Sup∣plication, Intercession, Desire, lifting up of the hands, sighing, weeping, the request of the lips and desire of the heart, and such like. And the godly when they prayed, are said to weep, to watch, to cast themselves upon their face. Q. Why say you, that Petition is a craving of what we need? A. We may ask that which is due debt unto us, but in craving we renounce all other titles, and fly wholly to his bounty and kindness, at whose hands we beg and intreat. When superiours will have inferiours do any thing, they may lay their command on them, and so bind them to it, by reason of that obedience which is owing to them from their inferiours: but when inferiours would have this or that from superiours, whom they cannot by any meanes bind to them (for the inferiour hath no authority or power over his superiour) then they fall to intreaty, not moving them otherwise then from hence, because it is fit their bounty and rich estate should supply their indigency, when they are humbly intreated.Dan. 9 8, 9, 19. Thus Daniel and all holy ones have come to God, not for our sakes, to us shame and confusion belongeth, but for thy name sake, thy mercy sake, do thus and thus. For indeed, in that we beg any thing, we confess we have no title in justice to it, and that it is most free for him we intreat, to give it or not to give it, if he please. If I think a thing due to me, and my own by right, I cannot beg it unfeignedly, as I would do a thing which is not mine, further then the bounty of him I intreat, shall bellow it on me. Q. What Reasons may shew the Necessity of this duty? A. The first may be taken from Satans malice, and our own dulness and in∣disposition to this duty; Satan knowing that when we send up our desires to God, it is to fetch supply against him, troubleth the soul, weak of it self, with a world of distractions. Where he cannot corrupt the Doctrine of Prayer with heresies and superstitious follies, there he laboureth to hinder the exercise of it. Wherein we should be so farre from being discouraged, that we should reason rather thus that must needs be an excellent duty which is so irkesome to the flesh, and which the Devil so eagerly sets against. The diligence that Satan
useth to steale away the Word of life, that it might not take root in the heart, commendeth to us the excellency of that heavenly truth, Surely that envious one would never seek to hinder us from Prayer, to molest us in Prayer, if it were not an exercise of singular use and comfort. And we should never be so dull and untoward unto it, if it were not spiritual and heavenly. 2. Our great poverty and want should move us to crave without ceasing. Alas, what temptation can we resist, much less overcome without fresh succour? What cross can we endure without impatiency, if we have not new support? What success can we look for, yea, in common affairs, without his blessing? What good can we do, nay think of, without new strength? When we do any good by his power, do we not need pardon for the blemishes of our best perfor∣mances? What good blessing can we enjoy, so as we defile not our selves in it, without a further blessing giving us with the thing, the holy use of it? Wherefore holy men knowing that God will be sought unto even for those things of which he hath given a Promise, in obedience to his Divine Order, desire to receive all from him as a fruit of their Prayers. And Gods manner is to keep many blessings from his Children untill they have begged them, as delighting to hear his Children speak. The consideration whereof moveth those that have nearest communion with God, to acknowledge him in all their waies, de∣pending on him for direction, strength, success, whereupon he delighteth in shewing himself more familiarly unto them in the sweetest experiences of his love, guiding them by his counsell whilest they abide here, and after bringing them to glory. 3. This should encourage us to this exercise, wherein ly∣eth all our strength, that if in spite of Satans annoyance and our own indispo∣sition, we will set upon this duty, we shall find our selves by little and little more raised up to Heaven, and our hearts more and more enlarged, God rewarding the use of that little we finde at the first, with encrease of strength and comfort. To him that hath (in the exercise of that he hath) shall be given more. As other graces grow in those that are in the state of grace: so this spirit of Prayer receiveth continuall increase upon more inward acquaintance with God and our own estates. 4. Petition is the Key of Heaven, a most ex∣cellent means of obaining every good thing. The things we want are of two sorts; such as we may by course of justice redeem, and get to our selves; or such which do meerly depend on the good will of persons, and cannot be gotten, but only by winning their good will: Thus there are two courses of getting things; for we may fetch those former things by commutative justice, by giving a penny for a penny-worth: but the latter things we cannot procure, but by humble intreaty only. Now all heavenly blessings are of this latter sort, such as cannot be gotten, but only from Gods grace and free favour, and therefore such as we cannot otherwise get, than by moving him for them with humble supplication. As this is a part of the Kings Prerogative, to have his subjects petition to him for grace, in regard of their temporall exi∣gencies in which they are: so this is the Prerogative of that Heavenly King, that we should in all things seek to him. 5. The being of every thing teach∣eth it to pray after a sort to the Creatour: the earth weary with drought, will open the mouth and cry to him; the young Ravens will report their hunger,Psal. 147.9. Zanch. de Rev. lib. 1. in Praeo. de Invoc. and call to their Creatour for sustenance: Shall not we, if we be his Children, report all our wants to him, and seek all good things from him? Look as it is in nature, nothing which doth grow, but hath in it an appetite and attractive force, whereby it doth draw to it self such nourishment as it wanteth: so no soul ever took encrease of grace, but there was in it this appetite of heaven∣ly desire, and attractive force of Prayer, by which it doth draw from the root, even from God in Christ, every thing needfull for it. Let all those that profess the Name of God be exhorted, not to conceive of Prayer as a thing arbitrary
and indifferent, but as of a necessary duty. Are any afflicted, let them pray? Are any in prosperity, let them pray? In what condition or state soever ye are, pray: then shall your prosperity be blessed and comfortable, it shall be continu∣ed, yea encreased for your good: then shall ye be kept from afflictions, or be made able to bear them, or be made much better by them. In thus doing, ye shall have all such good things as be needfull for you with a blessing upon them, with contentedness without them. By Prayer ye shall obtain pardon of sinnes past, strength to resist temptations of sinnes to come; yea, ye shall keep Sa∣tan at the staves end, that he shall not be able to touch you. Pray, and ye shall be blessed with encrease of faith, enriched with plenty of grace, refreshed with comfort and peace in this life, made fruitfull in good works, and crowned with perfection of grace and glory in the life to come. Would we do good to our selves, to our friends, to our enemies? Would we be beneficiall to the Church and Common weale? then let us pray. Nothing so deep, but with this Bucket we may draw it up; nothing so high above us, or so farre from us, but with this hand we may reach it to us. He cannot be miserable, that doth open his griefs unto the Lord, who cannot but regard the voice of his own Spirit. Great is the force of Prayer, and cannot be withstood. He that wrestleth by the strength of Prayer, though he wrestle with the strong God, shall prevail as Jacob did.Hos. 12.4. Of all helps Prayer is the most effectuall, the readiest at hand in all places, and at all times: if we be not without hearts, we need not be with∣out help. Prayer relieveth the distressed mind, strengtheneth the weak, re∣viveth the dull, enlargeth the straightned, enricheth the poor, preserveth the godly; procureth Divine blessing upon all his Ordinances, and our labours. It is the most universall help; it is good for all persons, at all times, in all things. Yea, which is more then all this, it procureth glory to God. But of all these more distinctly in their proper place. 6. The nature of love is to de∣light in communication with the beloved,Buc ibid. q 5. whereby it is more kindled and en∣flamed. Q. To whom must we pray? Joh. 16 23.A. To God alone in the Name of Christ Jesus. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. Q. Why must we pray to God? A. He is the true Jehovah, great and terrible, abundant in goodness, infinite in compassion, rich in mercy, of absolute sovereignty: who hath made all things, in whose hands are the deep places of the earth, who only is able to help and succour in all distresses. He is our God and King by Covenant, he perfectly understands the thoughts of all hearts, and to him it belongs to hear all Prayers.Psal. 54.1. 2 Reg. 19.15. Psal. 95.3, 4. Psal. 86.15, 16 & 44.26. Psal. 119.68. Psal. 30.7. Psal. 70.5. Psal. 40.17. Apoc. 14.7. Psal. 95 6, 7 Psal. 119 73. Isa. 4.8. Psal. 138 8. Dan 3.29. Psal. .2. Psal. 38.9. 1 Reg. 8.39 Psal. 65.2. In all these and many other respects, it is necessary we should call up∣on the Lord according to his Commandement. O Lord God of Israel, who dwellest beween the Cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the King∣doms of the earth: thou hast made Heaven and Earth. The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods: In his hands are the deep places of the earth. Thou O Lord, art a God full of compassion and gracious, long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth. O turn unto me and have mercy upon me. Thou art good, and doest good; teach me thy Statutes. With the Lord there is mercy: and with him is plenteous redemption. Thou art my help and deliverer, make no tarying, O my God. Worship him that made Heaven and Earth. O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneele before the Lord our Maker. For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding, that I may learn thy Commandements. There is no other God, that can deliver after this sort. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King and my God: for unto thee will I pray. Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. O thou that hearest
all Prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come. Q. What Reasons are there to shew that we must pray to God a∣lone? A. 1. The Lord from Heaven hath warned us to take him only for our God,Psal. 81.9, 10, 11. Deut. 32.39. & 6.13. Jer. 17 7.8. Mat. 6.9. Luk. 11.2. Joh. 16.23. & 4..3. Rom. 8.15. Gal. 4.6. Judg. 13.16. Apoc. 14.7. & 19.10. Psal. 5.2. & 105.4. Isa 55.6. and to worship him alone: The Sonne of God teacheth us to say, Our Father which art in heaven; The voice of the Spirit within us is, Abba, Father. Let us ask the opinion of the Angels and Saints. If thou wilt offer a Sacrifice (say they) offer it to God; worship him, who made heaven and earth. And this is the voice of men converted, To thee do we cry. From all this its ready to be con∣cluded, that God only ought to be called upon with joyfull belief: because the invocation of the true God only is commanded in the holy Scriptures, confir∣med with Promises touching audience, and commended to us by the examples of Angels and holy men. 2. When Prayer doth not simply ask things, but ask them as meanes making for Gods glory and our salvation; and when no power but God can make inferiour things conduce to the Glory of his name, and the increase of grace in us: hence it is manifest, we cannot ask any thing religious∣ly, but of God only. Even as a natural man cannot desire any thing ac∣cording to nature, which doth not pertain to the continuing and well-being of nature: so a spiritual man cannot out of grace desire any thing religiously, which doth not some way profit to the conservation and perfection of that grace which is in him. 3. Prayer is a spiritual Sacrifice,1 Pet. 2.5. Psal. 141.2. Mal. 1.11. Rev. 5.8. & 8.4. Luk. 1.10. Exo. 22.20. Deut. 17.3. Act. 14.12, 14. or sweet smelling In∣cense. But Sacrifice must be offered to the Lord alone. When the Priest of Jupiter with the people would have sacrificed to Paul and Barnabas, they rent their clothes, and cryed out, Sirs, Why do ye these things? The Rhemists upon that place tell us, that externall Sacrifice may not be offered to man or creature, but to God only: as if Prayer were not more honourable and higher service and worship, then are Bullocks or Calves. For how much the figure is infe∣riour to the thing figured, and the shadow to the body: by so much is the offe∣ring up of Bullocks and Calves inferiour to the Oblation of Prayers.Psal. 50.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Psal. 50.15. & 44.20, 21. Mat. 4.10. Jer. 23.23, 24. Neh. 1.6. Psal. 65.2. & 66.18. Psal 57.2. Eph. 3.20. Jam. 1.5.17. 1 Joh. 5.14. 2 Chro. 6.30. Psal. 94.9, 10. Jer. 17.9. 1 King. 8.39. Act. 1.24. Psal. 7.9. & 44.21. Rom. 10. Jer. 17. De beat. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 20. Vis. Jun. ani. in Bell. ibid. 4. Prayer to obtain grace or glory is a part of Divine worship. But Divine worship is proper to the Lord alone. 5. He to whom we pray must be able to hear all Prayers in all places, at one time; willing and able to give all good and perfect gifts, good for matter, good for use, and that alwaies; to search the secret cor∣ners of the heart, and to understand the thoughts. But God only is every where present, heareth all Prayers, is most willing and able to help, knoweth all hearts, and understandeth every imagination. As for mentall Prayers, the Angels often cannot know them; the Saints in Heaven have no meanes how to understand them for ought the Scripture teacheth. Had they knowledge, yet the other things are doubtfull; for they can do nothing which they will not, and they will not do any thing to which God calleth them not; they are so perfectly conformed to his pleasure, and attend his beckoning in all things. But we know it is the Lords will to be called on, and so to perform that he knoweth we want; and he is both willing and able to supply it unto us. 6. We cannot call upon any religiously, on whom we may not religiously believe. But we are to believe religiously in God alone; to derive faith from any creature is a thing accursed. Bellarmine shuffles to decline the force of this reason, thus; He can∣not call upon the Saints, who doth not believe that there are Saints, and in a manner hope in them. But the Scripture sheweth we should believe in the Saints in no manner, but in the Lord alone. It is one thing to have faith of the Saints, another to believe in the Saints: He that denies the former, denies the communion of Saints in the unity of the Spirit; he that affirmes the other, hath neither learned Christ or Piety. Let us then make the Name of the Lord our strong Tower, to which we fly seeking salvation. Men love not to be sorted in any business but with their Peeres and
equals; so neither shall the living God like to be matched with his crea∣tures. Q. Our Saviour teacheth us to pray, Our Father: must we not then pray to the Son, and the holy Spirit? Mat. 28.19, 20. Joh. 5.23. Isa. 6.3. Joh. 12.41. Act. 28.25.A. As we are baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, so are we to call upon the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: for they are one in essence, the object of religious adoration, and stand in such natural relation to each other, that when one is invocated, all are invocated. The Father excludeth all other persons that are pure creatures, not persons which have the same singular essence with him. But he is fitly named alone, because the Sonne by voluntary dispensation hath the part of a Mediatour,Joh. 14.6. & 16.23. through whom we go to the Father; and the Spirit of Christ the Office of a School-master, teaching what to pray, and as we ought. Q. Is it necessary alwaies to name the Father, or the three Persons in Trinity distinctly when we call upon God? A. It is necessary to conceive in mind the true God in Christ, though not di∣stinctly to consider the three Persons. The reason is, because every act of re∣ligion doth require that we some way apprehend the object of it; and as there can be no sight without some visible object propounded: so no act of religious worship without this object in some wise conceived. But in wishing the effect∣ing of things, it is not necessary to name any persons, nay, yet God indefinitely. Thus Jabez called on the God of Israel,1 Chro. 4.10. saying, Oh that thou wouldst bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast. Sometimes it is lawfull to name indefinitely, with∣out express mention of any person.Act. 4.24. & 22.24. Psal. 17.1. 2 Thes. 3.5. Lord thou art God, who hast made Heaven and Earth, &c. Hear the right O Lord, attend unto my cry. Instances of this kind are every where in the holy Scriptures. It is lawfull also when we name persons, to name one only, two, or all the three, provided that we name not one as excluding the other two, nor yet two as excluding the third: for thus calling on one, we invocate all: and as naming no person distinctly, we do not dishonour the persons: so naming one and not others, doth no breed any ine∣quality of honour in our worship. This is confirmed by the approved practice of the Saints in the Scripture, sometimes naming one, sometimes two, some∣times all three persons in Trinity.2 Cor. 13.14. Rev. 1.4, 5. 1 Thes. 3.11. 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.2. 2 Joh. 3. Eph. 1.17. Act. 7.59. Phil. 4.23. 1 Thes. 5.28. Gal. 6.18. 2 Thes. 3.18. 2 Tim 4.22. Philem. v. 25. Rev. 1.4, 5. 2 Cor. 13.14. 2 Thes. 2.16. Paul shuts up his Epistle to the Corinthians thus; The grace of our Lord Jesus, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. The Apostles begin their Epistles thus, Grace and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Steven prayed when he was put to death, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Lastly, We may name the Spirit before the Sonne, and the Sonne before the Father. For as that prece∣dency seemeth derived from priority of Order and inequality of Office, which is found amongst the Persons by voluntary agreement; so this latter naming of them, seemeth to be grounded on the equality of their natures. In the Revela∣tion, the holy Spirit is named before the Sonne: and St Paul more then once nameth the Sonne before the Father: Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, who hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts. Q What Rules are further to be observed in our calling upon God? A. First, We must call upon God by those Titles, by which he hath been pleased to make himself known unto us in his holy Word. God hath revealed himself by certain Titles, Properties and Works, that we might know what he will be to us,Psal. 68.4, 5. and make use of his Name accordingly in our Petitions. Secondly, We must so consider of God when we come unto him in Prayer, as that we may see in him the things we desire.Eph. 1.17. The Apostle going to Prayer for the Ephesians, who had believed on Christ, and about to seek the glorious gifts of the Spirit,
which might help them to know the glory reserved for them, he setteth God before him, as the God of that Christ, whom these had now received by faith into their hearts, and the Father of all glory, both of them strengthening his faith. For he could not think that God, the God of Christ, would be wanting to those who were Christs; or that the Father of all glory, would deny these glorious gifts, which he was about to entreat. Thus the Saints still set God be∣fore them, as having that in him for which they pray. The Church seeking courage against the rage of Persecutors, and that Wonders might be wrought, they set God before them, as the God of power,Act. 4.24. who had made Heaven and Earth. When David would beg remission of his sinne, he considers of God, as a God with whom there is plenty of redemption or forgiveness.Psal. 51.1.2. When he would have ease in misery, or deliverance from the cruelty of his enemies, he considers of him as a Father of mercy, and God of all consolation.Psal. 86.15, 16 & 79.8, 9. 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. Heb. 13.20, 21. Paul seeking the consummation or perfecting of the believing Hebrews, he doth set God before him, as who had from the lowest humiliation, brought the head of them to glory. This doth strengthen faith, and inflame devotion. When men come to ask of those who have enough of that they seek, and to ask it in such mea∣sure only as that it is not any thing for those they sue unto to vouchsafe, they easily perswade themselves that they shall speed. We seek things more securely, when we know them to be where we are in looking them, and we follow them more affectionately, when now we are gotten after a manner into the sight of them. Thirdly, We must call upon God by such Names, Titles, or De∣scriptions, as are most apt to enflame desires, stirre up reverence,1 Chro. 29.10. confirm faith, or encourage the heart, according as our necessity and disposition doth require. Majesty, Power, Bounty, and Love do shine in the Titles of God; and we are to make use of them especially, that are fittest to raise the heart in desire and faith, or to strike it with awe or reverence as occasion requireth. If many and general requests be to be put up, then such Titles and Names must be used that may perswade we shall be heard in all. If some particular Petition be to be preferred, then choice is to be made of such Titles or Names, as may help the heart in that particular. Abrahams servant being to pray for success in his Masters business, saith, O Lord God of my Master Abraham,Gen. 24.12. I pray thee send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my Master Abraham. When Peter did intreat God to make choice of an Apostle to supply the place of Judas, he saith, Thou Lord, who knowest the hearts of all men,Act. 1.24. shew whether of these two thou hast chosen. When David prayeth against the enemies of God and his Children, he saith; O Lord God to whom vengeance belongeth,Psal 94.1. O God to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thy self. When Jehoshophat was in fear of the Moa∣bites, Ammonites, and others that came against him, he cried unto the Lord, and said: O Lord God of our Fathers, Art not thou God in Heaven? and rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the Heathen?2 Chro. 20.6. and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? Nehemiah and Daniel praying for the people that were in distress, use this Preface;Neh. 1.5. Dan. 9 4 O Lord God of Heaven, the great and terrible God, that keepeth Covenant and mercy for them that love him, and observe his Commandements. If the heart be dejected in conscience of thine unworthiness, consider of God as a loving and mercifull Father, that is most ready to hear and help. If thou be in deep distress, it is good to adde the consideration of his power and goodness, who is able and willing to work thy enlargement. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father.Isa. 64.8. It is behovefull for every one that would make a good entrance into Prayer (without which he is not like to make a good proceeding) to acquaint himself with the true under∣standing of the manifold Names and Descriptions of God recorded in Scripture, and then to make choice of such Titles to Name him by, as are most fit to incite reverence, confirm faith, and are specially to be exercised in granting his
requests.Deut. 4.16, 17 Exo. 20.4. Fourthly, The express Commandement of God forbiddeth to worship him by any Image or similitude, and he himself sheweth in many places, that he will severely punish the sinne of them that shall give his glory to dumb Idols. Fifthly, God best knowes himself, and those Titles are fittest which he hath manifested of himself; which are more clearly revealed in the New Testament, in the time of Christ, than in the Old. CHAP. IX. Shewing that we must come to God in the Name of Christ, the onely Mediatour betwixt God and man, who makes Intercession for us; And not pray to Saints, or Angels to intercede for us. Question: MƲst we pray unto Christ as Mediatour? A. We must call upon God, as the first Authour of all good things, and the Father, of whom are all things, and we by him: Christ is to be called upon,Buca. loc. com. 35. q. 9. 1 Cor. 8.6. 1 Cor. 1.2. 1 Tim. 2.6. Ioh. 14.6, 13. & 16.23. Psal. 45.11. Psal. 72.11, 15. Phil. 2.10. Rom. 15.12. Ioh. 14.1. Heb. 1.6. Act. .59. 2 Cor. 12.8. 1 Thes. 3.12. 2 Ioh. 3. Act. 9.14. Phil. 4.23. 1 Thes. 5.28. Gal. 6.18. Rev. 5.12.13. 2 Thes. 3.18. 2 Tim. 1.2. 2 Tim. 4.22. Phil. 2.25. as the only Mediatour betwixt God and man, by whom are all things, and we by him: or by whom God doth give unto us all saving blessings, and by whom we have access to God. Of this we have most illustrious Testimonies and Ex∣amples in the Scripture. The King shall greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. Yea, all Kings shall fall down before him; all Nations shall serve him. At the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow. In him shall the Gentiles trust. Let all the Angels in Heaven worship him. Steven prayed, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. I besought the Lord thrice, saith Paul, that it might depart from me. Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you. The Angels in Heaven, and the twenty four Elders sing in the Revelation, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. But we freely acknowledge that there is some difference betwixt the adoration of God, as he is God absolutely; and of Christ, as Mediatour betwixt God and man. And as faith in the acknowledgment of Christ doth discern his natures, and attribute unto him according to them both, what it ought according to the Scriptures: so it desireth that in the work of hearing, as the apotelesme of the Office, he would do according to each nature, what is proper to them. Q. Why must we come to God in the Name of Christ? A. 1. All access unto God requireth three things: that he be in a place to which we may come, that a way be prepared, that liberty be granted to come with confidence. But all these are obtained in Christ our Mediatour. For he is appointed of the Father,Rom. 3.25. that he should be our propitiation through faith in his blood, in whom a Throne of grace is erected for miserable sinners, to which we may approach with boldness and confidence,Heb 4.16. the Law which did convince, accuse, and condemn, being removed out of Gods sight. And he hath not only dedi∣cated the new and living Way by his flesh,Heb. 0.9, 20. Joh. 14.6. Heb. 10.22. whereby we must come unto God, but is the true and living way leading directly unto the Father. Liberty to come unto God is granted unto us by the blood of Christ, who is entred into the heavenly
Sanctuary for us, that with a true heart, and full assurance of faith we might have access unto God. Therefore the Scriptures do plentifully witness,Eph 2.28. & 3.12. Heb. 7.25. & 13.15. Eph. 2.1, 2. Rom. 5.10. Prov. 15.8, 25 Isa. 1.13, 15. Heb. 11.4. 1 Tim. 2.5. Col. 1.14, 20. 1 Joh 2.2. Heb. 7.25. Psal. 110.4. Rom. 8 3. that we have no access unto the Father but in Jesus Christ, in whom he is become our loving Father, who not considered in him is a most terrible Judge, sitting upon the Throne of strict justice, most dreadfull to a sinner not able to stand before it. 2. We are all enemies of God by nature, ungodly and wicked: But the Prayers of enemeis, wicked and ungodly, God will not hear, cannot accept: Therefore we stand in need of a Mediatour by whom our Prayers being offered to him may be accepted. 3. Christ is our Mediatour, Redeemer, Advocate and Intercessour, who by the blood of the Cross hath reconciled us to God, and now sitteth at the right hand of the Father to make request for us; in whose Name our Prayers find acceptance. For he onely can wash away the staines of our Prayers, and so sanctifie them that they may be acceptable and pleasant unto God. Q. Why must we pray to God in the Name of Christ our Mediatour only? A. 1. No man will assume this honour of Mediation or Intercession to himself, but he that was called thereunto of the Father. For it is a fault to thrust our selves into business no way belonging unto us;Heb. 5.4. Non est fine culpa, qui rei, quae ad cum non petinet, se im∣miscet. De. Cretal. 6. lib. tit 12. de reg. juris. Digest. lib. 50. tit. 17. de reg. juris. 36. 1 Tim 2.5. 1 Joh. 2.2, 3. Heb. 2.17. & 4.14, 16. Eph. 3 12. & 2.18. As there is no secondary God, so no secondary Mediatour. That which is given to another with∣out commssi∣on from Christ, is taken from him. Rom. 8.34. Heb. 7.25. Quaedam sunt Dei nomina, quae quamvis Deo conveniant propria quadam ratione, tamen hominibus etiam communicantur. Act. 10.4. Vers 31. At vicissim alia quaedam▪ quae non communicantur: & in his nomen Mediatoris. Dan. 10.12. Christ is no immediate Mediatour, unless men have as immediate access to him, as he hath to God the Father. Heb. 1.3. & 7.25. & 9.24. 2 Chron. 26.18, 19. Psal. 141.2. Hessel. in 1 Tim. 2. Bell. con. 7. lib. 1. cap. 17. Rhem. annot. in 1 Tim. 2. and a thing no way incident to the authority of man, to ordain who shall be his Intercessour unto God to procure acceptance unto his Prayers. But Christ only is ordained of the Father to he our Mediatour, by whom we have access unto the Father with confidence, who is both able and willing faithfully to plead the cause of all Be∣lievers with God. 2. He that is to offer up our Prayers to God, must be our Mediatour of Intercession and Redemption, who is able to save us both by merit and efficacy. For these two parts of the Priestly Office are so conjoyned, that nei∣ther can stand without the other, or be communicated severally to any person. But Christ only is our Mediatour of Redemption and Intercession, who is able to save both by merit and efficacy. 3. To offer our Prayers to God is to get them acceptance in his sight: For there can be no Mediatour to inform him, but only to grace and speed our suits. And therefore it is all one to say to Cornelius, thy Prayes are come up before God, and thy Prayers are accepted with God: All one to Daniel, thy words were heard, and thy suit was accepted. Besides, to imagine any other offering of our Prayers to God by the Ministry of any, then that which doth purge out their wants, and purchase their acceptance, is to speak of God as of a man, and to talk in a dream. But thus as a Mediatour to offer up our Prayers to God, we have only Christ, by whom only our Prayers, as our selves are made acceptable unto God. 4. The Scripture teacheth us, that Christ offereth our requests for us, in that he is our High Priest, and hath recon∣ciled us to God. And the Law of shadowes allowed none to burn Incense, but the Priest that offered the burnt Offering, as the High Priests answer to Ʋzzia sheweth; to teach us that none can present our Prayers to God, which are spiritual Incense, but he which purgeth our sins. 5. The Papists themselves being convinced with evidence of truth, are forced to confess that Christ only as Mediatour doth present our Prayers before God; though they deny it again in praying to Saints and Angels as Mediatours and Patrones in a sort, as is to be shewed afterwards. Q. May we pray to Christ to pray for us?
A. The Rhemists to cover their idolatry in praying to Saints and Angels as Mediatours,Thom. Aquin. tell us they may not pray to Christ, to pray for us; for that were to think or speak basely of him. But out of what Well draw they this water: but out of the filthy puddle and sink of their own brain? For why may we not pray unto Christ that he would pray for us? seeing it is his Office to pray for us.Joh. 14.15, 16. For we being priviledged to call upon him, or beseech him to do his Office, it followeth, that our warrant is also good to pray to him to pray for us. Again, whereof he hath given us promise,Joh. 16. thereof we may make request unto him: it being then evident in express words, that he hath promised to pray for us, it followeth that we may call for his promise. These fellowes make out-cryes a∣gainst Calvin, as if he should overthrow the intercession of Christ, because he taketh away his praying upon knees in Heaven, as not fitting for the glorious estate whereunto he is received. But the Jesuits by these words at once, have made a clean dispatch of the intercession of Christ, that he should neither kneel∣ing, standing, nor sitting pray for us: for seeing we may desire him to do whatsoever by his Office of Mediation he hath promised to do: it being (by the Jesuites Divinity) unlawfull for us to pray Christ to pray for us: it fol∣loweth, that it is no part of his Office to pray for us. Our Saviour saith to his Disciples,Joh. 16.26. At that day ye shall ask the Father in my Name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: But his meaning is not that he would not ask the Father,Maldon. in oh. 16.26. but that the Father did so love them, was so favourable unto them, that he would give all good things unre∣quested, that it should not seem necessary, that he should make request for them. Q. Do not the Angels offer up our Prayers to God? 1 Tim. 2.5. See D. Fulk. answ to the Rhem. in Col. 2.18.A. 1. There being but one Mediatour between God and man, and that in matter of Intercession, whosoever setteth a created Angel in the place of that Mediatour, must needs thrust out our Saviour Christ. 2. If the Angels offer up our Prayers, it is either to inform God and put him in remembrance, or to procure acceptance to our supplications. But God is not as man, that he should need an Informer; nor can they procure acceptance to our Prayers. 3. The holy Angels will not undertake an Office to which they are not called of God. But God hath not called them to offer up the Prayers of the Saints. See the Reasons before. Q. In the Revelation it is said, that an Angel came and stood at the Altar, ha∣ving a golden Censer,Rev. 8.3. Bell. de Sanct. beatit. cap. 16. sect. Tertia. and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the Throne. A. This cannot be understood of any created Angel or ministring Spirit. For,Exo. 30.7. Lev. 16.12. Heb. 7.27. Zanch. ubi supra. 1. In the words there is an allusion to the ministry of the High Priest under the Law, and the Angel is propounded as a Priest ministring before the Lord. But that either the Name or Office of a Priest should be given to an Angel which is not partaker of flesh and blood, is a skrieking only heard in the wil∣derness of the Popish Church, never taught in the holy Scriptures. 2. The holiness of Angels which are not partakers of flesh and blood, although it were greater and perfecter then it is, cannot make any supply of our wants, whose defects must be made up by one of our own nature. But this Angel doth per∣fume the Prayers of the Saints with sweet Odours. 3. This Angel offer'd up the Prayers of all the Saints wheresoever dispersed, which cannot be done by all the creatures in Heaven and Earth, much less by one only creature. For if there were any one Angel which could be in all places at one time and in one mo∣ment, to hear the Prayers of all the faithfull, what needs so many Legions and ten thousands of Angels for the Ministry of the Saints. 4. The Jesuites them∣selves out of the verse before, have truly affirmed that it is our Saviour Christ:
which is plain by the Reasons before alleged, and by the manner of speech used in this place, of another Angel,Mal. 3.1. Viega. com. in Apoc. cap. 8. sect. 2. De manu An∣geli, & Christi. Nec rectè qui∣dam crecenti∣oribus dicunt, Christum nun∣quam Angelum absolutè dici: satis est ex consequentibus Christum esse colligere. Heb. 13.15. Aug. hom. 6. in Apoc. tom. 9. pag. 670. Trimas. in hunc loc. Beda in Ap. tom. 5. Ribera in Apoc. 8.5. Viega. ibid. whereby John usually noteth out our Saviour Christ in this Book, as one who differeth from other Angels, both in nature, in Office, in Authority, Dignity and Operation. For he alone is ordained of the Father to offer up our Prayers; the perfume and sweet Odours, wherewith the infection and imperfection of our Prayers, are perfumed, is his alone, and given to him; he hath reconciled unto God, and in him is the Father pleased. He, and he alone, doth appear in Heaven for us, pleading the cause of his Elect continually. Q. May we not pray to the Saints or Angels as Mediatours or Advo∣cates? A. 1. The Papists themselves teach,Bell. con. 7. lib. 1. cap. 17. 1 Joh. 2.2. Joh. 14.6. Col. 1.19, 20. Breviar. Rom. Offic. Parv. B. Maria. ad completor. Offic. B. Mar. Virg. ad primam, & seq. For if these blessings be theirs by their merits and right of pur∣chase, they may dispose of them at their pleasure. Concil. Trid. sess. 25. cap. 2. Bell. cont. 7. lib. 1. cap. Durand. in Sent. lib. 4. dist. 45. q. 4. Lombard. lib. 4. dist. 45. Alex. Ales. See Chem. exam. Par. 3. de Invoc. Sanct. pag. 232, &c. Catechis. Rom. In the Court of Heaven, he which ap∣points the su∣pream, ap∣points the sub∣ordinate: and as no creature may assume, so no creature may yeeld, either supream or subordinate jurisdicti∣on to any, in things of this nature, besides or without commission from the highest. But the distinction of Mediatour, Supream, and Secondary, is mans device. that we must not pray to the Saints as Authours of grace, glory, or any Divine blessing; nor yet as immediate Inter∣cessours to God for us. Which they prove by this, that Christ is the propitiation, the way, and reconciliation. But herein they prove themselves to be gross Ido∣laters: for they do not only pray the Saints to pray for them, but they pray unto them as the givers of grace. They call the Virgin Mary the Mother of grace and mercy; they pray unto her, to protect them from their enemies, and receive them in the hour of death; and this they do, not only to the blessed Virgin, but unto that saintless saint and sinfull Souldier of the Pope, Thomas Becket. 2. They teach not that it is necessary to invocate the Saints departed, or holy Angels: but that well and profitably according to the rules of piety it may be done. But they speak of Divine invocation directed to them being ab∣sent, as our omniscient Patrones and Mediatours. And they maintain that they are to be prayed unto in three respects. First, That by their Prayers they would vouchsafe to make intercession for us. Secondly, That by and for their merits they would obtain what is desired. Thirdly, That they would grant the benefits which are asked. For the Saints departed (according to their Doctrine) have more free access to God and Christ, then the faithfull remaining alive, as being more nigh to God; by their works of supererogation done in this life, they have merited that God should hear their Prayers; and they are appointed of God the administrators of the good things which are craved of them. Thus they are made to be Mediatours, both in merit and efficacy, betwixt Christ and the faithfull living in this world. By which their deceit is manifest, when they pretend that they pray not to them as Authours of Divine blessings: for no man can be called the Authour of Divine blessings according to piety and truth: but the Saints departed are called Authours of their own benefits; amongst which they reckon their merits For every one according to the Papists, is the Au∣thour of his merit; and why not of the communication of it? And if we ask grace or glory to be given for their merits, do we not make them in a sort Au∣thours of those benefits? And all this is done by our Adversaries. For they use formall Prayers, and do as devoutly and religiously invocate Saints as the Lord himself. They make difference between their apprehension of God in their Prayers, and of the Saints: but the matter, gesture, and devotion of Prayer is all one. In their Saint invocation they kneele down, elevating their eyes to Heaven, uncovering their heads, and prostrating their souls and bodies, with sighes and groanes, they say: Oh, blessed Apostle Paul, I beseech thee to de∣liver me from the Angel of Satan, and from the wrath to come, and conduct
me to Heaven. And to Stephen; Oh, the first Martyr and Levite of Christ, oh, holy Stephen I fly to thee, I invocate thee, I humbly and devoutly beseech thee. Bonaventure saith; Oh Virgin, be thou to me a strength against my sinnes that I go not to hell, encrease daily in me the flame of charity: warm my soul with thy love, pluck me forth of the kennell of vice; take away the filth of my sinne, thou which art whiter then snow, and together with thy Sonne grant my request, making me a Citizen of Heaven! Also in their Prayers, they offer up the merits of Saints to God, with the same form of words they do the me∣rits of Christ,Vis. White Orthod. pag. 55. 56. White Def. of the way pag. 98, 99. saying to Thomas Becket: Oh God, who hast granted us to cele∣berate the translation of blessed Thomas, we humbly beseech, that by his merits and Prayers we may be translated from vice to vertue, and from prison to thy Kingdom! And which is more monstrous, they use the same words to the Saints, they do to Christ, and apply to the creature, what belongs to the Lord alone. This they excuse by a silly shift, that though they use the same Titles and Formes of speech in the service of Saints, as they do to Christ, yet their meaning is not to attribute unto them the same holiness and merits that they ascribe to Christ, but an inferiour, and such as depends upon his holiness and merits. But it becomes the true Church of God,Bell. cont. 7. lib. 1. cap. 17. The deniall of true and reall honour to the Saints fully answerable to the Titles which they give them, must needs be as true and reall a mockery of them, as it would be to a Gentleman if his inferiour should thus salute him, God bless your honour, meaning your worship. 2 Tim. 1.13. not only to mean well, but to speak well; and such therein as will keep the Catholike faith, must also hold the Catholike form of words. Again, albeit they mean not such merits and dignity as belongs to Christ, yet they mean more then of right appertains to any meer creature. For there is no merit or dignity in any creature capable of these speeches, or of any other that are used in their Saint invocations: but the least that is meant, is more then belongs to any, but the Lord Jesus. 3. If we allow their words that immediate grammati∣call construction, that belongs to all words, they can import no less, than the same service that is given to Christ, both really and formally. Nor can many of their Prayers be excused with that more then unlikely interpretation: for they give such Titles to the holy Virgin, calling her the Mediatour of God, the repairer of the world, the end of our exile, the washing away of our sinne, the ladder of Heaven, the gate of Paradise, as will not admit that excuse. And by such like glosses, all Idolaters in the world may excuse themselves in the worship of their Idols; for when the Jew to his Calf, and the Gentile to his Image bended the knee, and called it God, they did not esteem it in that degree, that they did God himself, but onely gave it an in∣feriour honour, such as they thought an Image capable of; and when they were put to it, would answer as our Adversaries do, though the word or action were one, yet the honour was farre different: But we truly re∣ply unto them, that the inward estimation and opinion of the mind, de∣termining the said words, Prayers, and gestures, to such inferiour worship, as is mentioned, doth not remove the reason of Idolatry thereby from the said words and Prayers: because such as it is, it remains Divine worship attributed to a creature. And whereas they talk of the merits of Saints depending upon the merits of Christ, this will not stop the gap: for Christ hath by his obedience so merited or purchased all things for us, that he hath done it solely, immediately, and incommunicably; which are the three conditions of his merits: and therefore he that but subordinates the merits of a creature to the merits of Christ, robs him of his Office; in that his merits have no condition to elevate, or advance the merits of another, to the making of Intercession. Christ is not only robbed of his Office, by deny∣ing of his merits, or not using them, but also by using and applying them otherwise then we ought, and not rightly; which is done when we believe him to be the root of all merit, but other merits notwithstanding procure us favour, and reconciliation, and eternal life with God. Therefore accor∣ding to the Scriptures we affirm, that this Invocation of Saints [which
our Adversaries teach,] is unnecessary, neither pious, nor profitable, but impious, unprofitable, idolatrous, injurious to Christ Jesus. CHAP. X. Sundry Reasons to shew that Invocation of Saints, is neither necessary, pious, nor profitable, but idolatrous. Question: HOw may it be proved that it is not necessary for the Saints re∣maining on earth, to pray unto the Saints now conversant with Christ in Heaven? A. There is a two-fold necessity of Invocation: one in respect of duty, which the faithfull remaining alive are bound to perform to the Saints departed who live with Christ: the other in respect of end, for the obtaining whereof Invocation is ordained as a necessary meane. The Invocation of Saints is neces∣sary in neither respect. 1. Not in respect of duty,Vivorum invo¦catio humana est, quam inhu∣manum sit tollere, cum qui eam tollit, naturam ipsam tollat. De∣functorum ve∣rò ratio est dispar, quo∣rum invocatio sit religiosa, vel potius ir∣religiosa. Voss. Deut 12.8. 1 Cor. 4 6. Collen pag. 230. Antididag. pag. 43 Enchrid. cap. 5. ad. 8. Vis. Chemnit. axa con. Trid. Par 3. de invocat. Sanct. pag. 302. Nullum man∣datu requi∣ritur, quando ipsa, nos im∣pellit necessitas. ell. de beat. Sanct 1. l c. 20. Pigh contr. 13. Hos. confess. tom. 1. cap. 58. Tom. 2. in Tho disp. 4. sect. 1. pag. 434. Pigh. Ransh. cont. cap. 11. pag. 195. . De Sanct. beat cap. 19. sect. Item Exo. & cap. 20. sect. Atqe exhis In 1 Tim. 2. disp. 2. art. 7. sect. prim. because the Invocation of Saints is neither com∣manded of God, nor established by any threatning or promise, which yet were necessary, if in duty it were to be performed of the faithfull in this life. It is an unchangeable rule, that no man in Gods worship exceed the limits of his Commandements. But commandement or allowance concerning the Invocation of the dead can no where be shewed in all the Scripture. The censure of Collen saies, The Scripture no where teaches the Invocation of Saints, though notwith∣standing for all that, it be to be received and believed: and in another Book, the same Divines say, The Gospel indeed hath given no peculiar Commandement touching this matter, though it may evidently enough be gathered out of it: but with such gatherings we are well enough acquainted, when the same Divines in that place, are fain to gather it from Christs words upon the Cross, Eli, Eli, lammasabacthani. Eckius, though according to his fashon, he brags there are innumerable passages of the Old and New Testament making for it: yet confesses there is nothing expressly to be found in the Scripture that Saints must be invocated: and he addes, that this Invocation of Saints ought not to be ex∣pressly delivered either in the Old, or New Testament for two Reasons. Which he shewes at large, and they plainly declare he thought there is no Commande∣ment for it in all the Bible. Pighius plainly granteth so much: and he that shall peruse what stuffe Hosius bringeth for the proof of this point, may plain∣ly see that he was of the same mind. Suarez the Jesuite puts the question, Whether the Saints departed before Christ, did pray for others: and answers, that in particular they could not Whence it followed, that in that time Prayers could not regularly be made to souls in that state, and that any man (in that time) directly prayed to the Saints departed, that they would help them, or pray for them, we no where read. Bellarmine agrees with him, that the Saints in the time of the Old Testament were not Invocated, because they were not yet in Heaven. Salmeron another Jesuite saies, there is nothing touching this mat∣ter to be found in any of the Epistles. 2. It is not necessary that we pray unto them, of whom we can have no
certain faith or assurance,Nulla hic neces¦sitas fingi po∣test, nisi aut Deus non possit omnia tribuere: aut per Christum solum non possimus exaudiri. Bellar. de Sanct beat cap. 20. Hos. confess. cap. 58. that they hear our Prayers or be acquainted with our desires. But we can have no faith or assurance, that the Saints departed do hear our Prayers. Our Adversaries could never give themselves satisfaction in the point. They have raked together a number of waies whereby they think to ex∣pound themselves: but still they are uncertain. And their waies unsufficient to stablish their own conscience, as appears by the multiplying of their Questions. Whether the souls of those that are prayed unto be present, or not. If they be present, then whether it be really, so that they be in the place, where the party praying to them is, or virtually, only by, I know not what understanding the things uttered to them in our Prayers: Or whether they have the understanding of our Prayers from others, that give them knowledge. If this way, then who they be, that give them this knowledge? Whether the Angels that be about us, and know our actions, or God? If it be God that gives them this knowledge, then how he doth it? Whether immediately by himself, or by the ministry of others? If by others, then who they be? Whether Angels that are about us: or the spirits of holy and just men, that go from hence, and tell the Saints in Heaven what our Prayers are? If immediately by himself, then how? Whe∣ther directly, and formally, so that they see in him as in a glass, by reason of the beatificiall Vision, what is in the creature, and so consequently the Prayers of the creature? If they see them in God as in a glass, then whether it be from the beginning of their blessedness, so that instantly upon their glorification, and so soon as they come into Heaven, and see God, they see all things, that we do in him; or successively, one thing after another? But if God reveale the knowledg of our Prayers to his Saints, not formally in this manner, by force and vertue of his Vision, but only accedentally, then whether it be not by immediate revela∣tion, so farre forth as it please him, by his peculiar will, to let them see what we pray: as in this life he reveales sometime things that are secret, to his Prophets? It is incredible, and such as cannot be presented in any reasonable compass of words, how the Divines of the Church of Rome labour to shew these things; and to make every man his own opinion seem most probable and reasonable. But to no purpose: for albeit we acknowledge nothing to be impossible to God, yet it is not lawfull to believe any thing, as his will, which he hath not revealed. For we must judge of his will by the Scripture, which touching these speculations saies never a word: and being in manifest places appointed to pray in faith, how shall we pray to them, of whose hearing us we can have no faith? For these things thus taught by the School-men, relish well of mans wit and learning: but what is there in the Word of God to assure my conscience they be true. 3. This opinion of using the mediation of Angels and Saints departed, arose from the Gentiles,Philo Alex∣andrinus took this from Plato. Euseb. prep. Evang. lib. 12. cap. 1. cited by Hosius con∣fess. tom. 1. cap. 58. and specially the followers of Plato, whose Doctrine it was, that the spirits of men departed, and Angels imploy themselves in carrying our Prayers to God, and therefore it is a good way to invocate them. Eusebius reports the words of Plato: Certainly the souls of the dead departed have a certain power, and are carefull about the business of men. These things are true, but the reasons containing them are long: it is the best way therefore to credit that which others have reported concerning them, the reports being so manifold and ancient. The which words of Plato, cited sometime by a Papist, as Eusebius his own, and by Hosius as approved of Eusebius, to prove the invocation of the dead, shew, not only the affinity of the opinions of the Papists, and Gentiles, touching this point; but also the foun∣dation whereupon they both stand; the ancient tradition of their El∣ders. 4. In regard of men the invocation of Saints departed is not necessary: because neither the merits, nor the intervenient administration of the Saints is necessary
to impetrate and obtain the good things which are asked by the Prayers of the faithfull in this life. For otherwise the mediation and administration of Christ, either is not sufficient, or cannot be obtained unless the Saints departed inter∣cede for us: Both which are false; and which of the Saints first entred into Heaven, he needed not, nor used no former intercession of any Saint:And if it had been necessa∣ry for him that first en∣tred into Heaven, it will follow, that no mortal man did or ever shall en∣ter into Hea∣ven: because where no man for this cause could be first, there none of the Saints first entring into Heaven, there no man can be second or third. Bellar lib. 1. de beatit Sanct. cap 11. Pigh. ubi supra. Espenccus in 2 Tim. dig. 17. pag. 118. Quod ni∣mium est, sub acnsare posse videtur, cu∣jusmodi est quorundam sanctorum ve∣neratio, & picturarum crebritas. Sadol. lb. 4. Epist. 2. ad Eras. Consuit. pag. 154. Vicclius adnex. hom. Vicclij. Lipsia editis. a. 1538. com. pro intercess. Sanct. Utinam vulgus fidelium errore liberaretur, quo hactenus praefidere sanctorum plus fisus est, quam ei sui. Non cognoscitur Deus inter Sanctos. Calv. antidot. advers. artic. facult theolog. Sorb. art. 15. In Aug. de civ. lib. 8. cap. 27. pag 494 Some Papists hold it more fit, safe and better to pray to God in the Name of Christ, than to direct his Prayer to the Saints. Chem. exam. Par. 3. de Invo∣cat. Sanct. pag. 295. for there was none to make intercession for him. Since therefore it is not neces∣sary, that the Saints living here, should invocate their Brethren the Saints ruling with Christ in Heaven, the Papists should consider again and again, if they be moved with any good desire to keep a good conscience, whether it be not better to omit that invocation, then to perform it, although it might be disputed whether it were lawfull or no, of which hereafter. That we affirm for these Reasons. First, When whatsoever is not done in faith, that is, out of conscience certainly perswaded that what is performed is acceptable to God, is sinne; and therefore without sinne that may be omitted, of which we doubt never so little, whether it be lawfull, when it is found not to be necessary, it followes that invocation is rather to be omitted, then to be performed. Secondly, When the Papists themselves confess, that there is such difference betwixt the worship of latria and dulia, that he commits idolatry, who worshippeth him with that to whom this only is due; and it is hard for ignorant people and devo∣ted to the worship of Saints, to observe that difference alwaies without any er∣ror: it is danger, lest praying unto Saints they fall into idolatry, which reason also fighteth against invocation of Saints departed, although it be proved to be lawfull. The Papists themselves cannot deny but this invocation of Saints is much abused: let us hear the confession of some of them. Espenceus a Sorbonist: Are they well and godly brought up, which being children almost a hundred years old, that is to say, old and ancient Christians, do no less attribute to the Saints, and trust in them, than to God himself, and think God himself harder to be pleased, and intreated than they. Would God I lied, and there were no such. George Cassander: This false and pernicious opinion is too well known to have prevailed, among the vulgar, while wicked men, persevering in their naughtiness, are perswaded that only by the intercession of the Saints, whom they have chose to be their Patrones, and worship with cold and prophane ceremonies, they have pardon, and grace prepared them with God: which pernicious opinion hath been confirmed in them, as much as was possible, with lying Miracles. And there is another error, that men, not evil of themselves, have chosen certain Saints, to be their Patrones and Keepers, and put confi∣dence in their merits and intercession, more than in the merit of Christ: so far that the only Office of Christs intercession being obscured, they have substitu∣ted in his place the Saints, and specially the Virgin his Mother. Lodovicus Vive: There are many Christians, which most an end sinne in a good matter, when they worship Saints both men and women, no otherwise then they worship God: and I cannot see, in many, that there is any difference between the o∣pinion they have of the Saints, and that which the Gentiles had of their Gods. Q How may it be proved that the Invocation of Saints is neither pious nor profitable? A. This is proved first generally and then specially, in the speciall respects according to which the Papists say, they are to be prayed unto. Generally that it is not godly, we prove thus. No action of it self, and properly can come
in the name of piety or godliness, but what is prescribed of God, by whose word and institution every action is sanctified, which otherwise would be com∣mon. But it is certain, that the Invocation of Saints is not prescribed of God: therefore it cannot be called godly. Indeed an action may be called godly by metalepsis, because it is undertaken for the performing of a godly action: But that hath not place here. That it is not profitable, is demonstrated by the same Argument:Lev. 10.1. Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15 9. because all religious worship not prescribed of God, is unprofi∣table, as the Lord himself hath spoken. But the Invocation of Saints departed is religious worship, as the Papists teach. Specially we prove it according to the respects with which the Saints are clothed of the Papists when they pray unto them. 1. The Saints cannot profitably be invocated, as the givers of good things. Because the Saints are not appointed of God dispensors of good things, heaven∣ly or earthly.De voluntate corum ex vo∣catione, quae illis obtigat, judicium fieri debet. Voss. De vocatione autem ex man∣dato & pro∣missione invi∣tandus. Mat. 28.19. Psal. 73.25. Psal. 18.2, 3. Gen. 28.20. hem. in Ap. 2, 26. Bell. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 18. Apoc. 2.26. Apoc. 3.21. 2 Pet. 1.11. Apoc. 1.6. Pertinent ea verba, tum ad gloriam & majestatem sanctorum in coelis, tum adjudiciariam potestatem sed utrinque habi∣turi sunt sancti in Christo, communione personae non officij, procu∣rationis seu administrationis illius. Vossi. Psal. 49.14. Quia Christus est caput ec∣clesiae, etiam hoc ad mem∣bra pertinet. Sancti igitur similium Christo dominabuntur, reprobis in altera vita. Moll. in Psal. 49. Apoc. 12.5. & 19.15. Psal. 2.9. Vis. Drus. Praef. in Apoc. 2.26. Chem. ubi supra. Rainold. Idol. Rom. lib. 1. cap. 6. sect. 7, 8. & lib. 1. cap. 5. sect. 22, 28. & lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 4, 5. For this Office is given to Christ, to whom the Angels are sub∣jected as servants in that administration. All power (saith Chrst) is given to me in Heaven and Earth. David saith, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Thou art my rock, my shield, the lifter up of my head. The Papists make the Saints departed to be the Governours and Patrones of men and Countries, and to have the regiment of the faithfull committed to them. This they would prove by that of the Revelation, And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations. Again, To him that overcometh, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. But these places by all their wresting cannot be brought to speak for them. For 1. When shall the Saints have this rule, but in the end of the world, when they shall sit on the right hand of God, as Christ doth? And therefore it is said, I will give him power to rule, and he shall rule, even then when there shall be no use of Prayer: which appeareth by that which he promiseth also, the morning starre, which is full enjoying of Christ himself. We deny not but this rule is begun after death: yet so, that it must be remembred, that it is in part entred upon in this life, according to their mea∣sure of Victory against the Kingdom of Satan, and their fellowship in the King∣dom of Christ: whereupon we are taught, that all the godly are Kings whiles they are upon earth. If then we must make our Prayers to them that are de∣parted, because they have their fellowship in the Kingdom and Regiment of Christ, it will follow, that they having this fellowship in this life are to be pray∣ed unto and worshiped in this life. 2. Let it be observed, over whom this rule here spoken of, is given; namely, not to one faithfull man over another, but to the faithfull over the wicked, whom the faithfull shall break with a rod of iron: so that if there be any warrant for Prayer unto the departed Saints, it is for the Infidels, not for the faithfull. And their reward for their Prayer is no other, but to have their heads broken with a barr of iron: a reward very meet for such as will enlarge their marriage Bed (which they ought to keep undefiled to our Saviour Christ alone) unto every Saint. 3 Let it be noted how farre this rule stretcheth, even to all the Coasts of the Earth, wheresoever are any wicked ones, not to the Regiment of one Country or Province alone: which not only overthrowes the partition of Countries to severall Saints, (as every Nation in popery hath made choice of their Countrey-God and Patron) but also changeth the nature of Saints, into the nature of the most High, as those that hear in all places. 4. Seeing this is a promise made to every one of Gods Saints, who are many hundred thousands, by this reason every one of them should have a Regi∣ment in the Church of God, which were infinite. Lastly, Christ promiseth
that they shall rule with a rod of iron, as himself hath received:The blessed Saints do not partake with Christ, as his Ministers, Vice-gerents, or Coadjutors in the actuall rule and government of this infe∣riour world, but they only partake with him in his government as friends of the Bride∣groom by re∣joycing, con∣sening, reap∣ing increase of glory by his actuall government. Mat. 19.28. & 25.34. Rom. 8.17. Eph. 2.6. 1 Cor. 6.3. 2 Tim. 2.12. Eph. 2.6. Apoc. 3.21. Apoc. 14.13. See Jun. ani. in Bell. cont. 7. lib. 1. cap. 13. not. 64, 65. Mat. 19.28. Luk. 22.30. 1 Cor. 6.3. Coster. Ench. cap. 22. paragr. Quan∣do Bellar. lib. 1. cap. 18. Mat. 24 47. Luk. 12.45. Luk 22.29, 30. Anselme inter∣prets it of eternall re∣ward: Eu∣thynius, Of great ho∣nour. Theophylact, Perfectionem assequetur, Regnum inquam caelorum. Conregnabit cum Christo. Eman. Sa. in Mat. 24. in edit. pr. Sed. in Moguntania an. 1610. sunt omissa. Maldonat. in Mat. 25. Ubi hoc interpretatur. Luk 19.17. Hilar. in Mat. 25 vers. 31. Stella in Luk. 12. cont. not. an. 73. Luk. 16.9. Rhem. annot. in Luk. 16.9. will they in∣ferre hereupon, that the Saints have the like Kingdom, and power and glory with Christ? this were very absurd to grant, and against Christ plasphemous. The power then that our Saviour promiseth to give to every Christian that over∣cometh, is the participation of his Kingly Inheritance: First, Spiritually to overcome the world by faith in this life, and after this life to be set in full posses∣sion of his Royal Inheritance: not commission to one Saint, to governe in one Countrey, and to another to rule over another Kingdom. I will give him power to rule over Nations; that is, I will make him King in my communion, and fellow Heir with me. The sovereign power of Christ is not actually given to the creature, but the creature being in Christ, hath the fruit and benefit of this power in his salvation. By this power the faithfull are inabled in their own per∣son to overcome all the enemies of their salvation: and by the same power Christ makes all his servants (being his members) partakers of his glory in Heaven, whereas the whole world besides is condemned in Hell. Touching the other place, when it is said, Him that overcometh will I make to sit with me in my Throne: By the word sitting (as Lyra noteth) may well be understood resting from labours, which the godly must undergo in this life to obtan Victo∣ry, and it is opposed to the word overcometh. But if any man will contend that the Kingly power of the Saints is signified in these words of Christ, it must be understood either of judiciary power, or of the glory and majesty of the Saints in Heaven, for that which here they are afflicted of others, and have conflicted with ignominy and disgrace. If its judiciary power, that is proper to Christ, and synecdochicially in Christ is spoken of the Saints. The Saints shall judge the world, not in giving sentence upon them; but as witnesses and approvers of Christ his sentence. And seeing the Scripture saith nothing of the judiciary power of the Saints, but what our Saviour and Paul pronounce, which hath re∣spect to the last Judgment, this must be referred to that day, if it be so under∣stood. If we understand it of glory, equality of honour cannot be meant, for that is impossible for any creature to receive: But such a participation of glory, as shall suffice for perfect happiness. For Christ as he is Mediatour, is inferiour to his Father, and in that regard is not advanced to equall glory with his Father, though he sit with him. So the members of Christ, being inferiour unto him, may sit with him in his Throne, though their glory be unequall. Christ ruleth in the Church by himself, in his members, in the world, by his Office and the procuration of his Office: the Church ruleth, the members of the Church rule in Christ by communication of person, not by communication of Office, Ad∣ministration and Operation. Further, they object that of our Saviour, Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods. Our Saviour there speaks after the manner of men, who trust them with the administration of more and greater business whom they have proved to be faithfull in lesser. He shall make him ruler, that is, every godly man in common, and each particular Christian in Christ by common domination: for they are called common Lords equivocally in that one Lord univocally so called, Jesus Christ, our Head and Saviour. The goods, are of Inheritance; the Heirs are those who are called good Servants: the goods are one thing, the Good another, whose the goods are, and upon whose Family God bestoweth his goods. Moreover, they urge that of our Saviour. Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye need, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. See, the Saints may receive their friends and benefactors into their eternall Mansions. The Prayers of the poor are indeed procured by giving Almes, if they be thankfull
persons upon whom it is bestowed, but no patronage in Heaven. The Prophet David, no doubt, was a good Almes-man, yet he acknowledgeth no Patrones in Heaven,Psal. 73.25. The poor are said to receive their bene∣factors into Heaven, be∣cause they are the object of charity and be∣neficency, for which Christ receiveth mer∣cifull persons into Heaven. Maldonat. in Luk. 16.9. Jansen. har. cap. 95. Mat. 22.30. Luk. 20.36. Quod de nostri atque Angelo∣rum similitudine dicitur post hanc vitam, id virtutum, non officij ratione intelligi debet. Nosse autem quae sin∣gulatim homi∣nes aut patian∣tur, aut agant, non perti net ad officium beatarum ani∣marum, quae a laboribus suis requiescunt, inqu solo Deo laudando occu∣pantur. Maldonat. in Mat 22.30. Jansen. bar. cap. 117. but God the Lord. Neither doth the Text say, the poor shall be∣come Patrones, but they may receive you into the everlasting Tabernacles; which is to be understood parabolically. Your Almes shall be a testimony of your charity and liberality, which shall be everlastingly rewarded proceeding from true and lively faith. Neither is it possible to gather a conclusion out of this place in due form of syllogisme, that the Saints departed may receive their friends and benefactors into their heavenly Mansions, otherwise then by their testimony, if in the Judgment of God, they shall be found faithfull. Finally, Almes given to an hypocrite, in the Name of Christ, of true faith and charity, is acceptable to God, as given to a holy person, and shall be as well rewarded: Seeing God hath not made us Judges of mens sincerity, who have need, but commanded us to shew neighbourhood to all that be in necessity, especially to those that be of the houshould of God, as farre as we can discern them. Lastly, It is objected, that the Angels are appointed to be our Keepers. But the Saints departed are equall to the Angels. First, If it be granted that they are equall in glory, it followeth not that they have the same commission, or be appointed to the same work They want that Commandement of God and ordinary Vocation that the Angels have to minister unto us. For of them it is written, not of the Saints, Are they not all ministring Spirits sent forth for the good of them that believe? Secondly, In the places cited to prove the equality of Angels and Saints departed, not their present state, as they be severed from their bodies, but their future con∣dition, what they shall be after the resurrection, when being conjoyned with their bodies they shall not for all that be joyned in marriage, is described: for without this consideration of resuming their bodies, our Saviour Christs answer to the Sadducees cleaveth not together. Lastly, Our Christs will was not to de∣clare, that the estate of the Angels and godly men shall be in every point and absolutely equall: but as to that and such like points as were in question. We conclude therefore that the Saints departed are neither dispensers of good things, not the deputed servants of Christ to be imployed in this administration. But if the Saints did give to Christ by the Commandement of God, their subordi∣nate labour, as the Angels do, yet should they not be prayed unto; For to this, full power of dispensing is required, which may distribute at pleasure; But the Angels do perform or exhibite to Christ only ministeriall or instrumentall labour: for which it is not lawfull to invocate them as the givers of good things. But the Saints cannot ministerially and instrumentally perform service to Christ in this kind like the Angels, unless we shall say, that they ascend or defend as the Angels do. When therefore they have neither authority nor power to give good things, it followes that they cannot be invocated as the givers of good things, either godly or profitably. The Scripture teacheth us, that the Heavens must contain the humanity of Christ, untill his coming to Judgment, that the Saints are at rest under the Altar,Act. 3.21. Apoc. 14.13. & 6 9. Dec. par. 2. cap. 13. q. 2. cap. 29. Rhem. annot. in Mat. 17.3. & Mar. 9.1. in the peace of Christ, there expecting and waiting the coming of Christ to Judgment. The Jesuits teach, that the Saints departed may in person be present at the affairs of the living: because Moses and Elias personally appeared, and were present with Christ. The Angels both for the generall government under God, and for the speciall service they are to give to the Elect of God, have been and shall be alwaies conversant amongst men: but the Saints having received no such charge, cannot be so thought: unless the like causes and effects of appearance be alleged which be here. Cause there is not: our Saviour Christs both Person and Office being sufficiently wit∣nessed. Effects also there be not: for neither are the Saints seen or heard speaking as they were. Therefore untill speciall causes be proved, the general rule must stand,2 Sam. 12.23. that we shall go to them that are dead, but they shall not come to
us. This appearance of Moses and Elias was extraordinary, as was the passing of the Children of Israel through the red Sea, and the appearing of Christ to the Apostle Paul. But the Saints are not fettered, that they might be kept in prison against the Day of Judgment, as Hierome sheweth against Vigilantius.Bell de beat. Sanct lib. 1. cap. 18. Rhem. annot. in ap. 6.9. See what opinion these men have of Heaven, making a prison of it! By this Doctrine it must needs follow, that when the Children of God in the latter Day shall be put in full possession of the whole Inheritance of the Kingdom of Hea∣ven, there to remain for evermore; that they shall be in Heaven but as in a prison, and that they are there as it were in fetters and irons, because they may not come down into the earth. And why may it not as well be said, that the Saints in Heaven are therefore in prison, because they cannot go down to Hell? seeing all hinderance that staieth them from any place, where, not they desire, but the Jesuites would have them, is a prison? Yet our Saviour saith, that there is such an infinite gulf between those in Heaven and them in Hell,Luk. 16.26. that the one cannot come unto the other. And if they like this, why should they not in a mislike of Heaven, fall in love, as long ago with the waies which lead to Hell, so now with Hell it self also. As for Vigilantius, he said,Apud Hierom. advers. Vigil. cap. 2. That the souls of the Apostles and Martyrs, were setled either in Abrahams bosome, or in a place of rest, or under the Altar of God: whence Hierome would inferre, that he held the Martyrs to be fettered in a place or prison till the Day of Judgment,De eccles. triumph. lib. 1. cap. 1. and not to be with the Lord, with the Lamb: And Bellarmine gathers thence that Vigilan∣tius affirmeth, That the Saints are not yet blessed. Both collections perverse enough. What can be more injurious, then to inferre, that he taught, the Mar∣tyrs were not in Heaven,Luk. 16.22. Mat. 8.11. 2 Cor. 5.8. Apoc. 6.11. Apoc. 7.9. because he had written that they were in Abrahams bosome, in a place of rest? From which the contrary may be concluded, be∣cause the bosome of Abraham is in Heaven, where they that be, be with Christ; and to them that rest under the Altar, white stoles are given, with which they stood clothed before the Throne, and in the sight of the Lamb. But let us see, what Hierome doth answer. First, Wilt thou prescribe Lawes to God? No verily, but Gods Law prescribeth a place of rest unto the souls of the departed, and not I, might Vigilantius answer. Secondly, Doest thou fetter the Apostles? How unworthy is this question of Hieromes Learning? as though the Apostles were fettered, when they be limited by God to a place of rest, or could be thought to be kept in prison, when they are said to remain in Heaven. And Bellarmines inference is most unjust,Apud Hier. advers. Vigil. cap. 2. Apoc. 14.4. when Vigilantius in the same place calleth the Martyrs not only blessed, but most blessed. But Vigilantius denyed that the Saints could be every where present: whence Hierome gathereth that he de¦nyed they were with the Lamb, for of them it is written, They follow the Lamb wheresoever he goeth; and the Lamb is every where. That which is said of them that follow the Lamb, is not necessary to be understood of the souls in Heaven, but of them that imitate him on the earth: at least it must be understood of all the Elect, whereof many are in the Church upon earth.Mat. 8.19. Joh. 8.4, 27. Joh. 13.36. & 21.29. De sanct. Virg. cap. 27. 1 et. 2.21. Joh. 1.3. Mat. 8.6. Act .11. Aug. epist. 57. ad Dard. Jer 2.24 Psal. 139 8. Luk. 1.26. The godly are described to have followed the Lamb in holiness of life, whithersoever he should go: To have followed him, not as the Scribe falsly promised that he would follow him so, but as sheepe are wont to follow their Shepherd, whose voice they hear, and obey him, leading even to death: To have followed him, as Augustine explains it. What is it to follow him, but to imitate? because Christ hath suffered for us, leaving us an example that we might follow his steps: Finally, to have followed him, (which Augustine addeth) not as he is the Sonne of God, by whom all things are made: but as the Son of man, who hath left us an example which we ought to imitate. And the Lamb is every where in the majesty of glory, not as the Son of man, but as the Sonne of God: Therefore he is there also, whether the Saints received into Heaven cannot come. So that this Text which is alleged for the presence of the Saints departed, at their Tombes or other places, if it
be understood of their following Christ in glory, it so crusheth this opinion of the out-courses of the Saints into the earth, as nothing can do more. For seeing the Heavens must contain our Saviour Christ untill the day of restoring all things;Act. 3.2. Many of the Fathers deny that the souls of the dead do appear to the living at any time. Maldon. in Luk. 16.27, 28. it must needs follow, that the Saints (to enjoy a perpetuall presence of our Saviour Christ) must not pass the pale of the Heavens, which may well hold them, seeing (according to his humanity) they hold the Sonne of God. Besides, this absurdity followeth of it, that if the soules of the Saints be present at their Sepulchres, because they follow the Lamb, the Lamb also Christ in his humanity, is present at the Sepulchres of the Martyrs. Finally, they borrow a reason from the celerity or agility of Devils, to prove that the souls of Martyrs, pass to and fro in the world, as the Devils do: which is very insufficient. For the Devils, not only by property of their nature, but also by Gods sufferance, have such passage in the world, but the Saints, by God are assigned to rest, in the place of heavenly joy, untill the Day of Judgment. 2. They cannot godly and profitably be invocated, as they who by their merits do obtain audience of God:Psal. 16.2. because the Saints could merit nothing neither for themselves nor others. For they had need to say with David, My goodness extendeth not to thee.Luk. 17.10. Psal. 32 6. Psal. 143 2. And when they have done all, to profess not only in hu∣mility but in truth, that they are unprofitable servants; and also to pray God for remission of sinnes unfeignedly, that he would not enter into Judgment with his servants. Our Adversaries themselves confess that there is no propor∣tion between the good works of the Saints, and the recompense of reward. There∣fore it cannot godlily be alleged, which is falsly attributed to the Saints, nor profi∣tably be bestowed upon others, which was not sufficient for the Saints themselves. 3. They cannot holily and profitably be invocated, that they as our friends would joyn their Prayers with ours,Isa. 63.16. 1 Reg 8.36. 2 Reg. 22.20. Gregor. Dial. 4. cap. 33. Sterlinear. gloss. in Isa. 63 Hugo de Sanct. vict. erudit. Theolog. de Sacram fid. lib. 2. part. 16. cap. 11. Bell. de sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 20. sect. Ad sec. Vident sancti essentiam non scientia ejus Jun. Thes. theol. 42. sect. 10. Mat. 24.36. Mar. 13.32. Mat. 18.10. Occam. dist. 1. par. 2. cap. 3. Magist. lib. 2. dist. 11. See D. Feild. of the Ch. lib. 3. cap. 20. Durand. in Sent. lib. 4. dist. 45. q. 4. Bell. de san. beat. lib. 1. cap. 20. sect. Atque ex hic. or by their Prayers make intercession unto God for us: because the Saints in Heaven are ignorant of our severall neces∣sities, and the Prayers of the faithfull living on earth. What they bring of the Glass of the Trinity, wherein the Saints behold our Prayers, and what pertaineth to them, is a most fond device, which hath no ground at all in holy Scriptures. For God being simple and unchangeable, certainly he must be a most simple clear Glass, ever the same. Which if he be, why do they not see all things alwaies? Why not unchangeably, as well as those that pertain unto them? But that they should see all things in him is most false, and repugnant to the Scriptures, For of that day and hour (saith Christ, speaking of the Day of Judgment) knoweth no man, no not the Angels, which nevertheless do be∣hold the face of the Father which is in Heaven. Again, admit it were so, as they feign it to be, then this their Glass hath a naturall or a voluntary repre∣sentation: not naturall, for then the Saints should see all things at once, past, present or to come: not voluntary, for then so much only is seen of the Saints, as God will have to be known: But what assurance can we have, that God will shew unto them our Petitions. Moreover, the Papists do not after this manner call upon Saints: for by this reckoning they should thus say; Cause O God, that this or that Saint may know those things, which I require of him; and that he may be with me, and grant me that which I desire. But they deal far oherwise; O holy Peter (say they) O holy Paul, pray for me, bring this or that thing to pass for me. What they speak of Divine revelation is of no less uncertainty: for where hath the Lord acquainted us with his pleasure in this point? When did he make promise to reveale the Prayers of the faithfull living, to the Saints departedThe manifold wisdom of God, is revealed to the Angels by the Church, (1 Pet. 1.12. Eph. 3.10.) not by Vision of Divine essence.? And if he have not made such a promise, what ground can we have to believe it? In matters of this nature is it not
gross presumption to determine any thing upon our own heads? God did re∣veal some things to his servants the Prophets at his pleasure, when he knew it to be necessary: but thence it doth not follow that he will reveal our Prayers to the Saints departed. Necessity that they should be made known unto them, there is not any: for God never commanded us to pray unto them, never pro∣mised to enform them of our desires. Again, What a ridiculous, preposterous, superfluous order is this, that first we pray to the Saints departed, then God re∣vealeth to them our Petitions, and then they sollicit God in our behalf, from whom they know our Prayers. Our Saviour Christ, who best knew the mind of our heavenly Father, hath enformed us of another order:Joh. 16.26, 27. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it. At that day ye shall ask in my Name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you. For the Father himself loveth you. That the dead should understand our Prayers by the expli∣cation of Angels, or report of the souls lately departed, is disliked by the Je∣suites themselves, and of the same vanity with the rest; for the Scripture speaks not one word of any such notice, without which it is religion to us in matters of this moment to receive any thing as true, or to undertake any thing to be done as godly and profitable. And the Angels themselves know not the secrets of the heart. (But of this more hereafter.) The Jesuite answers two things.Bell. de Sanct. beatit. lib. 1. cap. 20. First, That we may pray unto the Saints departed, though they hear not our supplications: for some other may supply their Office; as he doth not in vain make supplication to the King, who knoweth that the King will not read his supplication, but some other in the Court, and that nevertheless he shall obtain his Petition, as if the King had read the supplication This is a device, which shall be proved in the great year of Plato. The reason of the simile following is altogether unlike. Doth not God and Christ our King, the searcher of the heart, read our supplications?Heb. 4.13. Mat. 6.28. in whose sight there is no creature which is not manifest, and who knoweth what things we stand in need of before we ask of him. Is this a matter of order, that he who knoweth not, should be called upon, and another should perform his Office, and supply his room in hearing, praying, intreating and granting his desire? Who seeth not what a miserable excuse this is? If the Saints be ready to preferre our suits when they be not particularly called upon, but some of their fellows who do not hear, will they not do it much more when we pray unto the Father in the Name of Christ? We desire to be certified from the Jesuite, how he can prove that any of the Saints depar∣ted do know our thoughts, or hear our Prayers?Gregor. Arin. minens. lib. 2. dist. 9, 10. q 1. Ex. 2 Par. See D. Feilà of the Ch. lib. 3. cap. 20. Aug. de cura pro mortuis ger. cap. 15. Dec. 2. par. cap. 13 q. 2. sect. Fatendum. Or how we might be assured in conscience, that if one hear not, another may, who will present our Prayers before God, and procure them acceptance? His second answer is, That it is certain they hear our Prayers, though the manner be uncertain: because they be our Patrones and take care of us. But it is most certain they do not know our thoughts, they be not our Patrones, nor do they take care of us in parti∣cular, but only of the Church in common, as hath been proved already. How should we think, that the Saints departed, being absent from us, should hear at once the Prayers of the faithfull in all parts of the world, when the Scripture doth teach us no such matter? They may pray for the Church in general, but they hear not our sighes, they see not the wants wherewith we are oppressed in particular, they know not our hearts.Rom 15 30. Eph 6.18, 19. 1 Thes 5.25. 2 Thes. 3.1. Heb. 13.18. Jam. 5.16. Wherefore the Apostle Paul desireth the Prayers of the Romanes, Ephesians, Colossians, Thessalonians, and Hebrws unto God for him: but he never prayeth that Mary would make intercession for him. James admonisheth the faithfull Jews, that they would pray one for another; that they should crave the aid or Prayers of Mary, he never warneth them. And surely we are rather to desire, that we might be holpen with the Prayers of the faithfull living, than of the dead, or the Apostles offended in their Epistles.
Q. How may it be proved that Invocation of Saints departed is Idola∣trous? A. 1. To whom we pray, in them we believe. But it is idolatry to believe in the Saints departed.Rom. 10.14. For the Scripture teacheth that confidence is a Divine worship, which cannot be given to any creature. This is acknowledged by the Papists them∣selves,Jer. 17.7. Eucherius lug. de Symbol. Ruffin. in Symb. Aug. ser. 131. de Tempor. Catechism. Rom. part. 1. cap. 10. q. 19. Concil. Nic. 2 Act. 2. Apertis verbis testamur nos duntaxat in unum Deum verum, lairiam hoc est, cultum & fidem re∣ferre & repo∣nere. Fox. act & Mon. examin. of Tho. Hawkes. Martyr. pag. 1442. Bellar. de Christ. lib. 1. cap. 5. sect. 2. Rhem annot. in Rom. 10.14. Bell. de San. beat. lib. 1. cap. 20. Hosius confess. cap. 58. As if we should say, whom we worship with Latria as God, he is the true God: he shoud be derided: so is this of Bellarmine, because there is no religious invocation, but of God. Jam. 1.6. who teach that we believe the Church, but not in the Church; that God the Creatour might be distinguished from things created. Tharasius President of the second Councell of Nice saith thus, We do plainly testifie, that we repose and referre our faith and trust only unto God. Bonner, a great Patron of Popery in his time, and a bitter persecutor of the Saints, saith thus; To trust to any (Saint departed) we bid you not, but to call upon them and pray to them, we bid you. And by this Argument Bellarmine proves that Christ is God, because the Scripture saith, Blessed are they that trust in him, and we are taught every where to put confidence in the true God alone. All this not∣withstanding, the Jesuites tell us, that it is lawfull to trust in the Saints; But how should we give credit to them, when they dissent not only from the Scrip∣tures, but from themselves, pulling down what they had built before? Bellar∣mine seeks another device to delude this Argument; Unto whom we pray as God [saith he] in them we must believe. But we pray not to the Saints departed, as unto God. This poor shift is evidently confuted by his fellows, who confess that we must believe in the Saints as we pray unto them, and so make that sentence of the Apostle general; And good reason, for invocation is from faith as the effect from the cause: and therefore we cannot religiously pray unto them, in whom we do not believe. Again, if one who is absent from us, and who by nature cannot be present at our matters or know our affairs, be called upon as present, he is invocated as God. But of this more in the third Reason. Rom. 10.14. Jer. 10.25. Joel 2.32. Act. 9.14. 1 Cor. 1.2. Rom. 8.26. 1 Sam. 1.15. Psal. 25.1. Psal. 62.8. & 91.14. & 10.17. Mat. 6.4. 1 King. 8.39. Psal. 50.15. Joh. 14.14. & 16.26. Joel 2.32.2. Invocation is a religious action, and proper service of God; such a prin∣cipall part of his service, that it is usually put for the whole, distinguished by a Greek and Hebrew Name, never applied in Scripture to any creature: the life and force of it, is, the inward cry, and secret request of the heart, which no creature immediately discernes, but God alone. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. As God only doth de∣liver out of trouble, and is to be glorified for our deliverance: so is he only in Jesus Christ to be invocated in the time of trouble. The Precepts, Promises and Threatings in Scripture concerning Prayer, do all shew that invocation is a Divine worship proper to the Lord in Jesus Christ. It is the express Comman∣dement of God, that we should call upon him alone in the Name of Jesus Christ our only Mediatour: and also there is a manifest Promise, that praying after that manner, we shall alwaies be heard of God, our most bountifull Fa∣ther. We shall never find in the Old or New Testament, that any Saint or faithfull man, did ever pray unto any other, save the Lord alone, and that in the mediation of Jesus Christ: but the examples of them that have called upon the Lord, and been heard in mercy, are almost infinite. 3. All religious worship and act supernaturall, is either Divine by certain in∣stitution and revelation, or idolatrous and Diabolicall. But the invocation of Saints departed is Divine worship, not instituted of God. For worship pro∣ceeding out of the apprehension of that excellency of that is worshipped, is of two sorts or kinds: for either it is limited to certain times, places, and things, when, where, and wherein, the excellency of that we worship, presents it self
unto us, and requireth our acknowledgment of it; as is the worship of Kings, Princes, Prelates and Prophets in their Kingdoms, Courts, Churches, and Schooles, ruling, guiding, teaching and instructing; or else it is spiritual, which in all places, at all times, and in all things causeth him that worshipeth to bow himself before that, he worshipeth, and of whom he craveth aid; thereby to testifie his acknowledgment of the excellency of it, which he findeth in every place, time and thing, to present it self unto him. Humane invocation is when one present doth crave the aid of one present or as present, by means agreeable to nature: as when we desire the Saints present with us to pray for us, or by Messenger and Letter acquaint them absent with our infirmities. Religious invo∣cation is that which is limited by no circumstances of time, place or thing, be∣cause that which is called upon, is presupposed to hear in all places, to under∣stand our sighes, to be acquainted with our wants, to be willing and able to succour us in all necessities. And in this sort the Romanists invocate the Saints in Heaven: for they suppose, that they know all things that concern us, that they watch over us with a carefull and vigilant eye, that they carry us in their hads, and by their mediation procure our good from God the Fountain of all good; and therefore they worship them with spiritual worship. But this reli∣gious worship is no where instituted of God by Precept or Promise. Nay,Rom. 1.25. Praeter creato∣torem ut. 1 Cor. 3.11. Gl. 1.9. Origu cont. Cels lib. 7. Col. 2.18. Hieron. ad Vigilant. Ep. 2. Theodoret. in Epist. ad Coloss. Epiphan. con∣tra collyrid. the worshiping of Angels is expresly condemned in the Word of Truth, and sun∣dry Testimonies of Antiquity consenting with it. The popish distinction of Latria and Dulia, doth not answer these Authorities and Testimonies of Anti∣quity: for those erring miscreants mentioned by Paul, the Councell of Laodicea, Theodoret, Epiphanius and others, did not think the Angels to be God, or equall to the most High, neither did they worship them in such sort, as to ascribe infinite greatness unto them, which the Papists mean by their La∣tria: but they gave spiritual worship and adoration unto them, in an inferiour and lower degree, such as the Papists call Dulia: because they thought them to mediate between God and mortal men in very high and excellent sort. Either then the Fathers condemned these without cause for worshiping creatures, or they meant to restrain more then that adoration, which ascribeth infinite greatness to him that is adored; which undoubtedly they did, ever the least and lowest degree of spiritual worship, or worship in spirit and truth.Bellar. de beat. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 20. Rhem. in Col. 2.18. An. 60. n. 20. Theodorets words are plain, that Hereticks, not Catholikes, as Bellarmine would pervert his words, had Oratories de∣dicated to St Michael. Bell. ubi supra. Rhem. ibid. But Symon. Magnus taught no such Doctrine. Baron tom. 1. ad an. 60. par. 17. Bellarmine and divers others labour to give a favourable construction of Theodorets words, and to salve the matter: but they are so plain and direct, that Baronius takes him up for them in this sort: You may see (for it must necessarily be spoken) Theo∣doret by his leave, hath nothing happily attained the sense of Pauls words, when in his Commentaries upon this Epistle he saies, these things were written by Paul, because Hereticks then came in, who boasted that Angels should be worshiped For who these Hereticks were, let him say himself; and being once fallen into an errour, he stumbled presently upon a worse, that he saies the Canon of the Laodicean Councell is to be understood of such Hereticks, as taught the worship of Angels, and erected an Oratory to Michael the Archangel: too inconsiderately attributing that to Hereticks, which of ancient time was done by Catholikes. But they seek to shift off this, Argu∣ment, saying, The Apostle noteth the wicked Doctrine of Symon Magus, who taught Angels to be our Mediatours, and not Christ Which answer is insufficient and too much restrained; First, For that both the Doctors who taught this errour, and the Scholars who were warned not to learn it, were all covered with the name and calling of Christians, and were either of the Church, or in some account members of the Church of Christ. Now that it standeth with the cunning and method of the Devill, at the first brunt to set upon the Churches of Christ, with this point of worshiping Angels with abandoning of Christ, will hardly be admitted of such as have been acquainted with his sleight, who
first useth to thrust in his tayl, that after he may draw in his head, and whole body. Secondly, For that the Apostle sheweth, that this errour was bred by a shew and pretence of humility, or of their own unworthiness, which is the very cloak of our Adversaries to hide their Idolatry. In going therefore from the mediation and invocation of Christ, to the worship of Angels under pretence of humility, they must necessarily leave our Saviour Christ in an higher and more glorious estate than the Angels. Whereunto belongeth, that this errour of Angel-worship is taught of mans wisdom or fleshly un∣derstanding, which is to prepare way to the Sonne by the servants, that after by the Sonne they may have a more commodious access to the Fa∣ther. And this was the very opinion of Plato, who made two kinds of Mediatours between God and man, one of Angels, another of souls de∣parted. And again, that the souls departed have care of mans affairs upon earth: which false-named Philosophy and vain deceit, how fully it jumpeth with the popish errour of mediation, each man may well perceive. The difference only is, that Plato having no knowledge of Christ, could not speak of a third kind of Mediatour between God and men, as they do. Thirdly, The Reason which he draweth from the effects, confirmeth this: For therefore he would not have us go to Angels, but to Christ alone, because the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in him, they should look for their accomplishment and full perfection in him; thereby insinuating, that the Adversaries granted, that we have part in Christ, although not all: the beginning, albeit not the ending. And if the Angels had been ap∣pointed Mediatours, with an utter contempt of Christ, he would not have shewed what we have, or come unto by Christs mediation: but it behoved him rather to have proved, that Christ is a Mediatour, which he taketh for granted: disputing this only, whether he were sufficient for all assaies, without the Angels or no. Against this, that which they alledge, that these men hold not the head, is of no value: for by these words he doth not note their errour which professedly they held, but what at unawares followed of that which they held.Gal. 5.4. Even as he telleth the Galathians, that they were fallen from Christ, if they sought to be justified by Circumcisi∣on, howsoever they thought that they might hold both Christ and Cir∣cumcision too: for when Christ hath the Dignity of being the Head of the Church, in that he is the only Mediatour betwixt God and us: who∣soever casteth him from this Title of the only Mediatour, with the same cast throweth him down from his most high estate of being the Head of the Church: seeing it is the Vertue and Office of the Head, immediately to send from it, whatsoever belongeth to the sense and motion of the whole body. Further, how small warmth their cause gaineth by this rag of distinction, that Angels may be worshiped, so that Christ be not shut forth from being the chief Mediatour, it may appear by the Story of John,Apoc. 19.10. & 22.9. Catech. Trid. par. 3. q. 4. Baron. tom. 1. Anul. ad an. 60. Bell. de beat. lib. 1. cap. 20. who is reproved for worshiping the Angel, albeit it was farre from his meaning to shut out our Saviour Christ from his Office of Mediation. To that part of the Argument, that there is no Commandement nor Pro∣mise to establish the invocation of Saints, Bellarmine replieth, that no Commandement is required, when necessity it self doth enforce us: that no promise is wanting, when innumerable signes and wonders done at the in∣vocation of Saints do sufficiently testifie, that God heareth them who pray to the Angels or Saints departed. But what necessity doth enforce the in∣vocation of Saints departed this life? The Papists say it may be done con∣veniently, profitably, not that it must be done of necessity. Necessity en∣forceth us to call upon God in the Name of Christ, who knoweth, willeth, is able, doth promise to help, and will make it good: but the Saints in
Heaven, who neither hear, nor know, nor are able to help, no necessity constraineth to go unto them. As for the signes, which are said to be done at the invocation of Saints, they are false or deceitfull, or falsly related, or falsly attributed; or if true, at least extraordinarily wrought of God for speciall causes. And what doth this make to prove the ordinary invocation of Saints usuall amongst the Papists? Certain it is, that Miracles had an end in the Church, before the custome of praying to Saints, as it is now used in the Church of Rome, was ever heard of. Again, Miracles are no sure notes of the truth of Religion, nor certain marks to know the Church by, unless they be strengthened by some other means: not for that a Miracle known to be so, is insufficient to testify of the truth of God, but because it is not possible infalliby to know, that the things which seem unto us to be Mi∣racles, be so indeed; unless being assured of the truth of that, for confir∣mation whereof they are wrought, we thereby be perswaded that they are of God. For seeing Moses hath forewarned, that God would suffer seducers to work wonders for the tryal of his peoples faith: who besides him that gave them this liberty, could set them bounds, beyond which they should not pass? Who could precisely define the compass of that Circle, within which only Satan could exercise the power he had by that premission? Be it granted that Beelzebub himself with the help of all his subjects, can effect nothing exceeding the natural passive capacity of things created: he must be as well seen in the secrets of nature, as these subtile spirits are, that can precisely define in all particulars, what may be done by force of nature, what not. Our Saviour hath taught thus much at least,See Jacksons 3. Book of the Creed. sct. 3. cap. 10. & 11. par. 4, 5. Mar. 13.21, 22 Tom. 2. opus. tract. 1. de con∣cept Virg. cap. 5. de distinct. ve∣rarum & falsa∣rum visionum. Tom. 2. de opusc. tract 1. de concep. Virg. cap. 1. Such signes and wonders might be wrought by seducers, that such as would gaze on them, and trust their own skill in discerning their tricks, should hardly escape their snares. Let us briefly see what the popish Doctors teach concerning this point. Cajetan writing to Pope Leo about the controversie of Maries conception, wisheth him not to suffer his judgment to be swaied, by shew of Miracles, and giveth many good reasons of the uncertainty, of finding out the truth by that means. Gerson noteth, that in this old age of the world, in this last hour, and time so near Antichrist his revelation, it is not to be marvelled at, if the world like a doating old man, be abused by many illusions, and fantasies most like to dreames. Yea, the Cardinall before mentioned proceedeth so farre, that he pronounceth, it cannot be certainly known, that those Miracles are true Miracles, which the Church admitteth, and approveth, in the canonizing of Saints, seeing the truth of them dependeth on mens report, that may deceive, and be deceived. But the Jesuite at last hath found Commandement, Promise and Example of Saint-invocation in the last of Job:Job 42.8. My servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept. In the Old Testament [as he confesseth before] it was not lawfull to invocate the dead, because they knew not our wants, un∣derstood not our Prayers: By what art then can he bring it about, that it was both commanded of God, and practised of the faithfull that lived before the ascension of Christ into Heaven? How shall it appear that Job was departed this life? the contrary is most clear. How will he be able to prove, that it is all one to invocate the Saints absent in Heaven, and to request them being present with us on earth to pray for us? But saith he, they are alive and present in respect of hearing our Prayers. They live with God, as Christ teacheth, but they cannot hear our Prayers, either by nature, or ordinarily by ordinary vocation. But what God doth extraordinarily, he knoweth. That the Angels do be∣hold our affairs, not seeing them from Heaven, but being sent of the Lord from Heaven, and present by their Vocation, no man denieth: that they know our thoughts, or offer up our Prayers, no man can prove. That the Saints de∣parted are sent from Heaven, do hear our Prayers, or know our state in
particular ordinarily, is that which never was, nor shall be proved by any good reason or authority. 4. To offer sacrifice unto any other but unto the true God, is abominable idolatry, He that sacrificeth unto any God save unto the Lord onely, he shall be ut∣terly destroyed.Ex. 22.20. Jud. 13.16. Bell. de beat. sanct. lib. 1. c. 1. Mal. 1.11. Psal. 141 2. Heb. 13 15. Psal. 50.14. Deut. 17.2, 3. Psal. 44.20. Ephes. 4.18. Heb 13.16. Prov. 19.17. Caiv. de resor. Eccles. vera. The prayrs we make to Saints have greater affinity with the prayers which we make to God, then with our re∣quest to living men; our pray∣ers to them is a service, not mu∣tual, but legal. See Bell. de Beat. Sanct. l. 3. c. 9. We pray living men to pray for us, we pray not unto them, Bell. 2. Sanct. 6. l. 1. Notation. in Martyrol. Rom. apr. 2. Hyper. de not. studend. theol. l. 3. c. 7. Villa∣vincent. possev Bellar. de Beat. Sanct. l. 1. c 20. Apol. de fuga sua & Apol. 2. Epist. ad solitar. vit. agent. & ad ubique orthod. Orat. in laudem Athanas. Ammian. Mar∣cellin. l. 22. Hares. 76. Circa. an. Dom. 495. Decres. p. 1. can. Sanct. Rom. dist. 1. c. 3. Notat. in Mart. Rom. apr. 23. Theodor. hist. Eccles. li. 1. cap. 30. sozo. lib. 2. cap. 24. This is confessed by the Papists, and confirmed by this text of Scripture. But prayer is a spiritual sacrifice; and whatsoever is said of sacrifice, that it must not be offered to any strange God, that is generally true of all spiritual service, and particularly of prayer. As we must not sacrifice to any o∣ther God, so we are charged not to lift up our hands to any strange God: and what may be said for prayer to Saints, that way be pretended in defence of sa∣crificing unto them. Almes are called sacrifices, because they be not so much given to the poor, as offered unto God, and accepted of him as a sweet favour. God needeth not our beneficence, but he promiseth to recompence it, as if it were bestowed upon himself. Hence Solomon, He that giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord. 5. To give spiritual worship to them that were no Saints, that never had be∣ing in this life, and that for ought can be known, are damned in hell, must needs be fruitless, superstitious, and abominable. But the Papists invocate them that ne∣ver were, for ought they can prove, and that were damned in Hell for ought they know. It is manifest by the silence of all approved authors, that there was never such a man as that Saint George, whom the Papists call upon. Baronius supposeth that which is painted of Saint George, to be an emblem, not an Hi∣story. But though the History of George be Apocryphal or uncertain, saith Bellarmine: yet there was such a Saint, because the memory of George was ever famous in the Church. But this is spoken sophistically, or directly contra∣ry to the truth. The fame of that man was great, but not good; for Atha∣nasius, and Gregory Nazianzene, do witness that George Cappadox a wicked man, an heretical Arrian, bad in kind, worse in mind, sent of Constantius with an Army and Band of Souldiers to Alexandria, did take upon him as Bishop of that City, who when he was most cruelly murdered of the Heathens under Julian the Apostata, and his body burnt with fire, and his ashes cast into the Sea, lest he should be honorably buried of the Christians as a Martyr: he began af∣terwards to be worshiped of some for a Martyr unworthy; as Epiphanius, re∣proving them, teacheth. And in progress of time the passion of George com∣posed, and divulged of his followers, so deceived many, that Gelasius also, although he did smell this deceit, yet thought him to be an holy Martyr; not without probable reason; seeing the passions of others, who were truely Mar∣tyrs, were falsly written of other Hereticks in like manner. But when the Ro∣mane Synod, in which Gelasius insinuates that the Romane Church so thought, was held nigh an hundred years after the other sentence given of Athanasius, Nazianzene, and Epiphanius: Gelasius doth not affirm that George was also ac∣counted for a Saint in the judgement of the Romane Church, much less of the universal Church Nay, if it be exactly considered, both what Gelasius thought that the passion of George was written of Hereticks, and of what Hereticks the interpreter of Gelasius hath observed, that to be done: it will manifestly appear that the universal Church of Bellarmine, that is, that the East and West being deluded of the Arrians, did worship George the Arrian for a Martyr. For when Baronius had shewed that it was found in some acts of George (those very same that Gelasius seems to disprove) that he had conflicted with Athanasius the Magician, that wicked Author alluding to George the Arian Bishop, the inva∣der of the Seat of Alexandria, and persecuter of great Athanasius Bishop of
that City, which the Arians called Magatian, and reckoned George amongst the Arians: out of which (saith he) it sufficiently appears that that whole Fable was the device of the Arians.Apud. Sur. de probat. Sanct. hist. tom. 2. Praefat. in Mar∣tyr. Georg a Pa∣ficrate sc. Spec. hist. l. 12. c. 131. hist. par. 1. tit. 8. c. 1.8.23. Martyrolog. 9. Calend. Matt. Usuard & Ado Tremir. in Mar∣tyrol. Breviar. sec consuetud. Rom. Curiae Vincent. & An∣ton. asicrat & Me∣taph. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 15. apud Baron. not. in Martyr. Rom. Ammian. Mar∣cell lib. 2. Jacob. de Verag. Aur. Leg c. 113. De purgat. li. 2. cap. 18. Ovid. Metam. l. 15. Senec. hist. Polit. Prudent. peri∣steph. hym. 11. Nota. in Mar∣tyrol. Rom Jan. 30. Baron. not in Martyr. Rom. Aug. 3. Deprobat. Sanct. hist. tom 4. Annal. Eccl. tom 1. an. Dom. 44. Tom 3 an. Dom. 315. Tom. 5. an. Dom. 402. But now Pasicrates (who writes that he was the ser∣vant of George) and Simeon Metaphrastes, in the History which Lippomannus saith was approved by the testimonie of the Eastern Church, where it is recited every year, being brought into an abridgement, they attribute to George a con∣flict with Athanasius the Magician. The same do the Western, Vincentius Bel∣vacensis, and Antonius. Moreover Bede reporteth that he suffered under Dati∣an, the most potent King of the Persians, who ruled over seventy Kings, o∣ver seventy five saith the Arian Fable, as Baronius witnesseth: but it is one and the same dream. And the steps of this are found in others amongst the Eastern more clearly, who make mention that he suffered in Persis, and some under Datian. Amongst the Western more obscure, who change the name of Datian into Dioclecian. To this may be added that both of them make their George a Cappadocian; in the East Pasicrates, Metaphrastes, Nicephorus, and Menologium Graecorum, in the West, Varaginensis, Vincentius, Antonius and Brevia Saris∣buriense. But no author worthy credit doth make mention of any George Cappadox a Martyr, but of the Arian; so that this one circumstance (to omit the other of Datian and Athanasius the Magician) doth sufficiently prove, that George, whom the universal Church of Bellarmine doth worship, was not an holy, but an Arian Martyr. To the probability of which opinion, this addeth somewhat, that the Alexandrians have an old and ruinous Church, of the Martyr great Saint George, without the City, at the shore of the salt Sea, built (as it is probable) in that very place, where the body of George Cappadox was burned, as the story relates, and his ashes cast into the Sea. Hiopplitus is another Saint that the Papists invocate, who as he is commonly painted, was torn in pieces of horses. But that there was never any such Saint, the silence of Authors worthy credit doth cry aloud; For Prudentius an antient, and I know not whether the first Author of that thing, seems to have played after a poetical manner, as he is reproved of Bellarmine to have done in a greater matter, and to have fitted his Poetical fiction for the Etymology of the name to Hippolitus Presbyter of Antioch. Certes Baronius noteth out of the Romane Martyrologe, that this Hippolitus was not torn with horses, but taken away by an ordinary kind of punishment. But Baronius addeth that Prudentius did blow three Hippolitus's into one, and that amongst them there was a souldier, who was torn in pieces of wild horses. But out of what Author doth Baronius prove this? Out of the acts of Saint Laurentius; in which, as he affirms, there are many things Apocrypha, and ma∣ny things contrary to the truth: So thou wilt say, as they are found in Surius: as Metaphrastes hath published his acts in Greek, taken out of the antient monuments of the Grecians, as Baronius adjoineth. But how doth Baronius know that they are taken out of the antient monuments of the Grecians by Me∣taphrastes, whom he doth so often pronounce to have mingled many forgeries, and monstrous lies, and sundry meer dotages. Nay, how durst he to praise those things as drawn our of antient monuments, which he knows do bewray a later Author by their vainity; for in those acts Decius the Emperor sitting in his tribunal, is said to have inflicted that punishment upon Hippolitus, after the death of Laurentius.Notat. in Marty∣rol. Rom. Aug. 10 & Annal Eccl. tom. 2. an. Dom. 261. But Baronius doth evince out of Cyprian and other sufficient witnesses, that Laurentius suffered under Valerian, seven or eight years after the death of Decius. And of the same acts of Laurentius in Me∣taphrastes, Baronius forgetting that he had said that he had taken them out of the antient monuments of the Grecians, hath these words, Quae Laurentii acta a Metaphraste sunt recitata, hand sane pristina illa a Notariis excepta videntur;Annal. Eccl. om. 2. an. Dom. 261. sed ab aliquo alio Scripta, quibus & quae ab Ambrosio, vel aliis de Sancto Lau∣rentio scripta essent, una texuerit: siquidem non nulla habent, quibus historica
veritas refragatur.Baptist. Mant. Fast. l. 7. Jacob vorag. Aur. Legend. cap 95. Notat. in Mar∣tyrol. Rom. Iuli. 25. Hieron. vid. hyn D. Christop. Mart Deration. stud. theol. l 3. cap. . ex Hiper. Beda Martyr. 8. calend. August. Vincent. Belvac. sec hist. l. 13. cap 24. Surius ex Divers De prob. Sanct hist. tom. 4. Notat. in Martyrol. Rom. Jul. 25. Missal. Sarii. Missa de S. Chri∣stoph. Kemnit. ex conc. Trident. part. 3. Belvac. specul. hist. l. 13. c. 5. Jacob. de Vor. Aurea. Leg. c. 167. Anton. par. 1. tit. 8. c. 1. §. 38. In Festo S Ka∣tharin. Virg. & Mart. Nov. 25. Lib. 7. c. 26. Euseb. l. 8. cap. 26, 27. Notat. in Mar∣tyrolog. Rom. Nov. 25. Eus hist. l. 8. cap. 27 Novem. 25. Breviar. Rom. reformat. Villa∣vin. Eccl spec. l. 13. c 8. Iacob. De Vorag. ur. Legend. c. 167. Anton. hist par. 1. tit. 8 § 38. In Templo S. Kathar. mirabi∣lia Roma. Missala Rom. re∣for. In festo. S. Kathar. Virg & Mart. Annal. Eccl. tom. 3. Ao Dom. 307. Christopher is acknowledged for a Saint amongst the Papists, whom they feign to be a man of Gyant-like stature, twelve cubits high, who leaning upon a long staffe, carried Christ over a dangerous River upon his shoulders. But the Papists themselves confess that this is feigned; Baronius somewhat doubting, saith, He knows not what to say concerning that huge sta∣ture, wherewith he is wont to be painted; yet so as he doth insinuate that it ought to be reckoned amongst Symbolical pictures by his praising of Vida, who interprets it allegorically, and by the mention of George. But Villavincentius for certain affirms, That it is doubtful to no man, that this picture was proper∣ly devised of the Fathers to this use, that it might shadow forth a Preacher of the Gospel. Therefore, although that there was a Martyr named Christopher; yet how could his memory be ever famous (as Bellarmine affirms it was) whom authors not ancient do report to have suffered under King Dagnus, in I know not what Samos, or City of Cicilia, or Lycia; so absurdly and besides the cre∣dit of all antient monuments, that Baronius is compelled to substitute Decius the Emperor for King Dagnus; out of how famous and rich Author I dispute not. So that if we grant that our Christopher was a Martyr, yet it cannot be proved that there was such a Christopher as the Papists worship, who was of a Giant∣like height, whose patronage they desire because he deserved to carry Christ on his shoulders. Katharine as the tale goeth was a Virgin of Alexandria, daugh∣ter of King Costus, who was beheaded of Maxentius, when she could not be drawn from the faith of Christ by fifty Philosophers, which he had used for this purpose. This woman is worshiped as a Martyr, but it cannot be proved that there ever was any such. There was no King Costus any more then King Dag∣nus. The Romane Missale hath reformed this circumstance, it was so palpable, but obtrudes the rest of the story upon the Church for truth, and to give credit unto it cites Eusebius, as if he were the Author of that fable. But Eusebius hath nothing to that purpose either in that place or any other; onely he hath that which doth rather derogate credit from the story, because he teacheth that Maximinus did rule at Alexandria, where this matter is said to be done, not Maxentius: Which is so manifest; that Baronius could not be kept back, either by the authority of Pius the fifth, or the Romane Breviary, but he saith the name of Maxentius is to be razed out, and in the place Maximinus to be sub∣stituted. Go to Costus and Maxentius being blotted out, hath Eusebius the rest of that narration? No, he hath not so much as the name of Katharine, nor any note either of Philosopher converted, or Lady, or Wheel, or of death or carrying into the mountain of Sinai. Eusebius writeth that there was amongst the women of Alexandria, a Christian woman renowned for Beauty, Nobility, Learning and Riches, but more renowned for Chastity, unchastly and impotent∣ly loved of Maxentius: whom he, when he had in vain sollicited by many re∣quests unto Whoredom, could not deprive of life, being more overcome with love then anger, but cast into banishment, and spoiled of her goods. Baronius because he no where found any other footstep of the Martyr Katharine in all antiquity, and the Papists had erred grievously if there had been none such, whom they worship with a double feast, and by name do invocate in their Lita∣nies; to whom God promised at her death, as they tell us, that it should come to pass that whosoever should celebrate the memory of her passion, and call up∣on her name in what affliction soever, should be heard; out of whose neck, when it was cut off, they affirm milk to have issued for blood, which they have amongst their Reliques at Rome, whom in their Mass they make a Mediatrix be∣tween God and men, and by whose patronage they trust to be delivered; and they pray God, who by his Angels placed her body wonderfully in the top of the hill of Sinai, that by her merits and intercession they may be able to come to the Mountain, which is Christ. Baronius, I say, least these and such like props of
popery should fall, would have that chast woman mentioned of Eusebius, who was driven into banishment of Maximinus, to be St Katharine: and that he might perswade this with greater shew of probability, what Eusebius saith,Euseb. Gr. l. 8. cap. 15. Lib. 8. c. 27. Lib. 8. c. 16. Cic. l. 3. de orat. that she was punished with flight, as Christophorsonus translates it, that is, (as Mus∣culus renders it with a word signifying the same thing) was banished: Baro∣nius doth expound as if Eusebius had said, thats he had escaped by flight, Maxi∣minus being ignorant and unwilling; and hence he infers, that we must not think, that Maximinus, who was so great and potent an Emperor, did cease to pursue after her, but that being sought and found out, she was crowned with Martyrdome. In which depravation of Eusebius he had offended less, if he had cited his words out of the Translation of Ruffinus, who perverts this place con∣cerning flight; but when he cites them out of the Translation of Christophorson,Lib. 8. c. 17. whom he had shewed to be more faithful: and in the very words,Annal. Eccl. tom. 2. A.D. 258 which he re∣citeth, it is said, Maximinus banished her, and a reason rendred why he did not put her to death: it must needs be, that Baronius in saying, that on her own accord she went into banishment, and not by the command of Maximinus, did offend perfidiously or extream rashly. And not content with this wresting of Eusebius to avoid the stroke of Ruffinus, he ridiculously changeth the name Katharine into Hecaterine, which conceit is largely confuted by D. Rainold, Idolat. l. 1 cap. 5. § 28. They object, Jacob prayed unto the Angel. But first it is no invocation,Gen. 48.16. Gen. 17.31. Gen. 17.18. Bapl. cont. Eun. l. 2. Athan. orat. 4. cont Cyril. thes. lib. 3. c. 1. Novatian. cap. 15. de Trin. Hilar. in Psal. 122. Procop. Gaz. in Gen. 48. Job. 5.1. Masius in Ios. 5.13. Vatabl. annot. Mercer. but an express desire, wherein Jacob desired that it might so be done, as in many o∣ther places, Let Nations serve thee: Oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight! 2. The Antients are of opinion, that the Angel is not a created Angel, because he is joyned with God, and the same benefit is craved of God and of the Angel; And the observation of some Papists, that the word Angel when it is put alone, is to be understood of a created Angel, is false and vain. Secondly, they ob∣ject that of Eliphaz, Call now, if there be any that will answer thee. But it is not certain, whether this speech be of holy men or of the Angels. If the first please, the sense is this, let Saints whomsoever thou knowest, be observed, and see if thou canst defend thy self by the patronage of any one, or whether thou canst find out any one, whom so great calamity did oppress besides his desert. But if he speak of the Angels, the sentence is thus: Call the Angels and see, if any of them will vouchsafe the answer which may be to thee an argument how base thou art, who canst not arise, I say not to the Divine, but not to any Angelical na∣ture: And so it is an Irony, and the seventy translate it, and the writer of this book, speaking of godly men, calleth them just, rather then by any other name. Again, they allege, If there be an angel speaking for him.Job. 33.23. Jun. Vatablus annot. Ex. 32.13. Gen. 32.9. Deu 9 27. Gen. 26.24. Gen. 26.3. Ex. 32.13. 1 R g. 8.25, 26. Psal. 89.4. 2 Chr. 27 7. Psal. 132.10, 11. Lev. 26.42. Ex 6.3, 4. Psal. 132.1. 1 Reg. 15.5. Chaldee Aquila. Symmachus. 5. Edit. render . But Angel in that passage may be a name not of nature but of office, and signifie an inter pre∣ter of the Divine will; and by uprightness understand the equity of God, which the prophet doth declare to man. If it be understood of a created Angel, the sentence is (as Mercer hath interpreted it) If to man thus afflicted there be one Angel an interpreter, to expound and declare to God his faith and repen∣tance, &c. In the old Testament the faithful prayed God to hear them for the merits of the Patriarchs: But in these and such like passages, the faithful pray not to be heard for the merits of the Saints, but for the grace and mercy of God, according to the free covenant made with the Fathers. But saith Bellarmine, the covenant of Grace and Righteousness of the Saints is both alleged; as re∣member David, and all his meekness; but in that Psalme the Prophet mention∣eth not his meekness but affliction, nor are these the words of Solomon, but of David himself, who (as by the eight first verses we may conjecture) wrote this Psalm, when the Arke of the Lord was to be brought from the house of Obed-Edom to Jerusalem, 2 Chro. 15. And when the obedience, love, or upright∣ness of the Saints is mentioned, it is for difference, not by way of boasting of their
merits, to shew they were such as walked in Covenant with God, and to whom pertained the promises, which for the iniquity of their sons should not be disa∣nulled.Gen. 43. Hos. confess. c. 5. Eck. Euch. de vier. Al∣phons. de Castro. li. 4. 1. Vatabl. in Gen. 48. Mercer ib. Lyran. Cajetan Ponscca. Heor Pin. Ribera in Am. 6. Rom. 4.7, 8. In the 48. of Gen. Jacob saith, Let my name be called upon the lads. But the words are an Hebraism, and signifie, Let them be called by my name, that is, Let them be accounted, not the sons of Joseph but mine: for he speaks plainly of the a∣doption of Ephraim and Manasses; and the like phrase is in other places. Eckius and Cochlaeus cite that of the Psalmist, For this shall every one that is godly pray un∣to thee, Psal. 32.6. But the Psalmist speaks of the Saints in this life craving remission of sins: Whither the Apostle referreth it, Therefore the Chaldee paraphr. tran∣slates it, Therefore shall every godly man pray to thee, the vulgar Pro hac. And so Hie∣ron, Ricket, Remigius, Euthymius, Theodoret, Haimo do understand it. And of the Papists themselves Lombard, Hugo Cardinalis, Lyran. Dionysius, Carthusian, Augu. Eugubinus, Baptista Fotengius Genebrard, Bellarm. Antonius Agellius, &c. I lift up mine eyes unto the hills,Psal. 121.1. Bellar. de anct. l. 1. cap. 17. saith the Prophet, that is the Saints, as Augustin interprets it. But August. looks unto the doctrine of the Saints, as Hierom al∣so, who expounds the hills, Excelsa propheticorum librorum ac legis: and the like may be found in other Fathers. But it is most simple, to understand hills pro∣perly,Dan. 6.11. that those hills may be meant, whereupon the Temple was built, whither they that were to pray did turn themselves. Or the words may be read by an in∣terrogation: To what end do I cast mine eyes about the mountains, as if any help must come from men? Another passage they allege out of the Psalms, The Lord will judge his people,Psal. 135.14. and in servis suis deprecabitur. But the meaning is plain, The Lord will repent him of the evils, wherewith he doth afflict his people in this world,See Herisb. in h. loc. and will be reconciled unto them: And so Junius read∣eth that place Si judicat Jehova populvm suum, mox de servis suis paenitet ipsum. Costerus in Enchirid. cap. 12. Eckius in Enchirid. cap. 15. Alphons. a Castro contr. haeres. Jerem Constantinop. in primo resp. ad protestant. c. 15. prove that the Saints in heaven are to be worshiped because we read, Mihi autem nimis honorificati sunt amici tui Deus.Psal. 139.17. But (not to say ought of the translation of that place, which both Arias, Pagnin, and Vatablus do translate far otherwise, and more agreeably to the mind of the Psalmist) if the words be understood of the Religious adoration of the Saints, what coherence can they have with the rest? How can they prove that  is to be honored, or honored is that to be to be worshiped religiously? or that by friends the Saints departed are to be understood? Many both antient and mo∣dern Writers,Herisbach. in Psal. 139. Amama anti∣barb. Bibl. l 3. in Psal. Psal. 68.10. Psal. 150.1. who receive that translation, and those amongst the Papists them∣selves; as Lyran Dionys. Carthusian. and Bellarm. give a far better construction of these words. Richeomus would prove, that Saints are to worshiped with reli∣gious worship, from these words of the Psalmist, God is wonderful in his Saints: and Praise God in his Saints. But the words in the Original are, Praise God in his holiness, or in his Sanctuary, for the word doth not onely signifie Sanctity but Sanctuary;Psal. 20.2. They that understand it of the Sanctuary, interpret it either of the Temple, that he speak unto the Priests and Levites; or heaven, that he directs his speech the unto Angels and blessed Saints. They that read it Sanctity, expound in by for, propter or de: as in the second verse, praise him for de vel propter po∣tentias eius: The seventy  well, if it be received well: For  is spoken of the Sanctuary. The vulgar, in sanctis eius: which may fitly be un∣derstood,Heb. 9.1, 2.3.12. if it be referred to places or the Sanctuary. And so Lyra, Genebrard, Bellar. Emmanuel, Sa. In sanctis eius, neutro genere. Hinc ev. in sancto vel san∣ctuairo eius. Est n. Apostrophe ad caelites. The Fathers generally expound it of the Saints,Amama. Bibl. ant. l. 3. in Ps. being deceived by the Translation, but none of them could ever wring any thing out of them touching the invocation of Saints. They would prove, that it was the manner of the Jews to pray unto, or invocate the dead: because our Saviour saith,Jo. 5.45. Think not that I will accuse you to the Father: there is who accuseth you, Moses in whom ye trust. Whence they gather, that Moses
hath received power, as of accusing, so of defending with God. But here Mo∣ses not in flesh or spirit, but in Doctrine or Law is understood; Therefore it is like to this, They have Moses and the Prophets.Luk. 16.19. They produce also a two-fold example; one out of the History of Lazarus and the rich man, where the rich man is said to desire Abraham, that he would send Lazarus to dip the the tip of his finger in cold water, and coole his tongue. But nothing can be concluded from this example, because it is that part of the Parabolicall History, from which they argue, is not Historicall but Parabolicall: as is manifest, because the dead have neither eyes, nor tongue, nor finger: and therefore nothing is signified by these words, but that the torments of the rich man were so great,See Mald. in Luk. 6. that if he had seen Lazarus, and could speak unto him, by this or the like speech he would have declared the greatness of his torments. The second example is taken from the enemies of Christ, who, when our Saviour cryed out, Eli, Eli, said,Alan. Cop. Dial. 3. He calleth for Elias: whence they conclude, that it was usuall for the Jews to call upon Elias and other Saints. But what can be more unsavoury, than from the horrible perverting of the words of Christ by his most deadly enemies, to con∣clude, that the invocation of Saints did take place amongst the people of the Jews? Moreover, both these examples, and whatsoever else can be alleged to this purpose, it is refelled by this, that when they make the Vision of God the ground of this invocation,Bellar. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 19. Pigh. cont. 13. fol. 194. yet they think the Fathers of the Old Testament did not see God, untill Christ by his passion had unlocked Heaven for them, and had delivered them from Limbus. But seeing the Saints in Heaven be now glo∣rified of God (saith Costerus) it is meet they should be honoured of us on earth. We accknowleg honour is due to the Saints, but civil, not religious: in kind the same with that which ought to be given to the Saints living, but diffe∣rent in degree. As concerning the acts of honour, there be some which may be given to men absent, as praise, imitation, &c. and these are due to the Saints de∣parted. Others are given only to them that be present; as bending of the knee, &c. and these be not due to the Saints departed. They urge again, If civil ho∣nour be due to vertue, wisdom, power and nobility, then more than civil honour is due to supernaturall vertue. The answer is plain, Civil honour is considered formally or causally: Civil honour formally, that is, honour indeed civil, separated and distinct from religious, may be from causes, not onely civil, but supernaturall: as the faithfull honour one another,Luk 1.3. not as men onely, but as faithfull, and therefore for supernaturall dig∣nity. Again, God, say they, promised honour and glory to his Saints. But when the Saints are said to have glory from God,1 Sam. 2. Joh. 12. Rom. 2. it is to be understood of that state whereunto they are translated essentially glorious: and not to be made to be had in honour, or religiously adored of others. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, &c. are glorified and honoured of God, whom yet none amongst the Papists do worship. They object again, In both Testaments we read that the living did pray unto the living; as the Children of Israel did request Samuel to pray for them, &c.Job 40. But it is one thing civilly to request the living to pray for us, another to invocate them religiously. Paul did intreat the Romanes, Ephesians, Thessalonians, Colossians to pray for him: but the Papists themselves will not say, he did religiously pray unto them. The first is done from the soul band of charity, when one doth request another: the other by holy Prayers, or (as Augustine speaketh) religious rites, and acknowledg∣ment of superiority. For none is adored for charity, but for omnipotency; not for being simply greater, but for infinite power. They reply, The Saints departed do live, in that part of themselves, wherein they are to be prayed unto, and make intercession for us. True it is, they live in Spirit, but we have no Example, Commandement or Promise to call upon them. And although they live in soul, yet they have ended this life which they had common with us,
and with their friends, who might go unto them. Nor can they hear us now, in that part wherein they live. If the Saints on earth (say they) have known the secrets and thoughts of others,2 Reg. 5.26. & 6.12. Dan. 2.30. much more the Saints in Heaven. Facult. Theolog. Coloniensis Advers. Monhem. Dial. 6. Renatus Benedict. panopl. fol. 36. Coster. in Euch. cap. 22. paragr. Secunda propos. And this they would prove,Luk. 16.29. Rhem. an. in. Luk. 16.28. because Abraham knew Moses and the Prophets. But this last is taken from that part of the Narration which is Parabolicall: and if it was from the History, it would not follow thence, that Moses and the Prophets were known of Abraham, whiles they lived here upon earth. As touching Daniel and Elias, it was according to their extraordinary vocation: but the Saints in Heaven, have no such calling ordinary or extraordinary, why they should know our thoughts. We deny not, but God can reveal the particular acts of mortall men to the blessed Spirits in Heaven: but we must judg of events, not by the power,Psal. 135.6. but according to the will of God. For God doth whatsoever he will. The power of God is limited by his will; but the will of God is known by his Word. But the Word no where teacheth, that God doth reveal our necessities or Prayers to his Saints in Heaven. If the damned (say the Rhemists) had care of their friends alive, how and for what cause soever, much more have the Saints and saved persons. And if those in Hell have means to express their cogitations and desires, and to be understood of Abraham so farre distant both by place and condition, much rather may the living pray to the Saints, and be heard by them; betwixt earth (that is to say) the Church Militant and Heaven, being continuall passage of souls. But the evidence of truth might have moved them easily to understand, that this Dialogue between Abraham and the rich glutton, is of things not done, but represented of our Saviour Christ, for the better and more commodious setting forth of the estate of the godly and of the wicked after this life: And they might do well to let us understand when this new religion entred into damned souls in Hell, that they should have care of the salvation of their Kinsfolks in earth: when they went to Hell they were void of charity and care that way: and if Hell be such a School-house of chari∣ty, that they learn that there of the Devils, which they never learned on earth of Moses and the Prophets, it were somewhat strange? Further, if Hell be a place of darkness and ignorance, where is it, and by what glass, and by mean of what light, that the gluttons soul knoweth Abrahams and Lazarus soul, which knew not them before it entred into Hell? They are wont to say, that the de∣parted Saints set all in the reflection of the beames of Gods Majesty, in whose presence they be. Will they say, that the souls in Hell have the same knowledg by touting into the Devill? They seek to excuse themselves, That they pray unto the Saints, not as God the Creatour, but as the friends of God. But this Caution is not wary: because the protestation is contrary to their fact. For by this very fact, that they call upon the Saints, as they that knew our thoughts, and can discerne sincere and upright sighes from counterfeit, they shew they do in part call upon the Saints, as they that exceed the condition of a creature, and partake that glory,Isa. 42.8. which God denies that he will communicate to any man. For as in wedlock companying together, so is religious invocation in Divine wor∣ship. But as a woman lying with another man, if she should defend her self, with this, that she doth not company with him as with her Husband, but with an inferiour affection, doth not thereby wipe away the fault, but adde the crime of impudency to unchastity: so do the Papists, no whit lessen their sinne of spiritual adultery, that they say they perform religious invocation to the Saints not as to God, but as to the friends of God. But at least they en∣deavour to shew, that the invocation of the Saints doth nothing derogate from the glory of Christ our Mediatour; because they acknowledg Christ to be our immediate Mediatour, who doth offer up our Prayers to God, but the Saints
thus would have to be Intercessors unto Christ for us. But hereby they diminish the glory of Christ. For they detract very much from his loving affection and good will towards us: which the Authour to the Hebrews describes.Heb 4.15. We have an High Priest, who cannot but be touched with our infirmities, &c. Let us therefore draw near with boldness unto the Throne of grace. Moreover, that in∣tercession is not made subordinate (as they pretend) but collaterall, in that they teach and believe, that the Saints did merit that they might be heard; and also, that they did not only merit to be heard for us, but they merited power to conferre and bestow the things we ask. Not to mention here, that whatsoever in the Psalmes is ascribed to God or Christ, that is given to the Virgin Mary in the Lady Psalter composed by Bonaventure: and many other things of like nature. They reply again, It is the will of God,Jam 5.16. Rom. 15.30. Eph. 6.18. 1 Thes. 5.25. 2 Thes. 3.3. Col. 4.3. 1 Tim. 2.1. Heb. 13.18. Gen. 20.7. Job 42.8. 1 Sam. 7.8. Ezek. 22.30. that the Saints living should pray one for another: and if it derogate nothing from the glory of Christ our Mediatour to intreat the Prayers of the Saints living, nor doth it derogate any thing from him, to pray to the Saints departed to pray for us. But this Argu∣ment holds no proportion. For praying to the Saints departed, we crave some∣what of them, who be ignorant of our state and condition: but intreating the Prayers of the faithfull living, we speak to them that be acquainted with our affairs: They that intreat the Saints present, do attribute nothing to them else, then that they can hear them, with whom they are present: but they that pray to the Saints departed, they ascribe unto them a power to hear our Prayers absent, and that in one moment farre distant one from another, and different in the nature of requests; which can agree to no creature. Moreover, they intreat the present, as fellow servants: but the Saints in Heaven are pray∣ed unto as Mediatours betwixt God and men. And if they pray unto them, as they that merit audience, even so they derogate from the glory of Christ: because that agrees to Christ alone. Had Pauls favour with God been so mightily improved by death, as the Papists contend, and his affectionate notice of his followers necessities continued the same or greater; His speedy dis∣solution or departure to Christ had been as expedient for the Churches which he planted as for himself. But it was never expedient for any Church or Con∣gregation to be deprived of their godly and faithfull Pastors bodily presence, as it was expedient for the Disciples that Christ should leave them.Joh. 16.7. Heb. 7.25. The only reason of this diversity is, because Christ lives for ever, and hath an everlasting Priesthood: whereas Saints and godly men which are departed this life, al∣though they live unto God, are (touching intercession or other acts of their ministeriall Function) dead to us. The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK. AN EXPOSITION Upon the Lords Prayer. CHAP. I. Of the first part of the Lords Prayer, viz. the Preface. The things therein to be considered. Who is meant by Father, and who are allowed to call God Father. Of the Prayers of unregenerate men, and how God heares them. Question: WHat are the Parts of the Lords Prayer? A. It hath three Parts; the first is the Preface, to stirre up our at∣tention and teach ableness, in which is declared whom we must pray unto, in these words, Our Father which art in Heaven. The second part is the Prayer it self, standing on six Petitions and a confirmation, which rendreth a reason why we pray to God alone; because the Kingdom which is all authority to grant our requests, belongeth to him the power, that is, all ability to execute our desires, is with him: the glory, that is, all this honour of being acknow∣ledged a Fountain of good things belongeth to him a Father of Lights, from whom every good gift descendeth; who in this regard is only to be invocated. The third is the Conclusion, in this word Amen: which is a testification of our assent and faith, whereas the former Petitions are testifications only of our desires. Q. What may be learned from this, that our Saviour doth not set down the Petitions abruptly, but first beginneth with a solemn Preface? A. From this practice of our Saviour, some reverend Divines observe, That he which is to pray to God, must first prepare himself, and not boldly without
consideration rush into Gods presence. And this without question is an undeni∣able truth: for if a man be to come before an earthly Prince, he will order him∣self in apparell, gesture, and words, that he may do all things in seemliness and dutifull reverence: how much more are men to order themselves, when they are to appear before the living God? Be not rash with thy mouth,Eccl. 5.2. Psal. 26.8. and let not thy heart be hasty to utter a thing before the Lord. David saith, I will wash my hands in innocency, and so will I compass thy Altar, O Lord. And this preparation stands not only in putting off our evil affections, but even our honest, and (otherwise in their due time) necessary cogitations, as the cares and thoughts of our particular vocations, house and family, and a serious and conscionable stirring up the graces of Gods Spirit in us, that we might come be∣fore him in holy and acceptable manner. Q What things are to be considered in the Preface? A. In the Preface is contained a description of God, who only is to be called upon in Prayer. And he is described by two Arguments: First, By the relation that is between him and his Elect in Christ, which declareth his large and bountifull affection. Our Father. Secondly, By his absolute sovereignty, majesty, and glory: which art in Heaven. In Scripture when the Lord is called our Father, usually there is some addition annexed; as in this place, which art in Heaven. And this description of God, by these two Arguments (the one arguing his gratiousness and readiness of will, the other arguing his greatness and fulness of power to help all that come unto him) is placed of purpose in the very en∣trance into Prayer to strengthen the Petitioners faith and hope of good success in Prayer. Q. What may be observed from this Preface in general? A. 1. Prayer is not a bare wish or desire, as we usually say, I would such a good thing might happen unto me, or such evil might be prevented: but it is the tendering of our desires unto God, of whom we crave the fulfilling of our requests. And when the Psalms speak in the third person, Let God have mercy upon us; the devotion of the mind is to be reduced to the second person, Lord have mercy upon us.Gen. 33.14. 1 Sam. 16.16. & 25.25. For it is the phrase of Scripture to speak to the person pre∣sent in the third person. Therefore in what words soever the Prayer be formed, let the mind ever think upon, and look to God, that the desire and Petitions be directed unto him. 2 No Angels or Saints departed,Phil. 4.6. but God our Father on∣ly is to be invocated of us. What an unseemly thing were it, that children should seek to servants in the house for supply of what they want, and not to their na∣tural Parents? so here. It is Gods will to be called on, and so to perform that he knoweth we want; and he is both willing and able to supply it unto us. As for the Angels and Saints departed, it is not certain that they hear our Prayers, or rather it is certain they know not our thoughts; nor can they do any thing which they will not; nor will they do any thing to which God calleth them not; they are so perfectly conformed to his pleasure, and attend his beckoning in all things. But they are not called of God to hear our Prayers. We may argue from this Prayer thus: That which is a platform of Prayer, teacheth as perfectly who must be called on, as it teacheth what is to be asked. But this is a perfect form of Prayer, teaching fully what things soever may be asked. Therefore it teach∣eth us fully what kind of persons may be called on. If it be objected, that the Sonne and the Spirit are not expressed: The answer is,Joh. 17.3. That the Father excludeth all other persons that are pure creatures, not persons which have the same singular essence with him: for such is the Divine dispensation, that when one is invocated, all are invocated. 3. These words admonish us of our spiritual adoption, and terrene peregrination. We are the Sonnes of God by faith in Christ Jesus, but travelling in a strange Countrey absent from our Father: in which estate we need his aid, because we are strangers; and
are assured of help according to our Petitions, because we are his Sonnes. 4. This also should stirre up love and reverence in him that prayeth: He is inflamed to love, who thinketh that he goeth to his Father, that he might conferre with him of things necessary for him, and he is striken with an holy fear, who considereth that his Father doth sit in Heaven, as the chief Gover∣nour of all things in Heaven and Earth. 5. Hence we learn, that God is both able and willing to help us. If he be a Father, he will not deny to his Children, what they ask according to his will, if it be good for them. If he be in Heaven, as the sovereign Commander of this world and all things therein, all things are in his hand, and he can do whatsoever he will. 6. This is an Argument of thankfulness, that God, who is most glorious in Majesty, dreadfull in power, immortall, unchangeable, higher then all earth∣ly things, should vouchsafe us liberty and leave to call him Father, and with confidence to lay open our cares into his bosome. It is humility in the Lord to behold the Angels;Psal. 113 6. How rich is his mercy towards us, whom he doth admit into the room of Sonnes. Q Who is meant by Father in this place? Deut. 32.6. Isa. 63.6. Psal. 68.5. & 89.26. Jer. 3.4. & 31.9. Isa. 9 6. 1 Thes. 1.3, 4. & 3.11. Joh. 20.17. Rev. 3.12. & 14.. Eph. 3.14, 15.A. Otherwhiles this Name is attributed to all the Persons in Trinity, or any of them: but oftentimes it is given to the first person in Trinity, as in those places where one Person is conferred with another. And so in this place it seemes to be taken personally for the first Person in holy Trinity, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ by nature; as he is the second Person in Trinity, by the grace of personall Union, as man; by Covenant, as Mediatour; and in and through him the Father of all the faithfull by grace and Adoption, which implyeth or presupposeth both regeneration and re∣mission of sinnes. Thus the Apostle conceived of God when he prayed: I bow my knees (saith he) unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and earth is named. And though such is the Divine dispensation, that when one Person is invocated, all are invocated, yet the Father is fitly named alone, because the Sonne hath the part of a Media∣tour, through whom we go to the Father; and the Spirit, the Office of a School-master, teaching what to pray, and as we ought. This compellation doth not only contain, that the Father begat his Sonne from eternity, but in respect of the Father it containeth the benefits of effectuall Vocation, Rege∣neration, Justification, Adoption unto the Heavenly Inheritance with all the Royalties, Prerogatives, and singular Liberties that accompany it. In respect of the Mediatour,Joh. 16.23. it contains the Office and Benefits of Propitiation, Recon∣ciliation and Intercession. And in respect of them that pray, it implies their condition, that they have a right and interest in God; they can call him theirs, for they have entred into Covenant with him. Q. Who are allowed to call God Father? A. Our Saviour Christ taught his Disciples, and in them all that believe in him and walk in the Spirit,Rom. 8.14. Rom. 8.15. Gal. 4.5. to pray after that manner: but not only they that have received the Spirit of Adoption, crying in them Abba Father, but they also that being weary of their sinnes, seek unto him in Jesus Christ, to be received into favour,Luk. 15.18. Isa. 63 16. Hieron. Ep. ad Damas. de filio pred. Bell. com. 4. in Orat. Dom. Bell. Catechis. cap 4. Luk. 15.22, 23 Psal. 103.13. are allowed by vertue of his gracious Covenant to pray unto him by this Name Father, though in somewhat different man∣ner from the former. Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee. Q. What may be learned from this Name that is given to God in our Prayers? A. 1. Prayer is the familiar conference of the faithfull repenting soul with the Lord, his most tender, mercifull, and loving Father in Jesus Christ, who delights in the voice of the penitent, is most ready to forgive our sinnes, supply
our wants, suppress our enemies, and succour in miseries. 2. In Prayer it is necessary that we conceive of the true God in Christ, as he hath made himself known in the Covenant of grace. We cannot come unto God in our own names, for we are all sinners, not able to endure the tryal of justice, or to bear the weight of his wrath. Our approach must be to the Throne of grace in the mediation of our Saviour Christ, who is the true and living way,Phil. 4.6. Ioh. 1.12, 13. Gal. 4.5. 1 Ioh. 5.1. in whom God is become favourable, and through whom liberty of access is granted. God in Christ is the object of Christian Religion, which in every religious act must be apprehended as he hath manifested himself. By this the Prayers of Gods Church, and the Prayers of Heathen are distinguished, who invocate God as a Creatour, not as a Father in Jesus Christ. 3. Every one that prayeth with confidence, fervency, and filiall reverence is the Son of God. This is the note,Act. 9.14. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Tim. 2.22. by which the faithfull servants of God are set forth, that they call upon the Name of God. Prayer is the breath of faith, whereby we are knit unto Christ, and re∣ceive the Prerogative of Adoption.Rom. 8.16. It is the Spirit of Adoption that teacheth us with affiance, humility, patience and submission to cry Abba Father. 4. It is one thing to pray for admission into the state of grace, that we might be accepted and received of God as Sons, another to call upon him as Sons already adopted to the immortall Inheritance: but no man can pray in an acceptable manner, who doth not truly repent of his sinnes, and seek unfeignedly to be reconciled unto God. The wicked cannot pray, nor will the Lord regard their cry. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. No suits can find acceptance with God, which are not presented in the Name of Christ: but Christ will not plead the cause of them that walk on in wickedness.2 Chro. 7.14. If my people that are called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked waies, then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin,1 Joh. 3.22. and will heal their Land. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his Commande∣ments, and do those things that are pleasing in hi sight.Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God. But he cannot come in faith that walloweth in iniquity. Ʋnto the wicked, saith God, what have ye to do take my Covenant into your mouth,Psal 50.16, 17. Isa. 1.13.15. Zech. 12.10. seeing ye hate instruction. The Spirit of supplications stirreth up godly sorrow, and causeth the heart to beg pardon with sobs and sighes for sin committed. He who would pray aright, must not only confess his sin, but also have a full purpose never after to offend his Father. For how can a child call him Father whom he cares not con∣tinually to displease through his lend conditions? He cannot do it, neither can any Father delight in such a child. Therefore we must call to mind our rebellions and trespasses against God, and with the Publican in heaviness of heart say, God be mercifull to me a sinner. And not this only, but we must set down with our selves never in such sort to offend again, and to lead a new life. 5. Hence we may ob∣serve both a ground of reverence, hope, humility and patience, when we come to deal with God. If I be a Father, where is my reverence?Mal 1.6. Heb. 12.28. Deut. 32.6. 1 Pet. 1.17. Job 42 6. Luk. 15.18, 19 Heb. 4.16. Mat. .11. Luk. 11.9, 13. Joh. 16.23. Psal. 27.0. Isa. 49.15. Luk. 15, 20. Psal. 103.13. Heb. 4.16. & 10.22. We come with reverence before our earthly Princes, and in all our gestures express it: how much more must this be in us, when we have to deal with the living God? for this Father is impar∣tiall in justice, that we have need to converse before him in fear. Again, it is a ground of hope; earthly Parents will not deny their Children good things: much less shall God deny us his Spirit, and what ever thing is good for us. Our doubting minds must hence be reproved, and strengthened. How confidently do children come to their Parents? If we have a suit to a friend that is reasonable, we will presume it; how much more may we be of good hope in all our requests which we make to God? Let us draw near with boldness and confidence to the Throne of grace. Further, it is a ground of humility and patience. Children can∣not plead desert of their Parents, neither will they think it much to wait their leasure: how much more doth humility and patiene become Christians, when they be to present themselves before the Lord? 6. A Christian must stirre up
the graces of Gods Spirit in him when he prayeth; but he must trust in the grace and mercy of God, not in the worthiness of his supplications. For he must pre∣sent himself before God as a Son, to be respected freely of grace, not as a ser∣vant to be rewarded of desert. The Fathers love is free, not merited by works. We do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousness,Dan. 9.18, 19. but for thy mer∣cies. If the Servants of God make mention of their integrity at any time, it is not to plead the merit of their works, or the cause why they should be heard: but only to shew that their hearts were upright and qualified as becometh humble Petitioners to so glorious a Majesty.Neh. 13.22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me, according to the greatness of thy mercy. And as we must not trust in the strength of grace, or multitude of good works; so we may not des∣pair by reason of weakness,2 Cor. 1.3. unworthiness, former sins, or want of feeling com∣fort: for God heareth our Prayers, not for their worth, but for his Names sake, The question is not what our weakness meriteth, but what God of his infinite abundant grace is pleased to give. 7. If the God to whom we pray be a Fa∣ther, we must learn to acquaint our selves with the Promises which he hath made in his Word; to quicken our hearts in all Prayer unto him, and thereby to gather assurance to our selves that he will grant our requests. For a Father cannot but must needs make promise of favour to those that be his children: and therefore the children of God must diligently record what Promises the Lord hath made unto them. The Promises made to encourage in Prayer, are these and such like: Before they call I will answer;Isa. 65.24. Mat. 7.7. Rom. 10.12. Jam. 4.8. 2 Chro. 15.2. Ezek. 12.10. Ask, and ye shall have; He that is Lord over all, is good unto all that call upon him; Draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto you. 8. Prayer is not a work of nature, but of the Spirit. A man of himself cannot call God Father, nor with confidence lay open his cares into his bosome: it is the Spirit that helpes us in our infirmities, that stirres up sighes and groanes in the heart for grace and mercy. Prov. 1.28. Isa. 1.15. Job 27.10. Isa. 29.13.Q. Do not unregenerate men pray sometimes? A. 1. There be that draw near to God with their lips, whose hearts are re∣moved farre from him: but the groanes of the heart, not the words of the mouth, make the Prayer. A man prayes for no more then he desires with the heart, and he which desires nothing prayes not at all. 2. Ungodly men may ask some things they need, but never as they ought; they ask not in faith, with an holy affection, they depart not from iniquity: therefore their Prayers be un∣fruitfull to themselves, not acceptable to God. 3. Unsound Christians, as they pray in a sort: so are they partakers of the Spirit in some measure, though not of the Spirit of Adoption to seal them unto eternal life. For there be some com∣mon gifts of the Spirit, not altogether ineffectuall, of which many partake, that are not effectually called to communion with Christ in his death and resurrection. Now in what measure these common graces are imparted unto temporary Be∣lievers, in the same they may put up supplications unto God: but even these liveless, superficiall, wavering desires, come from an inferiour work of the Spi∣rit in them. Q. Doth not God hear the desires of the wicked? A. 1. God hears the desires of the wicked in judgment, not in mercy. For the blessings he reacheth forth unto them are tokens of his indignation.Hos. 13.11. Psal. 69.22. I gave them a King in my wrath, and took him away in my displeasure. Let their Table be made a snare, and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap.1 Reg. 21.29. 2 Chron. 12.7. Psal. 78.34, 35 36, 37, 38. 2. Sometimes the wicked do humble themselves before God, and make semblance of returning unto him: and God in a manner proportionable to their repentance, is pleased to grant their requests.
CHAP. II. Shewing, what the Word Our imports; That a Christian may in Prayer, say My God, and Pray specially for himself or certain others, yet so as that he must be mindful of all that belong to the election of Grace. How God is said to be in Heaven, and what is thereby signi∣fied. Question. WHat doth this word [Our] import? A. Our is not onely a note of the joyning together of many in prayer, when one man is the mouth of the rest: but it importeth that common interest and fatherhood in God, which the rest of the faithful have in him, from which there groweth a communion of one Christian with another, so that they become brethren. Quest. Is it not lawful for us in prayer to say, My God or my Father? A. In special manner God is the God and Father of Christ,Mat. 26.39. Eph. 1.3. Jo. 29.17. Phil. 4.20. Phil. 1.3. & 4.19. Jo. 20.28. Psal. 22.1. & 5.2. & 59.1. Mat. 6.6. Zanch. in Phil. 4.20. See Maldon. in Math. 6.9. Job. 34.36. Lavat. in Job. ibid. Tremel. ib. Ar. Montan. Schind∣ler. pentegl. rad.  est oration ad Deum, quem honoris causa ita appellat. Tara.  volo ego. Jer. 3.4. Vers. 19. Psal. 89.26 2. Sam. 7.14. Rev. 12 7. the God and Father of all the faithful in common, nevertheless it is lawful for a Christian in private prayer to say, My God, or my Father, Paul saith, I thank my God; Thomas, My Lord and my God; David, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. Pray to thy Father in secret (saith Christ) and thy Father who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. Some Divines observe that it is not lawful for any meer man to say, My Father, but onely for Jesus Christ, who by this phrase of speech, doth distinguish himself from the sons of God by Adoption. But this observation will not hold, for in Scripture we finde the servants of God to use this manner of speech, My Father, and that with approbation, My Father let Job be tried unto the end, because of his answers for wicked men. Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My Father thou art the guide of my youth? Thou shalt call me, My Father, and shall not turn away from me. The Lord saith of every one that overcometh, he shall be my Son. Quest. What may be observed hence? A. 1. All true Christians have the Lord of Heaven and earth to their Father, I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,2 Cor. 6.18. Jo. 20.17. saith the Lord God Almighty. I ascend to my Father and your Father, saith Christ: There is no distinction of Jew or Gentile, bond or free, rich or poor, male or female, weak or strong: but all that believe with Abraham, they are the children of God,Gal 3.28. 1 Jo. 3.1. as was Abraham, Behold, what love the Father hath shewed us, that we should be called the sons of God. There is none so weak or unworthy in his own eyes, who is not allowed to call God Father. He is no respecter of persons, no more the Father of the rich than of the poor, of the noble the nof the base. The strong Chri∣stian must not despise the feeble, for they have one Father; nor the weak despaire of audience, for he is a child. In adversity we must not fear, for our Father will provide for us: nor in prosperity be proud, for what we enjoy is our Fa∣thers gift. 2. In outward state, office, and measure of grace one Christian may excell a∣nother, but in the common priviledges of Christianity they are all equal. For they have all one God, one Father, one Mediator, one Spirit,Eph. 2.18. Eph. 4.3, 4, 5. live under one Covenant of, and have like free access to the throne of Grace. What
success any of the Saints did ever finde, that may all the faithful look for. 3. All the faithful are of one spiritual society, and have sweet communion in Spirit with each other. They are children of one Father, members of one bo∣dy, knit together by one Spirit. And all that would pray acceptably, must hold communion and good agreement with their brethren, as the children of such a Father, by the same right of mercy and free liberality. For if we have all one Father,Mal. 2.10. Heb. 13.3. Gal. 6.1, 2. from whom comes every good gift which we enjoy; we should be rea∣dy to communicate to others, as use requires, whatsoever is under our hands. We must in prayer to God come with love to the brethren; if thou art about to offer thy sacrifice at the altar,Mat. 5.23, 24. and remembrest thou hast any thing against thy brethren, go, reconcile thy self first, then do thy duty after, otherwise the Lord will turn away from thy prayers. If one should give the King a petition, and carry in his hand or about him, some stinking savour which the sense of any abhorred, could he think but the King would turn from him? So he that com∣eth petitioning to God with wrath and malice, which stinketh odiously in Gods nostrils, must look that God will turn his countenance from him. Lift up pure hands without wrath.1 Tim. 2.8. Wherefore Peter exhorts man and wife to exercise all mu∣tual love towards one another, that their prayers be not hindred. Let us there∣fore labor to be of brotherly affection one towards another.1 Pet. 3.7. Should our pa∣rents know that we are faln forth with our brethren, durst we come in their sight? would we look for other then to be checked from them? Even so the Lord will turn his back to our prayers, while our affections are turned against our brethren. How should he call God his Father with affiance, who will not take the child of God to be his brother in affection? He that intirely affecteth the Father of the Family, loveth the whole house and family: in like manner the affection we bear towards our heavenly Father, must be shewed towards his whole family, house, and inheritance which he hath chosen. 4. We must not, because we pray alone, be careless of joyning with others in prayer.Mat. 18.20. Dum singuli o∣rant pro omni∣bus, sequitur, ut orent pro singu∣lis. Christ teacheth his Disciples jointly to pray, Our Father, &c. And hath promised his presence to two or three that meet together in his name. Look as if a single prisoner should ask us ought, it hath his force; but when all in the house lift up their voices at once, it is much more piercing; so in this matter, which letteth us see how wide such are, who will make light of praying with o∣thers, they hope they may pray for themselves, and like the old saying, Every man for himself, and God for us all. 5. In our prayers we must be mindful of others as well as of our selves. For as he teacheth them to pray, and to say, Our Father, because they were more then one jointly before him; so in this regard that he might make them mindful of all their brethren, called or uncalled, that belong to the election of God, Watch unto prayer for all Saints; not that we may not make a prayer wherein we must not mention others,Eph. 6.18. but because we must not fail at convenient times in the exercise of prayer, to mention others, as well as our selves, seeking their peace with God. We are members of one body; and therefore must help one another; and such as have learned love and mercy, cannot but seek at God the prosperity of their brethren, whose conflicting state they know by good experi∣ence in themselves; wherefore we must stir up our selves to the faithful perfor∣mance of this duty. He were a graceless child that would never pray for his mother, and we would think he would do little for us, that would not lend us a good word here or there: so when we remember not the Church, and will not open our mouthes one for another to God, What love is there? Let us therefore frequent this duty, not in word or shew, but in deed and truth. From the practice of this duty it cometh to pass, that a Christian man is like a rich Merchant, who hath his Factors in divers Countries: so a Christian man hath
in all places of the world some that deal for him with God (that never saw his face) who are petitioners for him unto God. 6. Hereby all true believers are distinguished from infidels and unbelievers: for they cannot call God Father: he hath created and doth preserve them, but they are not children by adoption in Jesus Christ. Quest. Is it not lawful to pray specially for our selves or certain others? A. It is: yet so as the mind may not depart from the beholding of this com∣munity, but refer all things thither. For though they are singularly conceived, yet because they be referred to that scope, they cease not to be common. The commandment of God touching the relief of the poor, is general, yet they o∣bey this commandment, who to this end succor them that they know to be in need and want, though they pass by others that are oppressed with as great ne∣cessity, either because they cannot know all men, or be not able to supply their needs: In like manner, they that in special words commend to God the neces∣sities of themselves or others well known unto them, minding with all the pub∣like society of the Church, do not resist the will or break the commandment of God? Q. How is God said to be in Heaven? A. By manifesting the effect of glory;1 Reg. 8.27. Jer. 23.23. Math. 18.10. sal. 11.4. Es. 57.15. Is. 66.1. Act. 7.49. Jo. 14.2. Mat. 5 34, 35. Psal. 57.3. Rom. 1.18. Psal. 2.4. Psal. 145.18. Deut. 4.29. Mat. 18.20. Jer. 23.24. E. 66.1. Psal. 139.7. otherwise the heaven of heavens is not able to contain him, he filleth Heaven and earth, yea all the creature is with him as a moat within the light of the Sun: But look as a King, who by his au∣thority and power ruleth over all his Kingdom, is at the Court more especially displaying there the glory of his Majesty; so God whose essence and presence of power is every where, in the heavens as in the Court of his Majesty, doth ma∣manifest his glory more excellently. As heaven is called the Palace, Seat, Habi∣tation, or Throne of God, in comparison of the earth, which is hs foot∣stool, from which he doth manifest his glory more oft and excellently then from any other place, and in which he mainfesteth himself most gloriously to the blessed Saints and Angels; so he is said to be in Heaven, not that he is far from us when we call upon him, as the heaven is distant from the earth, but that he is of divine, infinite Glory and Majesty, ruling and over-ruling all things, which he manifesteth from and in the heavens. Quest. What things are signified thereby? A. 1. It noteth the incomprehensible glory, majesty, immortality, and power of God, whereby he is able to do whatsoever he will in heaven or earth. The Lord is in heaven, and doth whatsoever he will.Psal. 115.3. Psal. 121.1. To this effect is that de∣scription of God, which the Apostle setteth down at large, calling him, Onely potentate, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, who onely hath immortality,1 Tim. 6.15, 16 dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto. 2. The Divine providence of God is noted by it, whereby sitting in his high watch-Tower, he doth at once behold all things here below, take notice of the necessities of his servants, attend un∣to their prayers, help and succor them in their distresses, confound their ene∣mies in their designs, and order, dispose and govern all things to the setting forth of his glory. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high,Psal. 113.5, 6. Psal. 102.19. Psal. 11.4. Psal. 20.6. 1 Reg. 8.29. Is. 63.15. who humb∣leth himself to behold things in heaven and earth. The Lord hath looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, from the heaven did the Lord behold the earth. The Lords throne is in heaven, his eyes behold, his eye-liddes try the children of men. The Lord will hear from his holy heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand. Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive and do. Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy glory. 3. It signifieth the supream dominion and sovereginty of the Lord, ruling in all places, over all things in great wisdom disposing the actions of all creatures, and affecting his own works in their fittest seasons. Art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou over all the Kingdomes of the heathen?2 Chro. 20.6. and in thine hand is there
not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? The Lord hath prepared his Throne in the Heavens:Psal. 103.19. Col. 4.1. Eph. 6.9. and his Kingdom ruleth over all. Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equall, knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven. Q. What may be observed from this part of the Description? A. 1. God to whom Prayer is made, who is the Father of all true Be∣lievers is an heavenly Majesty, perfect and infinite in power, goodness and glory.Isa. 57.15. Thus saith the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the holy place, with him also that is of a con∣trite and humble spirit. The Apostle calleth him, King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible,1 Tim. 1.17. and only Wise God. And he doth call Christ, who is one with the Father,1 Tim. 6.15, 16. Blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, Lord of Lords, who only hath immortality; dwelling in the Light which no man can approach unto. 2. In coming to God we must set before us his heavenly Majesty, power, goodness, omniscience and sovereignty clothed with his love, for this encourageth to pray, stirreth up reverence, and strengthen∣eth faith. Majesty without love may terrifie; love without Majesty may breed contempt: but when they are coupled together, the one allures, the other strike with awe. The glister of the pompe of earthly Princes doth move the subject to all humble regard of them, to all seemly submissness in their behaviours towards them: and doubtless, the not being striken with any consideration this way, doth make us so loose and heedless when we approach to God. Again, it confirmeth us in our faith, that God seeth our wants, is of strength and power to effect our desires, is of unsearch∣able wisdom to know perfectly what is best, and when it is best to help his Chil∣dren. Parents earthly, who have large hearts, have short hands, though they wish us well,Psal. 27.10. yet they have no power to effect what they would, or small wisdom to know, when help is fit. Were it thus with our Father, faith were shaken: but when he wanteth not will as a Father, nor wisdom and power as a heavenly Governour, our faith is firmly underpropped. Gods glory is infinite, his love everlasting, his truth heavenly and perfect, his power incomprehensible: Why then should we fear when we seek unto him?Rom. 11.23. He is both able and willing to graft in again the hard-hearted Jews: He is of power and willing to con∣firm and establish the rude and weak in faith. How then are we to accuse our selves, who know not how sufficiently to admire and adore an earthly majesty, a mortall man, and yet are so respectless of the High excellency of God? How slow of heart are we, that we are not raised up higher then these earthly things, when we are to deal with our God glorious in the Heavens? Why do we dread and trust in the power of man, not awing nor having confidence in his power, when the power of every creature higher then the earth, is un∣resistable by it? As what power of flesh can rsiest the least Cloud from dropping his rain, the least Starre from sending forth his light and influence? What a power is this of the Creatour of all these things, who dwelleth in glo∣ry above them?Psal. 61.2. Apoc. 5.6. Let us therefore considering this heavenly glory our Father hath, grow up to more reverence, devotion, and affiance towards him. 3. God can hear in every place, therefore we need not tire our selves with going on pilgrimage to any speciall place to seek him: for if we can but go to our hearts, and lift them up towards Heaven, we shall find him. God is as nigh to his peo∣ple in one place as in another: We may find him in the desert, in the dungeon, upon the bed of sickness,2 Chro 32.20. In publicis pre∣cibus necessaria est vox. In privatis autem precibus, non tam voce opus est, quam cogitatione, non tam manuum extensione, quam men∣tis intensione. Naenias Deus ibi exaudit, ubi habitat: Habitat autem in animo, & spiritus, non vox ducit orationem ad Deum. Alst sist. theol. lib. 2. cap. 9. if we seek him with all our hearts. 4. Prayer is an act of the heart, nor of the lips. It is not the sound of the voice that can peirce
the Clouds, and enter into the ears of the Lord of Hosts, but the sighes and groans of the spirit. The bruised heart makes the loud cry. 5. This doth admonish us to be heavenly-minded, if we will have any conjunction with God: for as he that would speak to the King at Court, must bodily move himself thither where the King bideth: so we that would speak with God, who dwel∣leth in heavenly glory (above all this visible frame of the creature) we must in spirit by faith move our hearts thither, where he is. Besides, where our Father is, there our Countrey is: and therefore as pilgrimes, and strangers do long after their native soiles, so must we after that glorious Inheritance, which our Father in the Heavens reserveth for us. Yea, For as much as we have cho∣sen God to be our heavenly Father, we are therefore to renounce all earthly things in comparison of him, and to cleave unfeignedly unto his Commande∣ments. The little child is never well but when it is in the Fathers lap, or under the Mothers wing: and the Children of God are never in better case, than when in affection and spirit they can come into the presence of their heavenly Father, and by Prayer as it were to creep into his bosome. Ʋnto thee, O Lord,Psal. 25.1. do I lift up my soul. 6. Christians must not in heart or voice utter any thing rashly be∣fore the Lord, nor use any vain or idle repetitions: for God is in Heaven,Eccl. 5.2. and we are on earth. Rashness is a bad Counsellour, and no better Petitioner. Many words without zeal, and repetition without fervency, is an empty and odious sound. 7. God can speedily send help to his Children, and they can quickly dispatch their suits unto him. Holy thoughts ascend into Heaven,Psal. 102.19, 20. Psal. 57.2, 3 & 18.16. and heavenly graces, blessings, assistance descend from above. Intercourse betwixt Heaven and earth in this kind, admitteth least delay. 8. The practi∣ses of ungodly against the Church and Chlidren of God, are all in vain: for God, who sitteth in Heaven, will laugh them to scorn.Psal. 2.4. Psal. 11.4. Psal. 59.13. It were ridiculous for a Dwarf with speare of bulrush to threaten the Sonne in the Firmament: so is it for sinfull man that creepeth on the ground, to resist the living God that ruleth in the Heavens. For be they never so strong, and knit in firme combination, the Lord can soon destroy and fire them, as bushes of thornes that be plat∣ted together. CHAP. III. The Rules to be observed in the Exposition of the several Petitions in this Prayer, and how they are to be distinguished. Of the first Petition, wherein is shewed what is meant by Name, and by hal∣lowed. The Ground of this Petition, what we desire of God therein; And how God is glorified of us in spirit, word, and workes. Question: WHat Rules are to be observed in the Exposition of the Petitions in this Prayer? A. 1. Each Petition hath a certain and firm ground, which must be known, acknowleged and believed. 2. Each Petition doth imply some confession or acknowlegement in respect of our selves. 3. Where we pray for any good, we pray against the contrary evils,Christus non praescripsit for∣mulam grati∣arum actionis: quia sicut precr, ita debenius gratias agere. Nam precatio est de futuris seu tandis gratiarum actio pro praeteritis seu tandis. Alst. ubi supr. and give thanks for the good things be∣stowed, or evils taken away, bewailing our defects and sins with grief and sorrow.
4. If one kind or part of any thing be expressed in any Petition, all kinds and parts of the same thing are to be understood. 5. Where any good thing is pray∣ed for in any Petition, the causes and effects thereof, and whatsoever properly belongs unto the said thing, is understood to be prayed for in the same Petition: except they fall out to be the express subject of some other Petition. And so when evils are prayed against, there causes, occasions, and events also are prayed against. 6. What we pray, we ask not for our selves alone, but for others, speci∣ally our Brethren in the faith. Q. How may the Petitions of this Prayer be distinguished? A. For the number of Petitions, Divines of good antiquity have reckoned seven, making two of the last; others of no less authority, have not regarded the number at all: Some of the Antient, and many of the Orthodox later Writers have reckoned but six: because the conjunction [but] knitteth, lead us not into temptation, and deliver us from evil, together into one sentence. But whether there be six or seven, it is no matter of our faith, and doth not deserve any heat of disputation to decide the controversie. If we respect the different persons whom the matter of the Petitions concerns,Jansen. har. cap 41. they are thus divided: the three first concern God only; the three last concern man. Again, if we respect that whch ought to be the chief end of every mans desire, and the means to compass the said end,Basting. Cate∣ch. 9.122. they have this order, and are thus divided: the first ex∣presseth the desire of the chief good; the means whereby this end is attained, are the matter of all the rest.Alsted. in orat Dom. Martin. sim. verb. Dei. Others divide them thus: In these six Petitions we ask either the end of our life, or the means which lead to this end. The end is either principall, the glory of God in the first Petition, or subordinate, our salvation, in the second Petition. The means are either leading to the end, or seducing from the end. The former we pray for, in the third and fourth Petitions, viz. piety and sustentation: the latter we pray against, in the fifth and sixth Pe∣tition, viz. sin past and present. Many such like divisions are made, but I will not stand to recite them at this present.Namen est id quo quis agnos∣citur: & ita passim in Sc. usurpatur. Mol. in Psal. 20. Psal. 22.3. Psal. 22.22. Psal. 116.13. 1 Reg. 5.5. Psal. 5.12. Psal. 115.1. Isa. 29.23. Psal. 44.5. & 68.4. & 86 9. Prov. 18.10. Psal. 118.10, 11. & 20.7.1. Joel 2.26. Exo. 34.5, 6. Exo. 3.14. & 6.3. Lev. 19.12. Deut. 32.3. Act. 9.15. Isa. 42.4 Mat. 12.21. Mal. 1.11, 12. Act. 21.13. Mic. 4.5. Mat. 28.19. Act. 2.15. Isa. 26.8. Rev. 3.4. & 11.13. 1 King. 5 5. 1 Pet. 4.14. Q. What is the first Petition? A. Hallowed be thy Name. Q. What is meant by thy Name? A. Name hath reference to God, and thy Name, signifyeth God himself, the Person named. More plainly, Name is put here for God, by Name or any other waies notifyed, that is, by Titles, Properties, Works, Ordinances, Mer∣cies, Judgments, or Signes of his presence and glory made known unto us. Name is put for the Person named, and so named, one kind of manifesting a Person for all other. Q. What is meant by this word hallowed? 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Pet. 1.16. Exo. 20.8. Isa. 13.3. 1 Cor. 7.14. 1 Tim. 4.4. Gen. 2.3. Lev. 10.3. 1 Pet. 3.15. 1 Pet. 4.11. Isa. 29.23. Act. 11.18. 2 Thes. 1.12. Ezek. 38.23.A. 1. To hallow, is to make a thing holy, which by nature was common or prophane, as the faithfull, by nature unclean, are sanctified by grace. 2. It signifies to separate or sever a thing in it self unholy, or common to an holy or singular use civil or sacred, and that in efficacy, word or deed, by sanctifica∣tion only or appropriation also. So God sanctified the Sabbath, the Temple, the Sacrifices, and the Priests. 3. To sanctifie is to declare, manifest, acknow∣ledg, and profess the holiness of a thing that is holy already. In the first sense, the word Hallow must not be taken in this Petition: for God and his Name alwaies was, is, and for ever shall be of it self most holy: But we pray, that
this holiness of God may be declared, manifested, acknowledged,Psal. 96.8. Mat. 11.19. and holily professed more and more; as wisdom is justified of her children: so declared to be, and approved of those that embrace her. This word Hallowed is set down in such a form of signification, as includeth all persons or things which are capable of setting forth and acknowledging his holiness. As, let thy Name be hallowed by thee; so saith Christ, Glorifie thy self. And,Joh. 12.28. Make me to hallow thy Name, in acknowledging thy holiness. And let all others acknowledg thee to be holy and the only true God. Thus Elias prayed,1 Reg. 18.30. Let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel. Q. What is the ground of this Petition to be believed? A. That God is in himself most holy, wise, strong, good, gracious, just,Psal. 148.13. Psal. 95.1, 2. Psal. 96.4, 5. Psal. 99.3, 9. 2 King. 19.19. Rev. 15.4. Dan. 5.23. Neh. 9.5. Isa. 29.23. Job. 1.21 Exo. 8.1, 2. Psal. 72.18. Psal. 113.3. & 111.9. mer∣cifull, and of incomprehensible glory; that his Name is most excellent, wonder∣full, and glorious, worthy to be praised, excelling above all thanksgiving and praise, most dear to God, and to be magnified of all his Saints. Q. What do we acknowledg in respect of our selves? A. We acknowledg that we were created such, as might worthily sanctifie the Name of God:Ezek. 36.21, 22 Jer. 23.27. Rom. 2.24. Amos 2.7. Mal. 1.6. but that since the fall of man we are so corrupt and wicked of our selves, so blind, hard-hearted, prophane, and poysoned with self-love, that we more regard our own credit and reputation than the glory of God; yea, that we cannot without the speciall grace of God, desire, think or do the things that pertain to his glory. Q. What desire we of God in this Petition? A. The summe is, that God would so work, that himself howsoever made known by Titles, Word or Works, may be discerned of us as holy,2 King. 19.19. and so confessed, and accordingly respected of us; that God would so effect this, that himself may be more and more honoured of us, who are his chosen,2 Sam. 7.26. Psal. 40.16. & 115.11. 1 Chro. 16.35 36. & 17.24. Psal. 35.27. Isa. 8.13. and in all others that are the Children of destruction. In brief, we pray that Gods infi∣nite excellency and holiness may be declared and acknowledged amongst us, in us, and with us. Q. What things do we ak more particularly? A. First, Here we ask that God would work all such things as may be matter of his praise, whether they be good things towards his Children, or judgments upon the wicked. For thus God doth honour himself,Isa. 41.20. Psal. 67.1, 2. Exo. 9.16. sal. 25.3. Jansen har. 45. p. 41. Exo. 15.1, 2, 3, &c. Ezek. 20.9, 14, 41. veses. Ezek. 39.7. Ezek. 28.22. when he doth such things before us, upon which we take occasion to honour him. Hence it is that he will winne honour to his Name in delivering his Children, and inflicting judgments upon them that walk rebelliously, and be enemies to his Church and people. The Lord speaking of the bringing back of his people out of captivity, and destruction upon their enemies, saith, I wrought for my Names sake, that it should not be polluted before the Heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made my self known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the Land of Aegypt. Behold I am against thee, O Zidon, and I will be glorified in the midst of thee, and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have executed judgment in her. And I will sanctifie my great Name, which was prophaned among the Heathen,Ezek. 36.23. which ye have prophaned in the midst of them; and the Heathens shall know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes. I will rain upon him [sc. Gog] and upon his bands,Ezek. 38.16, 22, 23. verses. Psal. 145.4, 5, 6, 7. Jer. 33.7, 9. and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great haile-stones, fire and brim-stone: Thus will I magnifie my self, and sanctifie my self, and I will be known in the eyes of many Nations. I will cause the captivity of Judah to re∣turn, &c. And it shall be to me a Name of joy, a praise,Isa. 5.16. Psal. 76.1, 2, 3. Isa. 64.2. and an honour before all the Nations of the earth. The Prophet foretelling what Judgments the Lord would bring upon the disobedient, saith, The Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in
Judgment,Psal. 83 9, 18. Psal. 106.8, 47. Lev. 10.3. Exo. 14.18. Numb. 20.13. Psal. 9.16. Jer. 9.23. Jer. 31.32, 33. Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.2. Joh. 17.3. 2 Cor. 3.18. 1 Cor. 1.24. Joh. 1.18. Rom. 16.27. Eph. 3.21. 1 P t. 4.11. Josh. 7.8, 9. Ezk. 36.22, 23. and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness. And when he inflicted that judgment on Aarons Sonnes, he said, He would be glorified in such as come near him. If he might not have it from them, he would have it in them, by sending such Judgments on them, as might be matter of his glory. Secondly, We pray that God would make himself known unto all Nations in and through Jesus Christ, who is the Image of the invisible God, the engraven form of his Person, the brightness of his glory. For in Christ we behold the glory of the Lord as it were with open face. What we know of God by the works of creation and providence, is little in comparison of that we see of his goodness, mercy, wisdom, grace, long-suffering, and clemency in Jesus Christ. And as God glorifieth himself by the revelation of his Son; so do the Saints glo∣rifie him in and through Jesus Christ. To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Ʋnto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus. If any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God giveth, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ. Thirdly, We ask of God to refrain the bring∣ing of such things upon us, which might make wicked ones take occasion to prophane his Name. For when God saith, he will not pullute his Name among the Heathen, by the utter extinguishing of his people; he doth teach us that the giving occasion to wicked ones to crow against his people, and himself their God, is a dishonour of his Majesty: and therefore here we pray it may be prevented. Remember this,Psal 74.10, 18. that the enemy hath reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish peo∣ple have plasphemed thy Name. In this respect, God is pleased both to spare his people, not bringing upon them deserved wrath, and to deliver them out of misery after he hath humbled them for a season.Deut. 32.26, 27. Ezek. 20.14, 15. Ezo. 32.12 Numb. 14 13. Deu. 9 28. Psal 106.7, 8. Isa. 52.5. I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men; were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should be∣have themselves strangely. Our Fathers understood not thy wonders in Aegypt, they remembred not the multitude of thy mercies: but provoked him at the Sea, even at the red Sea; Nevertheless, he saved them for his Names sake. Now therefore what have I here, saith the Lord, that my people is taken away for nought? They that rule over them, make them to howle, saith the Lord, and my Name continually every day is blasphemed. Yet if it so fall out, that the state of Gods people is incorrigible, and they will not be reclaimed from prophaning Gods Name, it is better that the open enemy should blaspheme them, than that he should receive such intollerable indignity from his own people. Be∣cause thou hast forgotten me,Jer. 13.25, 26. Josh 7.12. Jer. 30.14. and trusted in falshood, Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear. Thy sorrow is incurable, for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sinnes were increased, I have done these things unto thee. Fourthly, We ask that God would make us grow up to ac∣knowledge him,Jer. 9.23. Psal. 67.2 & 00.3. Hos 6.6. Joh. 17.3. Psal. 67.2. in all means and waies of his, wherein he manifesteth his glory. For as the Sunne shining brightly, should be glorious in it self, but if eyes were not opened to behold it, it should not be had in account as glorious with man; so the Lord, glorious in all his waies, hath not that glory in his creature, till, the eye of the mind opened, this be discerned of them. This is to be prayed for, because the dimme sight of the most holy men being unable to comprehend the high acts of God, hath driven them to stagger in themselves. When David be∣held the prosperity of the wicked,Psal. 73.3▪ 4, 5, 6. Jer. 12.1. Hab 1.13. and considered the manifold afflictions where∣with the godly are exercised every day, he was somewhat moved at it, untill he went into the Sanctuary of the Lord, and there understood the end of these men. Fifthly, We ask that he would enable us more and more in spirit, word and work,1 Cor. 10 31. 1 Cor. 6 20. Psal. 71 17, 8. 2 Sam. 7.26. 1 Chron. 6.35. Rom. 11.36. & 16.27. Phil. 4.20. Rom. 1.21. Luk. 5.26. Act. 3.10. Psal. 3.2. & 132.7. to give him glory from our selves, and seek that others may do the same, moved by our word and works; that as we discern him to be holy and glorious
every way, so we may accordingly glorifie him; that we might be zealous of his glory. Sixthly, We desire that God would dwell amongst us in the signes of his presence, that in them we might behold his strength and glory. Q How is God glorified of us in spirit? A. 1. By an inward and faithfull acknowledgment, admiration,Psal. 8.1. Psal. 48.10, 11. Psal. 67.2. Col. 1.10. and conside∣ration of his power, goodness, grace and holiness revealed in his Word, and manifested in his works above the capacity, contrary to the expectation of men in this world. O Lord, how great are thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep! A brutish man knoweth not: neither doth a fool understand this;Psal. 92.5, 6, 7. Isa. 33.9, 0. & 28.23, 24, 25. & 42.14. Joh. 3.33. Rom. 4.20. 2 Chron. 16.8, 9. Isa. 8.12, 13. 1 et. 3.15. Psal. 22.23. Psal. 6.7. Eccl. 3.14. Jer. 5.22. Psal. 119.120. Isa. 66.2. Psal. 63 8. Psal. 139.17, 18. Psal. 19.10. & 119.97. Psal. 116.1. Psal. 33.1. Jer. 9.23. 1 Cor. 1.31. Psal. 22.26. Psal. 115.1. 2 Sam. 7.18. Psal. 8.5. & 144.3. Luk. 1.48. Psal. 69.9. Joh. 2.17. Isa. 29.23. Exo. 15.1, 2. Isa. 42.12. Psal. 50.23. Jer. 32.17. Psal. 103.1, 2. 1 Thes. 5.8. Psal. 79.9. Psal. 8.1, 2. When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish: it is, that they shall be destroyed for ever. 2. By our sound affiance and confidence in the Word of God, resting upon his grace, staying upon his power and faithfulness, adhereing unto his Commandements. Abraham staggered not at the Promise through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory unto God. 3. God is glorified by us when we stand in awe of his greatness, and fear before him con∣tinually. Sanctifie the Lord in your hearts, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him. I know that whatsoever God doth, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doth it that men should fear before him. 4. By intire love, and sound joy God is glorified, whereby we sincerely cleave unto him for his goodness, and heartily rejoyce in his favour. I love thee dearly, O Lord, my strength. Rejoyce in the Lord, ye righteous. 5. Humbleness of mind, and spiritual poverty fitteth the soul to glorifie God. For he that in all things denyeth himself, will give God the praise of all his works. What am I, that thou shouldst do so great things for me! 6. Ardent zeal for the glory of God is here begged also. Thy zeal hath even consumed or eaten me up. 7. He that acknowledgeth his sinnes, and offereth praise to God for his general goodness or particular favours, glorifieth him. These as they be internall Operations of the soul, must be referred to this Head. Q. How is God glorified in word? A. By confession of our sinnes; justifying God in his Judgments,Josh. 7.19. 1 Sam. 6.5. Psal. 119.75. Neh. 9.33. Psal. 51.4. 1 Sam. 3.18. Ezra 9.10 Isa. 39.8. Dan. 9.7. Lam. 3.22. 2 Chro. 12 6. Job 36.24. Psal. 145.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 21. Psal. 116 12. Deut. 32.3. Psal. 51.15. & 40.9, 10. Psal. 50.23. Hos. 14.3. Psal. 34.1. Act. 4.21. Psal. 29.9. Psal. 45.1. Psal. 106.47. Gen. 14.20. Ruth 4.14. 1 King. 1.48. Psal. 63 3, 4. Psal. 51.15. Psal. 71.8. Rom 14.11. 1 Pet. 3 15. though hid∣den and above our reach; celebrating his works, confession of his truth, and speaking good of his Name to others But all this must proceed from an heart truly, sincerely, zealously affected to the praise of God. My heart is in∣diting a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made, touching the King: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. The Prophet would signifie, that being enflamed by the Spirit, and provoked by the ardent love of the Messias and his Kingdom, he could not refrain his tongue and hand. Q. How is God glorified in workes? A. 1. By sincere worship, when we approve, esteem, and exercise the holy Ordinances of God according to his appointment. If ye will not hear,Mal. 2.2. and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my Name, saith the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon you. 2. By reformation of our lives,Jer. 13.16. Hos. 6.1 if we have gone astray. Give glory to the Lord your God before he cause dark∣ness.
3. By fruitfulness in good works, walking before God in holiness and righteousness. Hereby is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. Let your light so shine before men,Joh. 15.8. Mat. 5.16. Phil. 1.11. 1 Pet. 2.12. 2 Thes. 1.12. Prov. 3 11, 12. Isa. 39.8. Job 2.20. Job 33.13. Job 13.15. Mich. 7.9. Iob 1.21. 2 Sam. 16.11. 1 Sam. 3.18. Psal. 119.71. Mat. 10.3. Psal. 119.46. 1 Pet. 4.12. Ioh. 21.19. Dan. 6.5, 6. Tit. 2.10. 1 Tim. 6.1. 1 Tim. 4.5. Phil. 1.20. that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in Heaven. 4. By patient submission to the will of God, neither despising his corrections, nor despairing under them, nor fretting against him. Why doest thou strive against him? for he giveth not account of any of his matters. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, untill he plead my cause. 5. By constant undaunted profession and suffe∣ring for the Name of Christ, if we be called thereunto. I will speak of thy testimonies also before Kings, and will not be ashamed. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of glory, and of God resteth upon you: On their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. 6. By diligence, faithfulness and honesty in our callings; as it is said of Daniel he was so faithfull, that no fault could be found in him. But all these must pro∣ceed from lively faith and ardent zeal to the glory of God. Mine earnest ex∣pectation and hope is, that in nothing I shall be ashamed: but that with all boldness, as alwaies; so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death. CHAP. IV. Wherein is shewed, what we ask for others in this Petition, what the evils are that we pray against, and the wants that we bewail, with di∣rections how we may devotionally make this Petition; And what the especiall blessings are for which we must give thanks according to this Petition, and the practicall conclusions that are to be drawn from thence. Question. WHat do we ask for others in this Petition? A. For others as yet uncalled, they are two-fold, belonging to the election of grace, or otherwise. Now for the former we intreat that God would daily bring them home to glorifie him with us; yea, that he would give them godly sorrow for such things as before their visitation they heedlesly neg∣lected.Psal. 67.2, 3. Psal 22.31. Psal. 96.7. Let thy people praise thee, O Lord, let all the people praise thee. Give unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people) give unto the Lord glory and strength. For other we pray, that God would restrain them from their high prophanation of his Name, and that he would turn their rage (and so by pro∣portion all their other sinnes) to the praise of his Name. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee.Psal. 77.10. Q. What are the evils that we pray against? A. All prophanation of Gods most holy Name. 1. Ignorance and folly, whereby we discern not,Lev. 18.21. & 19.12. & 21.6. & 22.3. Hos. 8.12. Iob 21.14. 2 Pet. 3.5. Psal. 14.2. Isa. 42.20. Jer. 4.19, 22. Isa. 27.11. Hos. 4.1, 2. 2 Thes. 1.8. Jer. 10.25. 1 Cor. 15.34. Mat. 22.2, 29. Ioh. 4.22. neglect, or disregard the power, goodness, grace and holiness of God, shewing themselves brightly in his Word and Works. Who is blind but my servant? or deaf as my messenger which I have sent? Who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lords servant? Seeing many things, but thou observest not: opening the ears, but he heareth not. 2. Unbelief and wavering,
when the heart is divided from the Commandement, and staggereth at the Pro∣mises. The Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believe not,Numb. 20.12. & 27.14. Deut. 32.51. to sancti∣fie me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congre∣gation into the Land which I have given them. 3. Carnall and wicked confidence, when we build upon sandy foundations, or rest upon rotten posts which cannot uphold. Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord,Jer. 7 4, . Amos 6.13. Psal. 2.10. Ier. 7.5. Amos 6.1. Psal. 27.1, 2. the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these. Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord. 4. Wicked, vain, superstitious and slavish fear, when we fear the loss of pleasure, honour, or profit more then Gods displeasure; when we dread the signes of Heaven, the malice of ungodly men, and what they can do unto us, as to doubt of Gods protection and grace; when we fear his threatnings in such sort as we fly from him, or make obstinate resistance to his good will and Commandement. Be not dismaied at the signes of Heaven,Jer. 10 2. Isa. 8.12. for the heathen be dismaied at them. Fear ye not their fear, nor be afraid. 5. Carnall love and re∣joycing in outward things, whereby the heart is withdrawn from God.Job 31.25. If I rejoyced because my wealth was great, and because my hand had gotten much riches. 6. Pride and self-sufficiency, whereby we are puffed up in conceit of our own excellency, trust in our own strength,Prov. 8.13. Isa. 2.11, 12, 17. Job 5.44. & 1.43. Prov. 3 7. Job 31.27. Rom. 12.16. Prov. 26.10. Hab. 1.16. & 2.4. Dan. 4.27. Act. 12.23. Luk. 18.11, 12 Mar. 6.52. & 8.17, 18. and seek the approbation and ap∣plause of men, more then the praise of God. When our first Parents were tempted in Paradise, the Devill told them they should be as Gods: which lesson, not only they, but we have learned: for we conceive of our selves as gods, though in words we deny it. This hidden pride appears in vain thoughts, secret applaudings of our own courses, spiritual fulness, and lofty imaginations which continually upon every occasion ascend in the mind. 7. Hardness of heart where∣by we are hindered from knowing God aright, from making right use of mercies and judgments, and from discerning the glory and majesty of God in his works and creatures. The Disciples through the hardness of their hearts, could not see Gods power in the Miracle of feeding many thousand with a few loaves though themselves were instruments of it, and the food did increase in their hands. Our Redemption what a wonderfull work is it, but how few consider of it, or regard it? 8. Luke-warm indifferency in matters of religion; which is a temper that the Lord hateth. Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people. Ephraim is a cake not turned 9. Ingratitude or forgetfulness of Gods benefits,Psal. 71.18. Hos. 8.14. Jer. 23.27. Rom. 1.21, 28. Psal. 106.7. Psal. 78.19. 2 Pet. 3.4, 10. Jer. 34.16. 1 Tim. 6.1. Exo 20.7. Numb. 11.6. Rom. 2.23, 24. Ezek. 36 20, 23. Tit. 1.16. Ezek. 20.27. 2 Sam. 12.14. Rev. 16.9. 1 Cor. 10 1 Exo. 16.2, 3. Rev. 1 11. Jer. 36.24. 2 Chron. 36.15, 16, 17. Ezek. 9.9. when we neither seriously think upon them with our selves, nor make mention of his good∣ness before others to stirre them up to magnify the Lord. Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and buildeth Temples. Our Fathers understood not thy wonders in Aegypt, they remembred not the multitude of thy mercies. 10. Prophanness or disobedience in speech or life, whereby the Name of God is polluted, and pure Religion disgraced. Through breaking of the Law dishonourest thou God? For the Name of God is plasphemed amongst the Gentiles through you. 11. Im∣penitency, when men harden their hearts in sinne, and will not return unto the Lord, notwithstanding they have been often admonished, lovingly invited, and severely chastened. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory. 12. Murmuring, impatiency, fretting at the hand of God upon us. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the de∣stroyer. 13. Obstinacy and incorrigibleness, whereby the Lord is compelled to give his people into the hands of their enemies to be scourged, because no admo∣nition, long-suffering, or gentle correction will work to sound and true amend∣ment. Because Judah would not hearken to the Prophets of the Lord, whom he sent unto them, rising early and exhorting them to repentance: therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the Sword in the house of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young
man or maiden, old man or him that stooped for age. 14. Denyall of the truth before men, or starting aside from our holy profession in the daies of persecution.Mat. 10.33. Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. 15. Presumptuous arrogating or giving to any other, what is proper and peculiar to the Lord of Glory. The Angel of the Lord smote Herod,Act. 12.23. Dan. 5 23. Psal. 78.1. Exo. 33.15, 16. Ezek 9.3. Jer. 18.17. Psal. 27.9 & 102.2. Psal. 7.9. that he was eaten of wormes; because he gave not God the glory. Lastly, We pray that God would not take from us the signes of his presence and glory, nor suffer the arrogant enemies of his truth to prevail and prosper to the dishonour of his Name. Q. What are the wants that we bewail in this Petition? A. 1. We bewail all the evils that we pray against in our selves or others, as knowing that God is thus dishonoured by men on earth. 2. We must not for∣get to confess with grief and sorrow, our dulness and deadness of heart, that we do not earnestly and constantly pray that Gods Name be glorified; that we con∣sider not the greatness and excellency of the things we crave; that what we ask in words we deny in deeds, what we pray against we pluck down or hold upon our selves by our carelesness, forgetfulness, indulgence to sinfull passions, rush∣ing into the occasions of sin, and works of darkness; that we weigh not our Petitions and root them in the heart, to express the power of them in life and conversation;Isa. 1.2, 3. Jer 5.7, 8. Psal. 78.32. Mar. 6.12. that our affectons are not stirred and moved according to the quality of Gods works and Word; and that we consider not as we ought, the wisdom, power, justice, and mercy of God appearing in his Works. Q. How should we stirre up our selves devotionally to make this Pe∣tition? A. To say this Petition feelingly, we must consider, First, How necessary a thing it is that God should have his glory. It is his right, and if we yeeld it not unto him,Rom. 11.36. Rev. 4.11. he will be glorified in us. For to this end all things were made, we live, move, and have being from him to no other purpose. Secondly, Though this is so necessary, yet how little God is honoured by us, who are his, he passing by us in many parts of his providence, we not seeing him, nor taking any heed to him in the things we do see; not affected with fear, joy, thankful∣ness as they require, little thinking on him, not speaking of him to his praise, not ordering our works in such sort as they might be to the glory of him our heavenly Father. It is God that hath formed us in the womb, brought us into the world, provided for us ever since, spred our Table, protected us against all dangers, laid us to sleep, raised us up again, dressed, undressed us, led us by the arms, and taught us to go. He hath given his Son to redeem us, revealed himself unto us in his Word, regenerated us by his Spirit, freely justified us from sinne, adopted us for his Sonnes, and sanctified us unto holy obedience. But we seldom think upon these blessings, we prize them not according to their worth, we walk not as becomes them that have received such favours from the Lord. How many waies do we take Gods Name in vain? Thirdly, We must consider how our hearts are so poisoned with love of our own names, estimation, and that glory which is from man,Joh. 12.43, 44. & 5 43. that we are altogether careless of Gods glory. Hence it is, that if we circumstantially so fail, that it craseth our reputation in any kind with men, it doth sting us, but when we be faulty towards God, we pass it over without trouble. Hence it is, that if one put the least contemptuous behaviour upon us, using a term of any disgrace, it doth kindle coales presently; but we can hear Gods Name dishonoured, and not be affected, and moved with it. We had need therefore to pray unto God, that he would heal this matter. Fourthly, To marke how fearfully with wicked ones not yet called, Gods Name is propha∣ned. Doth it not pity us when we hear that our friends have such servants as do twenty dishonest parts, which will redound to their discredit? Did we see their giving no regard to their Master, rioting his goods otherwise then he command∣eth,
drinking themselves drunk in his Cellers, would it not grieve us? Thus that Lord of us all,Psal. 119.139. that Master in Heaven is used by those that should be servants unto him; which if we well weigh, we cannot but cry to him for help, that those deluges of his dishonour might be stopped and diminished. Fifthly, We should seriously consider how forward we have been to dishonour God in thought, word and deed, before our conversion and calling out of the Kingdom of darkness. Were not our hearts set upon evil works? Did we not devise ab∣hominable things? Were not our deeds sinfull and odious? What good thing did we receive from God, which we abused not to the dishonour of his Name? How contemptuously have we slighted mercy profered in the Gospel? And should we not zealously affect the glory of God now we be called to the partici∣pation of grace, when in former times we prophaned his Name very wickedly? Sixthly, Gods Promises to such as seek his glory,Deut. 32.51. 1 Sam. 2.30. and threatnings to such as do otherwise; He will honour such as honour him, and such as despise him, shall be dispised. Seventhly, Let us consider that this is no common honour which God vouchsafeth us, when he commendeth unto us the care of his glory, and doth so farre abase himself, that he will make account of that honour which we give unto him, and desire to have it maintained and kept safe and sound. Eighthly, Let us remember how great his wisdom, goodness, righteousness, power, and all Vertues that are in him are, which whoso∣ever shall deeply weigh with himself, cannot but be ravished in great ad∣miration of him, to praise and magnify him in thought, word and deed. These things pondered, will ingender some more feeling when we preferre this Petition. Lastly, We have the example of Christ our Saviour, the ho∣ly Angels, and many of the Saints of God to incite and provoke us to glorifie God. I seek not mine own glory, but I honour my Father. Holy, Holy,Ioh. 8.50. & 17.4. Isa. 6.3. Psal. 145.11. Rev. 4.11. Holy Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy Name forever and ever. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created. Who is not awakened with this heavenly melody? Who is not stirred up to sing and rejoyce, at the hearing of those triumphant Songs of praise? Q. What are the special blessings for which we are to give thanks according to this Petition? A. 1. God is to be magnified for his excellent Works of creation and pro∣vidence, whereby as he formed, so he governs all things in most excellent order. The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoyce in his workes.Psal. 104.31, 32, 33. Rom. 11.36 He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hils, and they smoke. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live. 2. He is to be praised, that he hath manifested his glory in Christ Jesus unto the Church, and make known unto them his incomprehensible wisdom, mercy, compassion, love, and long-suffering. Blessing, glory,Phil. 4.29, 20. Rev. 5.12, 13. honour and power be unto him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. 3. We must bless the Lord that he hath shewed his power and goodness in the protection of his Saints, and confusion of their and his enemies. Fear God, and give glory to him,Ier. 33.9. Apoc 14.7. Apoc. 15.3, 4. & 19.2, 3. for the houre of his Judgment is come. Great and marvellous are thy workes, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy waies, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorifie thy Name? 4. Thanks and praise must be returned unto God for his gifts and graces freely vouchsafed unto us: that he hath enlightned our eyes to see and discern things pertaining to his glory; that he hath enriched our hearts with any measure of faith, love, reverence,2 Cor. 2.14. Eph. 5.20. 1 Tim. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. hope, zeal; strengthened us to walk unblameably, given us grace to reform our evil course of life, and called us to the profession of the truth, and made us con∣stant in manifold persecutions.
Q. What conclusions may be drawn from this Petition? A. First, Barely to use the Titles of God is not to pray, but therein we must lift up the heart to his excellency, either to crave and beg some blessing we stand in need of,Psal. 145.6, 7 9, 10, 11. Psal. 71.15, 22, 23, 24. Psal. 63.4, 5. Nihil petimus Deo intrinsecus accedere quod antea non ha∣buerit: sed ex¦terius aliquid fieri quo ejus gloria innotes∣cat ad bominum utilitatem opta∣mus. No en, regnum, obedi∣entia. non sunt in illo intimo Dei bono, sed assumuntur ex∣trinsecus. 1 Cor 10.31. 2 Sam. 12.28. Gen. 41.16. Dan. 2.20, 28. Psal. 115.1. Ioh. 13.32. or to give thanks for some benefit received. Secondly, The chief thing that we are to desire, is, that God may more and more be ho∣noured. This is more worthy then all the creature besides. The end is more worthy, than that which serves to the end; as meat and drink which serve to maintain the bodily life, are not so good as the body. So when all the creature and all the actions of us, are to tend hither, that God may be glorified, it is sure that Gods glory is farre more excellent; which must make us seek that he be more and more sanctified of us. It was Joabs praise, so to order the Battell, that his Lord and King might have the glory of the day, and not himself; Ought not all Gods subjects to respect their God, more then he did, or could respect his King? Excellently spake Joseph, when, that the honour of interpreting Dreames might not be given unto him, he saith, It is not in me, God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. In like manner Daniel would not assume to himself the power of revealing secrets, but saith, There is a God who revealeth secrets. These examples are for our learning, so that we must alwaies say with the Psalmist, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory. We see that servants of honourable personages they are all for their Lords honour; they will runne into Books, and out of good Inheritances sometimes, to maintain a kind of gallancy, which graces, as they think, the personage they serve: shall not we to our great good honour our God? If God be glorified by us, he also will glorifie us. O! let us seek his glory. Who will keep a servant no way to his credit? no more will God let us retain unto him alwaies, if we be so careless to him this way. Set and consider the dreadfull Judgments of God upon them, that in pride of heart have trampled upon his glory. Did he not honour himself upon Pharaoh and his Land, by his wonderfull Plagues which he sent amongst them,Exo. 14.4, 17. Rom. 9.22, 23. Ezek. 28.22. Isa. 37.23, 36. Dan. 4.30, 31. Dan. 5.23. Lev. 24 15, 16. Second causes are but the hands of God filled for our use, whereby he is pleased to reach forth good things unto us. Isa. 42.8. & 48.11. Psal. 79.9. Psal. 14.2. Rom. 3.10, 11. till he made Pharaoh himself and the Aegyptians to know that he was the Lord? Did not the Lord make Senacherib an example to all that should reproach the holy One of Israel? Did he not abase the pride of Nebuchadnezar, whilest he vaunted himself in his glory and greatness? For the like sinne was Belshazar weighed in the bal∣lance, and found too light. These things are registred for our warning, that if we would not perish with them, we should not sinne as they did 3. No glo∣ry or honour should be given to any thing in the world, but to the Name of God, further then they are instruments, whereby we may arise to glorifying of it. For God will not give his glory unto any, no not to the manhood of our Saviour Christ. Fourthly, It is a singular benefit of God to be admitted to the sanctifying of his Name, and as it were to set the Crown upon his head, and to hold it there; especially seeing he is able himself to do it: and when he would use others hereunto, he hath so many Legions of Angels to do it; yea, he can raise up stones to that purpose. Ffthly, When we seek this at God, we confess it is God that teacheth and enableth us to honour him. Our Children have no behaviours more civil, to our credit, which we do not train them unto. None by nature understandeth, none enquireth after God, nor yet care to glorifie him as God. As he is the God that teacheth us to profit in all points, so in this. The use of it is to teach us to referre all unto God, that we do prosperously this way, who worketh it in us, not our selves. As also to teach us on whom we must hang with conscience of our own wants, that we may more and more be enabled this way. Sixthly, Hence we see what care we must have neither to dishonour God our selves, nor to partake with it in others: for so doing we seem to mock God, and deny in deed, that which we beg in words. He that asketh his daily bread, and is careless to get, or save any thing
by some lawfull calling, should deride and tempt the living God. Seventhly, From hence we perceive, that spying Gods dishonour, we must be grieved:Ier. 9.1, 2. Ezek. 9.4. Iob 1.5. Psal. 119.136. Psal. 74.22, 23. for who can desire that truely, but it will grieve him to see the contrary? Yea, we must by ejaculation of our mind renew our requests (when we see such Spectacles) that God himself would provide for the maintaining the honour of his own Name. Arise O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily. Forget not the voice of thine enemies, the tumult of those that rise up against thee, increaseth continually. Eighthly, Holiness is the highest Title of honour and glory that can belong to any person, yea, to the most high God. As any person or thing is more holy: so is it more honourable. It was the honour of Jerusalem to be an holy City. It is the glory of the third Heaven, to be the high and holy place. As men were more holy:Psal. 16.2. so did David count them more excellent. When Christ Jesus will present his Church unto God a glorious Church, he will sanctifie it, and present it holy and without blemish.Eph. 5.26, 27. Mary magnifyeth the Lord in her song, thus;Luk. 1.49. Rev. 4.8. Rev. 15.4. Isa. 6.3. Non est omni∣no idem sancti∣ficari quod glo∣rificari sed glo∣rificari veluti species compre∣henditur in sanctificati, aut ex eo sequitur, sicut causa ex effectu. Jans. har. 41. cap. Lev. 11.44. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. He that is mighty hath done great things for me, and holy is his Name. The four living creatures say, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty. The Saints sing, Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorifie thy Name? for thou only art holy. When the Seraphims would gie God the greatest honour and glory, they cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts. Holiness in God is the rectitude and perfection, and so the glory of his power, mercy, justice, and all other his attributes: which are all most holy, and so most glorious. And as for other things, the more they par∣take of holiness, the more like they are unto God, and therefore the more excellent. CHAP. V. Of the Second Petition, what the word Kingdom doth signifie, and in what sense it is to be taken in this Petition, concerning the King, the Subjects, the Lawes, and the Degrees of this King∣dom; Why we are to pray for the coming of Gods Kingdom; The ground of this Petition, with the particular things that we therein desire. Question. WHat is the second Petition? A. Thy Kingdom come. Q. What doth this word Kingdom signifie? A. Kingdom in the largest sense signifieth the government and rule of a people under one Head or Governour.Ʋrfin. Catech. q. 123. explic. Regnum est talis politiae for∣ma, in quasun∣ma potestas. Psal. 29.10. Isa. 6.5. Psal 95.3. Omne sub reg∣no graviore reg∣num est. Sen. Thyest. act. 3. But in this Petition it is limited by particular refe∣rence to God, saying, Thy Kingdom, which importeth that administration of government, which God doth exercise in ordering all things, so as may set forth his sovereignty. Q. How many waies is the Kingdom of God taken in Scripture? A. Two waies. First, For that administration whereby he governeth all creatures, even the Devils themselves; which is called his universall King∣dom, or the Kingdom of power and providence. Secondly, For such an order or estate, wherein God hath all supremacy, and men acknowledg them∣selves liege-men to his Majesty, to their great benefit temporall and eternall.
God governeth his Kingdom by his Vice-roy Christ Jesus,Psal. 110.1, 2. Psal. 103.9. & 45.13. & 97.1. Apoc. 11.15. 1 Cor. 15.25. Psal. 110.2. Rom. 14.17. 1 Cor. 6.9. 1 Cor. 4.20. Phil. 2.9, 10. Heb. 2.8. Eph. 1.21. Heb. 1.6. Col. 1.18. Eph. 1.23. Psal. 2.6. Hos. 3.5. whom he hath or∣dained Lord of all things in Heaven and earth, and peculiarly King and Head of his Church and chosen people. Q In what sense is the word Kingdom taken in this Petition? A. The Kingdom of power is not here meant under which the Devils them∣selves live, for that goeth through all things most powerfully, nor can any crea∣ture exempt himself from it:Mat. 4.23. & 9.35. Dan. 2.44. Psal. 22.28. Exo. 19.6. Job 1.30. Col. 4.11. Rom. 14.17. 1 Thes. 2.12. Luk. 17.21. Col. 1.13. Mat. 3.2. & 11.11. Heb. 2.5. Mat. 18.20. 1 Tim. 2.8. But that Government in which God most grati∣ously ruleth, and we willingly obey, to our everlasting happiness: which is called the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of his dear Sonne, the Kingdom of Heaven, and the world to come; and by Divines, the speciall Kingdom. This Kingdom is confined to no certain place: out of this Kingdom we cannot go, if we abide in Christ. The Kingdom of Heaven, is the Kingdom of Christ, Dan. 2.44: Or, the state of the Christian Church opposed to the Jewish; Called heavenly in respect of the 1. King. 2. The Seate. 3. The Subjects. 4. Government. And 5. Conversation. Q. How many things are to be considered in this Kingdom? Luk. 19.12, 15.A. Four things. 1. The King. 2. The Subjects. 3. The Laws where∣by the Kingdom is governed. 4. The Degrees of it. Q. Who is the King? Zach. 2.9. Joh. 17.2. Mat. 28.19, 20. Joh. 18.36. Psal. 2.6. Hos. 3.5.A. In this Kingdom Christ is the King: it is he to whom the Father hath given all authority in Heaven and earth. Q. Who are the Subjects? Psal. 22.23. 1 Pet. 2.9. Eph. 5.23. Eph. 1.10. & 3.15. Col. 1 20. Rev. 15 3. Rom. 8.30. Act. 4.12. Job 22 22. Psal. 4.10. Mar. 1.14. Rom 3 27. Isa. 53.1. Mat. 13.24. Mat. 13.19. Mar. 1.13. Isa. 11.4. Isa. 53.1. Urfin. Catechis. q 123. expl.A. In this Kingdom all are not Subjects, but such as are willing to give free and frank obedience to Gods Word. Every particular man is not a mem∣ber of this Government: but only that company of mankinde in Heaven or earth, which is called from the world to the participation of eternall life through Christ. Q. What are the Laws of this Kingdom? A. The Gospel is both the meanes whereby men are gathered to this Kingdom through the powerfull operation of the Spirit, and the Law by which it is go∣verned. As a King by his Laws brings his people into order, and keeps them in subjection: so Christ by his Word, and the preaching of it, as it were by a mighty arm, draws his elect into his Kingdom, and fashions them to all holy obe∣dience. Therefore it is called the Kingdom of Heaven, the Gospel of the Kingdom, the rod of his mouth, the arm of God. Q. What are the Degrees of this Kingdom? A. This Kingdom is but one in substance but divers in Degrees. For Christ the King now reigneth, but not without enemies, without warre: but at the day of judgment, having abolished sinne and death, and trampled all his ene∣mies under feet, he shall reign peaceably for evermore. In this life he governs his Church by his Spirit and Word, Officers and Ordinances: but in the life to come,1 Cor. 15.28. God shall be all in all. And as for the Subjects of this Kingdom, some are militant here on earth, others are glorified in Heaven with Christ their Head, though in soul only; and at the day of Judgment both the one and other shall be glorified in soul and body. Of this Kingdom then there be three Degrees. 1. The Kingdom of grace,
in which Christ doth govern his Church militant in this life by his Spirit,Rom. 14.17. Col. 4.11. Mat. 4.23. & 9.35. Luk. 19.12, 15. Rom. 8.30. Rom. 14.17. Joh. 14.27. Psal. 45.11, 12, 13, 14. Psal. 65.4. Word and Ordinances, daily warring against his and their enemies, This is an entrance and preparation to the Kingdom of Glory. Great are the Priviledges of the Saints under this Government of Jesus Christ; they are qualified with eternall graces; they are comforted with the daily refreshings that flow from the sense of Gods favour; they are confirmed in the assured peace with Angels and good men; they are estated into an everlasting Inheritance; they daily reape the be∣nefits of Christs Intercession; they often sup with Christ, and are feasted by the great King; they live alwaies in the Kings Court, in as much as they are alwaies in Gods special presence; they partake of the Priviledges, Prayers, and Blessings of all the righteous; and they have the Spirit of God in them, to unite them to God and Christ, to lead them in the pathes of holy life, to comfort them in all distresses, to warn them if they go out either on the right hand or on the left, and to help them in their Prayers, making request for them. The second is the Kingdom of Glory begun or inchoate,Joh. 12.2. & 4.3. & 17.26. in which Christ reigneth in the world to come with the spirits of just men in glory, being perfectly freed from sinne, and admitted to the clear, immediate Vision and fruition of God their bodies abiding as yet in the grave, expecting full redemption and deliverance. The third, The Kingdom of glory consummate,1 Cor. 13.10 Eph. 5.5. Mat. 26.29. Mar. 9 47.  & 10.14. Cor. 13.10. 1 Cor. 15.28. Mat. 25.34. Luk. 12.32. Jam. 2.5. Luk. 1.33. Heb. 12.28. when sinne and death being utterly abolished, the Elect being perfectly separated from the reprobate, and all the enemies of God and his Saints being wholly subdued, the Lord only doth rule with his Saints in most perfect glory. This is the consummation and perfection of the former Degrees of this Kingdom, and shall never have end. In the King∣dom of grace we slip and fall often: but when the light of the Kingdom of glory, which is perfect, shall shine upon us, we shall stand firm and stable, all infirmi∣ty shall be done away. Q. What is it to come? A. Come, properly is an action of such creatures which have the power of moving, whereby they being absent or farre off, do approach near, and be∣come present: whence the metaphor here is taken, but with much enlargement of the sense. Here it signifieth five things: First, The coming and being of that which yet is not come. Secondly,Luk. 13.35. & 19.38. Apoc. 12.10. Christs King∣dom is said to come. First, In regard of means, Mat. 12.26. & 13.19. Mar. 1.15. Secondly, In regard of effi∣cacy, Rom. 6 7 Thirdly, In regard of perfection, and by increase of grace, Mat. 13.8. translation into Heaven, Luk. 23.42. and full redemption, Mat 25.34. Apoc. 22.20. Mar. 9.1.2. The continuance of so much of the King∣dom as is already come. Thirdly, Growth towards perfection of those things which are come in truth, but not in perfection of Degrees. Fourthly, The con∣summation and perfect coming of all things that belong to the glory of Gods Kingdom. The last is, When things concerning this Kingdom are come in their being, that they be revealed and come to our knowledg, for without this coming also we cannot glorifie God, in hallowing his Name. Therefore it is, that every speciall manifestation of Christs glory when it appeares to men, may be called a coming of his Kingdom. Thus Christs revealing some glimpse of his glory, is called the coming of the Kingdom of God with power. Q. What great need is there that we should pray for the coming of Gods King∣dom? A. We had need to pray that the Kingdom of God may come,2 Cor. 4.4. Luk. 11.18. Mat. 12.24, 25 Eph. 2.2, 3. Eph 4.18. Col. 1.13. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 19. Psal. 2.9. because Satan hath his Kingdom upon earth, all men by nature being his bond-slaves, living in ignorance, errour, impiety, and disobedience: which opposeth strongly a∣gainst the Kingdom of Christ. All men in words and shew detest the very Name of the Devil, but when they do his will, live under his Laws, delight in his works of darkness, subject themselves to the Pope and other his instruments, they are found indeed to love him as their Father, and honour him as their
Prince, whom in words they would seem to abhorre. As men may approach unto God with their lips,Mat. 15.8. when their hearts are farre from him: so may they in their lips be farre from Satan, when in their hearts they are near him. Q. What desire we of God in this Petition? A. We pray that God would that the honour of his Name may be amplifi∣ed, make his Government spread in the hearts of men, that the number of his Subjects may be increased, and subjection augmented in all who are brought under him, till they be perfected in the Kingdom of glory. In a word, we pray, That Christ would convert and bring home his chosen as yet living under the ty∣ranny of Satan, rule in the hearts of them that are already called, and perfect the salvation of his people, and the glory of his Kingdom in Heaven hereafter. Q. What is the ground of this Petition? Psal. 68.34. Psal. 2.6. Mat. 28.19. Psal. 110.2. Eph. 1.10. Psal. 66.3. & 67.4.A. That Christ is the universall, most powerfull sovereign Lord of all things in Heaven and earth, the King, Head, and Saviour of his people that he hath redeemed, and will bring home unto his Kingdom, whose government is op∣posed by Satan, the flesh, the world, not yet perfected by the absolute peace and glory of his Subjects. Q. What do we herein acknowledge? A. We acknowledge, that by our first creation we were under the King∣dom of Gods bounty and kindness,2 Tim. 2.26. Col. 1.13. 1 Tim. 1.13. and grieve that by sinne we fell from it, and so came under the tyranny of Satan, and the revenging justice of God. Q. What are the particular things that we desire? A. The things that we ask, are, First, That God would cast down the King∣dom of Satan,Rom. 5.17, 21. Col. 1.13. Act. 26.18. 2 Tim. 2.26. Psal. 21.13, 14. Luk. 10.18. Psal. 110 2. Rom. 16.20. Psal. 67.2. Cant. 8.8. Luk. 17.21. Isa. 54.2, 3. & 60.3, 4. Gen 9.27. Joh. 10.16. Mat. 8.11. Isa. 60.1, 2, &c. Rom. 11.25, 26. Psal. 2 8. Col. 4.3. Eph. 6.19, 20. Mat 9.37, 38. Eph. 4.11. Mar. 1.14. Mat 4.3. Isa. 11.4, 10. 1 Thes. 2 13. Psal. 110.2. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. 1 Thes. 1.5. Eph. 1.17, 18. Act. 26.8. Jer. 3 15. & 23.. 1 Cor. 11.23. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.5. Heb. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Act. 2.44, 46. & 4.32. Psal 51.1, 9. & 53 6. Isa. 62.7. sal. 3.8. & 67.1, 2. & 26.8. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. Gal. 2.5. 2 Cor. 2.17. & 11.3. Deut. 33.11. Col. 4.3, 4. 1 Thes. 3.1, 2. 1 Thes. 2.4. Col. 2.5. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 Cor. 2.10, 11. Act 13. Mat. 1.9. and all the props and pillars of it, where yet it is unshaken. In this God is glorious as a lawfull King in subjugating usurping Tyrants. I be∣held Satan as lightning fall from Heaven. Rule thou in the middest of thine ene∣mies. The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. Secondly, That God would plant both outwardly and inwardly the externall face, and in∣ward substance of his Kingdom where yet it is not. Other sheepe I have which are not of this Fold, them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance. And to this end we pray, that God would send forth his word into those people that as yet sit in darkness and the shadow of death; that he would powerfully accompany it by his Spirit, to bring his chosen from the power of Satan unto God; that he would give them Pastors according to his own heart, to feed them with knowledg and understanding; that he would erect his own Ordinances, and establish an holy order amongst them, and link them together in mutuall love and holy profession of the faith. Thirdly, For the Churches already planted we pray, that God would supply unto them what is wanting, and mercifully continue and encrease what good they enjoy; that he would preserve purity of Doctrine, that the Word may be preached purely, freely, with power and authority; that the Sacraments may be administred purely according to the in∣stitution of Christ, that the House of God may be governed according to the heavenly policy of that Kingdom, that comely order may be observed amongst the Saints, each man with all diligence, patience, meekness and zeal, doing the duties of his place; that the censures of the Church may be rightly executed; that the good may be encouraged, the evil may be shamed, and so brought to
amendment, or else cut off from the communion, and that to the working of true awefull credit to the Church,Joh. 14.23. Rom. 14.17. 1 et. 5.10. Eph. 1.17, 18. 1 Cor. 1.10. Joh. 17.11. Act. 2.46, 47. Eph. 4.3. Psal. 122.6. Act 4.32. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. & 1.27. Act. 9.30, 31. Gal 2.9. Deut. 6.7. Rom. 16.3, 9. Philem. 24. Col. 4.11. Isa. 49.23. Eccl. 10.16, 17. 1 Tim. 2.2. Dan. 6.26. 2 Chro. 19, 5▪ Isa. 60.3. Tit. 1.6, 7. 1 Tim. 3.2, 3. 2 King. 6.1. 2 King. 2 3, 15. Psal. 122.6. Isa. 59 21. Isa. 62.7. and advancement of the Kingdom of Christ Jesus. We pray also, that the graces of the Spirit, with the fruite thereof, may plentifully grow and encrease, and that God would bless his people with inward and outward peace and prosperity, that being freed from jarres, contentions, and externall persecutions, that they may walk in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, and mutually edifie each other in their most holy faith. And to this end we pray, that God would bless his Church with Christian religious Magistrates, which may be as nursing-Fathers, and nursing-Mothers to his Israel, which may so govern, that their Subjects may live in all godliness and honesty, which may rule for the praise of them that do well, and for the terrour of them that do evil: which may advance and defend the only one true Religion among their Subjects. Again, we ask that God would furnish his Church with Ecclesiasticall Officers, who might both govern and assist according to his will; men furnished with wise∣dom and grace to discharge their duties, such as be of unblameable conversation, ensamples to their Flocks in good works, whose hearts are set for the building of Gods Kingdom. We pray also for Schooles of Learning and Piety: for they are the ordinary means to maintain the Ministry, and so the Church of God. A man that hath divers Orchards, will also have a Seminary full of young Plants to maintain it. Schooles, they are as Seminaries to Gods Church, with∣out which the Church falls to decay: because they serve to make supply of Mini∣sters. And because Paul may plant and Apollos water, and all in vain, unless God give the increase; therefore we pray, that the holy Spirit would work effectually by his outward Ordinances, for the building forward of them that be already called, and the effectually calling of them that be members of the Church by outward profession only. As in the time of the Law, not the Ark alone, nor the Mercy Seate covered with Cherubims, but the answers from the Ark given immediately by God, were the undoubted evidences of his most glo∣rious presence amongst them: So not the externall sound of the Gospel, nor the bare ministry of the Word, but the powerfull work of the Spirit in every man soul and conscience, is the most evident demonstration of the same glori∣ous presence in the daies of the Gospel. The mighty and wonderfull works of the Holy Ghost, pricking some at the heart,Act. 2 37. & 9.4, 5. Joh. 1.12, 13. Act. 16.14. & 2 16, 17. 1 Cor. 14.24.25. Isa. 11.6. Psal. 122.3. Phil. 2.2. Jer. 32.39, 40. Rom. 15.31. 1 Thes. 4.9, 12. Act. 4.29. Eph. 6.19. Rev. 2.10. 2 Thes. 1.4. 2 Thes. 3.2. Rom. 15.31. Phil. 1 12, 13.14. Rev. 6.10. 2 Thes. 2.17. Luk. 22.31, 32. 1 Cor. 12.8, 9. Psal. 51.12. Cant. 1.2. Psal. 119.17. Psal. 38.21. Joh. 17.15. Jam. 5.15, 16. Isa. 61.1, 2. 2 Thes. 2.77. Psal. 5.8. Gal. 5.24. casting down others at the sight of their vileness, converting, quickning, comforting, discovering the thoughts, in∣flaming with burning zeal, assuring the heart of the truth received: this is an infallable witness of the most gracious presence of Christ amongst us. And for the members of the Church we pray, that they may live together in love, being of one mind and one judgment, yeelding free and willing subjection to the sove∣reignty of Christ Jesus, accepting the service and labour of his faithfull Messen∣gers, and walking in holiness without offence. Fourthly, For the Church in persecution we ask, that the Ministers of the Gospel may be inabled to preach, and others to profess the truth with all courage and boldness, as they ought to do; that they may be faithfull unto death, not fearing what the adversary can do unto them, that they may be delivered from unreasonable men, or protected against them; that the rage of the enemies and constancy of the Saints may turn to the encrease of the Church: and that in due time, he would put an end to the misery and tribulations of his Saints. Fifthly, For the Elect of God already converted we pray, that God would strengthen the weak, comfort the afflicted, recall the wandering, uphold them that stand, and lead them forward by his blessed Spirit into all truth and holiness. Sixthly, For our selves con∣verted and all others, we ask, that God would root out the relicks of darkness in us, which are as yet not subdued to grace; that he would preserve us to abide
in his Kingdom,Cant. 1.2, 3. Eph. 3.16, 17. Isa. 44.3, 4. 2 Thes. 2.17. Isa. 11.14, 15, 16. Psal. 42.1, 2. Mat. 8.11. Eph. 2.19. Psal. 63.1, 2. & 84.1, 2. Col. 1.12. 2 Thes. 1.5. 2 Tim. 4.18. 2 Pet. 3.12. Luk. 12.39, 40. 2 Pet. 1.11. Rev. 22.20. Col. 3.4. 1 Joh. 3.2. Dan. 2.44. Psal. 2.9. Apoc. 2.27. & 12.5. & 19.15. Psal. 69.24. and continually increase and quicken in us all those heaven∣ly vertues that he hath begun of his mercy; That he would subdue all the en∣mities and impediments, which Satan raiseth to hinder us in this way; That he would give all meanes serving to this end; as that we may live under his Ordi∣nances in his Church, enjoying the fellowship and society of the Saints. Seventh∣ly, Concerning the Kingdom of Glory we pray, that we may be made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light, be accounted worthy the Kingdom of God, and be preserved unto his heavenly Kingdom; that we may love, desire, and hast unto the coming of that Kingdom of Glory; that we may be prepared for the coming of that Kingdom; that Christ would bring us to his Kingdom of Glory: and that he would come to judgment, to magnifie himself in his just vengeance upon the wicked, and to glorifie his Name in the perfect salvation of his people, when death and sinne shall utterly be abolished, and all the enemies of Christ and his Saints be put under feet and subdued wholly. Lastly, For such as are uncalled, not belonging to Gods mercy, we pray, That in this life Gods power may bring them on their knees, and that they may be crushed with a rod of iron. CHAP. VI. The Evils that we are to pray against, the wants that are to be be∣wailed, the special Blessings for which we are to give thanks, with sundry usefull Conclusions, that are to be drawn from this Petition. Question: VVHat are the Evils that we pray against? A. 1. The tyranny of Satan, dominion of sinne, overspreading of false religions,Rom. 7.14.24. Eph. 4.17, 18. Rom. 6.12. & 16.20. Psal. 79.6. Jer. 10.25. Act. 4.25. & 12.21. Lev. 10 3. 2 Cor. 2.17. Col. 2.20, 23. Mat, 15.9. & 16 6. Phil. 3.2. Joh. 9.22. Joh. 3.10. Mat. 12, 25. 1 Cor. 2.3. Jam. 4.3. Judg. 21.25. & 10.1. Act. 18.17. Exo. 2.23. Prov. 29.2. Act. 4.17, 18. & 12.1, 6. Dan. 3.4, 5. and cruelty of Antichrist. Let not sinne reign in your mortall bodies. Poure out thy wrath upon the Heathen that have not known thee, and upon the Kingdoms that are not called after thy Name. 2. The corruption and mix∣ture of heavenly Doctrine, and pollution of Divine Ordinances with vain de∣vices, carnall rites, and unprofitable traditions. We are not as many which cor∣rupt the Word of God. Ye worship me in vain, teaching for Doctrines the tradi∣tions of men. 3. The abuse of Church-censures, when they be committed in∣to the hands of unworthy, unmeet, unlawfull Officers, or preverted for the maintenance of errour, and disgrace and molestation of the best members of the Church; as did the Pharisees, who made and executed this ungodly Canon, That if any did confess that Jesus was the Christ, he should be thrust out of the Synagogue: Or, as Diotrephes, who cast men out of the Church; for receiving the Brethren. 4. We pray against disorders, scandals, jarres and contentions in the Church of God. Whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and di∣visions, are ye not carnall, and walk as men? 5. We pray against Anarchy, when none reign, but every man liveth as he lusteth. Also against evil govern∣ment, when Magistrates maintain false religion or irrelegion, or tolerate them to the corrupting of the true, or persecute the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 6. We pray against having no ministry and government in the Church; also against a false ministry; as that of Pope, Cardinals, Priests, Jesuits, and such as Christ
never instituted: also against ignorant, idle, negligent, scandalous, proud, co∣vetous Ministers and Officers,Hos. 4.6. Cant. 5.7. Mat. 23.13. Isa. 29.11. Isa. 28.7, 8, 11. Isa. 56.10. Ezek. 34.3, 4. 2 Cor. 3.6. 2 Tim. 2.15. 1 Cor. 14.2, 3. Jer. 23.16. Ezek. 13.3, 4. 1 Tim 5.2. Eph. 4.0. Act. 7.51. 1 Thes. 5.19. Isa. 11.15, 16. Gl. 1.7. 1 Thes. 2.16, 19. 2 Thes. 3.2, 3. Gal. 5.12. Psal. 51.11. Jer. 7.15. & 52.3. 1 Sam. 26.19. Psal. 119.136. Mar. 3.5. Luk. 19.41. Psal. 101.3. Psal. 119.8. who either cannot or will not teach or govern according to their place; teach idly, rule remissly; teach corruptly, flattering∣ly, vainly, erroneously, without authority; rule with tyranny, inequally, not according to truth and honesty. 7. We pray that the Spirit of God be not grieved, resisted, or withdrawn, Ye stiffe-necked and uncircumcised in heart, and ears, ye do alwaies resist the Holy Ghost: as your Fathers did, so do ye. Quench not the spirit. 8. We pray against all lets and impediments whatsoever do hinder the gathering or progress of Christs Kingdom, the means of grace, and free passage of the Gospel. We would have come unto you (even I Paul) once and again: but Satan hindered us. I would they were cut off which trouble you. 9. We pray that we may not be cast out of Gods presence, nor deprived of his holy Ordinances. Cast me not from thy presence. If they be the Children of men cur∣sed be they before the Lord: for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the Inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other gods. Lastly, We pray against all decaies of grace, enormous and soul sins that hinder the building forward of Christs Kingdom, and revoltings from the way of truth. I hate the works of them that fall away, they shall not cleave unto me. Oh forsake me not utterly. Q. What are the wants which are to be bewailed? A. 1. The evils which we pray against, are wants for which we must mourn; as the tyranny of Satan under which the most do live; the reliques and remain∣ders of sinne which abide in the best; the want of good means which serve for the furthering of the Kingdom of Christ, as preaching, Sacraments, and Dis∣cipline. When we shall see a people without knowledg, and without good guides and teachers, or when we see one stand up in the congregation, not able to teach, here is matter for mourning. So when we see disorders, scandals, abuses in the house of God, then it is time to pray, Let thy Kingdom come.Luk. 9.11. Our Savi∣our wept over Jerusalem, because they knew not the things which belong to their peace. It is a thing also much to be bewailed, that there be so many impe∣diments and hinderances of the Kingdom of grace, as the Devil and all his An∣gels, their instruments, the Pope, the Turke,Rev. 17.16. and all the rest of the professed wicked of the world, which by subtile inticements and tyranny keep back and repell the means, whereby Christ ruleth as King in his Church. It is a thing to be bewailed that the people of God do fall before their enemies, or be slain by the sword of the ungodly. When the Devil sees one that was sometime of his Kingdom, but to cast a look towards the heavenly Jerusalem,Psal. 44.9, 10. he straight-way rageth against him, and labours quite to overthrow him. These and all other evils are to be lamented, as we shall see them to abound in the world, or in the Church. 2 We bewail our dulness and sloth, that we cannot pray for, and desire the coming of Christs Kingdom with that attention we ought; that we neglect in life and endeavour, what we seem to desire in Petition; that we strive not to beat down the power of sinne in our selves, nor to bring others to the King∣dom of Jesus Christ, nor to walk in love and unity with them that profess the truth sincerely, when we make this Petition; nor submit our selves to bear the yoke of Christ, and to be guided by his Laws. Q. What Motives are there which might move us to the devout asking of these things? A. First, To consider the breadth of the Devils Kingdom and Possession, how potent and numbersome his subjects are upon earth, where we dwell Who could see the King holding some shire within his Kingdom, and enemies
spread like Grashoppers over the face of all his Countrey? Besides, what good Subject that loved the honour of the King, could think on this, or view it with drie eyes? What true-hearted Israelite was not moved to see David fly out of Jerusalem with ashes upon his head, weeping as he went, a small company fol∣lowing him, when the Traitour possessed the chief places of the Land, and great troupes resorted daily unto him with shouting and great joy? Secondly, We must weigh what glory it is to God, and security to us, when true-hearted Israelites are increased; as a Prince-like Diadem, such is the multitude of well-ordered Subjects.Isa. 54 2, 3. & 60.2, 3. Prov. 14.28. In the multitude of people is the Kings honour. Multitude of obedient children is the glory of Parents: the praise of a Shepherd is the number of his Flock. In externall beauty the first Temple farre excelled the second, but in glory it came behind it,Hag. 2.7, 9. because the multitude that resorted thither to worship God, was greater. Thirdly, We must consider the strong Battell which this strong man armed, the Devil and his Angels make, (hindering the entrance of Gods Kingdom nationally or personally (to all sincere Ordinances of God, to all the more full conformity and subjection of those who are already converted from Satan to God. If the Thief watch to steal, will not the House-Keeper wake to save himself? If a City be besieged, will it not seek aid, and stand upon de∣fence? When Satan and his Instruments thrust sore against the Kingdom of Christ to overthrow it, we must seek unto God by earnest Prayer to be defended against their malice: If our enemies be ever waking, we should not slumber. Fourthly, To observe what a deal of darkness, and lusts of darkness remain, like Canaanites, as pricks and thornes in us. What communion hath light with darkness,Rom. 7.24. Christ with belial? How should the Child of God patiently endure to feel the stirrings of sinne and motions of the flesh within him? Heat and cold may agree in one subject and make a middle temper: so cannot grace and corrupti∣on, which mutually contend, and seek to expell each other. Fifthly, How prone we are to fall away and be brought back again, and how farre we are from be∣ing fully subdued to God. All creatures keep their course and standing: but men renewed by grace do slip often, seldom prosecute what they have well de∣vised; that which erewhile pleased, doth now displease; and good actions under∣taken they cast away, and contemn. Being conscious of our own weakness, we should fly to the Lord to be strengthened and supported by his might, who only is able to uphold us. Sixthly, What miseries we are here subject to, what blessedness we want, because the Kingdom of God is not fully come. The hap∣piness of Saints is not compleat, till the Kingdom of Christ be perfected In this world, so long as they be sojourning towards the heavenly Jerusalem, they be compassed with many miseries, lyable to many assaults, pressed with many infirmities, encumbred with sinfull motions, oppressed with manifold afflictions, never in quiet till they come to Heaven the place of rest. In Heaven their happiness is not every way consummate, till the Day of Judgment. Seventhly, Consider how precious is the Pearl of Divine Grace, and how excellent the Treasure of Divine Glory? Q. What are the speciall Blessings for which we are to give Thanks? A. Thanks must be given to God, that he hath erected a Kingdom of Light contrary to the kingdom of darkness; that he hath called us unto it; that he doth continually preserve it,Mat. 11.25. Eph. 1.3. Phil. 1.4, 5. Col. 1.3, 6, 11. 1 Thes. 2.13. & 3.9. 2 Thes. 1.3. & 2.13. 1 Tim. 1.14. Apoc. 11.17. protect it, build it forward, bless it with his Ordi∣nances, enrich it with his graces, and keep it by his power against the rage of all his malicious enemies, untill the time of happy deliverance. We give thee thanks, O Lord, God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned. Q. What Conclusions may be drawn from this Petition? A. First, It is God alone that can trample Satan under our feet, and dissolve the works of the Devil. It is he that must turn us before we be turned out of
the Kingdom of darkness. Prayer presupposeth both want of that we ask, and impotency in our selves to attain it, or that it is out of our power. Again, the strong man holds possession till a stronger cometh. Now who is, of any other creature, stronger than Satan in such degree as to cast him out? The Papists give some place in this work to the liberty of our will: But though it be true, we turn because we will turn to God yet (we will turn) doth note, not the principall cause, but a cause subordinate, working by way of free disposition, which disposiiton it receiveh from God, not from natural strength; so, still all is by him. Men turn not, because they will not convert; [because] here noteth the fundamentall, radicall, prime cause of impenitent not converting, which the will doth by way of disposition, which it hath by nature of it self unto sin: But it is otherwise when we say, This man converts to God because he will con∣vert, for here God is presupposed the principall Agent; man is a secondary and instrumentall; the habit disposing him to do this, being grace received from God, not derived to him with his nature. Away therefore with Papists Doctrine which make the will of man in a manner almighty. God offers grace like as a Merchant setteth his wares to sell, leaving it to our will whether we will buy or no. Were this true, if you ask what discerneth me from another un∣converted? The answer is, my will; I by the freedom I had of will, took that proffered, which another by the same liberty refused. Thus by the Doctrine of mans freewill the grace of God is trampled under foot, and the pride of man advanced. Secondly, Marke who must strengthen, confirm, and perfect all things begun in us, even God the giver of every good and perfect gift.1 Cor. 2.7. 1 Thes. 5.23. Heb. 13.21. 1 Cor. 1.8. 1 Thes. 3.12. He sanctifyeth us throughout, and makes us perfect in every good work. He con∣firmes us unto the end, and makes us to increase and abound in that which is good. Even as the Sunne first bringing light, doth more and more subdue all the darkness of the aire, till it come to full strength: so the same God that first dispelleth the darkness of sinne and ignorance, doth more and more perfect the light begun, till it come to Glory. And as the same Physician, which first recovereth us from some deadly lingering evil, must after restore decayed strength and cleanse a l relicks of sick matter, by such diets as Art adviseth: so God, &c. What then if we see all weak, ready to overturn; many graces in a manner utterly wanting, so weak they are in us? God that calleth the things that are not, as if they were, is the beginner and perfecter of his Kingdom. Thirdly, That Gods Kingdom is but in part come unto us; we see not all things as yet put under him; many not called, many enemies and evils unsubdued, many works of darkness hanging about us: which must comfort us though we find these things; We could not say this Prayer, were there not enemies still opposing us, in our confl cting course. The Kingdom of Christ were not to come, but al∣ready come, if we were perfectly freed from the molestation of the flesh, and the suggestions of Satan We are said to be translated out of the Kingdom of Satan, in regard that we do not voluntarily suffer under him as a lawfull King, but unwilingly as under an usurper too strong for us. Or rather, because he is begun to be, and certainly shall be cast out. Now that is said to be done, which a while is so in doing that it certainly shall be finished. Fourthly, All Christians must unfegnedly desire that God would shew himself the absolute Sovereign Lord God, in setting up and establishing his Kingdom of grace, to the utter overthrow of his enemies, and bringing of his Elect in Christ to the Kingdom of Glory. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion.Psal. 25.22. Psal. 51.18. Psal. 14.7. & 53.6. Psal. 28.9. Psal 63.2. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion. The holiness of Gods Name in his Attributes, do shew themselves most manifestly in the coming of this King∣dom. The coming of his Word to any man, and the work of conversion by the Word, do shew the infiniteness of his wisdom, power, mercy, justice, patience, grace and goodness in gathering and saving the Elect; also his wisdom,
power, hatred of sinne, and justice in overmastering sinne and Satan, and re∣venging himself upon the disobedient, are thereby most manifest. Again, the publishing of the Word, whereby this Kingdom is erected, is the means of re∣vealing the will of God, and of making men able to do his will. Therefore the coming of this Kingdom is to be desired. The Subjects of this Kingdom do yeeld free and willing obedience unto God, they set forth his praise, and magni∣fie his Name:Psal. 67.3. Psal. 66.3. Isa 60 6. Psal. 29.9. Psal. 96.9. & 89.7. Psal. 110.3. in which respect it is to be asked earnestly, that God may have the glory that is due unto him. In his Temple doth every one speak of his glory, O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness. God glorifies himself in the con∣fusion of the wicked, and by his over-ruling providence so chaines them up, that will they nill they, they do what his counsell hath determined: but the faithfull, and none but they, do freely submit themselves to his good pleasure, and celeberate his greatness.Psal. 65.1. Psal 145.10, Isa. 60 21, 22, Thy Saints bless thee, they speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power. What, that the glory of Christ our King is manifested, as his Church and people do increase and multiply. The brightness of his glory doth shine forth when putting his enemies to flight, and treading down their might, he spreadeth the borders of his Kingdom from one end of the earth to the other, and mightily protecteth his people against their Adversaries. And this is the glory of the Church, that she beareth many Children to God, which walk before him in holiness, and live together in peace.Isa. 11.10. Isa. 60.7.22. Psal. 99 2. Psal. 72.19. His rest shall be glorious. The glory of Christ and his Church do both suffer and shine together: When the glory of Christ shall appear, his Church shall be glorified: and when his Church is glorious, the glory of Christ filleth the world. The diminishing of the Church is the obscuring of his glory, and the breaking forth of the light is the deliverance of Sion. It may further be added,Psal. 122.1. that the coming of this Kingdom doth much tend to the comfort and security of every faithfull soul. The way to Heaven seems more easie and delightfull, when many travell together, each one calling upon and encouraging other; The power of the Adversary is repelled, and his assaults borne off with more ease, when multitudes combine mutually to aid and suc∣cour one another;Psal. 42.1, 2. The powerfull presence of God in his holy Ordinances doth much glad and rejoyce a Christian heart; The Prayers of the faithfull are the more effectuall, and the Ordinances of God more powerfull, when many joyn in the same Suits, tender the same Petitions before the Throne of grace. And the society of them that fear God, is many waies comfortable and beneficiall to good men, to the strengthening of their faith, quickning of their grace, setling of their doubts, kindling of their zeal, and encourag∣ment in the waies of holiness. Moreover, the Elect of God, till they be converted and brought to the Kingdom of Christ, do lie under the power of wrath and tyranny of Satan. They that actually are beloved to be made Heires of grace, be yet actually under wrath, till they be renewed by grace, and grafted into the body of Christ. For these Reasons then we must cry to God, that his Kingdom may come. Doth not every good Subject wish the enlargement of the Kings Territories, the rooting out of all opposites, that set themselves against the prosperity of his Kingdom? So must we, if we be true subjects to the Kingdom of Heaven. Did we border upon the Turkish Empire, so that we were often forraged would it not make us cry to God for help? and shall the Devill still sinke us in our persons, every where inva∣ding, and shall we be silent? What tyranny to Satans and sinnes tyranny? What wants to the wants of righteousness, peace, joy, &c. in which things Gods Kingdom cometh? We should seek it so farre as it is wanting, and joy in it so farre as we partake in it. To be naturalized into our Kingdom is a benefit great Ones esteem: but to be within Gods Kingdom, O how blessed!
Fifthly, Christ is the King of holy and just men that live in his Church, whom he doth protect, defend, and govern with singular care, love, and tenderness.Psal. 67.4. uram prorsus maternam in¦tuendo & ser∣vaendo gloriam caelo depingit. Psal. 23.1. Jer 23.5. Ezek. 34 23. Isa. 33.22. Ia. 40.11. Deus Rex est ditissimus, vae∣lens omnia necessaria nobis praestare. Psal. 2.8. Psal. 97.1. Mal 3.17. Psal. 119.136. Jer. 9.1. Feild of the Ch. lib. 3. cap. 16. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. The Lord is our Judg, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd: he shall gather his Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosome, and shall gently lead those that are with young. The faithfull are the Inheritance of Christ, which he hath purchased to be his peculiar people; they are his choice and select Treasure, which he will keep charily, and pre∣serve with diligence. Sixthly, Every true Christian must seek with his utmost endeavour, that both himself and others be in subjection to God. We should with David and Jeremy bewail the aversness of others, and rebellions they live in against God: and like Paul, bemone the laws of evil, which dwell in us, &c. If we desire that God would save us, should we not heartily desire that he would rule over us? If Christ be our Saviour, he is our Lord; if he hath redeemed us from death, he doth rule in us by his Spirit. The price of our ransome is already paid to the full, but it hath not full effect in us, till our cor∣ruptions be subdued, and our hearts brought to perfect subjection unto the Lord in all things. How would a naturall Subject grieve to spie in himself, or see in others much falshood, much rebellion against his Sovereign? So must we grieve that we and others have hearts so false and rebellious against God. And not only so, but we must endeavour to set up the Sovereignty of Christ in our own hearts, and amongst others more and more. How do men profess perfect conformity and totall subjection to men? How do Papists seek to pro∣pagate the Popes Kingdom? They find out new words, rather then his Subjects should not be made up: Should not we stirre up our selves to seek the enlargement and building forward of Christs Kingdom? This is one prin∣cipall end of the preaching of the Gospel,Eph. 4.11, 12. Luk. 4.43. that the Elect unconverted might be added to the Kingdom of Christ, and the faithfull converted brought to more perfect conformity. Heavenly graces are the true riches, with which as every man is best stored, he is most blessed. Seventhly, All Christians must here on earth set themselves to seek Heaven and perfect happiness with God in the Kingdom of glory. Prayer is not a windy asking, but a reall seeking of the good desired: be taught to pray, Thy Kingdom come,Jer. 29.13. Mat. 3.4. & 4.27. Psal. 34.4. Mat. 0.33. Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.20. Heb. 11.9, 10. we are informed to seek it with all our hearts. We have no way of getting any good thing, but by flying unto the grace of God in Christ, which is done by hearty supplication: but our Prayers must not be idle, as though bare desires were all that is required. Seek first the Kingdom of God. Seek the things that are above. Abraham is set before us as an example of this thing, who did acount even the Land of Promise a strang Countrey, looking for and seeking after a City which hath a foundation, whose builder and maker is God. Heavenly glory is the highest of all good things that are to be desired the Pearl of inestimable price, to be valued above thousands of gold and silver. In this world we are but strangers, Heaven is our native Countrey, where our heart should be, whilest in body we are kept here below. Would not an English man (by any case exil'd) much long to smell the smoke of his own na∣tive Countrey? Thus, if we be heavenly creatures, we cannot but in desire aspire thither, while we are here on earth as exiles and pilgrims from our heavenly Father. All creatures have an inclination to the place where they were bred, and where they may rest; the stone falleth to the earth, Birds de∣light in the woods. Heaven is the Habitation and rest of the Saints, and an affection towards it is given to every Christian that is borne of God. This seeking of the Kingdom of God implieth or presupposeth the knowledge of what it becometh us to know or to do about this Kingdom, or at least an en∣quiry of the way that leadeth to this Kingdom. Look as a man seeketh
earthly things, when he goes out to the Cryer to learn of them: and look as Clyents seek their earthly Inheritances, when they go forth to advise with their learned counsell: thus when we come forth to be instructed by the Word of God, which is the Word of the Kingdom, we are said to seek this Kingdom. In those daies the children of Israel shall come, they, and the children of Judah to∣gether,Jer. 50.4, 5. going and weeping; they shall go, and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Sion with their faces thitherward. Secondly, We seek this heavenly Inheritance, when we get sound Title and Interest unto it by faith in Christ Jesus. The Kingdom of Heaven is prepared for the adopted Sonnes of God,Rom. 8.17. Joh. 3.16. who receive Christ, and are united unto him: therefore as we strive more and more to be engrafted into Christ, and rooted in him, we are truly said to seek the Kingdom of Glory. Earthly men seek earthly things, whilst they get their Title to that they shall possess hereafter, made sure and ratified. Thirdly, We may seek this Inheritance of Gods Kingdom in getting something which we may shew for our right and title to it. Now this we do by exercising our faith in some Promises, by which God doth freely pass it unto us; as, fear not lit∣tle flock it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom.Luk. 12.32. Joh. 3.18. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. Thus men seek their earthly matters whilst they get good Copies for that they hold. Now the Promises of God laid hold on, are the only deed and Instrument which can be shewed for title unto eternall life. Fourthly, We may seek this Kingdom in re∣gard of getting our selves possessed of it: which we do by this means, while we labour to be enriched more abundantly with the graces of the Spirit, and by a sanctified course to draw nearer it and enter it here on earth. Men will not only get right unto the things they seek, but they will endeavour to be posses∣sed, to dig their turf in that Land they purchase. The more the Israelites did subdue the Canaanites,2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 10, 11. the more they were possessed of Canaan: Thus the more we overcome our sinnes, grow in graces, the more we grow seized of our heavenly Canaan.Catechism. Tri. par. 4. c. 11 q. 4. The Pearl of Grace is one part of Heaven. What is Glory, but absolute and perfect Grace? What is Grace, but a lively sparke of Glory? Grace is in proportion to Glory, as the Suburbs to the City, as the Porch to the Temple, as a little sparke of fire to a great flame; the further we proceed in Grace, the nearer we approach to Glory: yea, the more we grow in Glory. Why have we not Heaven upon earth, but for that our graces are imperfect? Fifthly, We may seek it in regard of getting our Title and Possession made sure to our consciences. Thus we seek earthly Inheritances, not only to be seized of them, but by strengthening our selves in them. Hence it is, that we will sue our Fines and Writs, which may in a manner after a certain time, put an end to all claimes which may be made by any, some few persons on just ground excep∣ted. So we must give all diligence to get those things ascertained unto us; which we do chiefly, while we faithfully lay hold on Gods Promises which promise our protection;1 Tim. 4.18. as, that he is our God, who will keep us from every evil work to his heavenly Kingdom; while we get the Spirit to witness to our spirits this gift of perseverance which is bestowed on us; while we learn to die by faith, and hold Christ as the Author and finisher of our faith, and raiser of us up at the last day; and the Father who is stronger then all, keeping us in his hand even by his Almighty power, as in a strong Tower unto salvation. We cannot be sure enough of earthly things; we desire to see the Bird in the Cage, and have all things so setled as there may be no question. How much rather should we not content our selves with uncertain hopes of our heavenly Inheritance, but travell to have it setled on us, and throughly assured to our soules. Sixthly, We must constantly desire perfect immediate fellowship with God. As the loving Wife longeth to be with her Husband, and to injoy society with him: so doth the Christian soul to dwell with her Saviour, Head, and Husband in happiness and glory. It will be questioned, Whether it be lawfull for a Christian to desire death.
The answer is easy; for death and departure hence by death is propounded as a blessing, promised as a blessing, and bestowed as a blessing,Apoc. 13.14. 1 King. 14.12. Isa. 57.1. hil. 1.23. Luk. 2.29. 1 King. 19 4. Eccl. 12.7. 2 Cor. 5.8. Joh. 14.3. 2 Tim. 4.8. Hb 9.28. 2 Cor. 5.4. Eccl. 7.22. Rom. 6.7. Apoc. 15.2. & 12.5. 1 Cor. 5.10. Rom. 6.7. 2 Cor. 5.8. and may as a bles∣sing also lawfully be desired. Our deaths-day is our doomes-day, that our go∣ing to Christ is as his coming to us. Now a Christian may love, and long after the one, and therefore may lawfully desire also the other. Death in it self con∣sidered, is an unnaturall separation of soul and body, and not to be desired: but as it is to the faithfull an end of miseries spiritual and temporall, an entrance into life that shall never change, there is great and good cause why Christians should desire it. Many are the benefits that death brings to good men; It free∣eth them from the injuries of the ungodly, the bitterness of correction, the infirmities of nature, the pain of labour, the fear of death. Death is cured by death, while mortality is swallowed up of life. It delivereth them from the temptations of Satan, from worldly provocations and evil examples, from sinne and corruption, and from Divine desertion. It bringeth unto them consummation of Grace, perfection of Glory, the inseparable com∣pany of Christ, and immediate Vision, and Communion with God. For these causes a man may desire death, but he may not hasten his own end. A man may desire many things to be done, which yet he himself may not do. A man may desire the ministry, yet may he not make himself a Minister. He may desire to have some malefactors taken away by the Sword of justice; yet being a private person, he may not do it himself. So a man may desire death, and seek it at Gods hands; but not procure it or hasten it by any meanes of his own. We may desire death, but without impatiency (that was Jonas his fault) we may not desire death as weary of Gods work, of doing or en∣during what he calleth us unto. We must submit our wils to Gods will,Mat. 26.29. 2 Sam. 15.26. as content to waite Gods leasure, and to abide Gods pleasure for death or life. Eighthly, We are here to note, that the godly must mourn, when the Church is in affliction. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, the place of my Fathers Sepulchre lyeth waste,Neh. 2.3. Dan. 10.2, 3. Jer. 9.1. and the gates thereof are consumed with fire? Oh, that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of teares, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people! If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,Psal. 137.5, 6. let my right hand forget her cunning. Memorable is the answer of Ʋriah to David, The Ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab,2 Sam. 11.11. and the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields: shall I then go into mine house, to eate and to drink, and to lie with my Wife? Whosoever was the Pen-man of the 102 Psalm, whether David, or some other living a∣bout the end of the Babilonian captivity, he sheweth himself to be ten∣derly affected towards the Church in distress. How importunate is he with God, to arise and have mercy upon Zion?Psal. 102.13. Vers. 14. How doth he put the Lord in remembrance of his Promise to restore it? The time to have mercy thereon, the time appointed is come; How full of passion is that speech, O Lord, thy servants delight in the stones thereof, and have pity on the very dust thereof. Phineas Wife lamented the loss of the Ark, more then the death of her Father and of her Husband. She wanted not naturall affecti∣on to them, but spiritual affection towards Religion more prevailed in her: once the death of her Father-in-law and of her Husband is menti∣oned, but the thing she insisteth upon, as that which pinched to the quick, was this, The Glory is departed.1 Sam. 4.20, 21. Nehemiah found no discontent in his own outward condition, when he sate down and fasted and wept certain daies; he lived in great credit and honour, being Cup-bearer to him,Neh. 1.4. that at that time was the greatest Monarch under Heaven: it was the afflicted case of his poor Brethren at Jerusalem that pricked his heart, and melted him into teares. The godly have mourned when Sion was in misery, and it
is charged as a foule fault upon the ungodly, That they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.Amos 6.6. The Reasons of this Instruction are evident. First, God is highly dishonoured when his servants fall before their enemies, be led into captivity,Psal. 74.18, 19. & 79.10, 11. & 89.50, 51. Psal. 10.13. & 42.3. Act. 9.6. 1 Joh. 3.17. or afflicted in any other kind. For then the enemies of the Church grow proud and insolent, the solemne worship of God ceaseth to be frequented, and such as openly professed the Gospel, are compelled to hide themselves in Dens and Caves of earth. Secondly, Christ suffers with his servants, and is afflicted with their afflictions. If Saul breath our threat∣nings against the Saints, he persecutes Christ. What good Subject is not grieved at heart to see his Sovereign plunged into heaviness and grief? It argueth want of love to Christ, when men have no commiseration of the members of Christ, being in want or misery, in distress, danger, or extremi∣ty. For it is not so much they that suffer, especially when they suffer for Christs cause, as Christ that suffereth in them. It is not so much they that want, whatsoever the occasion of their want be as Christ that wanteth in them.Mat. 25.35, 36 42, 43. It is I (saith he) that was hungry, and thirsty, and sick, and naked, and harbourless. And, it was done to me, that was done unto them. When men stand thick together in a throng, and one chance to tread on anothers heeles or toes, Why doest thou tread on me, or kick me, saith the one to the other? It is the toe or the heel on the foot that is troden on, kickt or hurt; and the toe is farre enough from the tongue, or the heel from the head; And yet when the toe or the heel is hurt, the tongue in the head speaketh and complaineth as if it self were troden on. Such a fellow feeling there is between the one and the other, that the one suffereth in the other, and therefore the one speaketh for the other, and complaineth of the wrong sustained by the other, as done to it self. In like manner when persecuters spurn against, and tread upon Christs feet here on earth, Christ their Head cryeth from Heaven to them, Why persecute ye me? Christ speaketh for them, because he suffereth in them. Though our Head be in Heaven in happiness, and his body here on earth, yet hath he a sense of those infir∣mities, that his body is here annoyed with. Though he be freed from all passion, yet is he not without compassion: though he feel nothing himself, yet hath he still a fellow-feeling of those miseries and distresses that his limmes here endure.Concil. Bas. Sess. 22. One Augustinus de Roma, was censured in the Councell of Basile, for affirming that Christ was the greatest sinner in the world: and yet his meaning, it may be, was not amiss, though the manner of speech improper,Gat. sp. to kindle Sor. for Sion. p. 24. having an eye to the guilt of our sinnes imputed to him, and the burden thereof imposed upon him. But Salvian an Orthodox Writer stick∣eth not to say, that Christ is the greatest begger in the world: as one that beareth his part and hath his share in all the wants and necessities, in all the straights and miseries that all his members in all parts of the world sustain and endure. For is he not in want saith he, that complaineth of hunger and thirst, and bareness and poverty, and restraint of liberty? Or who can be in greater want than he that sustaineth all these, so oft as any godly man sustaineth them? He wanteth not indeed in regard of misery, and yet he wanteth in regard of mercy: he suffers not in his Diety of himself, and yet he suffers out of his pity to his. If the Army be foyled in Battell, the Prince is said to loose the day: in some sort Christ himself is put to the worse, when the adversaries of the truth prevail.Rom. 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.12. Thirdly, the nearness of conjunction that we have one with another doth necessarily exact it of us. We are all members of one body, whereof Christ is Head. And there is a natural sympathy between the members of the same body,1 Cor. 12.26. being quickned all by the self-same soul. If any one member be honoured, all the rest rejoyce with it; if any one suffer, (be it never so base an one) all the rest suffer together with it. Thus it is in the natural body
of man; and thus it cannot but be in the mysticall body of Christ. Saul turned into Paul, and become a member now of that body, that he was a persecutor of before; Who is weak or ill, saith he, But I am weak with him? Who is scandalized, but I am burnt with it?2 Cor. 11.29. 1 Io. 2.10. 1 Io. 3.14. Not to mourn when Sion sitteth in heaviness, and goeth in sackcloth, argueth want of spiritual life, sincere love of the brethren, and a fellow-feeling of their miseries, is a sure argument of life: the want of it an undoubted sign of death. It is but a rotten limbe, a withered hand, or a wooden leg, that feeleth not, when the head, or but the heel onely is hurt. And surely those that have no fellow-feeling of their fellow-members afflictions, are at the best, but as glass-eyes, or silver noses, or Ivory teeth, that stand for a shew in the face or the mouth, but afford little use, and partake not in pain, because they partake not of life with the rest of that body, which by art onely they are set in, or fastned unto. It is no marvail if a peece of wood, or glass, or metal feel nothing though the head be slashed and cut to the very skull, or the whole man be sick at the heart: But to be a lively member of the body, and not to be affected with it, is impossible. 4. The consideration of our own frailty may enforce it. All things, saith Solomon, come alike unto all, no man can say,Eccl. 9.2. this or that I shall never endure. That that befalleth one man, may befall any man; and much more then, may that that befalleth many. No person or people have any such armour or proof, as is affliction free, but that it may come home, and pierce even to the heart with them. I have known a good old man, saith Bernard,Gal. 6.1. Ex. 34.9. who when he heard of any that had committed some notorious offence, was wont to say with himself, This man is fallen to day, and thus may I fall to morrow; and so bewailed other mens slips and falls as his own. And the like advice, and that upon the self same ground doth the Apostle give us concerning the outward mi∣series and temporal afflictions of our distressed brethren: Thinke on those,Heb. 13.3. saith he, that are in bonds, as if you were bound with them; and those that are in af∣fliction, as if you were in their body, say some, that is in affliction with them;Laur. Valla. but rather, as being your selves also in the body, not the body of Christ, or the Church, but in the body of flesh and frailty, subject to the like afflictions which you know not therefore how soon they may befall you. 5. The Church of God is our Mother, the faithful are our brethren, firmely knit unto us by the band of love and profession:Nisi totum cor∣pus bene habeat mebra singula laborare necesse est. Mosl. in Ps. 25.22. which consideration should effectually move com∣passion and fellow-feeling in their sorrows. If the Mother weep, what child can refrain tears? If one brother suffer, others make lamentation. The daugh∣ters of Sion will mourn, if Jerusalem be led into captivity. 6. We ought to have a fellow-feeling of our fellow-members afflictions, because our sins may have an hand in the procuring of their sufferings. Neither need this seem strange that our sins should be the cause of plagues and judgements upon others, when we the mean while remain free our selves. We see the like in the practice of Physick and Chirurgery. For is not the neck seared and rowelled oft, for the rheum that runneth down into the eyes? A vein opened in the arm or the foot, sometime to turn the course of the blood, spending it self over freely some o∣ther way, sometime to ease the pain of the head, and sometime to correct the distemperature of the whole body besides. For Achans sin many of the hoast of Israel were slain, and yet was Achan still untouched.Jos. 7.1.5.11.12. Gen. 10.18. 2 Sam. 24.15, 17. 1 King. 14.12. Abimelechs whole houshold were plagued for his oversight, and thousands of Davids subjects destroyed for the trespass of their Sovereign, Jeroboams dear son dyed for his Fathers offence. And why may not the sins of our Nation also be in part the cause of those heavy disasters befaln our brethren in foreign parts. 7. The cause of God should be most dear unto us, as the glory of God is most dear unto him. This is that which the blessed Saints of God use ordinarily, as a strong inducement to move the Lord to mercy, in behalf of his Church and children, overborn by their over mighty and
malicious enemies; that his name was reproached, when the adversarie prevail∣ed,Ps. 74.18, 19. & 79.10, 1. & 89.50, 51. Ps. 10.13. & 42.3. 1 Sam. 4.18, 19, 21. and his honour thereby impaired: yea, this was that, that most troubled and vexed them in their fiercest afflictions not their own miseries so much, as the dis∣honor of Gods name, which their adversaries were wont to triumph over in them. And this is it that must force sorrow from us, when the Church sitteth as a solitary woman clad in sackcloth, mourning by reason of the hand of God upon her. 8. The chastisment of the Church is a token of Gods fatherly in∣dignation, wherewith every good heart is much affected. For can a good child see his Father take a staffe in hand to smite one of his servants, or much more the rod in hand to correct some of his brethren, and not be grieved at it, or affecteth at all with it? especially knowing himself not to be wholly free from such faults as he correcteth them for; yea it may be for ought he knoweth by them more faulty. It is by the Prophet made a note of Gods children, that they tremble at his word.Is. 66.2. Act. 5.11. Ps. 119.119.120. And if they tremble at his word, sure much more at his wrath, though lighting on others onely, Thou takest away the wicked of the world like dross, saith David; And though he were none of that crew, but one that loved Gods Law; yet, My flesh, saith he, trembleth for fear of thee, and I am afraid of these thy judgements. And if Gods children be so affected with the judgements of God executed upon wicked worldlings for their rebellions a∣gainst God, and their oppositions to his truth; how much more with those of his chastisements, that he exerciseth his children with, being inflicted upon them by the hand of his and their adversaries (whom he useth oft as executioners) for the profession of his truth. 9. They that mourn with Sion shall rejoyce with her.Is. 47.18. & 66.10. The Church shall in time cast off her mourning weeds, for the Lord will return unto her in love and compassion; and then all that took sorrow in her contempt and misery, shall rejoyce in her consolation. The ninth observation, God is the onely builder, preserver, defender and redeemer of his Church, Re∣deem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles, Build up the walls of Jerusalem. As the Kingdom of grace is begun by Gods guiding,Is. 49.26. Ps. 25.22. Ps. 51.18. Es. 1.27. Jer. 50.33, 34. 1 Cor. 3.7. Act. 2.41. so by his help it must also grow, be encreased and be preserved, so that the saying of the Apostle is gene∣ral and most true: Neither he that planteth is any thing, neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase, and who doth adde unto the Kingdom of his Son new Citizens. Which things although they be so, yet are every one of the faithful exhorted to their power to help forward the Kingdom of God. The Magistrate by his authority promoting the Ministry, the Ministers by teaching faithfully, and with all their power seeking the salvation of the Church privately by praying that the Gospel may have his course, and may spread daily more and more. Finally all the members of the Church according to every one of their callings. God is the protector of his Church; of whom every good blessing pertaining to the welfare of his Kingdom is to be craved: but as we are to pray for, so must we endeavor the furtherance of it, for prayers are not empty wishes, but hearty desires that must be expressed in practice. Lastly, All Christians must desire the coming of Christ to judgement, and untill that glori∣ous Kingdome of Christ be come, wherein he shall reign in most perfect man∣ner, we ought to continue our prayers for the increase of it. The Spirit and the Bride say,Apo. 22.20. 2 Cor. 5.2. 2 Tim. 4.8. Apo. 19.7. Jo. 14.2, 3. Jo. 17.26. 1 Thess. 4.17. Luc. 21.28. Mat. 19.28. Act. 3.19, 21. Jo. 5.28. Come Lord Jesus. Henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righte∣ousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day: and not un∣to me onely, but unto them also that love his appearing. 1. The day of judge∣ment is the marriage day of the Lamb and of his spouse the Church, who shall be received into his palace of state to abide with him in glory for evermore. In this life each faithful soul is contracted unto the Lord, but the solemn marriage shall not be till the day of full redemption, which is the general judgement. 2. At that day the faithful shall obtain full and perfect redemption, sanctificati∣on and glory. That is the day of refreshing, restitution, and blessed deliver∣ance
unto them. 3. The glory of Christ is never fully revealed untill that day, when the Kingdom of God being perfected,Col. 3.4. the divel and all ungodly men trod∣en under foot, all offences taken out of the way, and all powers abolished, by which God was after a sort hindred, that he could not rightly appear unto us, as he is in himself, when these things being accomplished the Lord shall clearly and fully manifest his glory unto his Saints. But when we desire that God would hasten the deliverance of his Church, we ask also that the elect which yet remain, might all of them (not one excepted) be gathered quickly: and that the Church might quickly be freed from all calamities, the godly might rest from their labors, that their might be an end of sin and wickedness 4. That the glory of God in the perfect restitution of his Church and confusion of his enemies might be manifested. It is the good pleasure of God that we should pray for this delive∣rance of the Church; and freedom from all evils at that day, shall be given to them that groaning under the crosses of this life, do heartily wish and de∣sire it. CHAP. VII. Of the third petition, The things therein to be noted, what is meant by the will of God, by In earth, and As it is in heaven. The ground of this petition, with the particular things therein desired, and reasons to shew the necessity thereof. The benefits of obedience, with the sin and misery of disobedience. Question: WHat is the third petition? A. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven? Quest. Why is this petition necessary? A. 1. The name of God is acknowledged to be holy, when men do his will on earth. For then God is glorified on earth,Jo. 17.4. Ph. 1.20. when those under him finish the work he hath set them to do: which is then done, when the wills of all the sub∣jects of his Kingdom are subject to the will of their Lord and King.Mal. 1.16. Ps. 40.7, 8. Ezek. 36.26, 27. Ph. 2.13. Heb. 13.21. 2. Unless God cause that every man do his will in that particular place wherein God hath set him, the Kingdom of Christ cannot be conserved and flourish. 3. We can∣not be the Citizens of the Kingdom of God, unless we do his will. But of our selves by reason of the corruption of our nature, we cannot do the will of God. Quest. What things are to be noted in this petition? A. Two things, 1. The matter, that Gods will be done. The thing to be submitted unto, is Gods will, implied in a special emphasis in the praticle [thy] importing thus much, not the will of Satan, or the will of men, but of God. For these words thy will, must needs have reference to the words of the pre∣face, Our Father. 2. The matter of doing, taken from the pattern and sam∣plar of the Angels doing Gods will. Quest. What is signified by the will of God? A. The will of God [to omit other significations] in Scripture signifieth two things. 1. The decree of God concerning future events.Ps. 115.3. Es. 14.27. Mal. 3.6 Es. 46.10. Rom. 9.19. 1 Pet. 3.17. Pro. 27.1. Act. 1.7. & 4.28. s. 36.6. Rom. 11.33. The Lord doth what∣soever he will. The counsel of the Lord shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. Who hath resisted his will? But the petition is not meant of this secret will: first,
because no man can know it, nor search it out until it come to pass, whereas to the doing of this will, knowledge is necessary. Secondly, For that it is unresist∣able and cannot be withstood by any man. Thirdly, for that there are no pro∣mises for the performing of it, seeing a man may do the secret will of God, and perish as Judas,Deut. 29.29. Rom. 12.2. Deut. 29.29. Mar. 3.35. Ps. 103.21. Math. 7.21. & 12.50. 1 Pet. 2.15. Heb. 10.36. Act. 21.14. Jo. 6.40. Jo. 14.1. 1 Thes 4.3. Rom. 6 13. Jo. 9.31. Rom 12.1, 2. 1 et. 2.15 Rom. 8.29. Eph. 3.10. Pilate, &c. Fourthly, A man may do the secret will of God, and yet sin, and purpose what is not agreeable to the secret will of God without sin. 2. The word of God, which is his revealed Will, setting down what we ought to do, believe, or leave undone, The Ministers of his that do his pleasure. And this is meant in this place. Now of the whole revealed Will of God, there be three special points, which principally belong to this petition. 1 To believe in God through Christ. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth in him, should have everlasting life. 2. Sanctifica∣tion of body and soul, This is the will of God, even your sanctification. 3. The bearing of afflictions in this life, Those which he knew before, he did predestinate to be made like to the Image of his own Son. Quest. What is it to do the Will of God? A. To obey it, and that both in prosperity and adversity, All that the Lord hath said,Ps. 142.10. Deut. 6.1, 2. Deut. 27.0. Ex. 24.7. Deut. 4 6. & 5.1. Act. 21.14. Eph. 6.6. Heb. 13.21. Jam. 1.25. 1 Pet. 4.2. we will do and obey. Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do his commandments. Quest. What is meant by these words, In earth? A. Earth in this place, is put by a Metonymy of the subject, for men dwell∣ing on the earth;Ps. 33.8. Ps. 67.2.7. Ps. 65.5. Ps. 96.9. as in that of the Psalmist, Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. The persons who should do this Will, are noted forth by the place where they live, and where this Will must be done: see, all men on earth must desire that Gods will may be done on earth. Man by nature doth his own will and the will of Satan: but he is to de∣sire and do not his own will, but the will of God. Quest. What is the meaning of the words following, As it is in Hea∣ven. A. These words shew the manner how we must pray to do the will of God, that is, readily in all parts, constantly with some resemblance to the heavenly creatures.Ps. 103.20. Luc. 1.6. 2 Reg. 23.25. Ps. 119.112. Ps. 103.20, 21. These persons are pointed at by the place where they are, and where they do the Will of God, viz. heaven, and its meant of the Holy Angels, who in heaven, do shew willing, ready, faithful and constant subjection and obedi∣ence unto God. And this is signified in the Scriptures when they are said to be winged, and to stand continually beholding the face of our heavenly Father. The particle in which the force of the sentence doth lie,Heb. 12.23. 1 Sam. 15.22. is not here a note of parity, degree or equality, but of similitude, likeness, and truth. In heaven the Angels obey God, in Earth men Living ought to be obedi∣ent. Ps. 143.10. Jo. 5.30. Act. 21.14. Mat. 26.42. Deut. 29.29. Ps. 119.106. Col. 3.16.Quest. What desire you of God in this petition? A. That whatsoever God revealeth as his Will unto us, which he would have us do, or by event maketh known as his Will in us, which we must suffer, that we may obey him both in the one and the other; like as the heavenly creatures obey him, that is, speedily, readily, faithfully, and constantly. Quest. What is the ground of this petition? Mal. 1.6. 1 Sam. 3.18. Rom. 7.12. Isa. 39.8, 1 Pet. 4.2.A. That God is our absolute Sovereign and gracious Father, whose Will is the rule of Justice, most Holy, Equal and Good, whereunto by debt and covenant we must be conformable, and which God of his grace will inable us to do.
Quest. What do we acknowledge concerning our selves? A. First we acknowledge that once we were in that condition, that we might have done the will of God, whereunto we were obliged by the covenant and commandment of justice, and the debt of former favours received. Second∣ly, that since the fall we are apt to do our own will, but to neglect, yea re∣sist the will of God, and to cast off the yoke of Christ:Tit. 3.3. with which rebellion is joyned inability to do what is commanded, or to suffer patiently what is laid upon us. Quest. What are the particular things we desire of God in this Pe∣tition? A. First, we desire grace to deny our own wills: because they are corrupt, unjust, and dangerous,Es. 58.13. 1 Pet. 4.2. Luc. 9.23. Gen. 6.5. & 8.21. Rom. 8.7. & 7.24. which may be proved by the corruption of the under∣standing after the fall, from which evil thoughts, devices, counsels, purposes and resolutions do flow: which Moses affirmeth to be evil in man even from his childhood, as also Paul saith, That the wisdom of the flesh is an enemy to God, because it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Now if the un¦derstanding be corrupt, the will must needs be evil: and if we be not able so much as to will well, we are much less able to work well. Besides we are not in our own power, but belong unto the Lord: wherefore our own reason or will must not bear sway in our counsels and doings, we must not set before us this end to seek what is expedient according to the flesh.Mat. 16.24. Ps. 1 9.8. Vers. 19. Vers. 36, 37. Vers. 133. 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. .5. 1 Cor 13.9. Ps. 119.18.33.34. Col. 1.9, 10. Eph 5.17. Deut. 4.14. & 5.1. Is. 8.19, 20. Ps. 1.2. & 119.97. rov. 2.1, 2. Prov. 9.2. & 4.5, 7. Jo. 6.29. Rom. 1.5.12. Heb. 10.36, 8 Heb. 11.6. Rom. 14.23. s. 86.11. Zeph. 2.3. Ps. 119 32, 36. Ps. 51.6. Tit. 3 8. Phil 1.10. 2 Cor. 2.17. Gen. 17.1. Hb. 13.18. 1 Tim. 1.5. Mt. 6.1, 2. Luc. 18.11, 12. Ps. 119.112.167, 168. Ps. 119.60 Deut. 5.28, 29. This renouncing of our selves is so necessary, that Christ will acknowledge none to be his disciple, unless he first deny his own will. Howbeit because nothing is more hard then to renounce our own will, because we are carnal, and love our selves, and our own too carefully, we are taught to ask it of God that he will bring this to pass, and give us power to renounce our own wills. Secondly, we pray that God would not leave us to our selves, our own errors and wicked desires. I will keep thy statutes: O for∣sake me not utterly, I am a stranger in the earth, hide not thy commandments from me, Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. Order my steps in thy word; and let not any ini∣quity have dominion over me. Thirdly, we beg the true knowledge of Gods will, so much as may direct us in doing well, and guide us in every good moti∣on, desire, and action: for otherwise how shall we do it? How can that ser∣vant please his master, who cannot tell what he would have done of him? Most men will have books of statutes in their houses, and if they be to deal in any great matter they will take counsel of their books: In like manner men should acquaint themselves with the word of God, which is the rule of righteousness, according to which they ought to walk. Fourthly, we crave increase of Faith that might season every affection, command every thought, and subdue every passion into the obedience of Gods will and govern in every action. It is the will of God, that we should live by faith in all estates, inseparably adhering to every commandment, and resolutely holding fast every promise, though it be far above our apprehension. Fiftly, We beg humility of heart and spirit, that we might be ready at all times to submit our selves to the good pleasure of God. Seek ye the Lord, ye meek of the earth▪ seek meekness, seek judgement. 6. Truth, soundness, integrity, uprightness, and sincerity is to be prayed for, that they may be inwardly increased, and shine forth in all our practice and conversation. Thou requirest truth in the inward parts. Paul prayeth in the behalf of the Philippians, that they might be sincere and withour offence till the day of Christ. It is the commandment of God, that we should be intie and upright in all things: but what he commandeth, that must we crave of him by hearty sup∣plication. 7. Willingness, delight, diligence and fervor in well-doing is to be asked of God, that the heart being set at liberty, we might be able to set upon that which is pleasing in the sight of God, freely, with chearfulness, and with∣out
delay. Thy people shall come willingly. It is good to be zealous in a good mat∣ter.Ps. 110.3. Gal. 4.18. Psal. 119.45. Vers 60. Ps. 119.143. Ps. 119.35. Jo. 4.34. Col. 2.7. & 10. Heb. 13.18. Ps. 119.36, 7. Deut. 26.14. Heb. 13.20.21, & 6.1. 2 Cor. 7 1. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. 2 Pet. 1.5. 1 Thess. 4.1. Ps. 119.6. Ph. 2.13. Heb. 13.21. Ps. 17.5. Act. 20.24. Ps. 139.24. Gal. 6.9. 2 Thess. 2.16, 17. Act. 24.16. Ph. 3.13.14. 2 Thess. 3.13. Ps. 119.44.112 Apo. 2.10. 1 Cor. 11.1. Ps. 106.3. Rev. 13.10. Col. 1.11. Eph. 6.15. Rom 5 8. 2 Sam. 15 25, 26. Luc. 9.23. Jam. 1.2. Heb. 12.7. Act. 14.21. Mat. 16.24. 2 Cor. 6.4. Act 4 13. & 5.29 1 Cor. 16.13. 2 Tim. 2.25.26. I will run the race of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart. I made haste and delayed not to keep thy commandments. Make me to go into the path of thy commandments, for therein I delight. 8. We pray that God would give us grace more and more to renounce and die to our own will and works; that he should continually kindle and keep alive in us a desire, care, and endea∣vor in all things to live honestly in our conversations and particular callings, and strengthen us with grace more fully in all parts to obey him, till we feel not our selves, but Christ thinking, speaking, working in us. As ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and to please God, so abound more and more. 9. That he would inable us wholy to do whatsoever he requireth, and give us not onely to will, but to do his pleasure fully in one thing as well as another. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my foot-steps slip not. Lead me in the way everlsting. 10. That he would establish us to persevere constantly in his obedience, unto the end, and in the end, without starting, fainting, or intermission. So shall I keep thy Law continually, for ever and ever. Blessed are they that keep judgement, and he that doth righteousness at all times. 11. That he would give us in all the evils we endure, to make his Will our will, and bless his Name, and inable us with strength of grace aforehand, to bear whatsoever it shall please him to lay upon us. My brethren count it all joy, when ye fall into divers tribulations. 12. That he would strengthen us with boldness and courage in well doing, against the fear of persecution, loss of goods, liberty or life. Grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy word. Lastly, we pray that God would bring such as belong to his mercy from the snare in which they are taken to do the divels and their own will, to do his pleasure and work in his vineyard. Quest. What considerations should move us to the more devout making of this request? A. These three. 1. The necessity of making this Petition. 2 The great bene∣fits of obedience. 3. The miserable estate of them that live in disobedience. Quest. How may the necessity of making this petition appear? A. First if we consider how most live in the open breach of Gods command∣ments. Would it not grieve a good subject to see men trample down the Kings Laws, and every one run upon his own head? Secondly, if we think how many things daily we offend in our unfruitfulness, which maketh us rather to be utter∣ly idle and pick straws, then gird up our selves to holy thoughts. Our idle light discourse, our inordinate affections, our trespasses every where, and following our own lusts. Thirdly, if we remember and call to mind what unsoundness, in∣sincerity, partiality, unchearfulness, sloth, coldness, we shall find in doing the work of God. We are dull in hearing, slight in prayer, negligent in preparing our selves to the Sacrament, inconstant in our purposes, loose in our thoughts, senceless under the burden of sins, troubled at the sins of word or deed that break forth to our disgrace, careless of what our conscience telleth us to be amiss be∣twixt God and our own souls. Fourthly, how imperfectly, and in a sorry fashi∣on, we perform our daily dutyes both towards God and one another, what a deal of sin cleaveth unto them, that we cannot perfect the things we desire. Fifthly, our inconstancy, which maketh us no sooner in a good thing, but we are out again: and as little birds leap from pale to sprig, so we are out and in, off and on, and through sloth cannot hold out at these works, which are a dead work to our unregenerate parts. Sixthly, our utter impatience to think, will, do, perfect in some sort, and persevere in any good things, and the strength of our natural inclination carrying us another w. Sence of want makes earnest in
seeking help; the hungry belly will cry for bread. He that feels corruption ha∣ling him to that which is evil, cannot but cry to the Lord for strength of grace. Lastly, the manifold discomforts which the divel doth muster against us, that he might keep us from entring into, or continuing on, in any good action. Quest. What are the benefits of obedience? A. 1. This is the way to gain the honor and reputation of wise men. This is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the Nations.Deut. 4.6. Eph. 5.15, 17. Jer. 4.22. Io. 7.17. Act. 13.22. To be wise unto evil is the greatest sottishness: to be wise in obedience the greatest prudence. 2. By do∣ing Gods will we shall come to more knowledge of his will. If any man will do his will (saith Christ) he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God or no. 3. To fulfill Gods will, is to be a man according to Gods own heart. It is to approve a mans self to be Gods child, and Christs brother:Mar. 3.35. He that doth the will of God, the same is my brother, sister, and mother, saith Christ. 4 God will mercifully hear the prayers of them that devote themselves to the obedience of his will If any man will do his will, him he heareth;Jo. 9.31. Ps. 50.23. and to such belongeth the sal∣vation of God. 5. All blessings spiritual and temporal are promised, and shall be conferred upon them that obey the commandments, and walk before God in love, If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. But to him that is hap∣py, no good thing is wanting, no evil can approach. 6.Jo. 13.17. The Kingdom of Hea∣ven is graciously promised to them that walk in obedience. Quest. What is the miserable estate of the disobedient? A. 1. They are children of wrath,Eph. 2.3. & 5, 6. Rom. 6.16. because they remain children of disobedience. 2. They are yet in the power of sin; for his servants they are whom they obey. 3. These men cannot scape without punishment. He that knoweth not his masters will is worthy stripes, saith our Saviour, But he that knoweth his masters will, and yet prepareth not,Luc. 12.47, 48 neither doth according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. 4. Disobedience doth exasperate God, he could not else have been so much provoked by Adam and Eves transgressing his will, for to curse the world in such sort that it groaneth under the burden of it unto this day; and to damne all men in eternal flames, had not the very Son of God by taking the curse upon himself, saved a chosen number of them. How did Sauls disobedi∣ence provoke the Lord against him? Who because he rejected the Word of the Lord, the Lord rejected him;1 Sam. 15.23. yet his fact was such, as carnal reason could, and did say much in excuse of it; but it was disobedience. Wherefore let no willing transgressor of Gods Will, deceive himself, nor suffer any man to deceive him: For such things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.Eph. 5.6. For this is most certain, That Christ cometh in flaming fire,2 Thess. 1.8. to render vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
CHAP. VIII. The Things that we bewail, the Evils that we pray against, the special Things for which we are to give thanks, with the severall usefull Infe∣rences that may be drawn from this Petition. Question. WHat are the things that we bewail in this Petition? A. 1. We are to bewail the corruption of our hearts, that we are so prone not to regard, will, or do the Commandement of God, but to re∣bell or disobey. Put a match to an heap of Gunpowder, on a suddain it will be all on a flame; and as long as we adde matter to the fire, it burnes: so by nature we are most ready to sin, so soon as the least occasion is given; This sinfull disposition of heart, with all the corrupt motions, desires and lusts that issue from it, are to be bewailed with grief. 2. We are to be displeased with our selves for our slack and imperfect obedience to God,Psal. 119.18. Isa. 29.3. & 48.1. Ier. 5.2. Mat. 15.7, 8. 2 Tim. 3.5. and for our hypocrisie, privy pride, ignorance, infidelity, unwillingness, presumption, deadness of spirit, coldness, inconstancy, murmuring, rebellion, disobedience, and many other wants which break out when we are in doing Gods will. There is no servant of God, but hath wants in his best works, which are matter of mourn∣ing unto him. 3. We must bewail the errours of our life, who forgetting the Word of God, which should have been our counsellour and guid, have often stepped aside after the imaginations and lusts of our evil and deceitfull hearts. In many things we offend all. 4. It is to be lamented, that many times when we pray with the lips, or slightly with the heart, Thy will be done, in deed and truth we lean to our affections and lusts, that oppose themselves to the Law of God.Est. 3.5, 6. 1 Reg. 21.4. Psal. 43.5. Jon. 4.8, 9. Luk. 15 28. Mat 6.24. & 13.22. Rom. 12.2. 1 Tim. 6.9, 10. 2 Tim. 4.10. 2 Chro. 33.10. D ut. 9.24. & 31.27. 1 Sam. 15.23. 2 Pet. 2.7. Gal. 6.9. Mal. 1.13. Ezek. 9.4. Jer. 9 1, 2. Act. 7.51. Rev. 16.9. Gen. 4.13. Exo. 16.23. Numb. 21.5. Deut. 1.27. Iob 1.22. 1 Cor. 10.10. Iude 16. 1 Sam. 28.7. 1 Sam. 31.4. 2 Sam. 17.23. Act. 16.27. 5. We must humble our selves for our unquietness of mind, dejectedness, discontent and impatience, when God laies any cross on us, either immediately by his own hand, or by his instruments, as disobedient Children, unkind neighbours, tart or soure companions of life. It is Gods will that we should suffer affliction, and withall humble our selves under his mighty hand. 6 We must here bewail the sinne of the world, as ignorance, pride, hypocrisie, worldliness, ambition, schismes, contempt of Gods Word, op∣pression, irreligiousness, prophaness, weariness in well-doing, open rebellion, worldliness, murmuring, plasphemy, seeking to Wizards for help, &c. Lot was vexed with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites from day to day: so ought our souls to be vexed and grieved continually at the wickedness of our time. Q. What are the Evils that we pray against? A. First, We pray against spiritual desertions, that we be not given up to blindness of mind, the spirit of slumber or giddiness, hardness of heart, un∣belief, inordinate lusts, the carnall desires of the flesh, and the assaults of Sa∣tan,Rom. 13.13, 14. Psal. 119.36, 37, 133, vers. to be inticed, or drawn aside by them, to do what is displeasing unto God. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. Secondly, The particular evils that must be bewailed,Zach. 3.1. 1 Ioh. 3.4. 2 Pet. 1.4. are to be prayed against, as being contrary to the will of God, which is to be done of us in faith, according to knowledg, with sincerity, integrity, cheerfulness, speed, humility, diligence and constancy, viz. the will
and power of Satan, the dominion of sinne, &c. ignorance,Rom. 8.7. Hos. 4.6. Heb. 5.12. 1 Tim. 1.13. Deut. 10.16. Psal. 95.8. Prov. 23.35. Isa. 56.12. Ier. 44.16, 17. Rom. 2 4, 5. 2 Tim. 3.13. Hos. 6.4. Ioh. 5.35. Gen. 30.1. Eccl. 7.12. Iud. vers. 16. a purpose and resolution to continue in sin, hypocrisie, prophaness, inconstancy, murmuring, or complaining against Gods providence. Q. What are the special things for which we are to give thanks? A. We give thanks to God, that he hath begun to enlighten our minds with the knowledg of his truth, hath begotten us unto a lively faith, and hath been pleased to renew, incline, govern, and effectually move our will, that things spiritual and Divine do delight, content and please it: when as by na∣ture of our selves we can savour nothing but what is carnall. Who am I,Rom. 7.25. 1 Chro. 29.14. and what is my people, saith David, that we should obtain strength to offer so willingly after this sort? This is a most glorious, mercifull work of God, farre more excellent then the naturall fashioning of us in our Mothers Womb, as spiritual life is to be preferred to temporall, and the joyes of Heaven exceed the plea∣sures of this world. Q. What Conclusions may be gathered from this Petition? A. 1. Every Christians desire, Prayer and endeavour in this life must be, that Gods will be obeyed in all things. Teach me to do thy will,Psal. 143.10. Ioh. 5.30. Gen. 26.5. for thou art my God. Our Saviour saith, I seek not mine own will, but the will of my Father which hath sent me. For God is an absolute Sovereign, good reason therefore that his will should be the Law of his creature. The will of the Lord alone is good in it self and perfect in every point, as being the will of our most excellent and heavenly Father, who commandeth us nothing but that which is good,Rom. 7.12. Rom. 12.2. and layeth upon us nothing but profitable to our salvation. And if the heavenly Angels do refuse to do no Commandement, but most willingly execute whatso∣ever is required of them, it were a shamefull and foule thing for us, who by nature are lost, and yet redeemed by the Sonne of God, and adopted to be his Brethren, to resist the will of God, or draw back from his holy Precepts. How can we for shame weary, grieve, and dishonour him by our disobedience,Isa. 7.13. Heb. 3.10. Rom. 2.23, 24. 1 Tim. 6.1. Ioh. 17.4. who hath in his unspeakable mercy honoured and advanced us, above all we are able to comprehend? Rather it is our duty to glorifie our heavenly Father by a cheerfull, mild and filiall submission of our selves to his will in doing whatsoever shall be commanded. I have glorified thee on earth, (saith Christ) I have finished the work which thou hast given me to do. The Apostle in all his sufferings comforted himself in this, that he knew Christ should be magnified in his body,Phil. 1.20. whether it were by life or by death. For this end Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, the bondage of Satan, and sinne-revenging justice of God, that we should live no longer according to the lusts or will of men,Luk. 1.74, 75. 1 Pet. 4.2. Phil 2.13. Isa. 48.17. but according to the will of God. 2. It is God that giveth us both will and deed, maketh us persevere in every good Word and work, teacheth us to profit in obedience. Not being able of our selves to do what is truly acceptable unto God, we sue unto him for grace: nor being able to go forward, we intreat him to uphold, incite and strengthen us. This necessity of Divine grace we confess in this Petition.2 Cor. 3.5. 1 Cor. 15.10. Cant 1.4. Ier. 31.18. Psal. 119.5, 18, 36. sal. 239.24. Hos. 14.8. Merc. in h. l. Ioh. 15.5. 1 Cor. 15.10. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves. We cannot move till God breath into us the life of grace: and when he ceaseth to stirre and carry us forward, we cease to move. Draw me, we will runne after thee. In thoughts and words we are like eccho's, we cannot speak inwardly or outwardly till God hath spoken first to us. In the deeds we do, he prepareth them and worketh them first, we after him in nature, as a Boy writing under one who leadeth his hand in that he writeth. Of me is your fruit found: without me ye can do nothing. I laboured more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God that is with me. 3. No mans obedience
is perfect: for that we pray for, is not yet attained. In many things we offend all; in the good things we do,Gal. 5.17. we cannot perfect them. The flesh lusteth against the spirit. Concupiscence and lust doth still warre in our members, not for a time, but as long as we live in this world, and diffuses its poyson into our best actions. Not that our best deeds are sinnes, but that they are sinfull by reason of the corruption that cleaveth unto them: As Wine having some water mingled with it, yet is called Wine: for the best part giveth denomination to the whole. The work of the Spirit in respect of that order and degree which God hath instituted, is perfect: but it is his pleasure only to begin our perfection in this life, and to consummate it in the life to come. But we must remember, that good works are so: of God, that they are wrought by us, they are the works of God, but in and by us as his instruments, from whom their imperfection ariseth, and not from him, who is the principall Agent never deficient. 4. Christians must detest the works of the flesh, and take care that they be not misled or over-ruled with corrupt and carnal lusts, though they carry a shew of piety and godly zeal. If any one will be my Disciple, he must deny himself. The Disciples were urged with zeal, when they desir'd fire to come from Heaven, and consume the Samaritans,Luk. 9.54. who refused to give entertainment unto our Sa∣viour.Mat. 16.21. Rom. 13.14. Peter was carried with love when he perswaded his Master to spare him∣self, but he heard from him, Get thee behind me Satan. Take no care for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. It is the greatest slavery to be a bond-man to his desires, and to be carried headlong with lust and longing to obtain what we covet. Again, it is much better to wish and desire that which is just and right, then to obtain what is contrary to the Law of God, vertue and sound reason. And he is in worse case, whosoever doth compass that, which rashly, and by impulsion of carnall lust or appetite he desired, though in it self not un∣lawfull, then he that doth not obtain, what he hath well desired. And if we look into the Scripture, we shall find, that the godly did never follow their own pleasures, or grow indulgent to their affections, but it was much to their hurt or damage. 5. True Christians must be as carefull to have good lives,Rom. 6.13. 1 Pet. 2.15. words, works, as good hearts. We say not only Thy Kingdom come, but Thy will be done. Every man will hope he hath grace in his heart, and yet no man careth for obedience in his life:Iam. 1.21. Mat. 7.21. but the not doers of Gods will deceive themselves. Not every one that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter into the King∣dom of Heaven: but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in Heaven. God hath made the whole man, and requireth obedience of soul and body. Each man shall be judged according to his works,Rom. 12.1, 2. and receive according to that he hath done in this life, be it good or evil. The Law of God bindeth the whole man to his good behaviour, and not the heart alone: if it reach to the incli∣nation and thought, much more to our words and actions. What, that it is incredible to think that the heart should be right and honest, when the tongue is perverse, or the conversation dissolute? And because nothing is more ex∣cellent, honourable, sweet and comfortable, than to serve God, and to lead our life according to his Law and Precepts, what can a Christian wish or desire more, than to walk in the waies of God, than to conceive nothing in mind, to undertake nothing in action, which is repugnant to the Law of God? It ever went well with the Saints, whiles they walked in their uprightness: it ever went evil with them, if they turned aside into any by-path. 6. Prayer must be made, and care had that Gods will be done in an holy manner. The heavenly manner, as well as the lawfull matter of doing Gods will must be observed.Eph. 6.6. Rom. 1.9. Mat. 22.37. Servants are exhorted to do the will of God from the heart. Paul served God in spirit. The tenour of the Commandement is, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy thought. The same externall act may be done by the righteous and by the wicked;Isa. 58.3. both
may come to Church, hear a Sermon, receive the Sacrament, give an Almes: it is the manner of doing that makes the difference. This is the heart, life and very soul of every good action. Actions which are good in the matter there∣of, yet do stinke, and are very iniquity in Gods account,Isa. 1.13. if they be not done aright. Jehu was commanded to execute judgment upon the House of Ahab, and rewarded for it: but his heart was not upright,Hos. 1.4. 1 Cor. 7.10. and that fact is censured as murther. 7. Every Believer must abide in that Calling, wherein he was cal∣led, and submit his proper judgment to the will of God, who doth provide bet∣ter for us, then we can wish or desire. Every man must keep his order, and with cheerfulness faithfully execute the charge that is committed unto him, and do those things that be proper to his Calling. All Christians have a double Calling; one general, another special: and it is the Lords will that every one of us in all the actions of our life should look to our own Calling, which is as it were a standing appointeed to every one of God, that we should not runne at random in the whole course of our life: to which, whosoever de∣sireth to hold a right course in doing his duty, must needs apply himself. This is the direct means to obtain good success in the things we go about: for God of his infinite mercy and grace hath promised to direct our actions, studies, counsels and endeavours, that none other events shall follow them, then which he knoweth to serve for his glory and our salvation. 8. Christians must not content themselves in any thing they have attained, but must strive to perfection.Heb. 6.1. & 13.20, 21. 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us go on unto perfection Natural things in their manner long after the perfection of themselves. Light bodies are not well and quiet, if they be not above, and in their place. An Infant is still growing in the womb till all parts be perfected; and when it is come into the world, it resteth not till it come to perfect stature. So that it may justly be doubted, there is not truth of Christianity, if there be not a desire and longing after the perfection of Christianity. Be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect: in every thing,Mat. 5.48. and every way perfect. If the beginnings of grace be sweet, what shall the con∣summation be? If the first recovery out of sickness be welcome and delight∣some, who doth not long for perfect health? Can any man take pleasure in his defects? I count not my self perfect, saith the Apostle,Phil. 3.12.13, 14. but I forget that which is bhind, and strive hard forward towards the marke. We must shoot at the highest Mark, though we take up our Arrows short enough daily. When we call men still on, they think we know not what we would have, do they not thus and thus, &c.? But he that laboureth not to be better, will grow worse and worse: for who gathereth not, scattereth. Neither is there cause why any man should object, as if Christ might seem contrary to himself, when he teacheth us to strive to attain that perfection of Angels, which we cannot come unto but only in Heaven.Calv. in har. Evang. in Mat. 6.10. For it is not needfull when we pray that the earth may be obediently framed to the beck of God, to examine and sift every man, but it is sufficient by this Prayer to testifie, that we hate and are sorry for every thing that we see contrary to the will of God, and desire that it were taken out of the way: not only that it may be the Ruler of all our affections, but that with such cheerfulness as becometh us, we may give our selves wholly to fulfill the same. More plainly, Albeit it be confessed that we cannot in this world perform perfect obedience to the will of God, yet not∣withstanding it is required of us to take in hand to do it as well as we can, and to pray God in the Name of Christ, that by sending his holy Spirit, he would bend our minds thereunto, and mercifully pardon whatsoever weakness remaineth. For even then the Lord heareth his Children, when according to his will they ask those things which here they cannot have, and which he hath decreed not to make perfect in them in this life: to wit, when he doth increase in them the gift of sanctification, so that they profit every day more and more in the
knowledg and performance of his will, and as for the want of their obedience he doth not lay it to their charge. Besides, the Lord doth require perfection of us in the Covenant of grace, though he be pleased to accept of sincerity: Now what God doth require of us, we must beg of him. St Pauls Prayer for the Church of Corinth was that they might not do any evil,2 Cor. 7.13. although he knew that no man liveth which sinneth not, although he knew that in this life we must alwaies pray, Forgive us our sinnes. It is our frailty, that in many things we all do amiss, but a vertue, that we would do amiss in nothing, and a testimony of that vertue when we pray that what occasion of sinne soever doth offer it self, we may be strengthened from above to withstand it. They pray in vain to have sinne pardoned which seek not also to prevent sinne by Prayer, even every particular sinne by Prayer against all sinne, except men can name some transgression wherewith we ought to have truce. But things impossible must not be asked; as it is for us in this life to do the will of God, as the Angels do. First, This Particle [As] signifieth not the degree, but the kind of obedience, sc: sincerity and uprightness. But to ask and obtain this of God, is not contrary to this Decree. Secondly, Things simply and in themselves impossible are not to be asked: but things in some sense impossible, if we have respect to the Decree of God, may lawfully be desired. Now perfection is not simply impossible, but in respect of Divine dispensation; not absolutely, but during this life. For God will give grace to them that ask it, to do his will in respect of inchoation in this life, in respect of con∣summation in the life to come.Non enim an∣gustis huju vi∣tae spatijs cir∣cumscrebitur hujus Petitionis effectus. Til. Synt. p. 2. de orat. Dom. 19. Therefore consummation is to be desired, and the impossibility in this life patiently to be born. Consummation is to be de∣sired in this life, that we might obtain it hereafter: for he that doth not pray for it now, shall never possesse it at any time. But it is one thing that we cannot obtain perfection, another, not to desire it. For God will have us to desire it every moment, though he will not give it in this life. It no∣thing pertains to us to search the Decree of God, and what he hath determined to do: when we have this Rule prescribed, that we should ask according to the will of God. Therefore we ought to subject our selves to the will of God, and to ask those things that God willeth us to ask, whether he hath decreed it or not. In brief, We must desire, strive after, and hope for con∣tinuance, increase, perfection of grace, which in full measure we shall obtain in the life to come. 9. In all sufferings that God shall lay upon us, we must be patient, cheerfull and constant. The Lord hath ordained, that by afflictions his servants should be made conformable unto his Son Jesus Christ.Rom. 8.29. It is set down as a Canon, that by many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.Act. 14.21. And this is a very principall use of this Petition, thereby to comfort our selves against the offences of afflictions, and of this present world. For when being spent with long sickness we pine away, are contemned of most men, suffer injuries and persecutions, finally are tryed with a continuall cross, then do we find how hard and difficult it is to say this from the heart. If any man will be the Disciple of Christ,Luk. 9.23. 2 Tim. 2, 3. Heb. 12.6, 7. he must deny himself, and take up the cross. We are by profession Souldiers, who must endure hardness The will of God is good and holy, when he doth afflict, as well as when he doth com∣mand or bless.1 Sam. 3.18. Isa. 39.8. 1 Pet. 4.13, 14. It is the Lord, saith Eli, let him do what seemeth him good. Good is the Word that thou hast spoken, saith Hezekiah. It is a singular ho∣nour, that God should call us forth to suffer any thing for his Name sake: and by our patient suffering his Name is glorified. There want not mani∣fold Examples to encourage us in suffering for the truth. When the Brethren besought Paul not to go to Jerusalem, because he was there like to be deliever∣ed into the hands of the Gentiles: What mean you (saith he) thus to weep and to break mine heart:Act. 21.13.14. for I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Je∣rusalem,
for the Name of the Lord Jesus, which the brethren at Caesarea hearing, held themselves quiet, and said, The will of the Lord be done. 10. In proposing examples for imitation, we must set before us the best, and such as we know to be good, perfect and heavenly. In following such examples,1 Cor. 11.1. we shall alwaies find matter of humiliation, when we see in them how short we come of what we should do, how much we are wanting in our best ser∣vices. Also looking upon them we shall alwaies have cause to proceed on, and grow better and better: for as yet we have not attained the Mark. Heaven is the hope and Inheritance of the Saints, unto which they are born anew and adopted; into which they are admitted by grace, and which they shall possess in glory hereafter: good reason therefore that they should strive for perfection, and accustome themselves to walk according to the po∣licies of the New Jerusalem. What though they cannot be as perfect as their copy, yet the better the copy is, the nearer they may learn, the more eagerly will they strive to come to perfection. Once man could have obeyed perfectly, and again shall possess sanctification perfect and compleat in every degree. 11. In Heaven is all perfect obedience. There is neither defect nor failing there in the least circumstance.1 Cor. 13.12. 2 Per. 3.13. No unclean thing can en∣ter into it. When the Angels, who abode not in the truth, had sinned, they were cast out of Heaven, never to be admitted into that Mansion again. Heaven is the Throne of God, the Habitation of the holy Angels,Heb. 12.23. and of the Souls of just and perfect men: so that in it there is no place for sinne or temptation. CHAP. IX. Of the Fourth Petition, shewing the signification of the Word Give. And what is meant by Bread, and Daily Bread. Why this Petition, for Temporal, is put before others, for Spiritual Things. Question. WHat is the fourth Petition? A. Give us this day our daily Bread. Q. What doth this word Give signifie? A. To Give signifies First,1. To appoint or ordain. Josh. 9.27. Rev. 1.3. 2. To teach or instruct; a receive is to learn. Gen. 23.9, 13 Prov 9.9. Prov. 4 10. Psal 28.4. Numb 21.21. Psal. 6.10. Gen. 20.6. & 31.7. Psal. 55 22. & 66.9. Exo. 3.19. Deut. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 8.5. Gen. 28.20. Psal. 2.8. Ioh. 3.16. Gen. 31 9. Gen 32.10. 2 Cor. 9 9, 20. To sell for a full price or valuable conside∣ration. For as much money as it is worth, he shall give it. Secondly, To re∣compense according to desert: Give them according to their deeds, give them after the work of their hands, render to them their desert. Thirdly, To per∣mit or suffer. Thou wilt not give or suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Fourthly, To consecrate and offer willingly. Every man shall give according to the gift of his hand. These gave themselves to the Lord. Fifthly, To bestow freely and graciously. So Jacob vowed, If God will give me Bread to eat, and raiment to put on. God hath taken away the Cattell of your Father, and given them unto me And thus it is taken in this Petition: for God is not indebted to any man, but whatsoever we receive from him, is of free gift. The full sense of the word is, Give possession, give right, give continuance, give leave and ability to use and keep aright and holy; give a blessing to the right and holy use of daily Bread.
Q. What is meant by Bread? A. 1. Christ is ced the true and living Bread that came down from Hea∣ven.Ioh 6.32, 50, 5, 55. Isa. 55.1, 2. rov. 9.5. Heb 5 14. Jer. 5.16. Heb. 6 5, 6. Act. 20 7 1 Cor. 10.6. 1 King. 13.9. Gen 14 18. & 45.23. Gen. 47.13. Psal. 14.15. Ruth 1.. Lev. 3.11. & 2.6. Numb 28.2. Eccl 9 7. Gen. 3.19. & 18.5. Exo. 2.20. & 18.12. Isa. 58.7. Ezek. 18.7. Isa. 3.1 Deut. 8.3. Lev. 26.5, 26. Mat. 4.4. Prov. 27.27. Jer. 11.19. Psal. 147.9. 2 King. 6.22, 23. Gen. 31.54. Mar. 6.36. with Mat. 14, 15. Mat 15.2. Luk. 14.1. Prov. 31.14. Hag. 1.. 2. The Word of God is compared to Milk, Water, strong Meat, Wine; and we are said to eat or feed upon it: though it be not expresly called Bread, unless it be once in the Proverbs. 3. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is cal∣led Bread. 4. Material Bread made of Corne to nourish this natural life, is signified by it; as when Bread and Water are distinctly named, or Bread and Wine, or Bread and Meat. 5. Bread is taken for the grain whereof it is made. 6. It is taken for all kindes of Meats, whereby the natural life is sustained and cherished. In the sweate of thy brows thou shalt eat thy Bread, that is, thou shalt get thee food. The Lord will take away the stay of Bread, and the stay of Water, that is, of Meat and Drink. Man liveth not by Bread onely. Goates milk is called Bread; Honey, 1 Sam. 14 28. Flesh, Job 6.7. The fruit of Trees is called Bread. The food of Beasts is called Bread. To set Bread and Water before men, is to prepare great Provision. To buy Bread is interpreted to buy Victuals. To eat Bread with one, is to dine or ban∣quet with him. And generally all food necessary for the maintenance of this life is signified by this word Bread. Q. How must it be taken in this Petition? A. 1. Some understand it of the spiritual Bread that cometh down from heaven, and giveth life to the world, even Christ himself the spiritual Manna, promised in Paradise, figured in the wilderness, fore-spoken by the Prophets, shadowed in the Law, manifested in the Gospel. The reasons they render of this exposition are; First, this prayer is a compendiary sum of all the holy Doctrine concerning God and our salvation in Christ, wherein it cannot be thought, that he himself and our incorporating in him (the root and basis of all good things we have from him) should be omitted, being that which he so presseth us to seek,Jo. 3.3. & 6.32. &c. and giveth the first place unto in all his doctrines. Secondly, the methode and order of the petitions were not so natural, to ask earthly benefits before heavenly blssings. Thirdly, the Analogy and correspondence of these later petitions with the former three; for as they beginning with the great and glori∣ous name of God, fall afterwads to his adjoynts of the Kingdom, and honour: so these begin with Christ and regeneration through him, the fruits whereof are justification and sanctification, which follow in their place: as the Apostle a∣greeably hereunto reduceth the benefits we have by Christ, to these three heads, and that in the same order: regeneration the root and mother of the rest: justi∣fication and sanctification,1 Jo. 5.8. the two twins, and noble pair that cometh from it. There he three that bear record in earth, to the soul and conscience of every true believer: The spirit or part regenerate: Water, whereby we are washed and cleansed from our sin,Heb. 9.14. 1 Jo. 1.7, 9. 1 Jo. 5.6. and blood purging and abolishing both the root and fruits of it; which is attributed to the blood of Christ. And that is so to be taken in this place, not for expiation, is gathered by that the Apostle said before, This is he that came by Water and Blood, that is to say, not our justifier onely, which all men do willingly imbrace: but to sanctifie us also, which men will not easily be brought unto. Fourthly, Seeing it is plain, that by obtaining pardon for our sins, and righteousness in Christ (which is asked in the fifth petition) consequent∣ly we have all the blessedness that belongeth to it, one part whereof is this, to have all outward things, as additaments and appendances cast unto us, so far as God hath appointed them for our good;Mat. 6.33. and further then that, we have no
warrant to desire them: It seemeth not so likely, that either our Saviour Christ would rent these things asunder, and transplant one from another, espe∣cially to set the fruit before the branch that beareth it, or in so short a sum admit of repetition, which must needs follow, if being else where included, we ask them here by name. And this also may serve to prove, that no defect or maime can justly be imputed to this absolute form of prayer, though outward things come not within compass of the fourth petition. Fifthly, the doubling of the Article, This our bread this daily, sheweth it to be no common Bread,Io. 6.32. but a Bread of some rare and singular qualityes; the very like doubling of the Article to that purpose, we find in the self same argument, the bread the true. And most aptly is Bread here taken up, to express our spiritual conjunction with Christ, beeing that which to the worlds end must represent him in the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper. Sixthly, the word translated daily, which maketh all the doubt, being never read but in this prayer onely, and therefore of an uncertain signification, is derived from , not as it is expounded compe∣tent or sufficient for our nature, that is, for our sustenance and nourishment (for of that signification of the word, you shall hardly find any example, as H. Stephanus in his Greek Thesaurus noteth) but in that sense which the Scri∣pture useth it (and never otherwise) as it signifieth wealth and substance:Luc. 14.12, 13. Tit. 2.14. from whence are derived two words of neer affinity,  here, and , one noting that, which as the remain and overplus of our substance, we lay up in store and keep for a Jewel; the other, that which excelleth all wealth and sub∣stance,Rom. 9.5. Eph. 4.6. Ps. 119.14. which (among many other) is one signification of the preposition ) And so doth  aptly answer . I rejoyce in the way of thy testimonies, as above all substance. And it seemeth that our Saviour Christ doth herein allude to that saying of Solomon,Cant. 8.11. If a man would give all the sub∣stance of his house, for this love, he would be utterly despised. Lastly, It is not probable that in so heavenly compendious prayer Christ hath taught us to ask any terrene or earthly thing. This exposition is confirmed by the consent of Fa∣thers: but amongst the Papists themselves it is disallowed for these reasons.Cham. tom. 4. de Euch. 1. 9 cap. 11. § 26. Maldon. in Mat. 6.11. Mat. 6.34. Jo. 6.34. & 4.15. Luc. 11.3. Bell. tom 4. de oper. bon. in part.  cap 6 Gen. 28.20. Po. 30.8. Mat. 14.20. Jam. 5.13. 1 Reg. 8 35. 1 Pet 5.7. Ph. 4.6. 1. We pray Give us this day, as though we were forbid to beg for the morrow, as it is explained in the verses following. But the spiritual bread we may ask not for a day onely, but all the dayes of our life. 2 We ask this Bread as a thing ne∣cessary for us every day, as it is manifest by the words, Our daily bread: But it is not necessary to receive the Sacrament every day. 3. The examples of the Saints, the commandment of Christ teach that earthly blessings may lawfully be asked. If God will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, saith Jacob: Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, saith Agur, Pray that your flight be not in the Winter, saith our Saviour, Is any man afflicted, let him pray? Is the heaven shut that it doth not rain, pray and the Lord will hear? We are exhorted to cast our care upon God, not for spiritual things onely, but in all things, making our requests known unto him. But if earthly blessings must be desired, it is most agreeable to reason to refer them to this petition, the words themselves sounding so clearly for it. If the desire of temporal blessings may be referred to any other petition, it is indirectly, not as the proper object of that petition, and that to many as well as one. The reasons alledged to the contrary are easily answered, as will appear in the exposition of the words fol∣lowing. 2. The Papists generally, and some Protestants expound it of bread Sacramental and corporal both. Their reasons be,Bell. ubi sup. first the Lords prayer should be very imperfect and maimed, if the meat of the body should be craved so di∣ligently, without any mention of spiritual meat. 2. In the same Chapter the Lord doth prohibite the care of corporal things,Rhem. annot in Mat. 6.11. therefore it is not probable he would teach us to ask corporal things onely or principally in this petition. 3. The Bread that here we ask is superstantial, that is, the bread that passeth or excel∣leth
all creatures. But this reason fighteth with their opinion, as it doth with the truth: For if the Bread we ask excelleth all creatures, how can we beg cor∣poral sustenance under the name of Bread? Bellarmine maketh this objection, and returneth such an answer as directly overthroweth the Jesuites argument. The word  saith he,Bellar. ubi supra if we consider the sound, doth signifie supersubstantial: but if we consider the subject matter, it is no more but substantial or essential, that it may seem to be referred not so much to the excellency, as the necessity of Bread. For the Greek Fathers, who best knew the force of the Greek word, as Basil, Gregory Nyssen,In Qu. brev. q. 25, orat. 4. de orat. Dom vise Iansen. har E∣vang. c 41. Catech. Trid. par. 4 c. 13. q. 5, 6. Eeven copies of the old tran∣slion in Mat. hath aily bread. Francis. Luca. Burgensis. Maldonat. in. Math. 6.11. Chrysostom, Theophilact and Euthymius in their Commentaries upon Mathew the 6. do say,  to be substantial bread, that is, bread fit for the nourishment of my substance. Whereunto the ancient Inter∣preter had respect, who renders it Daily, that is, what bread we daily need. And whereas the vulgar edition in this place of Mathew, hath supersubstantial; He an∣swereth, first there be many antient books of the vulgar edition who have not supersubstantial, but Daily. As it is manifest that Cyprian read it, and the whole Latin Church, which in the Lords prayer, which without doubt it took out of Mathew, hath alwayes prayed and prayeth, Our daily bread give us this day. Moreover as the Greeks read , and yet having no regard of the preposition expound it substantial, why may not we Latines read it supersub∣stantial, that Word may answer to word, and yet without regard of the pre∣position expound it substantial? Add that when the vulgar Latin edition doth render the same word in Luke Daily, in Mathew supersubstantial, the word su∣persubstantial must so be expounded, that it may fitly agree with the word Daily. But it will most fitly consent, if by the word supersubstantial, we say that bread is signified which is daily necessary for the nourishing and conserving of our substance. Finally, supersubstantial may be the same that very substan∣tial: as superabundare is valde abundare. In which signification supersubstanti∣al bread, and daily bread is altogether the same. For therefore it is very neces∣sary, because it is very substantial. Thus far Bellarmine directly contrary to the Annotation of the Jesuites. But not the reason of the Jesuites onely, but that opinion of our adversaries is disallowed by Maldonate, for the reasons be∣fore laid down out of him against the first opinion. To them that object [as in the second reason above mentioned in defence of our adversaries opinion] it is not probable that in so heavenly a prayer Christ would teach us to ask any earth∣ly thing onely or principally: He answereth, that Christ intended not to command us to seek earthly things, to which we are prone by nature: but to instruct whence and how we ought to seek them. For he teacheth us to seek them,Vis. Iansen har. Evang. cap. 41. pag. 262. 263. not from earth, as bruite beasts, but of God, as men; not for all ages, but for the present time. But this is not an earthly, but an heavenly precept; and that so far, that very few obey it though Christ have taught. Thus this se∣cond opinion is sufficiently confuted by the adversaries themselves. Further their exposition may be disproved by these arguments. First our Saviour Chr st, who condemned vain repetition, and by a form of prayer provided a remedy against the same, is made here of the Jesui es to fault against his own rule: for that which is contained in the second petition, they teach to be asked in the fourth. Secondly, they lodge in one petition things of divers kinds, and far removed in nature, spiritual, and corporal, heavenly and earthly: yea (accord∣ing to their dotage) the creature and the Creator, which if they were well her∣binged should not have lyen so neer together. Thirdly, hereof it should ol∣low, that he taught them expresly to ask that which he had neither institued, nor instructed them of, and whereof his disciples were utterly ignorant. For the Sacrament of the Supper was not as yet instituted,Iansen. ubi supra. and the Sacraments of the old Law, they make but bare and naked figures or signes, severed from the spiri∣tual food that they represent. Lastly. seeing it is also quotidian or daily bread
as they confess it, it ought every day to be asked of the Lord, and consequent∣ly daily to be received, if it may be come by: unless men will mock the Lord, in asking that which they will not take, when it is offered. Whereby first, are condemned the elder Churches which used this great liberty: secondly, they bewray their own sacriledge, that make no shew of offer of it unto the people but once a year: whereupon they may better call it their yearly, then their daily bread. Thirdly, they bewray again the foolish superstition of the whole Clergy, to whom it is accounted for an hainous crime, if they consecrate the Fryday and Saturday before Easter. 3. The true and general received opinion is, that by bread in this petition is meant all corporal food, yea all things ne∣cessary to the maintenance of this life,Gen. 28.20. Mat 6.32. 1 Tim. 6.8. Act. 14.16. usually comprehended under these two heads, food and raiment. Also by bread are meant the causes and good effects of bread, as fruitful seasons, good temperature of air, health and chearful∣ness, as the Apostle saith, He filled our hearts with food and gladness. And be∣cause in this petition Christ would comprehend all corporal things which are ne∣cessarily required for the passing of this life:Gen 25.21. Mat. 8.6. 1 Tim. 2.2. 1 Reg. 8.36. therefore the word Bread in this place is rightly extended further, to all things which in policy, oeconomy, in the frtility of the earth, and such like are required to the necessary, honest, quiet passage o this life. Q If this petition concern temporal things, why is it put before the other for spiritual? A. 1. In the ranking of these petitions our Saviour did not intend to note what is first or last in order.Calv. har. E∣vag. in Mat. 6.11. Es. 44.22. & 59.2. Lam. 3.44. Scult. deprecat. cap. 25. For seeing our sins are as a cloud that hinder the access of our requests into the presence of the Lord, and separate betwixt us and his mercy, it is necessary that we ask first the pardon of our sins. 2. If order must be respected in these petitions, we may say, that Christ did not will to follow the order of dignity, priority or excellency; as if the temporal estate of the body were more needful, more excellent, or more to be desired, than the eternal life of the soul: but of nature and infirmity, as the natural life is before the spiritual, and a man must have a being in nature, before he can have a being in grace; and a comfortable natural life is both the fitter subject for the life of grace, and fitter instrument by which grace worketh, and doth the will of God upon earth. Righteous life presupposeth life, and to live vertuously it is impossible except we live. The Apostle in exhorting men to contentment,1 Tim. 6.8. although they have in this world no more then very bare food and raiment, gi∣veth us thereby to understand, that those are even the lowest of things neces∣sary, that if we should be stripped of all those things without which we might possibly be, yet these must be left; that destitution in those is such an impedi∣ment, as till it be removed, suffereth not the mind of man to admit any other care. For this cause first God assigned Adam maintenance of life, and then ap∣pointed him a law to observe.Gen. 1.29. Gen. 2.17. Gen. 4.2. Gen. 4.26. For this cause after men began to grow to a num∣ber, the first thing we read they gave themselves unto, was the tilling of the earth, and feeding of cattel. Having by this mean whereon to live, the prin∣cipal actions of their life afterward are noted by the exercise of their Religion. Therefore the petition wherein we are taught to desire corporal food, is set be∣fore them that concern the good of our soul. Of this order we may give these reasons further. 1. Request to have a comfortable natural life and being upon earth, doth follow immediately upon the request of doing Gods will on earth, because the dead cannot praise God. And if a man be not gathered into Christs Kingdom before death, there is no hope: For there is no work, nor device,Is. 8.18, 19. Eccl. 9.5. nor knowledge in the grave. Wherefore because no man can do the will of God on earth, except God give him a comfortable life upon earth, this petition follow∣eth next the other in a most holy order. 2. It is usual in Scripture, that the thing which is least to be insisted upon, is placed first in order, before that which
is sometimes more excellent that having finished the less worthy subject in few words, it might dwell more largely upon that subject which was more worthy. So our Saviour in one petition, and in few words doth express the desires of a natural life; but spendeth more words about the spiritual life, in the petitions following. 3. Gods indulgence and yeelding to mans weakness might cause this order; giving him leave to ask things more sensible, thereby raising him to ask spiritual.Jo. 4.53. Gen. 28.20. As our Saviour by curing mens bodies, did lead them on to know that he could and would cure their souls: letting it appear to them, he could as easi∣ly say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, as to say, Rise and walk. In like manner, men may by the experiment they have of Gods power and goodness to preserve the body, be led to seek unto him, with assurance that he both can and will save their souls. 4. In this petition Christ teacheth us not to seek bread or things necessa∣ry, to which by nature we are prone of our selves without any spur, but whence and in what sort we ought to seek them. For he lessoneth us to seek them, not from earth,Hac petitione ca∣vet, ne peccata fiant, sequente, quomodo facta remittantur. Maldon. in 6.11. as bruite beasts, but from God, as Christians: not for all times, but for the present day. But this is an heavenly, not an earthly precept, and that so far, that few have learned it of Christ our Teacher. 5. It might be added, that when Christ teacheth us to ask bread, he hath not so much regard of the bodie, as of the soul. For he cutteth off the greatest and most vehement affecti∣on, from which the greater part of sins doth bud and spring. Q What is meant by Daily Bread? A. The Greek word  hath bred great difficulty, and not being used in any other place of Scripture, is differently interpreted of Divines. Some render it consubstantial,Mrius Victor. advers. Arri. Maldon. ubi supra. Drus. Epist 26. Piscat. in Math. 6.11. Act. 7.26 & 16.11. & 23.11. Lib 5. de Sa∣cram Hierom. com. ad Ezek. 18 Aug. de verb. Dei. sec. 29. Deut. 32.29. 1 Par. 20.1. Prov. 27.1. Gorranus super∣additum sub∣stantia ad su∣stentationem. Basil. inter reg. 252. Em. Sa. Ad sub∣stantiae nostrae conservationem necessarium. Luc. 11.4. Barradim: Pa∣nem ad substanti∣alitatem. hoc est, panem nostrae substantia neces∣sarium. This is the forc of the preposition , ut aliquid superadditum designet. Mat. 6.33. In quaest compend. ex∣licat. def. 242. Luc. 15.12. that is, bread of the same substance with us. Hierom writeth that he read in the Gospel of the Hebrews  crastinum, as though there should be some opposition between this day and to morrow, and we should beg for this Day, Bread for to morrow. And the opposition of the words doth well agree, but the sentence doth not agree: for Christ doth not teach, but forbid us to be careful for that morrow. Others translate it succedaneum, that is, which succeedeth to bread already spent, and that it succeed the na∣ture of our body requireth, the word being derived of the participle ; of which we say, , sc. , that is, the day succeeding, Am∣brose confesseth and Hierom doth not dissemble, that  doth signifie that which cometh or succeedeth. Xenophon speaketh thus, , ver∣tente seu presente anno. And  sequente hyeme. For those things are called  which are to come. And Demosthenes against Midias, calleth the assembly that was next to follow . In the seventy it is found used for the time to come. And as Plutarch in Sertorio speaketh , they went about all the houses in order, or they went about from house to house. So bread  may be adventans or adventitius, which it sufficeth not to have taken once, but which in this vicissitude of changing times, had need to come oft every day. And hereunto agree those compositions, that Hesiode calleth that victum , which is sufficient and necessary for a year. Plutarch in Pericles calleth that , which is required for every day. It is translated by some superveniens, that is, as Varinus interpreteth it , that we at∣tribute it not to our industry, but to the gift of Cod. Or, that bread is not the principal thing which is to be desired in this petition, but adventitium, adjectitium, accessorium. It is ordinarily expounded Bread fit for the nourishment of my substance, or agreeable to my condition. Thus Basil, Suydas, Theophilact, and Euthimius, and of later Writers, very many expound it. Two words be deriv∣ed of  as it signifies substance or riches  that signifieth a peculiar select, notable treasure, and  that signifies vulgar, frugal, necessary,
sufficient. And so this Petition doth excellently consent with that of Solomon:Prov. 38.8. Chemnit. har. Evan cap. 51. bez. annot. in Mat. 6.11. Mercer. in Prov. 30.8. Jansen. ubi supra. Feed me with food convenient for me. And may well be translated essential, sub∣stantial, elimentary Bread, not that which is delicate, not superfluous. There be some that think it most fitly rendered Daily, as may be understood by that which followeth, Give us this Day. For there is no antithesis of words, but a similitude and likeness of the sentence. And it signifies, that God doth give necessary food to his servants every day. Therefore we ask of God, that he would not suffer our Diary to be wanting to us this day. For we speak to God as Children, who going to school in the morning, in the first place do require the appointed Portion of Bread for that Day.Gen. 7.13. Lev. 23.14. And then it is an Hebraism: for as the substance of the Day is put for the Day it self: so the Portion of Bread which answereth to the present day, may well be called substantial. The Syriack Interpreter for daily Bread, readeth, Bread of our want or necessity; whose exposition may well agree with most before alleged.Jer. 22.15. Lev. 26.5. Eccl. 5.11. 1 Tim. 6.8. These are the several conjectures of Learned Divines touching the signification of this word, who yet agree in substance, that daily Bread fit for our condition is here begged of God. For the word Daily may serve for each Interpretation, as it is evident in ordinary use of speech; where daily is applied to what doth succeed, is vulgur, must be received daily. CHAP. X. The Reasons why this Petition is to be made. Who must pray, Give us. How earthly Blessings are to be desired, whether absolutly, or with condition. In what sense Bread is said to be Ours. The difference be∣twixt the Wicked and the Godly in possessing outward Blessings. That it is both lawfull and necessary for a Christian to lay up for time to come. Question: WHy is this Ptition to be made? A. 1. Such is the frailty of our nature, that we are not able to con∣tinue in health one day without these helpes, and as it were props to uphold this decayed and ruinous cottage of our mortal bodies; less able to forbear them then many Beasts. For seeing there was necessary use of our meat in the time of our innocency, the necessity by our fall is much greater. 2. God would have us to cast all our care upon him,1 Pet. 5.7. Mat. 6.32. Hos. 2.8. Joel 2.22. and not only the care of spiritual things: for our heavenly Father knoweth that we stand in need of these temporal things. 3. God will be acknowledged that it is he who giveth us, whatsoever pertains to our daily Bread, and is angry if any think, that he hath received them from any other; and hath commanded us to ask them of him. Nay,1 Reg. 8.35. it is great impiety to attribute the things which pertain to our corporal sustenance to our industry, or to the creatures, or to ask them of the Saints. 4. It is a great portion of piety to ask the food of the body with solid confidence of our heavenly Father, when the care of earthly things doth hinder many from embracing and following the truth of Religion. Q. Who must pray, Give us? A. All, both poor and rich, must pray, Give us:Gen. 28.20. 1 Cor. 4.7. 2 Cor. 9.10. 1 Cron. 29.12, 14, 16. Hos. 2.8, 9. Deut. 8.17, 18. Deut. 2.5. Jam. 1.17. Heb. 1.2. Rom. 8.32. because we have nothing but by Gods free gift, have title to nothing but in Jesus Christ, can keep nothing but
by the Lords licence, neither can any thing prosper with us but by his blessing. The rich have abundance under their hands,Job 1.12. Pal. 106.15. & 78, 30, 3. Eccl. 3.13. Deut. 8.16. Prov. 11.4. Isa. 10.16. Although we possess out∣ward blessings, yet are we not right owners of them, but by faith, which is de∣clared by Prayer for them. 1 Sam 30.16, 17. not only for the present day, but the time to come; yet they cannot live of what they have, unless God give them their daily Bread. The begger stands before the door of the rich man, and the rich man stands before the door of the great Lord of all things. O∣thers crave of him, and he craveth himself. For why doth he abound in all things, but because God hath given? What shall he have, if God with∣draw his hand? Have not many gone to bed rich, and rose poor? and that he is not in want, it is of Gods mercy, not of his power or ability. Let a man be never so rich in the world, and want nothing that can be desired, yet if he want Gods blessing, in effect he wants all. Gods blessing is riches. Thou maist eat and not have enough, be clothed and not warm, earn wages and put it in a broken bag, if God do not bless thee. The blessing of God is called the staffe of Bread. In Bread there be two things, the substance and the vertues thereof proceeding from Gods blessing: this second, that is, the power of nourishing, is the staffe of Bread. For take away from an aged man his staffe, and he fal∣leth: and so take away Gods blessing from Bread, and it becomes unprofi∣table,Dan. 5.5. 2 King. 7.17. Quem dies vi∣dit veniens superbum. Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacente. in Sen. Thy. act. 3. Prov. 10.22. Hag. 1.6, 7. Eccl. 5.12. Numb 11.33. 2 Reg. 7.19, 20. Isa. 3.1. Psal. 105.16. Lev. 26.26. Ezek. 4.16. & 5.16. Dan. 1.13, 14, 15. Psal 78.30, 31. Luk. 12.15. Dan. 5.4, 5. Job 20, 22, 23. Psal. 227.1. Hujus necessariae petitionis adfert hanc causam. Chrys. tom. 14. oper. imperf. in Mat. Non solum ut nobis suppetat cibus, sed ut cum suppeditet & nobis Domini manus quae salubrem atque adeo saluta∣rem vim inferens pani quotidiano efficit, ut & cibus corpori profit, & corpus animae serviat. and ceaseth to nourish. And the like may be said of all labour and toyl in any Calling, for it nothing availes, unless God still give his blessing. More∣over, We pray that Bread may be given us, not only that we may have what to eat, but that what we eat we may receive it from the hand of God, that the Bread we eat might be sanctified unto us, received without sinne, and made pro∣fitable to our body. Q. How are earthly Blessings to be desired? A. Corporall Blessings no less then others promised in the Gospel, are to be craved with confidence in Gods Promises, humility, according to the will of God, with that mind, in that manner, and for that end that God requireth that we might serve God and our neighbour, not for ostentation or that we might spend them upon our lusts. Q. Are corporall Blessings to be asked absolutely or with condition? A. We may desire corporall Blessing, because we are allowed of God: but in the success of our Petitions we must submit our selves to the good pleasure of God,Judg. 7.2, 3. who will not give these things if they be not good for us, nor withold them, if it make for his glory and the furtherance of our salvation to have them. As for the words Absolute and Conditional they may be referred, either to the Thing desired, or to the Event of our desire. In the former sense, earthly Blessings may be prayed for absolutely, as God alloweth us to desire them: but in the latter we must ask them conditionally: That is, We may pray for them in holy manner, because the Word of truth doth warrant us, and the desire of them is engraved in the heart of man by nature, that he cannot but desire them so farre as they be necessary: But we cannot be assured to obtain the particular thing we desire, because God seeth it good for us to lack what we lawfully desire, to whose gratious disposition we must freely submit our selves. Now the secret purpose or determination of God to give, or not to give, is not the rule of our desires, but the revealed will of God, to which so long as we keep our selves, we do well, Nor is it for us to dispute, whether such or such blessings be good for us in particular, but whether they be just, lawfull and good in themselves, whether God allow us to crave them, and we be fitted to receive them: for we must
walk by rule, and commit the particular success of our suits unto the Lord, who knoweth better what is good then we our selves, and will keep from us what∣soever might be hurtfull. Moreover, temporall blessings are not evil in them∣selves, but hurtfull to us by reason of our corruption: and so grace it self through our sinne and wickedness is turned to our hurt. Whereas therefore it is usually said, that temporal blessings are to be desired with condition, absolutely spiri∣tual: It seems more plain and consonant to truth, if we say; All blessings are to be desired of God in that manner and order that his Word alloweth, and to be expected from him according as he hath promised: that is, what God hath simply promised to do, that in particular must be looked for, what he hath pro∣mised so farre as shall be for our good, that cannot be hoped for further then will make for our good, whether it be spiritual or temporal blessing: wherein we must referre our selves to the wisdom of God, and not be our own Judges. But in praying for outward blessings it is good to observe two Rules. 1. Pray first for grace, and then for peace and prosperity. 2. Pray not for temporal blessings alone, but for grace with them, and the blessing of God upon them. Q Why is Bread said to be Ours? A. Not that it is a thing in our power, gotten by our industry, or due by any right: but that of the bounty and goodness of the Giver, it is made Ours by deed of gift. Ye are Christs (saith the Apostle) and all things are yours.1 Cor. 3.22. Lev. 26.5. Eccl. 9.9. 2 Thes. 3.12. So then by means of Christ, Bread is called ours. For God having given Christ to us, doth in him and by him give all things else to us. It is ours, and yet we pray that it may be given: for it is ours when we receive it, but it is of God who giveth it. Whatsoever God is pleased to bestow upon us out of his Treasures, and is necessary for our life and calling, that by the free gift of God is ours. Q. What things are required that Bread may be called Ours? A. 1. We must be engrafted into Jesus Christ, who is the Heire of all things.1 Cor. 3.21, 22 Heb. 1.2. Mat. 15.26. Eph. 4.28. Gen. 3.19. 2 Thes. 3.12. Psal. 128.2. 1 Thes. 4.11. Hab. 2.6. Prov. 5.15. Prov. 3.27. Prov. 4.17. & 20.17. Prov. 9.17. Luk. 16.12. De sensu verb. vise Lively in Hos. 8.2. 2. We must labour in a good and honest Calling, profitable to Church, Com∣mon-wealth or private family. 3. It must be gotten by just and honest means; as that which is lawfully given us by our friends, or raised by painfull labour, and upright dealing in our place and calling. 4. We must be just and faithfull Stewards to dispense what God hath given us according to his appointment. For the poor have right and title in that which God hath given us, when their necessity requireth, and our ability will permit to succour them. Opposite hereunto is the Bread of wickedness or deceit, hid Bread or stolen wa∣ters. Q. Why are goods lawfully gotten called another mans, and grace our own, by our Saviour Christ? A. Temporal riches are called another mans because we do not possess them with full right, when in a small moment they may be taken from us, or we from them, and when we die, we must leave them to other, it being not possible to take them with us: and also because God gives them to men not as their proper goods, but as those which he will have to be dispensed by them. There is a double right, Jus charitatis. that belongs to the poor, and Jus proprietatis, which belongs to the owner. By right of charity, so much as may refresh the poor in his neces∣sity belongs to him, though the propriety be not his. But heavenly and eter∣nal Blessings are called our own, because they cannot be taken from us, and be∣ing obtained make us blessed; they do ever profit us, never forsake us.Deut. 23.24. Mat. 12.1. Earth∣ly blessings are not born with us, nor we born for them; they pertain nothing to piety, nothing to life eternal: but spiritual blessings are called ours, because we are regenerated of the Father, redeemed of Christ, and sanctified of the Spirit unto them, they belong to life eternal, and can never be taken from us.
Q Why are goods lawfully gotten called the mammon of iniquity? Luk. 16.9. Luk. 16.11. It may be our Saviour cal∣leth them so in reference to the former Parable of the Steward bestowing his Masters goods. Beza in Luk. 16.9. Down. 2. part of special Warfare. lib. 2. cap. 3. sect. 8.A. The reason is, because they are deceitfull, not able to effect what they seemed to promise; for unrighteousness is put for deceit: or they do us hurt, and become instruments of sinne. Either they abide not with us, or they puffe us up with pride, draw us to security. If they be not gotten by fraud, they beget sinne: if they be not taken from us in this life, they will be sure to leave us when we stand in most need. Q. If they only that be in Christ are lawfull Heires of outward blessings, how comes it to pass that wicked men abound in wealth? A. Wicked men possess outward things as the common gifts of Gods favour and bounty, for which they must give account unto his Majesty: but the godly enjoy these blessings as gifts of Gods special love, and part of their Childs Por∣tion; which makes the little that the righteous hath to be farre better then the Treasures of many and mighty rich men; As the mean fare of a poor subject with the Prince his favour, is much better then the large allowance of a Traitour commited to the Tower with his displeasure. Nor yet do we say that ungodly men are unjust usurpers of what they possess, having no title at all unto them: but as God of his bounty in Christ doth suffer them to live, so doth he conferre upon them those things that tend to the maintenance of this life, that he might imploy them in some inferiour service that he hath assigned them unto: whom he will call to a reckoning for the abuse of his mercy, after they have run their course. Q. When Christ bids us pray, Give us this day, doth he forbid us to provide or lay up any thing for the time to come? A. It is not only lawfull, but necessary to lay up something for the day or year to come,Eph. 4.28. Gen. 41.27. & 50.20. Prov. 10.4. Psal. 37.5. Act. 11.28. as God shall give opportunity and means. For Joseph is com∣mended in the Scripture for his wisdom, and godly provident care: Solomon commendeth him for a wise Son, that gathereth in Summer. This was also in the Apostles, who when they heard there was like to be a famine, whereof Ag∣abus did prophesie, betimes gathered money from all places, which the godly laying up untill the time, might then lay out for the use of the poor. Our Saviour gave commandement to his Disciples, to gather up the broken meat that nothing be lost.2 Cor. 12.14. Paul teacheth it to be the duty of Parents to lay up for their Children. Hitherto belong all the Precepts concerning frugality and parfimony, which stands in the gathering and keeping things gotten for our use and the be∣hoof of our Brethren.1 Pet. 5.7. Psal. 55.22. Prov. 3.5, 6. Isa. 28.16. Psal. 37.5. Mat. 6.25, 26. Prov. 10.16. & 16.3. But we must ever waite upon Gods providence, both when we have the means, and when we want them, casting off distrust, excessive distracting, unprofitable, and needless cares.
CHAP. XI. Shewing what we desire of God in this Petition; The ground there∣of. The particular things we are taught to ask under the name of Bread, and Daily Bread. And how we may lawfully pray for riches. The Evils we pray against. The wants we are to be∣wail. The special Blessing for which we are to give thanks in this Petition. Question: WHat desire you of God in this Petition? A. That God of his free mercy and love in Jesus Christ will give unto us all such things,Prov. 30.8. 1 Tim. 6.8. Job 23.12. Jam. 2.15, 16. which he seeth we may conveniently possess for the present time, even all things necessary and comfortable for this life. Q. What is the ground of this Petition? A. That God the absolute Sovereign and Lord of all things in Heaven and earth, in whom we live, move, and have our being,Psal. 24.1. Dan. 4.29. 2 Sam. 7.27. Mat. 6.32. 1 Pet. 4.19. Job 36.31. Psal. 104.28. & 145.15. Psal. 127.1, 2▪ is our most mercifull and loving Father, who knoweth that we stand in need of all these things, and out of tender care will provide whatsoever he seeth to be convenient for us. Q. What do we acknowledg herein? A. A. That in earthly things all our labour and travell is vain and to none ef∣fect, if God give not the increase: That we have no power to use the creatures under our hands, nor they any power to refresh, nourish, or comfort us without his blessing: yea, that we have no title to any earthly comforts to pos∣sess or use them,Res Dem nostros celeri citatas Turbine versat. Sen. ib. further then it shall please God of his bounty and love to bestow them upon us. And we further acknowledg that our humane frailty and infirmi∣ty is so great, that we cannot stand one day in good plight without these props of nature. Q. What are the Particulars we are taught to ask under the Name of Bread? A. Here we are taught to desire, 1. Food and Raiment; as Jacob prayed, If God will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on. 2. Health of Body.Gen. 28.20. 2 Sam. 19.32, 35. Job 7.3, 4. Prov. 15.15. 3 Joh. 2. Jam. 5.14, 16. Psal. 6.2. Isa. 38.3, 5. Psal. 119.117, 118. Judg. 16.28. Psal. 119.175. Prov. 3.24. Psal. 3.5. & 4.8. Lev. 26.19. Deut. 28.23. 1 King. 8.35, 36. Hos. 2.21, 22. Jam. 5.17, 18. Deut. 28.12. Jer. 5.24. & 14.22. Zach. 10.1. 2 Chro. 7.13. Job 38.26 Psal. 67.67. Psal. 147.8. Joel. 1.13, 14. Isa. 55.10. Deut. 28.8, 12. Zech. 8.12. Deut. 26.15. Prov. 3.16. & 30.8. Deut. 28.11. Gen. 24.12. Psal. 129.8. Psal. 104.15. & 23.5. Gen. 21.8. & 29.22. I wish above all things that thou maist prosper, and be in health, even as thy soul prosper∣eth. 3. Bodily vigour and strength. I am afflicted very much, quicken me, O Lord, according to thy Word 4. Quiet and comfortable sleep. Thou shalt lie down and thy sleep shall be sweet 5. Fruitfull and wholsome seasons for man and beast. When Heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned a∣gainst thee: if they pray towards this place, and confess thy Name, and turn from their sin when thou afflictest them: Then give rain upon thy Land. 6. Gods blessing upon our labours in the fruit of the earth, and such like commodities. Then shall the earth yeeld her increase, and God, even our God shall bless us. Look down from thy holy Habitation from Heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the Land which thou hast given us. 7. Competency of outward blessings, and fit Habitation. Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me. 8. Good success in lawfull businesses of this life. O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day. 9. Fitting delights and liberty. For God gives Bread to strengthen the heart of man, and Oyl to make his face to
shine,Prov. 5.18, 19. Phil. 22. Act. 12.5. Rom. 1.0. & 15.32. Jer. 29.7. Prov. 17.1. Psal. 122.6, 7. Lev. 26.6. Iob. 11.18, 19. Psal. 144.4. Zech. 3.10. 2 Thes 3.16. Col. 3.15. 1 Tim. 2.2. Gen. 43.14. Prov. 3.4. 2 Chro. 19.5, 6, 7. Iudg. 3.28, 29, 30. & 4.14. 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. Psal. 72.4, 12, 13. Neh. 2.4, 5. Psal. 64.2, 3. Psal. 4.8. Ier. 23.6. Deut. 33.28. Numb 23.9. Psal. 21.3, 4. Psal. 30.9. Prov. 3.16. Isa. 38.2. Mat. 26.39. Psal. 91.16. Isa. 38.6. 2 Cor. 1.4. Psal. 107.13. & 119.152. Psal. 39.9, 10, 13. Iudg. 15.18. Exo. 17.4. Gen. 17.18. 2 Sam. 10.12. 2 Sam. 23.8, 9, 10, 39. Isa. 3.2, 3. Act. 10.1, 2, 7, &c. Ier. 8.22. Luk. 10.34. Col 4.14. Gen. 4.22. 1 Sam. 13.19. Isa. 3.3. Gen. 24.60. & 30.17, 22. & 20.17. & 25.21. 1 Sam. 1.10. Exo. 17.11. Gen. 31.26, &c. Prov. 17.2. & 14.53. Gen. 18.67. Psal. 72.1, 2. 1 King 10.5. 1 Tim. 3.4. Ier 13.20. 1 Sam. 25.16. Ioh. 20.19. Deut 4.5. Gen. 2.15. & 4.2. & 27.14. Exo. 3, 2. 2 Sam. 13.8, 9. Prov. 31.13, 19. Act. 18.23. Eccl. 2.26. Isa. 28.26. Credit and good Name. Eccl. 7.1. Prov. 22.1. Psal. 37.6. Prov 15.15. and Wine to comfort him. 10. Prosperous Journeys. Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous Journey by the will of God, to come unto you. 11. Peace and Concord. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; Peace be within thy wals. Now the Lord of Peace himself, give you peace alwaies, by all means. 12. Favour and protection of the Magistrate. God Almighty give you mercy before the man. 13. Safeguard and protection from all enemies that might annoy, and all dangers that might befall us, sleeping or waking, at home or abroad. Thou Lord only makest me dwell in safety. 14. Length of daies to the good pleasure of God What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? shall the dust praise thee? 15. Deliverance out of danger and misery; as from sickness, poverty, and such like. O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit, so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live. 16. The life and preservation of our friends. Abraham pray∣ed for Ishmael, O that Ishmael might live before thee. 17. Valiant Souldiers for the defence of our Countrey against the invasion of all our enemies. Courage and fortitude is promised as a blessing, and must be sought by earnest and hearty Prayer. 18. Learned and good Physicians, which might minister unto us in the time of need, and skilfull Artificers to labour about the things that are necessary for our outward good. 19. Prosperity of marriage and fruitfulness. Thus the friends of Rebekah blessed her, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the Mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those that hate them. 20. Victory over our enemies. When Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed. 21. A right and happy state politick, domesticall, scholasticall: as good Magistrates, an obedient family, dutifull Children. The Queen of Sheba was astonished, when she beheld the order of Solomons Family. 22. Wisdom and skill to make good use of what God hath given; as Corne, Oyl, &c. Q What Particulars are we further taught to pray for, in these words, Our daily Bread? A. Here we pray for, 1. Contentation with our estate, though it be mean. Let your conversation be without covetousness,Heb. 13.5. 1 Tim. 6 6. Phil. 4.12. 1 Tim. 6.8. Eccl. 5.9, 10. Psal. 55.22. Psal. 37.5. Prov. 16.3. & 10.3. Job 29.14. Eph. 4.28. Gen. 3.19. Prov. 16.4. & 12.24. 2 Thes. 3.12. Prov. 31.13, 14, &c. 2 Tim. 2.6. Heb. 1.2. Eccl. 5.18. & 6.2. 1 Cor. 8.7, 8. 1 Tim. 4.3, 4, 5. and be content with such things as ye have. 2. Readiness in all estates of life to rest on Gods providence whatso∣ever fall out. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass. 3. Love of justice and equity. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me, and my Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem. 4. Diligence, faithfulness, and painfulness in our Callings. He becometh poor that laboureth with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent maketh rich. 5. Title and interest in Christ to whatsoever we possess, that we might enjoy them as the gifts of his Fatherly love and compassion towards us. 6. Liberty to use the things we have with∣out scruple of conscience, and power to discern and take a taste of such comforts, which through his allowance we have liberty of conscience to use. We are like lit∣tle Children who cannot carve for themselves when meat is provided: our heaven∣ly Father who prepareth our daily Bread, must put it into our mouthes, and give us to taste it, else it will not benefit. 7. Frugality and moderation in the use of all outward comforts of this life, that we be not oppressed with surfeit∣ting
and voluptuousness, and the cares of this world. Be not drunk with Wine wherein is access. Gather up the broken meat, that nothing be lost. 8. Joy,Eph. 5.18. Joh. 6.12. Psal. 21.3. & 104.14, 15. Act. 14.17. Eccl. 24.25. & 5.17. Eccl. 3.12, 13. Deut. 12.18. & 26.11. Neh. 8.9. rov 17.22. Isa. 9.3. Deut. 8.3. 1 Reg. 19.8. 1 Tim. 4.5. Hag. 1.6. Lev. 26.26. rov. 10.22. Phil. 4.6. Psal 37.5, 6. Psal. 16.5. Col. 1.17. Psal. 3 5. Psal. 119.91. Job 1.10. Psal. 55.22. & 127.1, 2. Psal. 91.10. cheerfulness, and comfort, that through the blessing of God we may use them with gladness of heart. I know there is no good in them, but for a man to re∣joyce, and to do good in this life. And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labour, it is the gift of God. 9. The sanctification of whatsoever is in our power, and the blessing of God upon it for our use, that it may strengthen our frail nature, and by his providence be elevated to a supernatural use. 10. The maintenance of what we have with the sanctified use of it, that it might not take up our thoughts, nor draw our hearts away from God: For he must uphold our Lot as well as deal us forth our Portion; he must direct to use, as well as give the blessing, otherwise it will steal the heart from God, or become unprofitable. We pray for grace to contain our selves within the care for the meanes, leaving the events unto Gods only dispo∣sition. These things we beg of God in this order. First, For those who are Gods, but yet uncalled, whether having abundance, but without the title of In∣heritance; or have neither title nor possession of any thing (for many be∣longing to mercy conflict with extream poverty) we pray in the behalf of these, that God would give as a Father to the one, as Children and Heires in Christ, the things they have; for the other, God would be pleased by a new grant, to furnish them with necessaries, who have justly, as we all, forfeited all things. Secondly, We who have something about us, yet find want of others, we wish that God would supply us so farre, as he seeth good for us. Thirdly, We who are called, and have for outward things more then we could in mo∣desty ask (for God doth for his sometimes this way, and other, above that they can ask or thing) we do beg at God to maintain these things unto us. And we wish also that God would give us leave to use the things we have; and that he would give us power to take a taste of such comforts, which through his allowance, we have liberty of conscience to use. Moreover we desire that with his blessing he would make them comfortable to us: And that he would bless all means we use, tending to preservation of this present life. Fourth∣ly, If we be in Christ, and yet poor, having in a manner nothing, we pray that God out of his secret love would minister to us, and make the fruit of his daly providence a contented Portion unto us, be it never so little; and fi∣nally make us see him by faith our All-sufficient God, that will not leave us, nor forsake us. Q. Is it lawfull for a man to pray for riches? A. In regard of the quantity of outward blessings to be desired, they are either necessary, sufficient and plentifull, or abundant and superfluous. The ne∣cessity of riches either respecteth a mans nature or his state: The necessity of nature is, that a man have things necessary to sustain and preserve nature, as food, apparel, lodging and such like; with which a man must rest contented if he have no more: according to the Apostles Rule, If we have food and rai∣ment, let us therewith be content. And these necessaries every man is bound to desire and seek after, both that nothing be lacking unto him for the preserva∣tion of his life, and also that he be not chargeable unto others. The necessity of state, place or calling, either respecteth himself or others. Unto the former is required that a man have not only things fit to sustain nature, but to main∣tain himself according to his place and calling: in which a greater or less pro∣portion is necessary, according to the dignity or meanness of a mans quality or condition. And thus a Noble-man hath need of a large allowance to maintain him according to his Nobility, and a King more to maintain his Royalty. In respect also of others, riches are necessary either to maintain those wich are committed to a mans charge, or others who are not under his
Government: For the former, the Father is bound to maintain, not only him∣self, but also his children, the master his family, the magistrate his officers: of which a man ought have as great a care to provide them necessaries according to their several conditions as himself.1 Tim. 5.8. Gen. 30.30. Prov. 31.15, 21 Joh. 13.29. & 12.6. Prov. 6.6. & 10.5. 2 Cor. 12.14. Prov. 13.22. And this provision of necessaries ought not onely to be for the time present, but also for the time to come: for the learning of which lesson the sluggard is sent to the Pismire to learn providence, seeing she in Summer provideth food for Winter. Neither ought a man thus to provide for his charge, that they may have comfortable maintenance whilest he liveth, but also that they may have a competency for their relief after he is dead. In respect also of others who are not under our charge, riches are ne∣cessary, and that both for publique and private uses: publique, as when we contribute to all good uses, which either respect the Church or Common∣wealth: to which purposes we are to extend our helping hand, not only out of our supersluities, but out of our necessities, pinching both back and belly to perform these publique services: private, as when out of that portion which God hath alotted us, we be ready according to our ability to relieve the poor who stand in need of our help. The Second degree or measure of riches, is to have not only things necessary, but also to have some sufficiency and reasononable plenty of them; so as a man may have not only wherwith to hold life and soul together, and to provide in some slender manner for his charge and family, but also such store, as that together with them that depend upon him, he may live comfortably and cheerfully in his vocation. And not only so, but also may be enabled thereby, to be liberally helpfull and benefi∣ciall unto others, and to advance their good whether it be publique or pri∣vate.Prov 30.8. Act 20.35. Deut. 28.11. Eph. 4.28. And in this degree also riches may lawfully be desired: First, Because the Holy Ghost doth account this plentifull estate in it self, more happy then that of want. Secondly, Because God requireth of us, that we be ready to perform those good duties both publique and private unto others. In Scrip∣ture we find many Commandements enjoyning, and Exhortations incouraging us to give unto the poor, and to do the works of mercy to those who need our help; as also to give Tribute to the Prince, and maintenance to those who labour in the work of the ministry: all which manifestly prove the lawfulness of desiring and seeking this sufficiency of riches and convenient plenty, so it be with moderation. Thirdly, The Lord in his infinite bounty and goodness, hath not only created such plentifull store of these his creatures, as are sufficient for necessity,Lev. 26.5. Deut. 28.2, 3, 4, 11. but also for honest comfort and delight, and hath in many places promised this store and plenty to those that fear and serve him. The third degree of riches is abundance and superfluity, when a man hath more then is fit for his place and calling, or then he can or will imploy to any good uses. And this desire and seeking of abundance is unlawfull, not simply and absolutely in it self, but by reason of our corruption, as it argues distrust and diffidence in Gods Promises,1 Tim. 6.9. Mat. 13.12. is contrary to the end why riches are to be desired, will not stand with Christian moderation, and is the oc∣casion of many dangerous temptations. Q. What are the Evils we pray against in this Petition? A. We pray against, 1. Beggery and extream want. The destruction of the poor man is his poverty.Prov. 10.15. & 30.9. Lev. 26.19, 20 2 Sam. 21.1. Joh. 1.1. 1 Reg. 8.33, 35. Lam 4.9, 10. Psal. 105.16. Isa. 5.13. Deut. 32.14. 1 Chro. 21.14. Gen. 21.16. Exo. 15.25. Jer. 29.17. Ezek. 5.17. Mat. 24.7. Jer. 19.9. Judg. 15.18. 2 Sam. 12.16. 2 Chro. 7, 13. 2. Famine and dearth of corn. There was a famine in the dayes of David three years, year after year, and David enquired of the Lord. Under this head may be comprehended, extremity of hunger and thirst. When Sampson was so athirst, he called on the Lord and said, Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant, and now I shall die for thirst. 3. Pestilence or other sickness and infirmity. If I shall shut up Heaven that
there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I send pesti∣lence among my people: If my people, which are called by my name,Ps. 91.3. Ps 38.1. Mat. 8.2. Luc. 17.13. Mat. 9.27. Mar. 10.47. Mat. 9.2. Ps. 35.13. Luc. 4.38. Jo. 4.47. Mar. 8.22. Mat. 17.24 & 15.22. 1 Reg. 13.6. Num. 12.13. Ezek. 14.21. Gen. 13.7, 8. Heb. 12.14. Deut. 7.14. Ps. 106.16. Hag. 1.6. Job. 7.13, 14. Exod. 22.23. Joel. 1.19. Leu. 26.19, 20. Pro. 26.1. 1 Reg. 8.35. Deut. 28.18, 24, 40. Ps. 107.34. Ps. 120.1, 2. 2 Chro. 32.20. Lev. 26.25. Deut. 28.48. Jud. 2.14. Jer. 5.15, 16, 17. Ps. 35.11. & 10, 18. Ps. 11.2. & 12.2. & 25.19. & 28.3. & 36.3. Ps. 44.9, 10, 11, 12. Judg. 20.23. Contempt and opprobry, I am the song of the drunkards. Ps. 69.11, 12. Ps. 71.7. Deut. 32.30. Ps. 39.10.13. Ps. 119.36. Pro. 15.27. & 1.19. 1 Tim. 6 9, 10. Hab. 2 9, 10. 1 King. 21.4. Ps. 78.21, 22. 1 Tim. 9.10. Numb. 11.18, 19. Pro. 18.9. 2 Thess. 3.10. Mat. 20.3.6. Pro. 6.9, 10. & 10.4.5. & 20.13. Pro. 15.13 1 Tim. 5.23. 1 Tim. 4.4. Mat. 4.4. Eccl. 9.11. The race is not to the swift. Pro. 4.7. & 28.8. & 30.9. Eph. 4.28. Hab. 2.6, Pro. 11.24, 25.26. Eccl. 11.1. Is. 58.7. shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked wayes: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land. 4. Wild beasts, which is one of the plagues of God, that he sends upon the world to punish the disobedience of men. 5. Discord and contention, frow∣ardness and undutifulness in them that should obey. As much as is possible have peace with all men. 6. Ill success in our labors, journeys, or the use of any thing that is put into our hands for good, that it may not be a curse unto us. He gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul, under which head is comprehended barrenness of the ground or cattel. 7. Terrors and anguish that might hold our eyes waking in the night season. When I say, my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint: Then then fearest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions. 8. Oppression. If thou afflict any widow or fatherless childe, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry. 9. Un∣seasonable weather, as excessive rain, or immoderate drouth. O Lord, to thee will I cry: for the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and the flame hath burnt all the trees of the field. 10. Unjust war, or annoyance and vexati∣on by wicked men in suites of Law, secret conspiracies, false reports, flatteries, or such like, False witnesses did rise up: they layed to my charge things that I knew not. 11. Falling before the enemy in just war, and captivity with reproach and misery that followeth it. Thou makest us to turn back from the enemies, and they which hate us, spoil for themselves. Thou hast given us like Sheep appointed for meat, and hast scattered us among the Heathen. 12. Cowardise and faint-heartedness in the just and lawful defence against them that unjustly invade and set upon us. How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up. 13. Untimely death of good Magistrates, holy Ministers faithful friends, &c. Remove thy stroak away from me, I am consumed by the blow of thy hand. O spare me that I may recover health: before I go hence, and be no more. 14. Covetuousness or o∣ver greedy desire of earthly things. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. 15. Distracting cares. Take no thought for the morrow for the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self. 16. Distrust in the providence of God for the things of this life. It was the sin of Israel, that they believed not in God, and trust∣ed not in his salvation. 17. Discontent with our estate. The love of mony is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pier∣ced themselves through with many sorrows. 18. Idleness. He that will not la∣bor, let him not eat. 18. Scrupulousness whereby we deprive our selves of the comfortable, honest, and sweet use of what God hath given us to injoy. 20 Super∣stition, whereby men place holiness in abstinence from meats and drinks, and ac∣count voluntary poverty a state of perfection; as the Papists do. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine own infirmity. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused. 21. Vain confidence, when we rest in the means, but look not to the Lord for a blessing upon the creatures. Man lives not by bread alone. 22. Mercilessness, cozenage, in∣justice, when we respect our selves and our own advantage, but have no feeling of our poor brethrens necessity. There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth: and there is that withholdeth more then is meet, but it tendeth to poverty, The li∣beral soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth shall be watered also himself. He that which holdeth corn, the people shall curse him: but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it. 23. Luxury and riot in the use of meat, drink, sleep,
apparel, recreation, buildings, and such like. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness,Prov. 23.20. Luk. 21.34. & 15.13, 14, 15, 16. and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. Lastly, we pray against that pro∣phaneness which naturally possesseth the hearts of men, which maketh them careless of their spiritual title to earthly things, or whether they taste of the special love of God in the use of earthly things, so they may have their fill of vain pleasure, or injoy outward things as they stand in need. Quest. What considerations serve to kindle devotion in this Peti∣tion? A. The motives breeding devotion this way, are, First, For all that yet find the want of something,Catech. Trid. Exposit. orat. Dom. in 4. Petit. for the more comfortable service of God, that they would well weigh the wants of others and of themselves. Secondly, Consider what a sweet thing it is, to feel this, that God of his grace giveth this or that to us. If we sit at board with great personages, if they carve us a bit and give it us, the whole feast is not so sweet to us, as their honorable remembrance of us. All the creature is a deaf Nut, and no better, if the Lord be not perceived in it. Thirdly, For such as have abundance, they must consider, how he that giveth these, is the maintainer of them; how easily God might bring the things they have to nothing, letting riotous servants and children, like back-doors, bring down the house. Fourthly, how many wayes God can keep them from being able to use or find comfort in any thing they take or possess; if he send a scruple into the conscience touching the lawfulness of it, if he send sickness, deep discontents, lingring after that we have not; or otherwise if he should give us to such weakness in using any thing, that we should breed our selves more bitter∣ness in the end, then we take comfort in the first tasting of them. How little things put us out, that for the time all we have is nothing to us? Fifthly, we must consider how all things without Gods blessing are nothing,Deut. 28.38. clothes warm not, meats nourish not, physick heals not, labors prosper not to effect any thing; which those well know, whose false affianced hearts have been well whip∣ped out of all the creature. Sixthly, we must remember the singular use and be∣nefite of earthly blessings, and how many wayes our life would be irksome and tedious, if we should be deprived of them. Nor are they profitable to this life onely, but they are instruments of vertue, furtherances of our Christian course, if used aright according to the will of God. Q. What are the wants which are to be bewailed in this petition? A. The special things to be bewailed are, 1. Covetuousness, a vice which is na∣turally engraffed in every mans heart: it is when men over-greedily desire the things of this life, and have their hearts so taken up with the thought of them, that they cannot mind the things that concern the glory of God,Psal. 4.6. the good of his Church and their own salvation. This desire is unsatiable, and men that have enough, would still have more. 2. Diffidence and distrustfulness in Gods pro∣vidence touching the things of this life. This appears, when men are pressed with adversity: for then they howl and weep, and pierce themselves through with many sorrows. And these two sins do oft carry men to the use of unlaw∣ful means, and wicked shifts, to satisfie their desires, or supply their wants. 3. Unthriftiness, that we have consumed or wasted the good creatures of God vainly,Luk. 15.13. riotously, to the maintenance of sin, and the satisfaction of our lusts. 4. Hypocrisie, in making this petition, when we begge of God what we need, but will not wait his leasure, nor trust in his promise; but shift for our selves by hook or crook: when we desire our own bread, but live by oppression, in∣justice, fraud, cozenage, stealth, the sweat of other mens brows. 5. Sottish∣ness and pride, when we pray God to give us our daily Bread, but are puffed up with outward things as if we had not received them; and in prosperity are so senceless and overly in prayer, as if we needed not the blessing of God to
maintain our lot, and make what is under our hands to be profitable and com∣fortable for our use. If our barns be full, and our tables richly furnished, we pray so coldly for a blessing, that it may appear we feel not the infirmity of the creature, we find not want of Gods blessing. 6. Unthankfulness for mercy received, that we have not taken notice of the Lords bounty, nor looked to him by whom we are fed, clothed, laid to sleep, raised again, preserved in health, strength, and safety; who doth keep us in our going out and coming in, and maketh our way prosperous. 7. Unquietness and discontentment, that by froward carriage, unseemly speech, sullen behaviour, we have troubled them that we should have comforted, and been injurious to them whose peace and welfare we are bound to seek. 8. Want of compassion, that when we are fed, we remember not them that want and stand in need. Lastly, we are to be grieved and mourn in moderation for the outward miseries that lie upon our selves or other the people of God; specially, that afflict the Church in ge∣neral, as war, famine, &c. Quest. What are the special blessings for which we are to give thanks? A. Thankes are to be given to God,Deut. 8.8, 9, 10. Psal. 21.2, 3, 4. Psal. 65.9, 10. Psal. 18.1, 2. Isa. 38.16. 2 Cor. 1.4. Joel 2.26. that he hath created things necessary for this life and doth daily minister unto us out of his treasure; that he often de∣livers our life out of dangers, and comforts us in our sorrows, that he hath blessed our labors, and made his benefits useful and comfortable unto us. If we sojourn a week or two with any, how thankeful are we? But we are Gods daily guests all the year long: he layeth the cloth every where. CHAP. XII. Several practical Conclusions that may be drawn from this Petiti∣on, with directions to know a lawfull from an unlawfull de∣sire. Question: WHat Conclusions may be drawn from this Petition? A. 1. God giveth and maintaineth to us all things belonging to this life. God giveth, God taketh, saith Job, His blessing maketh rich, saith Solomon.Job. 1.21. Prov. 10.22. Jam. 1.17. Ier. 27.5. Psal. 145.16. Ezek. 16.17. Hos. 2.8, 9. Psal. 104.27, 28, 29, 30. Act. 14.17. Neque potest non esse utilissi∣mum atque op∣timum, quod ab optimo pa∣rente Deo nobis datur. Denido, quid potest esse tam difficile, quod non facile consequamur & obtimamus si Deus ipse obijciat postremo, quis non men Dei atque pudore percellatur, si qua bona ille tam plane offert; ea negligat, & frustra elabi patiatur. Mal. in Iosh. 1.1, 2. Dei nutu cuncta distribuuntur, con∣servantur & augentur. Psal. 65.9. Every good and perfect gift descendeth from him. Mine is all the earth, I gave it to whom I will. He openeth his hand, and filleth every living thing. Silver and gold, and wool and flax, and corne and wine and oyl are mine, saith the Lord. For as in a house the Master in the Family, keepeth (to the dogs) every creature in it; giveth one greater, another lesser wages: putteth some in honourable place, others in the scullery: so doth God the great Father of all the Family in Heaven and in Earth; neither can any deal us a fit state but he. For as the Physician only can prescribe the diet, so God he seeth where a full and liberall measure, where a more sparing is expedient. The Devil, he taketh upon him that all Kingdoms are his, he giveth them as he will; a loud lie; he cannot touch a hog till God sealeth him a Warrant: and as an executioner that kil∣leth by poyson, serveth the Magistrate: so doth he serve God in giving a deadly sweet poysoned Cup to those God leaveth to his power. Again, though our good friends and our means help us with this or that, yet God is the first Donor; these are instruments conveyghing that which God of grace deviseth
to us, and bestoweth upon us. He that sendeth a Present in the giver of it, not the man that putteth it into our hands; which doth teach us to be content with that we have,Mat. 20.15. and not to envy other mens plenty▪ We look our Children and Servants should take that of us which we give them, without murmuring, or discontented semblance, be it fine or course. How much more must we be willing to stand to Gods carving, and not dare to quetch against his dispo∣sition. 2. All things needfull to the maintenance and comfort of this life are to be asked of God. It is God that giveth them, and it is his will and pleasure that we should crave them at his hand.Psal. 102.24. Zech. 10.1. O my God, take me not away in the midst of my daies. Ask ye of the Lord rain, in the time of the latter rain. The necessity of man requireth that he should have supplies for this life, that he may have a right mind in a sound body; else he can neither enjoy himself, nor do good to his neighbour, nor do the service and works which the Lord requireth: He can∣not profit man, nor serve his God Witness the condition of distracted and melancholik, of naturals, of deaf, and dumb persons. Also what can men diseased and in pain do, in comparison of what they may do when their minds are free, and bodyes strong and healthy. And God who knoweth that we stand in need of these things,1 Tim. 4.8. Psal. 34.9, 10. hath promised to give them as well as spiritual. God∣liness hath the promise of this present life. God will withhold no good thing from them that fear his Name. But Prayer is the mean whereby we obtain what God hath graciously promised, and will mercifully bestow. God is the only Foun∣tain from whom all good things do flow to us God himself speaketh of himself to Abraham,Act. 14.17. & 17.28. Gen. 17.1. Obad. vers. 5. Gen. 32.20. Deut. 8.5. I am God All-sufficient, or sufficiency it self, as the word Dai is taken elsewhere. Hereupon Jacob the Patriarch when he had tried the exceed∣ing bountifulness of God All-sufficient toward himself: I am less then all thy mercies, and then all thy truth which thou hast shewed to thy servant. And that the Jews might be perswaded that God alone is the Well-spring of every good gift,Deut. 26.2, 3. therefore we read it was commanded unto them to bring of the first of all their fruits in a basket, and profess that they had received them of the bounti∣fulness and mercy of the Lord. Moreover, all our labour and watchfulness are unprosperous: yea, and even his own gifts also, being good in themselves, are yet hurtfull to us, unless he pour his blessing upon them. For the earth being cursed for mans sake,Gen. 3.17. which the Lord both in Word pronounced, and in deed declareth, so often as he sendeth upon us scarcity, either by drouth, or by wa∣ters and hail, if at any time it yeeld Corne and other things necessary for life, there is no wise man but seeth that these things proceed not from mans travell, but from the special blessing of God. For here that principle hath place: Neither he that planteth is any thing neither he that watereth,1 Cor. 3.7. but God that giveth increase. Besides, when the very strength of nourishing in Bread, is said to be of God,Psal. 105.6. & 107.34. and the Lord is he, who sendeth famine, taketh away strength from such things as should nourish, maketh the earth fruitfull and barren: hereof it followeth that it is God by whose power and providence,1 Reg. 17.1. 2 Reg. 8.1. both the fruits come to ripeness, and serve men for their nourishment. The same is most true in matters belonging both to the Common-wealths and Families, whereupon saith the Psalmist:Psal. 127.1, 2. Except the Lord build the house, their labour is lost that build it. This point Christ proved to his Disciples by one experience, who when they had wearied themselves all night and caught nothing,Luk. 5.5. Joh. 21.6. being commanded in his name to cast forth the net, they inclosed such a multitude of Fishes, that their net brake withall: giving to understand by this Miracle, that all our labour dependeth of God, and that it is his only blessing that maketh men rich. All creatures in their kind teach us to cll upon God for the supply of our necessities.Psal. 104.27. & 145.15. The young Ravens report their wants unto God. All things trust in thee, O Lord, that thou shouldst give them meat in due season.
It is the pleasure of God,Psal. 37 3, 4, 5. that we should trust in him for things corporal as well as spiritual: But invocation doth accompany sound confidence; if we trust in God, we cannot but seek unto him by Prayer. Again, God is glorified by our acknowledgment of his Divine providence, and our voluntary submission unto his good pleasure in outward blessings;Ioel 2.22. Hos. 2.8. He will be acknowledged the given of every good thing, and it angry that we should think we receive them from any other. Love and praise is due to God for his mercies towards us: But we cannot be thankfull for what we ask not. What love shall God have from us for what we have received, if we look not to him for what we want? The sweetness of earthly comforts is lost, when we cannot be assured of Gods favour in them, nor tast his special goodness, and discern his fatherly care. But the heart can never be certified of Gods love and mercy in the enjoy∣ment of these common blessings, if it be not lifted up in Prayer unto his Ma∣jesty. Let every Christian then assure himself that he may lawfully desire and pray for the things of this life, only it must be considered of whom, by what means, for whom, for what time, in what right, and in what measure, or wherewith we would have our wants supplied. It will be said,Mat. 6 33. If we seek the Kingdom of God, all these things for this life shall be ministred unto us. And that our Saviour saith, Labour not for the meat that perisheth;Ioh. 6.27. The answer is easie, for it is not said, Seek only the Kingdom of God, but first, that is, seek it chiefly. And the promise of having all things for this life, doth not exclude the lawfull means to get them: but rather binds us with assured con∣fidence to seek unto the Lord for them. Thou hast spoken unto thy servant con∣cerning his house for a long time: therefore have I been bold to make this sup∣plication before thee. Gods promise should embolden us to pray, but not lull us asleep in security. Also the Exhortation of Christ in the last place mentioned, is not absolute, but comparative, namely, that of the two, he would have them rather seek for that which is spiritual and everlasting, then for that which is corporal and perishing. Notwithstanding these places, or any thing else that can be objected; James said, the cause why men had not,Iam. 4.2. was because they did not ask. It was Asa his fault, not that he did seek to the Physicians for health, but because he sought only to the Physicians,1 Chro. 16.12. Psal. 119.71. Ier. 10.24. and not to the Lord. It may be objected, it is good to be afflicted. And Jeremy saith, Correct us, O Lord. But afflictions in themselves are evil; they are fruits of sinne, they also occasion men to sin. Therefore Agur prayeth,Prov. 30.8, 9. that he might not be poor, that is, so needy, as to be destitute of daily food and cloth∣ing, lest (saith he) I steal, and take the name of my God in van. Yet, it is most true which David saith. But afflictions are good by accident, through Gods gracious working of humiliation and repentance by them: of them∣selves they are not good. It is no good argument to say; Afflictions work for our good, therefore we may pray for them, or we must not pray against them. For the very sinnes of Gods Children, through the infinite wisdom and power of God, may, and oft do, work much for their good; yet in no case may be prayed for, but alwaies prayed against. The Prophet Jeremy doth not pray absolutely that he might be corrected, but as the case then stood betwixt God and his Church, sith God was forced to correct them, he desireth that the correction might be in judgment and moderation, as a fruit of his fatherly love, and not in extremity, as proceeding from his wrath and heavy displeasure. The very words do shew this sense: for he saith, Correct me, but in judgment; not in thine anger. He doth in this place only deprecate the greater evil of punishment, and willingly submitteth himself unto the less. Wherefore notwithstanding any thing that can be said against it, If any man be afflicted,Iam. 5.13. let him pray. For God himself saith, Call upon me in the day of trouble,Psal. 50.15. I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me.
1 Chro. 29.14. 1 Cor. 10.26. Psal. 115.26. Gen. 32.10. Luk. 17.10. Illud certe ut mo, nisi impius negaver it, me∣rae liberalitatis esse, quidquid Deus largitur mortalibus: ac proinde nemi∣nem unquam; nep robissimum quidem, jure expostulare posse, si quid corum quae ab ipso accepit, omittat. Mal. in Josh. 1. vers. 1, 2. Gen. 32.10. Job 36.31. Psal. 145.15. Psal. 104.27. Gen. 33.5.3. The least outward thing is the gift of Gods grace to us. All things come of thee, O God, and that of thy free goodness. The earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof. And though he made it for mans use, and hath given it to the children of men; yet hath he reserved the right in himself, to dispose of it to this or that person, both what he pleaseth, and as much or as little as seemeth good to him. And when he hath disposed of any parcell of his goods to any men, they hold them but as Stewards, to be accountable to him their Master; and are but Tenants, at the meer will and pleasure of him their Lord. The first grant of earthly things to man was of bounty, much more the Possessions of them since he hath forfeited his interest by sin and disobedience. It is the Lords mercy that we are not confounded; and if life it self, be given of mercy, then all things pertaining to the maintenance of life must spring from the same Fountain. We cannot deserve one bit of bread or sup of water. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant, saith Jacob. Nothing is more free then gift: but whatsoever we receive we ask it on gift, challenge it not as due. He giveth meat in abundance. Thou givest them their meat in due season. These are the Children which God hath graciously given me. Such therefore as will challenge Heaven by way of commutative Justice, because they have given a penny answerable to that penny-worth, were never taught by the Spirit of Christ. And considering that God of his grace is the giver of bread, and of all other good gifts for this life: this should move all men to get their names entred into his checkroule, and become servants to this great Master: and being admitted to be Members of his Family and Hous∣hold of faith, this should cause them to approve themselves good servants, by doing their Lord and Masters will: then may they be assured they shall want nothing that is good. It is of this God and Father, of whom it is said in the Parable,Luk. 15.17. His servants have bread enough, and to spare. It is therefore good serving this Master, who will alwaies either give much, or cause the little which he giveth to be sufficient. Whosoever are good servants and children to such a Master, such a Father, how can they want? For as he hath wherewithall to give, so having commanded us to ask of him, he will give to us liberally, and never upbraid us with what he hath given. And when we have received any thing, we must accknowledg this as Gods gift with all thankfulness. If a friend give us our Board but a moneth or two, we think our selves much be∣holding to him. How much then are we beholding to God, at whose Table we live of free cost all our time?1 Reg. 6.27. Let us seek our maintenance of God, for if the Lord do not help (as the King of Israel could say when there was nothing to be had either out of the Barne-floor, or out of the Wine-press) we cannot have maintenance. Prayer is a special means to obtain good things with a blessing, which if they be received with thanks∣giving,Deut. 8.18. 1 Chro. 29.14 they are good indeed. Let us not therefore forget the Lord our God, for it is he that giveth us power to get substance. What though we were born to the things we do possess, or they were given us, or we bought them, or did attain them by hard labour and industry? yet it must be acknowledged. that Gods gift of grace was in all these. For who made our Ancestours? Who gave them Lands or living to leave us? Who did put it into the hands and hearts of our friends to bestow any thing upon us? Did not the Lord? Whose money or goods was it, wherewith we bought any thing? Was it not Gods? And who gave us wit to invent, and strength to labour? Was it not that God,2 Cor. 9.10. who doth also teach our hands to warre, and our fingers to fight? All these things be of him to whom be praise and glory for ever, Amen. Let no man say in his heart, my power or might of my hand hath gotten this wealth: let not any ascribe praise for his maintenance unto friends, false gods, or any other means, but to the true God: lest he teach them to acknowledg that, by
his taking away of their wealth,Hos. 29, 10. which they would not acknowledg by his be∣stowing it upon them. And as we must be thankfull for what we have received,Mat. 20.15. so we must look unto it, that we do not envy other mens plenty, because it is the gift of Gods free grace. 4. As outward blessings are given of grace,Mal. 3.10, 11, Psal 8.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 3 22. 1 Sam. 30.16, 17. so is the blessing and comfort of them. In Adam we have lost our right to all things, which in Christ the Heir of the world we only recover: But what we receive in Christ, that is given of favour. Again, we may easily an hundred waies be thrust from the posses∣sion of all things, before we come to use them; according to that Proverb,Dan. 5.5. 2 King. 7.17. Job 20.22, 23. Isa 3.1. Hag. 1.6. Prov. 10.22. Dan. 1.13, 14. Many things come between the cup and the lip. When men have all things needfull in their possession, yet another gift of Gods blessing must be added, else all they have will not avail them. All the rich fools plenty could not con∣tinue his life. Men may taste, and eat, and put on clothes, and yet be neither warm nor satisfied. While the daintiest meat is in the mouthes of men, it may be their bane, and not their nourishment; as it fared with the Children of Israel, who while the meat was between their teeth, ere it was chewed,Psal. 78.30, 31. Mar. 6.41. & 14.22. Luk. 24.30. Act. 27.35. the wrath of the Lord smote them with a very great Plague. Therefore it was the manner of our Saviour Christ, alwaies before he did eat, to bless it, asking his Fathers leave to use it, with a blessing upon it. So did the Apostle, He took bread, and gave thanks to God in the presence of them all. Gods own Chil∣dren must be remembred, that they trust not in earthly meanes. Many of them are took like Asa; who if they have outward helps, they seek to them and not to God, who must give them with a blessing, or they cannot profit those that have them.2 Chro. 16.12. But let Gods hand upon his servant Asa be a warning to all that fear God. His disease was but in his feet, yet because he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, it was his death. 5. Our faith and invocation must be daily renewed towards God for his care on us in this life. Whatsoever we have, our faith must be no less on him, then if we were stripped naked of every thing; yea, our mouthes must be no less open wide to him. David though a King, saith, The Lord is my portion, and the sustainer of my Lot. Had we done much for one, if he when he felt him∣self warm should not respect us, but look at his own strength, would we not count it treachery? If a substantial man, who deserved credit alone, should be less trusted when he layeth down a substantial pawn, would it be well taken? This duty belongs to poor and rich. He that hath store and plenty under his roof, must beg his daily bread of God, as well as the naked and hungry that lie in the street. But what need we every day to do thus? Because all we have,Assidue peten∣dus est panis, ut in haec consue∣tudine aman∣di & colendi Deum retinea∣mur, nobisque omnino persua∣deamus, id quod est, vitam ac salutem nostram ex Deo pendere God doth let us no longer leases of it then for the day. Again, this we have of anothers; we cannot use it though we have it without the owners leave; as the servants that keep things under us, we allow them not without our leaves to do their pleasure with them. Besides, God can keep us from touching them, or finding any comfort in them, (though we use them) or feeling his sweet grace, as who is the giver of them. Wherefore let us take heed of the sen∣sual confidence in the creature, and fly up in spirit to him that giveth and main∣taineth with us all things; as the Sunne which both bringeth and continueth the light with us, Let us not set down our rest upon things present, and sing with the glutton, Take thy rest soul; or with the Priest, This is my rest: but by be∣nefit of the things we have, let us, as by wings, fly up higher into belief on our Creatour. God greatly delighteth in this, and often to hear us, doth keep us Tennants at will, as it were, from hand to mouth often, that we might wait on him. Aegypt had Nilus to water it, but the Land of the Israelites, was to expect the first and the latter rain, when God should as a Gardiner with his Spout-pot, so from the bottels of the Clouds pour upon them. Which may serve to put all men in mind of their wretched condition, as well rich as poor,
whom, without exception, Christ accounteth of as beggars, and biddeth them ask of him their daily bread, without which they cannot continue, no not one moment.Psal. 55.17. Dan. 6.10. And if this Petition for bread must be made every day, then others also. For Gods Glory, Kingdom, and Will are opposed every day: and man hath need of forgiveness and new supply of grace every day. Omission breeds unfitness, difuse of Prayer doth so estrange the heart from God, that there fol∣loweth unwillingness and difficulty to set about this work of Prayer again any day.Pr. 1.2. He that will pray but now and then in a good mood, may justly expect that God will never hear him. If we pray daily, then shall we hold a gracious familiarity with God our Father; Then will he hear us alwaies, and we shall ever have our requests granted, when it shall be best for us. It may rejoyce a Christian heart to consider, that he hath leave to come to God to preferre his suits to him every day, nay oft in a day. We are loth to put up Petitions to men too oft, lest they should grow weary of us, and we troublesome to them: but the Lord is best pleased with them that come oftnest to him, that crave most at the Throne of mercy. In Courts of requests amongst men, there are certain daies in which one mans suit is heard, at which time other mens suits must be put off to other daies of hearing. Every man cannot have his suit sped every day, no not every Term. But all Gods people may come to him by Christ Jesus, and have their requests heard and granted in the Court of Heaven every day; yea, seaven times, and if need be seventy times seven times in one day. 6. Christians must depend upon God for provision and maintenance every day. There be innumerable things, which if they be wanting to us, either we lose life, or lead it uncomfortably. Now this necessity of things being known, and the infirmity of nature, we must go unto our heavenly Father, and humbly crave of him all things that be needfull for us:Prov. 3.4. Lev. 26.6. Isa. 95.13, 14. Psal. 122.6, 7. Prov 3.23. & 8.0. & 1.3. Iob 5.19. who hath his ears open to the supplications and cries of his people. For whiles he doth exhort us to ask bread, in that he doth promise that he will give largely to them that pray. By teaching how we must ask, he doth exhort; by exhorting, he doth inforce; by enforcing, he doth promise; by promising he doth bring us into most cer∣tain hope of obtaining. Ob. But no man can reckon up the particular things he needeth. A. When we ask things necessary according to the will of God so farre as we know, God will grant unto us what he knoweth to be expedient, though it be not asked in particular. As God of his common bounty giveth to wicked men what they crave not: so of special love he will bestow upon his Children both what they beg and what they need, though by reason of their ignorance they do not desire it in particular. But if we obtain not our desires in things necessary for this life, we must examine our selves, whether some sin unrepen∣ted of do not hinder good things from us, or we have not hurt our selves by sloth and lack of providence: and upon serious humiliation we must conclude, that what God doth deny to give, is not good and profitable for us, who hath more care of our salvation, then we of our own. 7. As Christians must pray, so must they labour by just and honest means to procure the welfare of their natural life. Some things must be desired, so as we fit and prepare our selves for them, but must not labour after them: but the maintenance of this life is of the number of those things that cannot be prayed for, unless they be laboured after, as God hath appointed. Poverty and want is threatned to him that laboureth with a slack hand: plenty and a∣bundance promised to the diligent. In the sweat of thy brows shalt thou eat thy bread.Prov. 22.29. The hand of the diligent maketh rich. Now faith be∣lieveth as God hath promised, and prayeth according to the Tenor of his Word.
8. We must crave of God a good mind, that we might wisely and justly use, things well and honestly gotten. God hath made us Stewards of his blessings to be disposed to the glory of his name, and comfort of our Brethren: which Office cannot be discharged without his grace and direction. The good things which we have gotten by our honest labour, through the favour of God, are not our own wholly,Prov. 3.27. our poor Brethren must share with us therein: But to know what portion is due unto them, and willing∣ly to part with what the Lord hath given them, is a grace that none re∣ceive, but they to whom it is given, who do heartily beg it of the Lord. Earthly things soon creep into the affection, and steal the heart away from love, pity and compassion, if they be not kept out by hearty Prayer, and the heart framed to mercy by often and frequent communication with God. The use of wealth is a work of grace, no less difficult then the get∣ting of it. It is as hard to possess the world without pride, coveteousness, forgetfulness of the poor, and security, as it is to live contentedly in the want of things, necessarily directing the heart unto God for seasonable sup∣ply. To think we need not ask of God the right use of earthly things, is to be grossly sottish of the state of our souls, and extreme mindless of that duty we owe to God. 9. It belongeth to every Christian to desire and procure the bodily wel∣fare of his neighbour.Psal. 35.13. Jam. 5.14, 15, 16. The Law of charity doth binde a man to love his neighbour as himself; His necessity doth call for our help; and a mer∣cifull care of our Brother is a sure proof that we are truly religious.Act. 12.5. Gen. 25.21. Jam. 5.17, 18. Isa. 58.7. Heb. 13.3. Heb. 13.16. Act. 10.4. Re∣member them that are in bonds, as if ye were bound with them: and them that suffer adversity, as if ye were in their case. Prayers joyned with Alms∣deeds are excellent Sacrifices, well-pleasing unto God. Humanity and Christi∣ty both, do call for mercy at our hands; yea, spiritual self-love: for we do our selves good in relieving our Brethren. Is not the hand a gainer, when it hath made shoes for the feet? Is not the stomack benefited by cooking meat for the rest of the members of the body? We are members one of another. This doing of good to our Brethren,Prov. 19.17. Eccl. 11.1. 2 Cor. 9.6. is but lending to the Lord, and he will repay with advantage. The poor are the Lords fer∣tile soyl, which through his blessing shall yeeld plentifull increase to them by whom they are dressed. To relieve our needy Brethren, is to make bags which will hold, and to lay up Treasure in Heaven,Luk. 12.33. 1 Tim. 6.19. Extra fortunam est quidquid do∣natur amicis  Quas dederis sola semper ha∣bebis opes. Mart ep. l. 5. ep. 43. Mat. 6.34. Luk. 12.20. and to lay up in store for our selves a good foundation. Liberality is the best riches, the best good husbandry to gain riches: There is that soweth, and is more increased; but he that spareth more then need, shall surely come to poverty. 10. We must not trouble our selves with distrustfull cares for time to come. Take no thought for the morrow: for life it self is in the hand of God, and we have no assurance to live till the morrow. It is the good pleasure of God that his Children should live by faith, as well for the pre∣servation of their bodies, as for the salvation of their souls. He hath un∣dertaken to provide for them, and they must look to him for it every day. God liketh to see and hear his Children oft in his presence, and hath so order∣ed it, that their necessary occasions should bring them before him day by day. God looketh for new acknowledgment of his gifts every day: and willeth that they have cause thereof by new gifts from him every day. Distracting cares are very troublesome, accompanied with great vexation and fear: di∣sturbing the quiet and peaceable frame of the soul, and taking away the sense and comfort of what we have for the present, and torturing the heart with fear of what shall never fall. Now it is the gracious pleasure of God to free us from this carking torment, that we might attend more comfortable imployment, and casting off the thought of earthly things which
will disquiet, give our selves to the contemplation of heavenly things, which be full of comfort. And surely it is much for our profit and comfort, that God will have us to live at his finding, and he will be pleased to keep our maintenence in his custody. For we may be well assured, if we trust in him, we shall be well provided for. And seeing it is his will, we should ask our maintenance every day of him, we have good leave and good occasion to increase an holy acquaintance with God, by coming oft into his presence, and speaking oft unto him. Besides, if the Thief, or Vermin, or any casualty deprive us of those outward props of our life, we may go to him boldly for more: for if we depend on him according to his Commandement, he is by promise obliged to provide for us. He hath store and great plenty, and will furnish his Children with sweet, and good, and enough. It will not stand with his honour that his Children should want. No man under the Sunne can live more merrily, and more secure∣ly then Gods Children may do: for they need care for nothing but to please God. Though there are many things for which they must labour in their Calling, yet there is nothing for which they need to care. The Children of Israel might lie down and sleep securely in the Wilderness, when they had not one morsell of Bread against to morrow; for the mor∣row day brought with it Manna,Psal. 4.8. provision for the morrow: this was be∣cause God sustained them. But conscionable dependance upon God every day is no nurse to idleness, no enemy to providence for the time to come, which falleth within the reach of our daily course, no opposite to thrif∣tiness and frugality. We are sent by the Ant to school, that we may learn in Summer to provide against Winter. He that sleepeth in Harvest is the sonne of confusion. God would not have us superstitious Capuchians, who think it an offence to have any thing unspent over night; nor pro∣phane Companions that sing care away, and set Cock-on-hoop, whose money burnes in their Purses till it be consumed; nor yet foolish unpro∣vident ones who buy their fewel when it freezeth; but care of time to come, which cometh from unbelief, and desire to be greater then that we should need to care, is that which the Word condemneth. Care must be for the present, but providence for time to come. 11. The maintenance whereupon a Christian may desire to live, must be his own by the gift of God, neither unjustly gotten, nor unlawfully pos∣sessed.Prov. 5.15. 2 Thes. 3.12. Drink waters out of thine own Cistern. The Appostle commandeth that men should eat their own bread. How can any man pray God to bless that unto him, which he hath gotten by fraud or injustice? How can he hope for good to come by any unjust or indirect deal∣ing? 12. Every Child of God hath a true right to those temporal goods which he doth lawfully possess.Mat. 5.5. Heb. 1.2. 1 Cor. 3.22. Duplex jus: charitatis & proprietatis. Jus charitatis manet semper, sed non pro sem∣per habent; enim jus uten∣do non pro om∣ni tempore, sed pro tempore necessitatis. Act. 4.22. The meek have right of Inheritance un∣to to the Earth; For they are one with Christ, who is the Heir of all things: and what they possess is given them of God in love and mercy. But this right the godly man hath in his goods is limited not absolute; he must not dispose them at his own pleasure, but according to the ap∣pointment of God, the Lord of all things. Whosoever hath best right to any thing, hath a chief Lord over him, by whom he must be order∣ed in all his expences, to whom he must give an account in the day of reckoning. 13. All things are not necessarily common amongst Christians. Each man hath such a propriety in that which he lawfully holdeth, that with∣out his leave or just cause, no man ought to meddle with it. In the very time when community of goods was most needfull, and when voluntarily
the Saints made their goods common, even then, till a man had passed away his right by his own act, the propriety and right was still in himself. For thus saith Peter to Ananias, while it remained, was it not thine own?Act. 5.4. and when it was sold, was it not in thine own power. God hath set this order a∣mongst men, that they knowing what they get shall be their own,Deut. 15.11. they may be encouraged to labour. Also that he might trie the liberality of the rich, and pa∣tience of the poor. 14. Our desire must be moderate touching things of this present life. Thus Agur prayeth, Lord let me not want, nor abound, feed me with food convenient for me. Jacob saith, Seeing thou givest me bread, and rai∣ment, thou shalt be my God for ever; Paul, Having bread and raiment let us be content. Nature is content with small things,Luk. 12.13. and grace moderateth the desire of earthly things. A mans life doth not consist in the abundance of the things which he possesseth. Nay, it is dangerous to the life:Speciosa magis quam tranquilla imperij facies est. Valtur. de re mil. lib. 1. cap. 3 Minus in parvis fotuna furit. Praebet sonmos casa securos. Sen. Hyppol. act. 4. chor. Tuta sine tlo est domus; Rebuque par∣vis alta prasta∣tur quies. Immane reg∣num est. posse sine regno pati. Sen. Thyest. act. 3. Miserere tu folicium. Mart. epig. lib. 1, 50. Eccl. 5.12. Isa. 5.12. Prov. 30.9. 1 Tim. 6.17. Psal. 123.4. Ezek. 33.32. 1 Tim. 6.9, 10. for a Lamp with a little Oyl is maintained: with much extinguished; so is this light, this natural life which the soul causeth in the body. A mans prosperity is not in abundance; for the dinne and tumult which accompany the expences which follow upon it, are more irksome then that exceeding of one ones estate is contentfull. A moderate estate hath more ease and comfort, another more disturbance and ostentation. The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whe∣ther he eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. It is an old saying, that more perish by fulness then by famine. The way of the covetous is not most compendious to this life, much less to a better life. For out of superfluity doth grow disregard of God and his Works, yea, denyall of God, as he saith, lest I be full and deny thee. From thence doth grow confidence in riches, high-mindedness, and contempt of the poor. The heart thereby is stolen away, and wonne to the love of the world, so much, that, either it keepeth men that they come not at all to the means of salvation; or if they do come to the preaching of the Word, and sit with the people of God before the Minister, yet they do not profit; because their heart goeth after their covetousness; Or if while they hear, they begin to affect the Word, yet when they are gone, the cares of this world, and deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, and they become unfruitfull. They that will be rich, saith the Apostle, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtfull lusts, which drown men in de∣struction and perdition. For if once men affect and love riches, it becometh a root of all evil, causing shipwrack of faith and a good conscience. Of all e∣states a moderate and middle estate for maintenance, is freest from surfetings of the body, and temptations of the mind. Contentment and grace have best entertainment among them that have not overmuch. But it is to be marked, that not the having, but the affecting of great things is sinfull. For what God casteth upon us walking within the compass of our waies, we are with thankfulness to embrace it. We are no where commanded to cast away riches,Nec abnuendum est, si dai im∣perium Deus. Sen. Thyest. act. 3. Psal. 62.11. Jam. 4 3. Rom. 13.14. but to look to the good use of them, that the heart be not carried away with vain confidence, and self-conceit. Whn thou art full, take heed lest thou forget the Lord. Let us therefore bridle our inordinate appetites which know not how to say enough. If we have but small things let us learn to be content, and desire no greater. For we must not desire earthly things as our goods, but as our necessaries; not as the only good, so as to rest in them as the wished end, but as helps and furtherances to the Kingdom of Heaven. But how may we know what is a lawfull from an unlawfull desire? First, By their quality, when they are vehement, though about a thing that is good: vehement, so that they work a perturbation in us, and put us so off the hooks, that we are not our selves for the instant; these are sinfull. Rachel might lawfully have desired Children:
but when it comes to Give me Children, or I die: To this, that she will die of the sullens, if she have them not, this lawfull desire is depraved and become sinfull. Thus we know natural heat from unnatural; the natural heat is so temperately dispersed, that it disturbeth not the sweet content of natures con∣stitution: But these unnatural heats, they make the part to glow to which they shoot, and breed a tedious distemper. So an ordinary desire doth not interrupt the sweet harmony of natures constitution, but whiles it is kept in due order, a man walketh not feeling disturbance by it. Secondly, By the quantity: for if they be excessive and unsatiable, they are sinfull. To have care of business, is lawfull; but when there is no end of it, one draweth on another, this is unlawfull. So to take delight is lawfull: but when men dwell upon it, and unsatiably after one must have a second, after a second a third; this is gross sensuality. So to take a Cup of Wine is lawfull; but when one draught calleth on another, one meeting another; this is inordinate. How is natural thirst known from unnatural? The one is satisfied with a draught or two, that more is not cared for: The other is so kindled by drinking that it still desireth drink: as it fareth in Thirsts caused by Agues, Heates; and in Dropsie-like appetite by salt Rhewmes provoked. Thirdly, by the Object, if they be carried after things unlawfull: as to encrease our estate by fraud, cosenage, oppression. Thus when a womans mind standeth to Ashes, Lie, Pitch, raw Flesh (as such who do long, are subject to these) we know them to be unnatural, because they are after that which is unwhol∣some, and agreeth not with nature, when she is in her right frame and temper. Fourthly, Desire is unlawfull when it is accompanied with envy, malice, grudging, and repining at the prosperity of others, whom God hath preferred before us in these things. 15. Every daies prosperity and adversity is in the hand of God. Who is there that thinks he cannot provide food for himself for the space of one day, if he be not able to do it for a long time: But the Scripture teaching us to ask our daily bread every day, doth admonish us of our weakness to make preparation for our selves for any little space. Whatsoever we enjoy, we must alwaies behold God in it, and acknowledg him to be the absolute giver, owner, and maintainer of it. Whatsoever be taken from us, we must still ob∣serve the hand of God in it, who giveth and taketh away at pleasure. The infinite power of God is in all things to be magnified and adored, for we stand at his disposition to be exalted or to be abased. The Lord himself hath as∣sured us that prosperity and adversity come of him.Lev. 26.3. Deut 28.1. Prov. 22.2. The rich and poor meet together, the Lord is the maker of them both.
CHAP. XIII. Shewing what is meant by Forgiveness and by Debts. That God doth not forgive without satisfaction. How many wayes forgiveness of sin may be considered. And how he is to be qualified that would make this petition. The ground thereof. And what we desire of God therein. Question: WHat is the fifth petition? A. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our Debtors. Q. What is it to forgive? A. Forgiveness is opposed to paiment, recompence, or satisfaction,Luc. 1.79. Dan 9.9. Num. 14.19. Act. 5.31. Ps. 32.1, 2. Ps. 85.2. Psal. 51.2. Act. 3.19. Is. 43.25. Jer. 31.34. Mic. 7.18. Is. 44.22. Ps. 25.7. & 79.8. Is. 38.17. Ps. 65.3. Col. 3.12. Ezek. 18.21, 22 Act. 13.38. Rom. 8.33. Vox  proprie sig. ase amovere. Mat. 4.20. unde sumpta Metaph. sig deserere & dimittere, & permittere, freq. autem rationem alicujus rei non habere Mat. 15.14.18.12. & 23.23.  ad omne genus gratificandi pertinet▪ Luc. 7.21. Ph. 1.29. Act. 3.14. & 25.11.16. and doth note a gracious and free pardon of mercy. In Scripture many phrases are used to explain what forgiveness is, as when God is said to cover iniquity, put it out of sight, not to impute, or call to a reckoning for it: to blot it out of his book, not to remember it, to do it away, pass by it, do it away as a mist, seal it up, cast it behind his back So that forgiveness is the pardon of Gods free mercy, when he himself doth freely cross out these debts, and imputeth not the punishment thereof unto us. More fully it may be defined, an act of free grace, whereby a man is acquitted from the whole guilt, and is released from all the punishment of his sin, in such sort that nothing can be laid to his charge. In this act of for∣giving, allusion is made unto the acts of creditors to their debtors, which stand bound to them in obligations to pay certain sums of mony, or upon not pai∣ment to forfeit a far greater sum. Now when the debtor doth make this forfeit, and is no way able of himself to discharge it, if the creditor doth forbear to sue the debtor, and doth freely cancel the obligation, and give to him an acquittance of that debt, this act of his is to forgive. It is likewise resembled by the act of a King and Judge towards such subjects, as by transgressing the Law, had confiscated their lives into the hands of justice. Now when the King of his meer grace doth remit the offence and punishment, this is to pardon and forgive. Such an act as this, is that of Gods forgiving of a sinner. Q What is meant by Debts? A. Sins, so Luke saith, forgive us our sins.Luc. 11.4. Mar. 11.25, 26. Col. 2.13. And because it is set down in∣definitely, by Debts or sins, we must understand all sins, original and actual, greater and smaller: the smallest are not so little, that they need no pardon, nor the greatest so hainous that they cannot be pardoned. There is a twofold Debt that man oweth to God; the one of duty that we are bound to pay;Luc. 17.18. Rom. 8.12. Rom. 13.8. Mat. 18.24. Luc. 7.42.47. & 13.2. Bell. Tom. 4. de oper. partic l. 1. c. 6. pet. 5. Omnis qui peccat injuriam facit Deo. Omnis qui peccat, legem Dei praevaricat ur. Ibid. Deut. 27.26. Gal 3 10. Ezek. 18.4. Rom. 6.23. Jam. 2.10. as of love, thankfulness, worship, obedience, the other of sin and punishment, which we are fallen into through the neglect of our duty. Now in this petition we desire not to be discharged of the duty that we owe to God, but to be acquitted from the sins that we have committed, and to be freed from the punishment that we have deserved. Sins are called Debts by similitude, because man stood bound by the law unto perfect obedience, with this obligation, that if he continued not in all things written in the law, the forfeiture was, he should be accursed; which curse comprehended in it all misery in this world, and eternal
destruction in the world to come. This forfeit Adam and Eve did make, and in them all mankind, who daily adde unto this debt by their actual sins: and by reason of sin we are bound over to eternal punishment, if the divine justice be not otherwise satisfied, and a pardon of grace obtained. Q. Doth God forgive sin without satisfaction? A. Forgiveness is of meer grace, but that grace might do it justly, that in∣finite wisdom of God found out a means to satisfie justice.Ep. 1.7. Rom. 4.24. Jesus Christ the e∣ternal Son of God took upon him the condition of man that being God and Man, he might be an Al-sufficient Mediator between God and Man. This Son of God being made Man, stood in the common nature of Man, as a common person, to answer as a surety for man: and was therefore arraigned, condemn∣ed,Is. 53.5. Rom. 4.25. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and had the full wrath of God due to sinners executed upon him; which wrath he satisfied and overcame, and thereby purchased eternal redemption. Thus by his satisfying Gods justice, a way was opened unto Gods mercy, that in saving of man he could be just, and yet a justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. Q. How many wayes may forgiveness of sin be considered? A. Forgiveness is considered, 1. As it is decreed by God, who in his graci∣ous purpose hath chosen some to life, and ordained that in time they should be partakers of mercy. 2. As it is purchased by Christs death and passion. Christ sustained the person of all the elect, in whom all their sins were virtually forgi∣ven, when he had paid the price of their redemption. All the sons of Adam sinned virtually in Adam when he transgressed in eating of the forbidden fruit; and all the Elect of God were virtually redeemed in Christ,2 Cor. 5.19. when he actually laid down his life for their ransom. 3. It must be considered as it is profered in the Gospel of peace, and sealed in the Sacraments. To you is preached forgive∣ness of sins,Act. 13.38. 4. As it is received by faith and conferred by grace: for when the word of the Kingdom is received, the good thing promised in the word is receiv∣ed also. Now the promise of a pardon in Christ Jesus is received two wayes. First, slightly and superficially by a temporary faith, which tasteth the word of life, but feedeth not upon it. Secondly, Soundly and effectually by a sovereign and well-rooted faith, which firmely knitteth unto Jesus Christ. And accord∣ing to this double manner of receiving the word, there is a twofold remission; the one inchoate, which is not ratified in heaven, because the promise is not en∣tertained into an honest and good heart; the other perfect and sound, which is confirmed in the Court of heaven, according to that of our Saviour, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. What∣soever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And this sentence of pardon is considered two wayes: first as it is passed in heaven, when upon the presentment of the merits of Christ applyed to the sinner, believing in him, through the operation of the Holy Ghost, he is actually received into favour, and acquitted from the guilt and punishment of former sins, which sentence can never be revoked nor blotted. This judgement is passed, at what time the E∣lect in Christ have their names inrolled in the book of Gods effectual calling, and are numbred among the just. For where the holy Ghost worketh in us the grace of faith to believe in Christ, who was raised from the dead, and applieth his grace and merite Christ actually presenteth us unto his Father, who doth most graciously receive us into favour, and freely discharge us from all our trans∣gressions. Secondly, It is considered as made known or manifested to the con∣science; which is a second act of the Holy Ghost, wrought in this manner. First, when the Holy Ghost hath by the word convinced the conscience of the peril it stood in by reason of sin, then by the light of the Gospel he sheweth un∣to man a possibility of salvation, and offereth forgiveness upon condition of believing. Then by the ministery of the same word, he worketh faith in the
heart, whereby we obtain and receive forgiveness offered. Thirdly, Be∣ing enlightned by the Spirit, through the reflexion of the renewed conscience upon it self, we come to know that we do believe, and that believing our sinnes are pardoned and done away. Thus the Spirit shining about the soul, the sentence of absolution is made clear to the heart of the sinner guilty in himself, but believing in Christ for mercy. This sentence hath different de∣grees: it is sometimes more clear in the apprehension of the soul, sometimes more dimme, yea, sometimes quite blotted out in the counter-pane of our release or copy of our aquittance, so that a person standing perfectly just before God, hath little or no sense or apprehension of it in his own con∣science. 5. It must be considered in respect of continuance, not only in regard of the new application of it to the conscience, but of the Divine sen∣tence. For pardon is vouchsafed of mercy, as it is promised in the Go∣spel and received by faith. But God doth not promise pardon of sinnes past, present and to come, before they be committed and repented of, nor can the believer by faith receive the pardon of them. All Divines grant, that in respect of the pronouncing of that sentence to the heart, it is not actu∣ally applied, neither can a particular sinner be said to be every way actual∣ly forgiven, untill it have been committed, confessed, and repented of. But if sinnes to come be actually pardoned to the believer, and that be pro∣mised in the Gospel to be received by faith, we desire to know why it may not be revealed to the conscience? What is known by the Word, and ap∣prehended by Faith, that may be known to the renewed conscience, The Word of Truth hath never taught us so to distinguish, and it is not for us to admit what we have not learned from it. Nevertheless, we must not so con∣ceive, as if by every gross sinne the person justified did fall from the state of justification, and favour of God: but the state of the person sinning must be distinguished from the actual pardon of particular sinnes commited after effectual calling. 6. Forgiveness of sinne is to be considered in respect of the execution of the sentence. For so long as sinne abideth in us, and we be subject to the displeasure of God, and temporal chastisements by rea∣son of our offences, the sentence of pardon hath not taken full effect. If it be objected, that the remission of the sinnes of the justified is full and perfect: The answer is, that the remission of the sinnes of the justified, is full and perfect, not for that they are already freed actually from the inherence of sinne, and the displeasure of God disliking it: but because they have full title unto, and right in that mercy of God, which as it hath already delivered them from the dominion and condemnation of sinne, so it will in the end wholly free them, from the inherence of it, the displea∣sure of God disliking it, and all the temporal chastisements that do light up∣on us. 7. The full and perfect consummation of forgiveness is not obtain∣ed till the Day of Judgment when we shall be discharged openly by the Judg him∣self, before the Tribunall of Grace. Repent,Act. 3.19. that your sinnes may be blotted out when the time of refreshing shall come. The sinnes which are pardoned in this life, are pardoned in the life to come. Q How is he to be qualified that would make this Petition? A. He must acknowledg his sinnes with grief and godly sorrow,Joel. 1.13, 14. 1 Joh. 1.9. Jer. 14.20. Psal 143.2. Isa. 53.5. Ezra 9.5, 6 7. Dan. 9.7, 8. Luk 15.21. Act. 2.37. Luk. 18.13. freely judging and condemning himself before God, with hope of pardon in the free mercy of God through Jesus Christ. Confession, sorrow and faith are required in him, that would crave forgiveness of his of∣fences. Q. Are sinnes called our Debts in the same sense that bread is ours? A. No: Bread is ours because it is given unto us by the gift of God: Sinnes
are ours,Act 3.19. 1 Joh. 1.9. & 2.12. & 4.9. Apoc. 1.5. Jer. 31.33. because we stand guilty of them, and the blame is justly imputed to us. We therefore sustaining and confessing the fault, do implore mercy of God for pardon. Wherein we do not use any excuse, or lay the blame upon any other: but judge our selves, and fly to the clemency of God in Jesus Christ. Q. What is the ground of this Petition? Ezek. 36.25, 26. Exo. 34.6 7. Psal. 86.15, 16. Psal. 145.8. & 103.8. Dan. 9.18, 19. 2 Chro. 7.14. Hos. 14.1, 2. Isa. 1.18. & 40.2. & 43.25. & 44.22. Psal. 130.3. & 27.7. Jer. 31.34 Micah 7.19. 2 Chro. 6.25, 26, 27.A. That God in Christ Jesus is most gracious and mercifull, ready to par∣don iniquity, transgression and sinne, not only giving the penitent leave to ask mercy, but commanding them to pray with assiance to be heard. Q What do we acknowledg in this Petition? Gen. 1.27. Eccl. 7.29. Luk. 5.31. 1 Chro. 21.17. 2 Chro. 6.37. & 29.6. Psal. 143.2. Prov 20 9. Dan 9.5. Rom. 3.9. 1 Joh. 1.9.A. We acknowledg that God made us just and upright, but that we are most miserable and wretched sinners, corrupt by nature, sinfull by practice. Al∣so we acknowledg that we are starke bankrupts unable to make satisfaction for the least offence, or to discharge the least penny of our debt. For every man is bound to keep the law wholly and continually, so that the breach thereof even once, and in the least point, maketh us debtors: But no man can avoid the breach of it, or when he hath broken it, make amends unto God for it; con∣sidering that whatsoever he doth after the breach, is both imperfectly done, and if it were perfect, yet it is due by obligation of the Law, and therefore cannot go for paiment, no more then a man can pay one debt with another. Therefore we are compared to a Child new born, red with blood, not able to wash nor to help himself:Ezek. 16.4, 5. and to captives close shut up in prison and set∣ters,Luk 4.18. Mat 12.29. kept by a strong one; so that there is as small likelihood of our deliver∣ance out of the power of Satan, as that a poor Lamb should deliver it self from the gripes and pawes of a Lyon. Lastly, We acknowledg that with God there is mercy to cover our offences,Psal. 32.5, 6. & 51.5, 6.7. & 130.3. Col. 1.14. and to forgive the guilt and punishment of our transgressions great and small. Q. What desire you of God in this Petition? A. That God of his free mercy in Jesus Christ would fully pardon and forgive all our offences,Act. 5.31. Isa. 44.22. Act. 10.43. Psal. 51.2. Isa. 43.25. Mat. 1.21. Rom. 5.9. and cancell our obligation, that in law it be not available against us. Q. Do we here pray for the sinnes of this Day, as before for the Bread of this Day? A. Not only for them, but also for all that ever we have done at all times be∣fore, to the end that we might be the further confirmed in the assurance of the remission of all our sins. Q. What do we pray for more particularly? A. 1. In respect of them that be without, we pray. First, That God would give them repentance to turn from their evil waies;Jer. 5.7. Act. 5.31. & 11.18. Jer. 31.18. Act. 8.22. Mal. 1.9. 1 Joh. 5.16. Jam. 5.15. Exo. 32.31. Act. 7.60. that considering how many and great and grievous their sinnes be, they might seriously humble themselves before God, and amend their lives. Secondly, That he would give them faith to believe in the grace of God through Jesus Christ, that upon the sight of sinne they be not swallowed up in despair. Thirdly, That God would apply that mercy of his reaching to forgiveness, unto them that are yet Children of wrath, over whom his anger yet abideth through unbelief: These things we ask in respect of our Brethren by grace of election, yet un∣called. 2. For our selves that do believe, we ask. First, That God would blot out
the remembrance of sinnes past: Not that God can play fast and loose,Psal. 25.11. Psal. 130.2, Hos 14.3. Psal. 143.2. Mat 9 12. 3. or say and unsay, nor that we ought to beg what we have obtained: but we have ob∣tained remission of sinnes in a fort only, not perfectly. For notwithstanding our assurance of forgiveness, if the eye be taken off Christ never so little, the remembrance of former sinnes will disquiet afresh. Now since pardon of sin past is assured by faith, it followeth that we must ask it as long as we live: be∣cause faith ever looks to Christ as an humble Petitioner. Secondly,Psal. 79.8. We ask the continuance of his grace, that his mercifull pardon may be a gift without repentance. For in this life our justification is not fully executed, but con∣tinued: and God who continueth his mercy towards us, willeth that we should ask it daily by hearty supplication. 3. We ask the manifestation of it,Rom. 8.15.16 Eph. 1.13. that he would make us see and feel this forgiveness of his; For our faith is weak, the spiritual sight of our souls is dimme, and the comfortable apprehension of mercy little, and sometimes none at all. Now we get by this Petition our faith confirmed, our sight clear∣ed, our sense restored, our comfort encreased. To this branch therefore must be referred these three things as asked by us. First,Psal. 51 8, 9, 10, 22. That God would heal the doubtings and darkness of our minds. Secondly, that he would strengthen our faith to full assurance in this point, that our sinnes are pardoned. Thirdly, That he would make us feel our peace in the joy following it. 4. Every day we sinne, and every day we must beg both the sense and feeling of sinne and pardon of grace and faith to believe the remission of them.Psal. 130.3. & 143.2. 1 Reg. 8 36. 2 Chro 6.25. 1 Joh. 2.1, 2. Psal. 51.2, 7. 2 Chro. 6.26, 27. Psal. 103.2, 13 Mal. 3.17. Sins of daily incursion have a pardon of course, but t is required that we humble our selves, and sue for mercy: Sinnes notorious are not actually forgiven, till they be actually repented of. 5. We ask in this Petition, that God would execute the sentence of forgive∣ness every day more and more, killing and crucifying the sinne that abideth in us, sparing us as a Father doth his Children, removing from us those temporal chastisements which our sinnes might every way bring upon us, to our great smart: for though God as a Judg hath pardoned our sinnes, yet as a Father he may scourge them in us, though we be freed from the guilt of condemnation; yet God is displeased with our sinnes that be inherent, and do oft break out in us. 6. We desire that God would keep us from security, hardness of heart and impenitency,Psal. 19.12, 13. Psal. 130.3. Zech. 12.10. Mar. 9.24. that he would quicken us by his spirit continually with sighes and groanes to crave pardon and forgiveness, and carefully to maintain peace and communion with his Majesty in the use of all holy means that he hath ordain∣ed for this end. After once we have tasted the mercy of God, we are apt to grow secure, careless, unmindfull of his love, slothfull in the use of his Or∣dinances, forgetfull of our accounts, ready to runne into arrerages: There∣fore we pray that God would keep us by his Spirit, that the world by her allurements might not steal our hearts away, that no slumber in this kind possess us: but that every day we call our selves to reckoning, and sue out a pardon for our offences, that our peace with God might be continued, and our comfort encreased in assurance of his love. 7. We pray that our hearts might be inclined more and more to love,Eph. 4 32. Col. 3 12, 13. gentle∣ness and compassion towards our enemies, that we might have the greater comfort in confidence that God hath forgiven us. 8. We pray that we may be acquitted from all sinne, before the Tribunal of Grace, at the Dreadfull Day of Judgment, and that the sentence of absolution may take full effect at that time. 9. As we desire forgiveness of sinnes: so do we pray to be accepted as righteous unto life in Jesu Christ.2 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. Phil. 3.8, 9. For as it is not enough for a begger to come before a King, to hae his rags taken from him, unless he have convenient
Apparel and Ornaments: so for us it is not enough to have our filthiness done away, unless we be clothed with convenient righteousness; not enough to put off our Shakels and Manacles, unless we be decked with Garters and Bracelets. CHAP. XIV. The wants that are to be bewailed. The Evils that we pray a∣gainst. The special Blessings for which we ought to be thank∣full; And the usefull Conclusions that may be drawn from this Petition. Question: WHat are the wants to be bewailed? A. 1. The corruption of our natures, and wickedness of our lives; the sinnes of our youth,Psal. 40.12. and of our old age. My sinnes have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up: they are more in number then the haires of my head, therefore mine heart hath failed me. Thus with David we are to travell and groan under this burden: but this grief for sinne is a rare thing in the world.Psal. 51.2. Psal. 119.59. Isa. 44.19. Jer. 8.6. Hag. 1.7. 2. The ignorance, security, deadness and senselesness of our hearts, that feel not the weight of sinne, cannot press instantly for mercy, make light of running into Gods debt-Book, grow regardless of his love, re∣spectless of his Ordinances, indulgent to our passions. Men can mourn bit∣terly for outward things; fear the displeasure of great men, are afraid of run∣ning into debt and danger: but how careless are we of our souls? How pre∣sumptuous in greatest dangers? 3. That though we intreat mercy, yet we are ready to runne into sinne again, excuse, lessen, and plead for it, and so to hinder the success of our Prayers, to impeach our comfort, disturbe our peace, wound our conscience, and pluck upon our heads many grievous cut∣ing crosses, spiritual and temporal. 4. The weakness of our faith and coldness of our desire, that though we find little comfort and many doubtings, yet we cannot stirre up our selves to ask importunately: and though God have made many precious promises confirmed by Oath, Covenant and Sacrament, and ratified by sundry experiments of his love, yet we are ready to doubt in tryal and temptation. 5. It is to be bewailed that when God hath revealed himself to be gracious and mercifull in Jesus Christ to all them that will confess their sinnes,Jer. 14.19, 20. Luk. 19.18. Prov. 14.29. Prov. 16.32. Prov. 19.11. Rom. 12.19. Rom. 1.30. Iohn 12.40. and turn unto him with their whole hearts; yet so many in the world should walk dissolutely, and following vanity neglect mercy offered unto them in the meanes of grace. 6. It is to be lamented, that we who stand in need of daily forgiveness for infinite, innumerable, great sinnes com∣mited against the Law of God, should be so riggid, and hard to be entreated in respect of wrongs done unto us by our Brethren; merciless and impla∣cable. Mat. 13.14. Deut. 9.4. Jer. 2.35. Mat. 9.12, 13. Luk. 15.7. & 18.9, 10. Rev. 3.17. Hos. 12.8.Q. What are the Evils that we pray against? A. 1. We pray that God would not give us up to hardness of heart, nor suffer us to walk in stubbornness and disobedience, or self-conceitedness, vainly puffed up with opinion of our own righteousness. He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. 2. We ask that God would not remember our sinnes, nor keep his anger for ever. Be not wroth
very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever: behold, see,Ia. 64.9. Psal. 25.7. Exo. 32.11, 12 Jer. 14 21. Exo. 34.9. Psal. 79.8. Lam. 1.9. & 5.20. Psal. 6.1. Psal. 27.9. Psal. 38.1, 2. Psal. 85.5, 6. & 88.16. we beseech thee, we are all thy people. O remember not against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low. 3. We desire that God would not bring upon us the desert of our sinnes, nor the punish∣ment temporal, spiritual or eternal that is due for our transgressions. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. Hide not thy face from me, put not thy servant away in anger. Turn us, O God, of our salvation, and cause thy anger towards us to cease. And to this head must be referred, that God would not take us away in our sinnes, but give us grace and time to repent, and watch for his coming. Q. How should a man stirre up himself to make this Petition devoti∣onally? A. 1. The first mean of the more devotional propounding this Petition, is to work the heart to godly sorrow for sinne, considering the filthiness of it, our own indignity, the tyranny of Satan, and the miseries that accompany trans∣gression. What is sinne, but the corruption of the soul? What are we, rotten flesh, the filth of the earth, dust and ashes, that we should dare to lift up the heel against the incomprehensible Majesty of God, of whom we are created, preserved, redeemed, and enriched with incredible benefits? And to what end do we offend? That being estranged from God, who is the chief good, we might yeeld our selves unto the Devil into most miserable servitude, for the base, filthy wages of sinne. Nor can it be spoken, how cruelly the Prince of this world dominiers in their souls, who breaking Covenant of love with God, whereby our spirit is knit to God, do revolt to this malitious enemy. Sinne vi∣olates the sanctity of the soul, prophanes the Temple of God. Innumerable are the evils which sinne hath brought upon man. God himself is at warre with the wicked, with whose ungodly acts he is greatly offended. The wrath of God doth pursue the sinner, as the shadow followeth the body. Those considerations should move us to mourn for the sinnes that we have committed against the Law; and if we can truly sorrow that we have offended, we shall earnestly beg to be received into favour. What will a Malefactour now in danger leave unattempted to get his pardon? 2. That the sight of sinne drive us not to despair, we must remember that God is ready to grant release to them that seek it by hearty supplication. For he would never have taught us to crave mercy by Prayer, if he had not been willing to pardon them that repent. But if we hope stedfastly, we shall earnestly and affectionately cry to God, For∣give us our trespasses. What if one might be released from his debt, but asking to have it forgiven? Who would not seek instantly? Who would spare to speak that have this hope? 3. The third mean is to let our hearts smite us in the sins, which of infirmity we fall into; for because men pass by sinne impenitenly, without conscience of it all the day, therefore they without life and power and feeling desire, propound this request to God at evening. 4. To mark how uncomfortable it is when Gods countenance this way is hid from us, and how heavy it is when doubting and darkness do grow upon us. 5. We must get a fear of Gods fatherly corrections, which we provoke. The Child that feareth the rod will be afraid and cry to have a fault pardoned. So we must think what a joy and sweet state it is to have our Quietus est daily by us. The peace of God passeth all understanding: there is nothing that can make us so comfort∣able to our selves, nor so fruitfull in the knowledg of our Lord Jesus Christ, as assurance of salvation. Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sinne is covered. 6. Consider the examples of the faithfull; how ear∣nest have they been with the Lord for mercy? How importunately have they sollicited him to blot their sins out of his remembrance, and in loving favour to turn unto them? Their zeal should inflame our desire, and quicken our dulness.
Q. What are the special Blessings for which we ought to be thank∣full? A. 1. We must bless God that he hath given Christ to be our propitia∣tion, in whom we might obtain mercy. At the birth of Christ, the Angels sang, Glory be to God on high. Christ is the gift of Gods rich love and mercy, for which we are bound to render immortal praise. 2. God is to be praised for his Word and Ordinances, in which he hath made known what his plea∣sure is touching the pardon of our sinnes, and giveth us assurance of his fa∣vour. He hath not dealt so with every Nation, neither have the people known his Law. 3. We must give thanks to God for the pardon of our sinnes; that he hath given us grace to humble our souls, seek mercy, believe his pro∣mise;Rom. 7.25. and that he hath looked upon us in love, removing our iniquities farre out of his sight. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his Inheritance?Mica 7.18. O the incompre∣hensible mercy of God, who sheweth himself so easie to be intreated! Men if provoked are hard to be wonne: the Lord proffers reconciliation, and teacheth how to sue that we might find favour and live in peace. 4. God is to be magnified, that he hath spared us so long, corrected us in measure with great lenity,Psal. 78.38. removed the crosses that lay upon us in due season, given us in∣ward peace and contentment, and sustained us under the burden of sinne that we did not runne into despair.Isa. 12.1. O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me. Bless the Lord,Psal. 103.2, 3. O my soul, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and healeth all thy di∣seases. Q. What Conclusions may be drawn from this Petition? Rom. 3.10. Jam. 3.2. Prov. 0.19.A. 1. All men are sinners, even the regenerate. There is none righteous, no not one. In many things we offend all. Who can say my heart is clean? No man liveth without his daily sinnes; we like Infants have our scapes; like wound∣ed persons, cured our scarres; like white Swannes, our black feet. If we say that we have no sinne,1 Joh. 1.. 1 Reg. 8.46. we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. All these sentences are confirmed by the mouth of our Saviour Christ, teaching the just and faithfull to ask pardon of their daily slips, and that in truth, not in coun∣terfet humility.Catech. Rom. Par. 4. cap. 14. q. 4. For who would brook one praying, to lie not to men but to God, when with the mouth he prayeth, Forgive my debts, when in heart he saith, that he hath no debts, that should be forgiven? What shall we say of them, that talk of justification by the works of the Law, of merit, of per∣fect obedience to the Law of God? He that askes pardon for his offences, cannot possibly conceit that he is pure and free from sinne. He needs not for∣giveness, who hath not runne into transgression. 2. Forgiveness of sinne is a a special favour,Psal. 32.1, 2. that is to be desired of all men. The man is blessed, whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sinne is covered. It is a peculiar gift of Gods e∣ternal love,Mic. 7.18. Col. 1.14. Eph. 1.7. Rom. 5.1, 2, 3. which he vouchsafeth to them, that he hath chosen to be Heirs of salvation. It is the purchase of Christs blood: an excellent price, which shews the worth of the benefit. Nor are the effects of justification less precious: for being justified by faith we have peace with God, free access to the Throne of Grace, and rejoyce in the hope of Glory. Sinne makes separation between God and man, and raiseth contention betwixt man and his own conscience: But when sinne is covered by gracious pardon, then follows sweet peace with God, and quiet∣ness of mind. Sinne is the bondage of soul: when the cords of sinne be un∣loosed, we are set at liberty. Sinne is the filthiness of the soul, when we are purged from it, we are made white and clean. He lives merrily, and at hearts ease, who hath his accounts taken up in Jesus Christ. This will appear by the contrary:Isa. 59.2. Lam. 3.42, 44. For untill sinnes be forgiven, they separate between God and man, whether he be converted or unconverted. If a man be not in the state of
grace, his prosperity in this life doth but fat him against the day of slaughter; and increase of his daies are but a multiplication of his sinnes, against the day of reckoning. And he may look for death to arrest him every day, which if it doe before his sinnes be remitted, he shall be found in his sinnes at the Day of Judgment, to his everlasting perdition. If a man be in the state of grace, yet if by new sinnes the Lord be provoked to withdraw his loving countenance, and to shew tokens of his displeasure against him, his life becometh unprofitable and uncomfortable, untill God speak peace unto his soul again. He cannot come boldly into the presence of God to pray, hear or receive the Sacrament: or if he do come, he is very heartless in the performance of them, and all that a man hath, though it be a Kingdom, can give him no comfort. But when God forgiveth sinnes, God of an enemy becometh a friend, and of a displeased Fa∣ther, beginneth to look graciously upon his Child The guilt of sinne sub∣jecteth to the curse: freedom from sinne bringeth deliverance from all misery. They are to be held extremely foolish, and out of measure sinfull, that of all things, care and look least after forgiveness, and the making of their Salvation sure unto them. If they have offended, and be in danger of punishment by the Laws of man, then, if by Petition, or bribe, or by any other means they can procure, either commutations, or releasment, or pardons, they will spare no paines this way. Or if they can make sure to themselves and to theirs large temporal estates, it is all that they labour to make sure in this life: but they are altogether negligent in seeking remission of sinnes by Christ Jesus, they have no thoughts of making their Calling and election sure. 3. It belongs to God only to forgive sinnes, and to restore the feeling of his grace. To the Lord our God belongeth mercies and forgivenesses.Dan. 9.9. 1 Joh. 1.9. Psal. 130.7. Mar. 2.7. Isa 43.25. Exo 34.6, 7. Rom. 8.33. With the Lord is mercy and plen∣teous redemption. I, even I am he, saith God who blotteth out thy transgres∣sions, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sinnes To forgive iniquity, transgression, and sinne, is a branch of his Name. Sinne is a breach of the Law of God, and an offence against his in infinite Majesty. But God only can dispense with the breach of his Law, and forgive the wrong that is done unto his Highness. The wrong that is done to man, he may and ought to forgive:Luk. 17.4. but the sinne which is against the Divine Law, God only can pardon. In the forgiveness of sinne there is a three-fold power. The first of Authority, which one hath principally of himself, not of another: so God only pardons sinne. The second, of excellency by Commission, which one exercises as delegate from another, but by way of excellency: so Christ as Mediatour pardons sin.Act. 5.31. Joh. 20.23. The third of Ministry, which only by intimation in the Name and Authority of the Sovereign Lord proclaimes it: so the Ministers of the Gospel remit sinnes; that ministerially in Christs Name pronounce forgiveness to them that believe. There is a whole power, such as is in the King, and a contracted power,Totum potesta∣tivum & con∣tractum. such as is in inferiour Magistrates: but the Ministers of the Gospel have no power in their own persons, only as Heraulds or Pursevants they intimate the chief Magistrates Decree or pleasure. This is comfortable to all that need and desire remission. It is well for them that God doth not put them over to others, but reserveth this power of pardoning of sins to himself. They that come to him may be assured that he will and can forgive them: for David saith,Psal. 86.5. He is plenteous in mercy unto all that call upon him. What though our sinnes have abounded, both for greatness and number? The grace of him that pardoneth,Psal. 130.7. Rom. 8.34, 35 Psal. 32.2. Psal. 51.1, 2. Psal. 130.3, 4. Mat. 9.2. & 18.24. Rom. 3.24, 25. aboundeth much more. For with God is plenteous redemption. What should he fear the censure of men, or the hatred of the ungodly, that is acquitted before God? It is God that justifieth, who shall condemn? 4. Gods forgiveness is of free grace: We do not redeem it with our satisfactions: but beg it of mercy. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, according to the multitude of thy com∣passions, do away my transgressions. We are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. And you hath he quickned, be∣ing dead in your sinnes,Col. 2 13. Hos 14.1. having of his grace forgiven you all trespasses. Thus the Children of God are taught to pray: Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously:Vers. 4. Isa. 43.25. Ezek. 36.22. Eph. 2.8. Eph. 1.6. The promise of God runneth thus; I will love them freely: For mine own sake I will be favourable to thine iniquity, and remember thy sins no more. And as pardon of sinne, so is salvation by the free grace of God. We are saved by grace through faith. We are predestinated to life, to be ob∣tained of rich grace and meer mercy: Election is of grace, and so is the life to which we are elected: otherwise grace should be subordinate to justice. Faith is given of grace, and so is life that is obtained through faith: which is called the Inheritance of Promise, or the promised Inheritance. For it is the pro∣perty of faith to deny all worth in our selves, and to look meerly to the free Promise, and undeserved Love of God. The Promise is through Faith, that it might be of Grace. Eternal life is the Inheritance of Children, not the wages of servants: but the Inheritance is given of favour. Either salvation is meerly of grace, or meerly of works; for it cannot be of both. Grace and works are so opposed in Scripture, that what is of grace cannot be of works, and what is of works cannot be of grace.Rom. 11.5, 6. Eph. 2.9, 10. But salvation is not meerly of works: for then man had cause to boast in himself, but not in God. How comfortable is this to afflicted and burdened sinners, that see no worth in themselves, and find that they have nothing in them, to pay for a release or ransome? Here yet they may see grace, yea, free grace in God. If we will but ask forgiveness, and accept forgiveness, and be thankfull for forgiveness, his Name and Nature is to be gracious; He must deny himself, if he do not of his free grace forgive, and save us. 5. Forgiveness of sinne is full and per∣fect in respect of guilt and punishment. The Scriptures do so em∣phatically describe forgiveness, that it cannot imply less then pardon of the whole guilt and punishment; As when God is said to forgive the whole debt,Mat. 18.32. Isa. 43.25. sal. 32.1. Mic. 7.18. to blot out our sinnes as a mist, not to remember them any more, to cover them, cast them behinde his back, bury them in the bottom of the Sea: which phrases import more then a partial forgiveness. This is clear by the cause, price and effects of redemption. For that pardon which is given of rich grace, is a full pardon, not curtalld or defective. Sole grace and paiment of any part of the debt cannot stand together. That pardon which is given upon a valuable and sufficient price is full and perfect. But Christ Jesus hath satis∣fied the justice of God for our sinnes.Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. Heb. 1.3. He bore our griefs, and carried our sor∣rows. And he was wounded for our transgressions: and the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all.Heb. 1.3. By himself he purged our sinnes. Peace, access unto the Throne of Grace, and freedom from condemnation is the effect of forgiveness; which do clearly prove it to be full in respect of guilt and punishment There is no condemnation to them that be in Christ Jesus.Rom. 8.1. Rom. 8.33. Rom. 5.1, 2. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifieth, who shall condemn? Being justified by faith, we have peace towards God. How comes it then to pass, that the Saints of God be subject to so many afflictions? For answer, we must know, that whereas there are two things in sinne, the fault, deformity or stain, and the punishment; Christ who is the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world, by the working of his grace purgeth out the one, and by ver∣tue of his satisfactory sufferings, freeth such as he purgeth from the im∣purity of sinne, from the punishment due unto it: and in proportionable sort he purgeth out the one by his sanctifiing grace, and by vertue of his satisfactory sufferings freeth us from the other.Feild of the Ch. lib. 5. appen. 1. part. p. 43. So that when sinne is only so purged out, that it is no more predominant, there remaineth no condemnation, but yet some affliction, and when it is wholly taken away, there remaineth no punish∣ment at all. For it is most certain that Christ suffered the punishments; not only of
those sins, that men commit in the time of ignorance, infidelity, and the state of Nature, but of all sins: and the justice of God will not require one debt to be twice paid. So that the reason why godless men are subject to all kinds of punishment, is, because they do not become one with Christ,Quamdiu inha∣bitat in nobis peccatum, tam diu etiam morti sumus obnoxii. Zanch. in. 1. Io. 1.9. nor are made partakers of his sanctifying spirit, purging out the sinfulness that is in them, that they might enjoy the benefit of his satisfaction: and likewise the reason, why good men turning to God by repentance, are still subject to some punish∣ments in this life, notwithstanding their union with Christ, is because they are not so fully conjoyned to Christ, and made partakers of his spirit, as to be purged from all sin. For if they were, they should be freed from all punishment by his sufferings: he having suffered for all them that become one with him, all that the justice of God requireth. 2 It must be granted, that temporal evils did befall David after his sin was pardoned; and the like doth befall other of Gods children, but it must be known, that those afflictions were not satisfactory pun∣ishments, or had any respect unto the justification of those that were therewith exercised: but they only had respect unto their farther sanctification. The same evils in different persons, sc. the godly and the wicked are of different natures, and sent of God for different purposes.Ps. 49. & 118. 1 Cor. 11. Et aerumnas fu∣gis bene colloca∣tas? Esse jam miserum juvat. Sem. Thyest. act. 3. Nunc & damna juvant. sunt ipsa pericula tanti. mart. epig. l. 1.13. In the wicked they are signs of his wrath, but to his children they are signs of his love: They are to the wicked plagues and forerunners of destruction, but they are unto the godly correcti∣ons unto instruction: They are bitter potions to purge out the corruption, and medicines to eat away the dead flesh of the soul. The prosperity of the wicked turneth to their ruine: and the adversity of the godly worketh for their good. We may say of the chastisements of the righteous, as of the remainders of sin in them: in themselves they are evil, but God turneth them to good. The hearts of all that believe in Christ should rejoyce at this, to consider that they are not onely redeemed, but that they are fully redeemed from wrath and satis∣factory punishment temporal, and eternal. If temporal chastisements be in∣flicted, God doth send them in love, either as tryals of his graces wherewith he hath filled them, or as Physick to prevent or remove the corruption of sin which yet remaineth in them; they shew what grace they have, or prepare and make way for that grace they have. Crosses are not curses to them, but by the gra∣cious providence of God are turned into blessings: For, Blessed is the man whom the Lord teacheth by correction, and instructeth him out of his Law. 6.Ps. 94.22. He that would obtain pardon through the grace of God, must begge it by earnest and hearty prayer. The means to remove sin is to flie unto the mercy of God in Je∣sus Christ. Prayer is necessary not onely to the sense and manifestation of for∣giveness, but to the pardon it self. Necessary by the ordinance of grace, not as a meritorious cause, but as a means whereby it is obtained. For pardon is re∣ceived according as it is proffered and promised in the word of Grace, the glad tidings of salvation. But it is profered and promised upon condition that we pray, When thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemie, because they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and confess thy Name, and pray,1 King. 8.33. and make supplication unto thee in this house, Then hear thou in heaven, and for∣give the sin of thy people Israel. If my people which are called by Name, shall hum∣ble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked wayes: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land,2 Chro. 7.14. Pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. Manasses be∣sought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers.Act. 8.22. 2 Chron. 33.12.13. Luc. 18.13. Hos. 14.2, 3. And prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication. The poor Publican prayed, God be merciful to me a sinner. Faith believeth accord∣ing to the promise of Grace, and receiveth what is offered in the word, accord∣ing as it is offered. But promise of forgiveness to be vouchsafed unto him that doth not ask it, there is not one in the whole Scripture. Moreover, the Lord
will not justifie the wicked, that is, the impenitent, and such as go on in their wicked course; but such as turn from their evil way, and seek him unfainedly. But faith and remission are linked immediately. That is most true, but we are to know there be divers acts of faith, amongst which we may reckon these three as most pertinent to this purpose: One whereby it obtaineth forgiveness; ano∣ther whereby it receiveth it, the third whereby it assureth, that sin is pardoned. The first of these is prayer, for faith desires mercy without humble supplication, and looks up unto God as a poor petitioner. As it assureth that pardon is to be had, and stirreth the desire after it: so it maketh the soul to go forth in hear∣ty prayer, that it might obtain. Hence we learn, how we may come to assur∣ance that our sins are blotted out of the Lords remembrance. First we must un∣feignedly entreat mercy, and then effectually receive it: for the promise is, Aske and have, seek and finde, pray and thou shalt be forgiven. And from this step we rise to the assurance of mercy, concluding that as we have prayed, so it shall be unto us. A Christian must not depend upon sense and feeling, nor look for such a certificate from heaven as by inspiration or audible voice might com∣fort him in the certainty of Gods mercy, and expell all doubts and fears, whe∣ther he will or no: but he must stir up faith according to the word of promise, and conclude the pardon of his sins, as it is there laid down. And because we have the word of the Lord for it, that whatsoever we ask according to his will in faith, we shall obtain it: therefore when we have prayed, we must without more ado, cast our souls upon the gracious promise, and trust cnfidently in the mercy of the Lord. 7. In asking pardon of sin, there must alwayes be hearty acknowledgement and confession of sin. When David gave over hiding his iniquity, and said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, then saith he, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.Ps. 32.5. 1 Jo. 1.9. God hath promised to forgive those that confess their sin. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. Hearty confession of sin giveth glory to God: for thereby is acknowledg∣ed his sovereignty and goodness, the equity and holiness of his Law, his Justice in punishing,Jos. 7.19. his grace in pardoning our offences. My son confess thy sin, and give glory to God. When a man hath committed a sinne, and will not confess it, he doth enforce God to bring him to tryal, and discover his transgressions: but he that freely confesseth, putteth conscience out of office, and is hereby cap∣able of forgiveness. God is ready to forgive, but he will have it appear that forgiveness is of grace: which is then manifest, when we acknowledge our trans∣gressions before him. An unfeigned confession of sin, argueth a true desire of pardon, yea it doth put an edge to desire: for when the bed role of many dam∣nable sins is laid open to the view of a man, it will make him earnest with God, as it did Daniel,Dan. 9.19. who after his confession, is most fervent in prayer. But he cannot entreat for mercy, that will not confess his errors. The whole need not the Physician,Jer. 3.13. but they that are sick. The promises of grace run thus, Acknow∣ledge thine iniquity, and be received unto mercy. And if we would partake in the good promised, we must perform the condition required. Look upon all the servants of God that have lived in former times, we shall find, when they sued for mercy, they did evermore take shame to themselves in the hearty acknow∣ledgement of their offences. Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee. It is the property of faith to abase it self, and magnifie the rich grace of God: what then can be more fit and natural, then for him that seeks justificati∣on by grace, to condemne himself freely before the throne of grace, and to set forth our unworthiness, that God might be glorified in shewing mercy. If thou canst not prevent sin altogether, yet take heed that Satan prevail not to draw thee to hide or deny, or excuse it. Of all things that is most foolish and dangerous. He that hides his sinne shall not prosper. The root of this evil is pride and self-love: the end shame and vexation. Sin upon the conscience is
like corruption in an ulcer, that will throb and rage, if it be not loosed forth. The more we seek to cover our sins, the more we discover them before God, and to our own consciences: and every excuse is an aggravation of them. 8. Be∣lievers may come to assurance that their sins are forgiven. For whatsoever we ask in Christ agreeable to his will, we know that we are heard in it. The Pa∣pists object. They who begge a pardon of sin, are not sure of pardon. But with more truth we may invert it; They who may ask forgiveness may come to assurance that they have forgiveness. Nor is it consequent, that if a man know himself to be justified, that then he may not ask remission of his sins. Do not many right learned and wise among themselves,Alex. of Ales part. 3. q. 61. m. 7 att. 3. Io. Bacon. l. 3. d. 30. q 1 art. 2. Chatharin. in Apol. cont. Dominic. a Scoto Vega. l. 9. in Conc. Trident. Bell. de purgat. l. 2. c. 15. teach that a man may be sure he is in the state of grace, and justification, by the ordinarily working of Gods spirit? and do not all Papists think, that by special revelation men may be sure they are in the state of grace, as Paul, Peter, and divers others, were, who yet might and ought to make this petition? But in what case such as believe must ask forgiveness, see before. 9. Our humiliation, invocation and faith touching forgiveness must be renewed daily. As we must ask every day our daily bread, so must we the pardon of our daily transgressions and sins. For notwithstand∣ing any former assurance of forgiveness, if we take our eyes from Christ, the remembrance of sins past will disquiet conscience afresh. But faith looketh to Christ in all humility and hearty supplication. Again, the best men are clothed with infirmities, and in some thing or other do sin daily. Now as we transgress, we must ask pardon. Constant repentance is no less necessary after we are entred into the state of grace, then at our first entrance. If no man can be justified or saved without repentance, continual repentance is required to continuance in justification. Not that the former pardon can be made voide by new sins committed for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance; but that continuance of Gods gracious favor is to be sought in all humility, as well as our first accep∣tance into the state of mercy, and actual pardon of sins past. For as a Chri∣stian cannot utterly fall from grace, and wholly loose the gifts of the spirit, no more can he from the state of justification: but as he that is fallen must rise by repentance for the repaire of grace, so must he to obtain remission. Man re∣generate is the subject capable of justification; and so long as the life of grace abideth in a Christian, he continueth in the state of justification: but actual re∣mission of sins, specially such as make breaches in the conscience, is obtained by actual prayer of Faith after the sin committed.Luk. 13.5. 1 Joh. 1.9. Zanch. in 1 Iob. 1.9. de remis∣sion. Isa. 61.1, 2. If the regenerate acknowledge their sins, God is faithful and just to forgive. The seat of pardon is the heart of man contrite and humble, which thirsteth after mercy. I came to seek, saith Christ, that which was lst, and to bind up that which was broken. The conditions without which pardon is not obtained, are humiliation, confession, prayer. Forgiveness is free and of meer grace; repentance and prayer are not causes, for which, but conditions without which, this favour is not obtained. Not to dis∣oute what God could have done without reprehension of injustice▪ by his ab∣solute power; certain it is, that the Lord will not receive the impenitent into favour. For what were this, but to put no difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked, to set open a gap to impiety, to expose mercy to contempt, thrusting it upon them that refuse, and cast it away? Grace should not be glo∣rious, if it did hearten men to the practice of sin, and encourage to persevere in an evil course Moreover, it is not enough that the pardon of mans sin be actually passed by God, but this pardon must be sued out, that the same also may be passed in a mans conscience: and this must be renewed daily, even as the conscience is blur∣red and stained with sins daily; else a man shall have litle comfort or fruit of that pardon which stands upon record for him in heaven. Justification is a continued act, and the application of it by the work of the Holy Ghost, as also the full execution is wrought by degrees, never perfected till the day of judgement.
Lastly, If pardon of sin be asked that day in which it is committed, the guilt lying upon the conscience, it doth benumm the conscience, and so it is forgotten altogether; or else when it is put off till many sins be committed, either the heart is discouraged with multitude of offences, that it is afraid to present it self before God, or if it do come into Gods sight, those many sins are confessed and prayed against but confusedly and in gross for the most part. Wherefore it shall be every mans greatest wisdom, to ask pardon, and make his peace with God every day. It is not safe to suffer sin to lie long unconfessed and unpardon∣ed, lest it fester, green wounds are soonest cured, with most ease to the patient. Sins lying unpardoned beget other sins daily: but speedy confession doth pre∣vent the out-breach of after-sins. Aske pardon every day, then will sins be more particularly confessed, and more distinctly and earnestly prayed against, and pardon will be sooner granted, and that with less horror of conscience. Great is the security of that man, who walking in the midst of dangers, hath his accounts taken up in Christ. Peace with God doth sweeten labor, sleep, sickness, crosses of what kind soever. He needs fear none evil, that is freed from the danger of sin, carrying an acquittance in his bosom. All trouble and vexation ariseth from this, that our faith is weak, our assurance assaulted with many doubtings, our communion with God many wayes eclipsed though our neg∣ligence in prayer. All these things should move us effectually to renew our Peti∣tions for pardon, and our faith in the promises; for according to our desire so shall it be unto us: David heard this promise from Nathan in the name of the Lord, Thou shalt not die; yet ceased he not to ask mercy and comfort. 10. All sins shall be pardoned to him that with true repentance and faith unfeigned doth ask forgiveness in the name of Christ.Ps. 51.1, 2, 3, 12. If sins hinder not humiliation, they can∣not hinder comfort. Sins before and after Baptisme, sins of ignorance and a∣gainst conscience, sins of infirmity and voluntary, are pardonable by grace, and shall be forgiven to him that with grief and sorrow doth intreat remission. In the Law,Lev. 5.1.2. & 6.1.2. sacrifices were appointed for sins willingly committed as well as for sins of ignorance. The Scripture mentioneth examples of many that sinning notori∣ously after grace, have obtained forgiveness. Our Saviour Christ teacheth them that sin after baptism and regeneration, to pray for remission: and whatsoever we must ask, we are assured it may be obtained. The Lord never taught us to begge what is impossible. Whereas committing of sins after knowledge, and falling oft into the same sins, doth much affright and burden the heart of many of Gods dear children, in so much that they are afraid to come so oft to God for pardon of the same sin; yea sometimes they doubt whether they be in state of grace. This doctrine doth serve to remove this doubt, and these fears. This salve which Christ hath prescribed to cure such sores, sheweth that it is incident to his own Disciples to have need of it. And sith he hath appointed a remedy for sins committed after conversion, sc. every day to ask forgiveness, and more assurance of his favour: let us daily use this remedy, assuring our selves that this dayes sins confessed and prayed against, shall be forgiven as well as any com∣mitted and forgiven heretofore. As the body hath relapses into the same diseases, and the same Physick may be used to recure them: so the soul hath relapses, and the same remedy which before hath done good, may and must be used again to recover them. 11. Whosoever would be justified before God, must be behold∣ing to God for the free forgiveness of all his sins, as well as of any. All sins are mortal, and of themselves damnable: wherefore if all sins be not pardoned, a man abideth in danger of the curse. Faith cannot receive the promise of pardon for one sin, and not for another: nor doth God pardon one sin past, when he remembers another, to call to a reckoning for it. When the faithful sin griev∣ously to the wounding of their conscience, till they have repented of that sin in particular, they cannot believe the pardon of any past. He cannot truely con∣fess
and repent of one sin, that repenteth not of every one: nor can one sin be remitted without another. Christ saith to the thief,Luc. 23.43. This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. But he could not be in Paradise unless all his sins had been re∣mitted: for one sin is sufficient to exclude us out of the Kingdom of heaven. David saith, He forgiveth all thine iniquities. Paul: He hath quickened you to∣gether with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. The blood of Jesus Christ,Ps. 103.3. Col. 2.13. 1 Jo. 1.7.9. saith John, clenseth us from all sin. Let all that will be saved, be glad they may be beholding unto God for pardon of all their sins, and let us ask for remission of all sins. God can as well pardon all, and the greatest sins, as one of the least; and the least sin hath need to be pardoned as well as the greatest: for a Musket shot will kill as well as the shot of a great Ordnance. 12. Every Chri∣stian ought to desire and endeavor that others may have their sins pardoned, as well as his own. Our Saviour prayed for them that put him to death,Luc. 23.34. Act. 7.60. Psal. 79.8. Dan. 9.19, 20. Eza 9.6, 7, 8. Neh. 1.5.9. Exod. 32.11. 1 Sam. 12.23.19. Job 42.10. & 1.5. 2 Tim 4.16. Num. 6.25. Jam. 5.16. 1 Jo. 5.16. Ezra 9.10.14. Jam. 5.19, 20. Father forgive them. Steven for them that stoned him, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Daniel he prayed for forgiveness of the sins of the people, so did Ezra, Nehemia, Moses, Samuel for the Israelites: Job for his friends and children, Paul for them that for∣sook him when he answered before Nero: the Priests for their Hearers. If a man see his brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them. The like glory of Gods free grace doth manifest it self in their salvation, as in the salvation of ones self. Hereby we shew our greatest love unto them by praying for the greatest good unto them, sc. forgiveness of sin, and peace with God. Love to the Church and Commonwealth doth require it: for while the sins of Gods people remaine unpardoned, they do decline, and the whole state is exposed unto Gods judgements. This moved Ezra to pray for the people, fear∣ing lest God should be angry with them, till he had consumed them: because they had married many strange wives. And as we must pray, so we must use all good means to bring our brethren from the error of their wayes: for he that converts the wandring from his evil course, doth save a soul, and cover a multitude of sins. Whereas the sins of many fearful and tender hearted Chri∣stians do oppress them, that they (as they think) cannot pray for forgiveness they onely can grone and sigh out requests, but cannot express them: such as these may take comfort, and raise up their Spirits by thinking on this doctrine. What though they cannot satisfie themselves in their own prayers, they must not be so uncharitable as to think that others cannot pray, yes they can pray, and must and do pray for the forgiveness of your sins. Live upon their stock, when ye have little of your own. The Papists talk of a Treasury of the Church wherein are reserved the overplus of the merits of the Saints, that when men lack merits of their own, the Pope may furnish them with supply from others. This treasury is but a fiction: but this doctrine commendeth unto us the true trea∣sury of the Church. First, Christ Jesus who commandeth all Christians on earth to pray one for another, he did pray for us. Next, all faithful Christians do ac∣cording to the will of God, pray for us, which prayers of theirs are daily offer∣ed up by Christ for us, and cannot but avail with the Lord, because they be made by his appointment. 13. Sins do cast men into debt and arrerages with God. It is likened unto the debt of ten thousand talents. Sin is a breach and forfeiture of that bond of obedience,Mat. 18.24. Rom. 8.12. & 13.8. Gal. 5.3. wherein man doth stand bound to God by the law. The consequents of sin do argue it: for when sin is committed, either paiment and satisfaction must be made by the surety Christ Jesus, or else a man is liable to the arrest of his own conscience, and in certain danger to be cast into the prison of hell, Ʋntil he have paid the utmost farthing, that is,Es. 59.1. Rom. 6.23. for ever and ever. Which serveth to discover to all sinful men, that they are much in debt, and in the state of Bankrupts: they are more in debt then themselves and all their friends they can make in the world can satisfie: yet foolish men, if they be so honest, or so wealthy, as to owe no man any thing, they are proud, and
insult over their Neighbors: when yet they make no bones of any sin, that may make for their pleasure, profit, or credit. Great is the misery of that man whose sins are treasured up against the day of vengeance. It is burdensome to live in debt and fear of Arrest, though a man may fly or hide himself from the Bai∣liff, or if he be taken can suffer no greater sorrow then to be cast into prison, where death will put an end to care: But the Arrest of conscience, which can∣not be avoided, is much more terrible, and torment of hell, out of which there is no redemption, is most intollerable. CHAP. XV. Shewing, the meaning of these words, As we forgive them that tres∣pass against us. Who our Debtors are, And what it is to forgive them. Several objections answered, many necessary conclusions de∣ducted, with divers reasons to perswade us to forgive the injuries that we receive from others. Question: WHat is the meaning of these words, As we forgive them that trespass a∣gainst us? Luc. 11.4.A. Luke reads it, For we forgive them that trespass against us. But these words do not plead a cause, upon which God should forgive us: for we cannot love till God hath given us grace, as the wall cannot reflect heat upon a stander by,Mat. 18.27. Col. .13. till the Sun hath shined upon it. Forgiveness of sins is of the meer grace and mercy of God: our forgiving others is no merit or price, why God should remit us,Eph. 4.32. Col. 3.13. because we have forgiven our brother. Be ye kind one to another, ten∣der hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you. To forgive wrongs is one part of that debt of duty which we owe to God: But the paiment of one part of what we ow, and that very imperfectly, cannot me∣rit remission of other offences committed against his Majesty. Besides, our love to our neighbor is so weak and defective, that it needs pardon, and cannot be the cause why we are forgiven. Neither do these words make comparison, in this wise, to forgive me no otherwise, but as thou seest me ready to forgive a∣nother; as if our forgiveness were a rule, sampler, or master picture, after which God were to conform his forgiving of us. For that is a rule which we imitate, but God doth not imitate us, but we God in remitting offences: there∣fore we are not a rule to him, but he to us. God doth remit to us many more, and much greater offences, and much more freely, then we are wont, or possi∣bly can forgive to our debtors. We sin more against God then man can against us: our sins are more hainous against him, then any wrong that can be offered unto us.Mat. 18.24, 28 This is signified by that parable, where the Lord forgave to his ser∣vant a thousand talents, when he would not forgive to his fellow-servant an hun∣dred pence. Nor did the Lord therefore remit, because the servant had first for∣given his debtor, as provoked by his example: but first the Lord forgave, after∣wards the servant would not forgive. Our forgiveness is maimed in degree, though it may be intire in parts:Catech. Rom. par. 4. c. 14. q. 14. for the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, even when we are reconciled to our neighbour; and do what we can the remem∣brance of great injuries will stick too fast in the breast. So that if our forgive∣ness were a rule of Gods forgiveness, and his pardon should not be more perfect then ours, we should rather desire damnation then salvation. The Lord him∣self
doth shew the inequality. Can a mother forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her wombe? Yea, they may forget,Esa. 49.15. yet will I not forget thee. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel?Hos. 11.8, 9. How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled toge∣ther. I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Eph∣arim, For I am God and not Man. I is to be noted that this particle As, is used divers wayes. First as a note of likeness, not of truth. He shall come As a thief in the night. Secondly, Of truth but not of likeness.1 Thess. 5.2. Jo. 1.18. Eph. 5.8. Luc. 9.36. & 11.4. Heb. 2.27. Rev. 1.15. Ph. 2.6, 7. Catech. Rom. par. 4. c. 14.4.12. Maldon. in Math. 6. Iansen. bor. Evang. c. 43. We beheld his glory, the glory As of the onely begotten Son of God Thirdly, of quality, but not equality. Be merciful As your heavenly Father is merciful. Fourthly, Of like∣ness and truth. And it is an Hebraisme, to call that oftentimes like, which is the same thing with that whereunto it is compared: and is more effectual to avow the truth of a thing, then if it had been uttered without the note of likeness. But in this place the particle As is not a note of similitude to note out either the measure or manner how we would have God forgive us, but onely denoteth a certainty of the truth of our own forgiving of others. We may not therefore conceive the words, as if they did import the cause of our for∣giveness, or any similitude of the measure and manner of forgiveness, but onely as a qualification of the subject capable of forgiveness, or a condi∣tion, sponsion, and insinuation. If we forgive others, God is faithful to for∣give us; but if we forgive not our brother,Mat. 6.14, 15. no more will our heavenly Father for∣give us our trespasses. Brotherly pardon is joyned with free remission: he that will not forgive, shall not be forgiven. And when we pray in this form of condition and sponsion, we must remember that we break our promise solemnely given in this petition, if we we do not pardon our neighbour. But our forgiving others, is a sign we are such to whom forgiveness be∣longeth, and a helpe strengthening our faith to believe that we are heard in that request. This act of ours is no cause (as was said, but a condi∣tion on our part required, and a sign testifying that mercy belongeth un∣to us, and that we are indeed received into favour upon our request. For when we find that a spark of grace maketh us ready to forgive; how much more may we assure our selves, that God will out of his endless mercies be ready to forgive us? And as he who seeth a print of this or that Im∣age, doth know that the seal hath been set there and applied: so we feel∣ing our selves ready to forgive, do come to know this more surely, that Gods forgiveness hath been applied in us. And as one that doth see that done which is greater, will easily believe the lesser; so we seeing our selves made by his grace, though sinful ones, ready to forgive, may much more be perswaded that God so infinite in goodness hath pardon for us, that we may fear him. Again, as they who have the condition on which a thing is to be done, may boldly expect performance of that which de∣pendeth on it; so we having forgiveness, in which God hath promised us forgiveness, may be bold to assure our selves that we are pardoned. Q. Who are our Debtors? A. All that have offended us, and hurt us in deed, word,Ps. 15.3. Lev. 19.13. Col. 3.13. Mat. 18.35. 1 Cor. 6.8. or man∣ners: such against whom we have any complaint: for they are called our Debtors, not for money matters, but in regard of some duty. Q God onely can forgive sins, how then is man said to forgive his Deb∣tors? A. The sin against God we cannot, but the injury or dammage against our persons we may forgive; as if the Magistrate take a Thief wronging us, we may forgive him his injurious minde towards us, but cannot absolve him from the offence against the Law. Q. What is it to forgive our Debtors?
A. It is freely and in conscience towards God of our own accord to lay down anger,Lev. 19.18. Prov. 19.11. Rom. 12.19. Col 3.13. Longe aliud est in Deo & in alijs rectoribus remittere pecca∣ra  aliud vero in privatis ab altero lsis. Illi enim opposi∣tum est punre; huic vero pae∣nam postulare, aut optare, aut etiam conqueri. Col 3.13. Mat. 7.1. Deut. 19 19, 20. Josh. 7.24, 25. Rom. 13.4. 2 Tim. 4 14. Causa paenae est ipsa actus vitio∣sitas, causa de∣biti naturalis, quod aliquid mihi absit. Restitutionis modum & quantitatem ipsa rei natura determiat poena, determinari non potest, nisi per actum liberum voluntatis. Mat. 10.16. & 7.6. Restitutionis debitum in hoeredem transit, paena non transit. hatred, and desire of reveng and punishment so farre as justice will suf∣fer, either from God or men; and willingly to bury the remembrance of in∣juries, even then, when he doth not desire that hath offended us: For here we speak of the duty of him that prayeth to the Lord, what he ought to perform. Three waies a man is said to forgive his Debtor. First, When he doth not con∣ceive anger or desire of revenge for an injury, or having conceived it, doth lay it down. Secondly, When he passeth by the wrong, and remitteth the damage being such as may be born without satisfaction. Thirdly, When being bound in conscience to prosecute the matter, and call for punishment, he doth it without spleen or malice, in love and with compassion. So that they do not forgive their Debtors, who either keep heatred in their hearts, or mule about revenge, or cast by what occasion to do hurt, or be glad at any evil that doth befall their enemies; yea, they who think much to be reconciled to such as have wronged them, or to deserve well at their hands by all kinds of duties, and to reconcile themselves unto them. Q. Paul did not forgive Alexander the Copper-smith: therefore remission is not necessary. A. There is a three-fold remission; of revenge, judgment, and punishment. All men ought to remit revenge, and of this the Petition is to be understood. Judgment of others is not ever to be remitted: for God forbidding a lie, wil∣leth not that we judg dissolute fellows to be honest men, or the sluggard to be painfull: but he would have us to discern the good from the evil. And as it belongeth not to all men to inflict punishment, so neither is it in their power to remit it: for God willeth the execution of his justice and Law. The applicati∣on is easie, for Paul was not carried against Alexander with any private grudg, but with burning zeal for the glory of God. Q. The Scripture alloweth men to require their Debts, and if they be wronged, to complain to the Magistrate, and if there be no remedy, to go to Law, in a simple desire of justice: and for that cause both Magistracy and Judicial Constitutions, were set up in the Common wealth of Israel: yea, in lawfull warre we may kill our enemies. A. This Petition is to be understood of wrong or injury that might stirre up desire of revenge,2 King. 8.6. Deut. 20.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 6.5, 6, 7 not properly of civil debt; of debt of duty, not of debt of money; yet so, that if our debtors be not able to pay, we are bound in duty to forgive them, or at least to have a conscionable regard of their inabil∣lity. We must know therefore that in every wrong done unto us, two things concurre: First, Defect of love in him that wrongeth us, or an injurious mind, which is apt to beget the like defect in us, scil. to cause us to cease to love him, yea, to spite and seek revenge. The second thing is, there is some hurt or damage groweth either to our Name, Life, or Goods, which work∣eth in us that are wronged desire of satisfaction, and recompense for the hurt done unto us. The first of these, sc. their ill will to us, must alwaies be for∣given; so that all ill will in us to them, and all purpose of revenge must ab∣solutely and utterly be laid down by us. But the Scripture alloweth us to crave our debts, and satisfaction for wrongs sustained. Yet because requiring of debts and satisfactions may proceed from malice and reveng, difference must be put between one wrong and another: some are small, and they do us little damage, and the consequence of them cannot be to any great harm: some other wrongs are great, which do much hurt our names, goods, or lives, and the consequence of them is great. Again, satisfactions must be distinguished;
some are to be made to the Magistrate, others unto the party wronged. Now all those smaller wrongs, which are no great blemish to our name, or any great empairing of our goods or quiet, must be remitted, even in respect of satisfacti∣on; because love should cover all such offences. And if we seek satisfactions in these cases, it must needs proceed from want of love, and from some de∣gree of revenge: Except the Magistrate and Common wealth be interessed in the cause, and do require us to prosecute such offenders, for to make them examples to like offenders: but then it must be done in love and mercy to their persons. But if the damage be greater then love is bound to pass by, because in our name, life and goods, we are much wronged, or the consequent of not seeking satis∣faction, would be much to our damage, or to the dishonour of God and religion (as in some cases it falleth out where the matter of the wrong is not al∣waies great) in such cases the Scripture alloweth us to seek satisfactions: but with these and the like cautions. First, We must not seek to right our selves as Judges in our own causes, but must referre it to neighbourly arbitrement, or if that cannot be, then to referre it to the Magistrate who is appointed in such cases to do right. Secondly, Satisfactions must not be required in spleen, or prosecu∣ted in malice, or by indirect courses. Q He is a base fellow that hath done me some notorious wrong, am I bound to forgive him? A. Luke hath the words thus; for we forgive every one that is indebted to us.Luk. 11.4. Because we are by nature more hard to some, more easie to others, and do bear wrongs more patiently or less impatiently from superiours then from equals or inferiours: therefore he takes away all respect in brotherly pardon, when he saith, We remit to every one, that is indebted to us. Q Are the parties offending and offended both bound to reconciliation? A. For the person that hath wronged his neighbour, the rule is; If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remember that thy Brother hath ought against thee;Mat. 5.23. leave thy gift at the Altar, and go first and be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift. For he that prayeth in impenitency must not hope to speed. For him that is wronged, the rule is set down;Luk. 17.3, 4. If thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him. Q Am I not bound to forgive mine enemy unless he repent? A. It is not sufficient to forgive our adversary, when he intreateth favour, as God doth pardon us when we humble our selves and pray: but we must for∣give them of our free accord, though they never desire it, yea, though they persist in their ungodly practice. When ye stand praying, forgive,Mar. 11.25. if ye have ought against any, that your Father also who is in Heaven may forgive you your trespasses. The place alledged before, is to be understood of brotherly commu∣nion and reprehension, not of private hatred and revenge. Q. May they use this Petition who from their heart desire to forgive their enemies, but cannot obtain that perfect oblivion of injuries that is requir∣ed? A. They may; for in the faithfull so long as they live in this world, there abideth both flesh and spirit, corruption and grace, whose acts and motions are contrary: The flesh is prone to revenge, the spirit inclineth to pardon: whence followeth a perpetual combate and contention, the part regenerate re∣sisting the desires and motions of the part unregenerate, and the part unregene∣rate making head against the part regenerate. Again, asking forgiveness of God, we ask whatsoever is necessary to the obtaining of it; as grace to forgive our e∣nemies, according to the Commandement of Christ. Q. Is nothing required of us to the obtaining of mercy with God, but that we forgive our enemies? A. There was a sort of Hereticks that thought they might live as they lis,
and yet be sure of pardon, so they did forgive their Adversaries. But the Scrip∣ture teacheth plainly, that if we would obtain mercy, we must humble our selves, repent of sinne and turn unfeignedly unto the Lord: and it is a certain truth, that no man can in conscience forgive his enemy, who doth purposely live in any known sinne. Amongst many conditions which might have been mentioned, our Saviour made choice of this: because nothing is more fit, then that he who begs mercy, should shew mercy; and it doth fitly serve to insinuate with God by Argument taken from the greater; We that have much of the old Leaven, by the spark of thy grace in us, are ready to forgive; be thou much more. Moreover, it is a most grave common faction that we live together in brotherly kindness; and seeing offences will come by reason of mens in∣firmity, we should be the more circumspect, that our hearts be not poysoned with rancor and malice. Q. What Conclusions may be drawn from these words? A. 1. In asking forgiveness of sinne, it is meet that reasons be used to con∣firm and strengthen faith in respect of audience. Thus David yeeldeth rea∣sons why God should have mercy on him: first from his tender mercy; then from his own confession of his sinnes, and from the effects which would fol∣low upon Gods shewing mercy to him.Psal. 51.1, 3, 7. Apt reasons serve much to embolden a sinner to come before God: and this he hath need of, because Satan hath many devices to keep him from asking forgiveness: as sometimes to hide from his sight the ugliness and danger of sinnes, causing him to forget his sinne, or to think there is no great need of pardon. If this fetch will not prevail, then he setteth all his sinnes before him, and stretcheth them upon the tenters of ag∣gravation, making them seem greater then they are, pleading Gods wrath and justice against them. Now against Arguments of discouragements and fears, rea∣sons of asking forgiveness are very usefull. Strong reasons are the props of faith, the kindlers of desire. What Oyl is to the flame, that are reasons to fervency. The greater hope to speed, the more heart to ask. Dulness doth often seize upon us when we are to seek mercy: the best remedy of that disease is to furnish the heart with strong Arguments to perswade, that it shall be unto us according to our desire. 2. All Gods actions to us imprint their stamp in us: His Election makes us choose him, and choose the houshould of faith before all others. His love of us, maketh us love him and our Brethren: his forgiving us, maketh us forgive our Brethren. When Christ is received by faith, his stamp and Image is engraven upon the soul. He that hath obtained mercy of the Lord, is mer∣cifull to others. The word may be called the Image of God, as it unfoldeth his Divine Properties, incomprehensible Wisdom, tender Mercy, rich Grace, Patience, Long-suffering, and readiness to forgive: which being digested by faith, doth transforme us into the nature of it, that we become holy and pure as the Word is pure and holy. 3. Conscionable forgiveness of our enemies is to the humble and penitent sinner, an undoubted token of forgiveness from God. For if we wretched sinners upon earth can forgive others,Mat. 5.7. & 6.14, 15. how much more will the gracious God of Heaven forgive us? If we having but a drop of mercy can forgive others, much more will God, who is a Sea full of grace. But this reason doth tie God to forgive us no otherwise then by his gracious and free Promise; for it is a necessary consequent and fruit of the other, and not a cause, considering the inequality between our debt unto God, and mens debt unto us, both in number and weight: which ariseth from the great inequality between God and man. For if to strike a King be much more hainous then to strike a poor subject; What is it to strike God, who is infinitely greater then all the Kings of earth? Let us therefore nourish this grace, and put away implacableness, which once out, will never return. Why should a man be so cruel to his own soul, as not to forgive? For besides, the torment and vexation of mind that accompa∣nies
desire of revenge; he that will not forgive wrongs cannot enjoy the sense of pardon and forgiveness from God. Let us forgive so as never to remember any more that which is remitted. To perswade to this Christian duty, let us re∣remember, (1.) That no man can wrong us so much as we daily trespass against God: therefore if we forgive the greater, we must forgive the less. (2.) No man can wrong us so much as our Saviour was wronged for us, yet he forgave his persecutors, and hath left us his example, that we should follow his steps. (3.) They that revenge themselves upon their neighbours, wrong God more then their neighbour could wrong them: for they usurpe upon his Divine Prerogatve. Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, I will repay. (4.) He that will not forgive,Rom. 12.19. hurts themself more then he that doth the wrong. For the injury offered reach∣eth but to the name, body or goods: but the desire of revenge woundeth the conscience, provoketh God to wrath, shutteth the gate of his mercy agaist s, and bringeth our sins into remembrance before him. Let unmercifull and reveng∣full spirits consider what is said in the Parable of him that would not forgive his fellow servant: He was delivered to the tormentors.Mat. 18.34. (5.) It is a great Argument that we are the Sons of God, if from the heart we forgive injuries, and love our enemies. For in this that we love them that hate and persecute us, some similitude with our heavenly Father doth shine forth, who hath redeemed us be∣ing enemies with the death of his Sonne. Love your enemies,Mat. 5.44.45. bless them that curse you, &c. that ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven. (6.) For∣getfulness of injuries doth embolden us to ask pardon of God with confidence and good assurance. The best way to obtain mercy with God, is to shew mercy to them that have offended against our estimation, goods or body. Grace to remit an injury, is a testimonial sent from Heaven to certifie the heart, that God is at one with us in Jesus Christ. 4 He cannot in faith ask forgiveness of his sins,Mat 6.14, 15. Mar, 11.25. Mat. 18.35. who doth not from the heart forgive his enemies. For mercy must be asked as Christ hath directed, and as it is promised in the Gospel. But forgiveness is never promised to him that will not forgive. God hath expresly commanded every Christian to forgive one another, and when they come before him, to lift up pure hands without wrath and doubting. What is more absurd, then for a man to ask forgiveness of God, when for Gods sake he will not forgive? What is this, but to preferr his credit and reputation before Gods favour? What is more equal, then to deny his request, who will not do for another, what he re∣questeth to be done unto him? He that will not blot out the remembrance of an injury, is too proud to speed in his suit when he intreateth mercy for himself. The Lord bendeth his ear to the cry of the humble sinner, that abhorreth him∣self, and repenteth in dust and ashes: but an heart meditating revenge is lofty, sick of self-love. The acts of faith are uniform, and it cannot lift up the soul to beg pardon, nor receive the promise, when it is not of force to allay the bit∣terness of passion. When the malitious make this Petition, What do they but desire God to pour a curse upon them? Nor is their sin the less, if they leave out this condition: for what is that but a presumption, breach of Gods direction, and prophane abuse of his love. 5. He cannot but forgive others, which is perswaded in his heart by faith, that his own sinnes are forgiven him. Neces∣sarily with forgiveness of sinnes is joyned true charity and love of our Neighbour.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Sixth Petition. What Temptation is, with the several Kinds thereof. How God is said to Tempt his servants, and for what end he doth it. How man Tempts God, and how Satan, the World and the Flesh Tempt man. Question: WHat is the Sixth Petition? A. And lead us not into Temptation. Q. Why is this Petition annexed to the former? 2 Cor. 2.11. 2 Cor. 7.5. 2 Cor. 1.2.7. Eph. 6.11, 12. Luk. 11.21.A. 1. Forgiveness of sinnes and grievous temptation are inseparable com∣panions. For the Sonnes of God having obtained pardon of their offences, when they set themselves to walk before God, and to perform all duties of piety and love, as the Word requireth; the enemy of man-kind doth de∣vise all arts, and prepare his engines to cast them down, that he might bring them again into slavery and bondage. 2. We cannot rightly desire God to forgive us our sinnes, unless we crave also power to abstain from the like in time to come.Joh. 8.11. & 5.14. Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. Cant 5.3. Prov. 26.11. 2 Pet. 2.22. For who being delivered from a great disease, will return to it again, and will not rather desire a diet whereby he may e∣scape it? Swine indeed after they are washed, and Dogs after their Vo∣mit, return, the one to their water, the other to their Vomit: but those that are truly washed with the blood of Christ, will never give themselves over to their sinnes again. 3. God hath ordained Prayer one means of keeping the faithfull from revolt; and they ought to be so much the more earnest in Prayer [their enemies being many, mighty, malitious, subtile and powerfull, and they very feeble and weak of themselves] as they are more subject to be beaten and buffeted with tentations,Mat. 4.3. Joh. 8.44. 2 Cor. 11.14. Eph. 6.12. 1 Pet. 5.8. Rev. 12.3. Gen. 6.5. Job 15.16. Mat. 15.19. Rom. 7.14, 18. than o∣thers. 4. The condition of them that are called to the hope of life, will be worse than the state of those that never tasted of the good Word of God, if they give themselves to evil; as a relapse in diseases is more danger∣ous then the first sickness was. Q. What is Temptation? Deut. 4.34. & 7.19. & 29.3. Psal. 26.2. A. Temptation is any action whereby we make proof or experience of any matter. The Original word in Hebrew hath the signification of lifting up for a sign, or essaying some high thing. Q. What are the several kinds of Temptations that we read of? A. We read of three Temptations: First, Gods tempting man, which is called temptation of probation. Secondly, Mans tempting God. Thirdly, The Devils, the Worlds, and the Fleshes tempting man; which is called temp∣tation of seduction. Q. What is Gods temptation of man? Gen. 22.1. Heb. 11.17. Job 9.23. & 34.36. Deut. 13.3. Job 23.10. Luk. 18.22.A. It is an action of God, whereby he proveth and makes experience of the Faith, love, repentance, loyalty and obedience of his servants. Q. How is God said to try or prove his Servants?
A. 1. By sending afflictions and deferring to help them. For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as silver is tried.Psal. 66.10.11 Psal. 05.19. Exo. 15.25, 26. & 16.4. Rev. 2.10. 1 Pet. 4 12. 1 Cor. 10.13. Exo. 1.8, 9. Psal. 10.25. Ʋntill the time that his Word came, the Word of the Lord tried him. And this kind of temptation by outward judgments is most grievous, when the Lord layeth his own hand so grievously upon his servants, that they think themselves to be quite forsaken. 2. By offering occasions and objects to try whether they will sinne or no. A man suspecting his servant which in word promiseth fidelity, layes a Purse of Money in his way, to try if he will steal it: which if he steal, he hath found by watching, that he is a secret thief, and so laid him open for stealing any more. Now this trying of him is no sinne, though he sinne in stealing. In the same manner God tempteth his servants to try their stedfastness and constancy.Deut. 13.3. Thou shalt not hearken un∣to to the words of the Prophet or Dreamer of Dreames: for the Lord thy God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart. 3. God tempteth his servants by leaving them to themselves, and withdraw∣ing his graces from them. We read of Hezekiah, that God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.2 Chro. 32.31. 4. He tryeth them by some strange and extraordinary Commandement, wherein some high and great experiment of their love and obedience is required. As Christ bid∣deth the young man, Go, and sell all that thou hast, and giv to the poor.Mat. 19.16. And under this kind is comprehended the temptation of Abraham,Gen. 22.1, 2. when he was commanded to offer his Sonne Isaac in Sacrifice. 5. I do not find that phrase in Scripture, that God is said to try his Children by pro∣sperity, but we find it to be a slippery state, in which the godly have taken the foyl. Give me not riches, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say,Deut. 8.16. Prov. 30.9. Who is the Lord? Q. For what ends doth the Lord tempt his people? A. 1. To manifest the graces he hath bestowed upon them; and thus he tempted Abraham.Gen. 22.1. Jam. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. My Brethren (saith James) count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations. Ye are in heaviness (saith Peter) through manifold temptations, that the tryal of your faith, being much more precious then gold that perisheth, might be found unto praise. There must (saith Paul) be Heresies among you,1 Cor. 11.19. Psal. 44.14, 15, 17. Deut. 8.3. 2 Chro. 32.31. that they which are approved may be made mani∣fest among you. 2. To make man see his weakness, and how unable he is to stand without grace from above, or to manifest hidden and secret corruptions, partly to a mans own self, and partly to the world. There is much sinne that lurketh privily in the heart of good men, which never comes to knowledg, till temptation manifest it unto them. Q. God knoweth what is in man, and what he will do, long before,Joh. 2.25. Psal. 139.1, 2. and needeth not to make tryal of any man. A. God makes tryal of his servants, not for himself, but for our sakes; not that he might learn any thing, for all things are manifest in his sight, but that he might shew to others what is most evident to him. To others I say, both they themselves that are tryed, whom it specially concernes, that they prove and know themselves; and others,Psal. 26.1, 2. & 139.23, 24. who seeing the faith and o∣bedience of the Saints, might learn to imitate them; or their weakness and levity, might learn to deny themselves and walk in humility. Q. God tempteth no man. A. 1. Temptation often signifieth a soliciting and provoking to evil,Jam. 1.14. Mat. 4 1. Jam. 1.14. which is the action of Satan, the world, or our own corruption: and thus God tempteth no man, that is, he doth not stirre up or move any mans heart to sin. 2. There is a good temptation, which is the tryal of the heart; and an evil, which is the wicked suggestion of Satan, the world, or the flesh, and solicitation to sin. The good temptation is the work of God, not the evil.
Q. How are these Temptations Good and Evil differenced one from a∣nother? A. 1. In the efficient cause. The good is alwaies of God: the evil of Satan,1 Thes. 30.5. Ma. 4 3. Joh 6.5. 2 Cor. 12.7. and our own concupisence. Therefore Satan is called the Tempter, that is, the Author of evil temptation. 2. In the matter or objects; For God tryeth us by Commandements that are grievous to the flesh, by a∣bundance of outward blessings, by outward afflictions; by deferring to help, by false Prophets,1 King. 22.22. by Satan himself, whom he suffers to buffet us. But ex∣ternal good things, or evil, are only accedential occasions of evil tentations; Internal evils, as concupisence, is the proper cause of it. 3. In the form. Good temptation is the tryal and discovery of some grace or corruption lying hid in man; of strength or weakness, piety or impiety, faith or infidelity, pa∣tience or impatience, sincerity or hypocrisie, constancy or levity: which tryal is a thing good in its kind, and in some sort to be desired. But evil Temptation is the inticement or allurement of the heart to evil thoughts, counsels, acts and works; which is a thing it self evil, and hurtfull. 4. In effect; For in good the Lord doth ever obtain what he doth intend. For alwaies by the tryal of probation, either the faith and constancy, or the infidelity and weakness of men is brought to light. In the evil, Satan doth not ever effect what he intendeth, but when we give way to the temptation, and do not man∣fuly resist unto the end, nor earnestly crave aid or defence of God. 5. In the the end; For God tempteth to a good end, either that the glory of his grace might be more illustrious by our faith, patience, obedience, con∣stancy, and that others by our example might be provoked to holiness; or that the pride of our flesh might be humbled, fierceness tamed, security shaken off, hypocrisie detected, faith and repentance increased in us. But Satan, the world, and the flesh, tempt to an evil end; For they tempt the godly to turn them from the study of godliness, or to make them slothfull, or proud and insolent of that they have, and so plunge them into destruction. They tempt the wicked, lest they should repent of their sinnes, and turn unto God. 6. In the manner: for Satan tempteth a man to sinne against the will of God; God tempteth a man to do some thing against his reason or affections. Q. For what Reasons is God pleased to try his Servants? A. To whom God vouchsafeth a greater measure of grace, to them he appointed singular tryals, and temptations above other men; First, Because Gods graces do better appear in temptations then out of them, as gold is best tried in the fire, and thereby proved most pure and perfect. Second∣ly, Temptations serve to abase the servant of God, and to bring him down in his own conceit, that he be not proud of those things that are in him, or puffed up with conceit that there is more in him, then indeed there is. This we see in Pauls example; He was buffeted of Satan, lest he should be exalted with abundance of Revelations. A type hereof we find in worldly af∣fairs; The best Ship that floateth on the Sea, when it carrieth in its most pre∣cious Jewels, is ballaced with gravell or sand, to make it sinke into the water, and so sail more surely, lest floating too high, it should be unstable: even so dealeth the Lord with his servants; when he hath given them a good measure of his graces, then doth he lay temptations upon them, lest they should be puffed up in themselves.Luk. 11.16. Exo. 17.2. Psal. 95 9. Psal. 78, 19, 20 Mat. 4 7. Deut. 6.16. Psal. 91.11. Q. How doth man tempt God? A. When leaving his ordinary way of waiting on God in meanes, he will put him to it, to shew his power, mercy, &c. before his time. Thus God is tempt∣ed many waies; First, By contemning the means which we have, and requiring extraordinary. Secondly, When means are wanting by prescribing God time and
manner how to work for our preservation. Thirdly,Num. 14.22. Mal. 3.15. 1 Co. 10.9. Num. 21.6. By provoking God with our sins, and trying whether he be true and able to punish them that transgress. Fourthly, Israel did oft tempt the Lord by murmuring and dispising his present mercies vouchsafed unto them. Fifthly, He tempteth God, that casteth him∣self rashly into dangers, presuming of the absolute power of God, when he is not called thereunto. Sixthly, Concerning things indifferent whch do not edifie, but are rather joyned with scandall, danger of offence and impiety;1 Cor. 10.22. Act. 15.10. Paul saith, Do we provoke the Lord? Seventhly, Peter saith, they did tempt God, who imposed the yoke of the Law upon the Disciples, though they did it with great zeal, and peradventure with no evil intention; Because they knw whether the Law of Moses, which was given to the Jews, might not be imposed upon the Gentiles. Q. What are the Temptations of Satan, the world, and the flesh? A. They are perswasions, inticements, or allurements,Mat. 26.41. Luk. 22 40, 46. 1 Cor. 7.5. 1 Thes. 3.5. 2 Sam. 24.1. 1 Chro. 21.1. Act. 5.3. Jam. 1 14. 1 Chro. 21.1. Joh. 13.2. 2 Sam. 11.2, 3 Mat. 4.3, 4, 8. Jer. 44.17. Gen. 3.6. & 39.7. Job 29. Mat. 16.22. 1 Reg. 33.8. Act. 21.12. Deut. 13.2. Jam. 1.14. Obad. vers. 3. 1 Pet. 2.11. Job 31.1. Mat. 4.3, 8. Josh. 7.21. Prov. 23.31. 1 Joh. 2.16. Numb. 24.11. Prov. 7.16. 2 Tim. 4.10. whereby they labour to draw us into sin, or withdraw us from God to our temporal and eternal destruction Satan, the world, and the flesh tempt by inticing alwaies unto sin. Satan by in∣ward suggestions, and outward objects; the wicked of the world by bad exam∣ples, or wicked perswasions, alluring or terrifying. The flesh tempteth when we are inticed of our own concupiscence. The things of this world, though good of themselves, do much hurt unto us by accident; as Wine, though good of it self, doth much hurt unto persons intemperate. Look as a sick man is much en∣dangered, by the presence of things which provoke his appetite, but feed his sickness: So the presence of those things which disdiet the soul, and provoke lusts, are very dangerous, the occasions of many temptations. These are the enemies that do assault us, but the most pernicious is the flesh; for without it neither the world, nor the Devil can have any power over us. In vain should one knock at the door where there is none within to look out and answer: In vain should the Devil by his perswasions knock at our hearts, did there not dwell in them these lusts which will look out to him too readily. Satan prevailed indeed with our first Parents, but the reason was, their willing and ready listening to his allurment, which they might have withstood but would not. Again, though the Devil be a furtherer of all provocations to lust, (as unclean persons do help complexion with the painting box) doth make them seem to us good in farre greater degree then they are, yet they would not be able to tempt us effectually, had we not this lust in us. Look as a man while he is now in a hot fit of his Ague, while this heat doth possess him, O he thinketh drink the only thing, and counteth them happy that may drink enough; but when this distemper is over, though the pot were by him, careth not to taste it; So these earthly things, when concupiscence is up, Oh alass (such false glasses these are) that our judgment and estimation do think them so good that we may not forbear them, when the same things at a∣nother time (when lust is somewhat subdued) do little or nothing stirre our desires; that he would think his phantasie and senses were by some jugling delusion corrupted.
CHAP. XVII. Descovering, what the Temptations are that we pray against in this Peti∣tion: what it is to Lead into Temptation, and how God may be said to do it. Question: WHat are the Temptations that we pray against? A. Whatsoever things, by the corruption of nature, are unto us occasions of sin, be they in themselves not hurtful. But more fully to an∣swer this question sundry things are to be noted. 1. Things not good in them∣selves may be profitable by accident; as crosses and afflictions which of them∣selves destroy nature, through the mercy of God are means to purge sin. Now the good that commeth by the cross we pray not against, but against the cross and affliction which of themselves are evil. 2. God willeth some things simply, others as they are exercises of faith and prayer, tryals, and testimonies of our constancy. Now what God willeth simply, we are to will: but we are not to will evils as evils, onely it is required that we patiently bear evils as they are good. That we ought not simply to will temptations, appears hence; because to bear them is an act of patience,Tentatio non ap∣petenda, sed for∣titer & cum gaudio toleranda Bell. to. 4 De bon. oper. in part. l. 1. c. . Aug. conf. l. 10. c. 28. which it should not be, but rather of duty, if we ought to will them simply, and not to pray against them. 3. We pray to be delivered from temptation, not that we shall obtain perfect freedom in this life; but because we are delivered from many, in which we should perish, if we did not ask deliverance, and that those evils into which we fall might be pro∣fitable. God will give these two very great blessings to them that ask deliver∣ance in general: but this benefit is imperfect for the relickes of sin that remain in us. 4. The principal sleights that Satan useth to vanquish the strong and va∣liant are these. 1. When the affliction doth continue long, and deliverance is differed. 2. When it seems to be an enormous, singular, extraordinary, unusu∣al affliction. 3. When under pretence of some great good he doth tempt to undertake something, which is joyned with peril, or above our strength and calling. 4. When he doth cloak vices under pretext of vertues; as covetuous∣ness under the shew of providence. 5. He doth abuse peace, prosperity and quietness, to cast us into a deep slumber and security. Q. What are the degrees of Temptation? A. It hath these degrees, Suggestion, Delight, Consent, Practice, and Perse∣verance in evil.Jam. 1.13, 14. Q What is it to lead into Temptation? Gen. 26.10. & 27.12. Ex. 32.21. 1 Reg. 21.21, 29 Ps. 66.11. & 43.3. & 78.54, 71. Luk. 5.18, 19. 1 Tim. 6.7. 1 Tim. 2.26. 2 Cor. 2.11. Eph. 4.27. 1 Tim. 3.6, 7. Drus. praet. l. 1. c. 6. Bell. to. 4. de bon. oper. in part l. 1. cap. 6. in petit. 6.A. The Hebrew word that answers to that which is translated Lead, signifies to bring upon, or cause to come upon, and is rendred of the Seventy, by words equivalent unto this. In the New Testament it signifies to bring, or to bring into: and thus according to the use of the word. To lead into temptation, is to bring into the hand and power of temptation, that we faint under it, or be foiled by it. Thus the Hebrews say, to be brought into the hands of joy, fear, sickness, sin, sleep; for to rejoyce, sin, &c. To tempt unto sin, is to intice or in∣cline the will of man unto wickedness. To lead into temptation, is to bring things so to pass, that a man is exposed unto tempters, whether they be evil men, or Satan, or a mans own evil lusts, who are the immediate actors in temptations unto sin. In this act of leading into temptation, allusion may be made unto the acts of a General of an Army, who may according to his dis∣cretion lead which band he pleaseth, and set them in the forlorn hope, the place of greatest danger; and may reserve which band he pleaseth in the corps du guard,
the greatest safety. It may likewise be resembled by an act of the Moderator of the games of combates, where none might enter the lists and play their prize, but according to the permission and appointment of the overseer and modera∣tor of those exercises. Nor is it barely to be beaten with temptation, or expo∣sed to temptations, but to be cast upon it in such sort that it doth get the up∣per hand over us, and we be overcome of it, either by consenting, or giving place. The sense of this phrase may be understood by comparison of other places. Of the incursion or immission of tentations the Scripture saith,1 Cor. 10.13. Jam. 1.2. Luk. 22.40. 1 Tim. 6.9. No temptation hath overtaken you. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations. Pray that ye enter not into tentation. And Paul saith, They that will be rich, fall into tentation and a snare. Q. Were it not better to repeat this Petition thus, Suffer us not to be lead? A. In no sort: for this were to lay the Lords words in water, change his tongue, and set him to school to learn to speak, who teacheth all men to speak,Rhem. annot. in Mat. 6. especially, when as Luke, which otherwise in divers words varieth from Mat∣thew, here keepeth the same phrase with him: where if any thing had been hard∣ly spoken of one, the other would in all likelihood have mollified it. And if this manner of speech had been but once or twice in the Scrip∣ture, it had been a great malepartness to have delayed it, that the strength of the words should perish by a waterish interpretation. But now that the Scripture useth this phrase in divers places, and that in stronger sense than here: it is too shameless an impudency to go against the stream of so plain, so often, and so vehement speeches. For it is said,Rom. 1.24. Ex. 9.16. 1 Sam. 2.25. 2 Thess. 2.11. Ex. 14.4. Jo. 12.40. 2 Chro. 10.15. 2 Sam. 16.10. Gen. 45.8. & 50.20. Ezek. 14.9. 1 Reg. 22.20, 21, 22. Act. 2.23. & 3.18. & 4.28. God gives up to a reprobate sense; that he hardeneth the heart, that it was of the Lord that Elies sons did not obey the good counsel of their Father; That Rehoboam did not hearken to the reasonable request of the Israelites: That he sent Joseph into Egypt, whom his brethren had enviously sold, and rather he sent him than they: That he took away from Job, that which the Divel, the Chaldees and the Sabees did. That sitting in the throne of his high judgement, he sendeth the divel to be a lying spirit in the mouth of the false Prophets; that he commandeth him to go and perswade the wicked. God indeed suffereth men to be tempted, but this is not an idle permission, as some imagine, but joyned with a work of God: as in crucifying Christ, it is said, they did nothing but that which the hand of God hath determined before. For if God did onely permit sin and no way work in it, he should not govern in the most actions of men, seeing the greatest part of the world are wicked, all whose actions are (as themselves are) wicked. But let it here be observed, that sin hath reference unto God as it is an object or sub∣ject wherein or whereupon he worketh, disposing it to his own holy ends: but it never hath reference unto God, as the effect hath to the efficient cause, to be wrought by him. Q. How is God said to lead into Temptation? A. God cannot possibly sin, nor be the author of sin in and with his creature, as he is of every good word and work: for he doth neither inform the manner of it by his commandment, nor work it in him by his Spirit. God cannot so far will sin, as to approve it for good in it self: he cannot be the Author of it in the creature, nor yet the creature work while it keepeth communion with him. God inticeth no man to sin; but without stain or blemish to his wisdom, holiness and justice, he leadeth whom he will into temptation. In which we may consider these acts:2 Chro. 12.7. 1 King. 22.22. 2 Cor. 12.7. 2 Sam. 24.1. Is. 19.14. & 63.17. Rom. 1.26, 28. 1. By his power and providence he upholdeth the tempters and tempted, preserving their life and strength for action, which he might take away at pleasure. 2. He doth sometimes propose some object, whereby occasion of sin may be taken; as Bathshebas washing her self was mini∣stred unto Davids sight. 3. He doth let loose Satan, and doth not hinder the tempter from tempting. Thus he gave Satan leave to set upon our first parents
in Paradise. 4. He doth leave man unto himself in the temptation, and not support him with that grace without which he seeth that man would not stand. God furnished forth our first parents that they might stand if they would, but he gave them not to will; and so being suffered to themselves, they sell by ac∣cident of their own liberty and vertibility. 5. He doth withhold from sinners his grace, without which he knoweth that they cannot stand: and thus it is just with God to forsake them that have forsaken him,2 Chro. 24.20. 2 Chro. 32.31. and made forfeiture of his grace. 6. He doth withdraw those gifts of minde which once he gave; which he hath just cause to do, if he please: for what man doth not by his sin deserve that punishment? If a man abuse his hand, why may not God wither it as he did Jeroboams? We hold this to be good, justice, and is it not as good justice, that those that have abused their powers of imagination of understand∣ing, and of discerning things that differ, should be punished by being deprived of the right use of them? 7. God doth smite the sinner with blindness in under∣standing, hardness of heart, the spirit of slumber and giddiness, which doth di∣rectly bring the sinner to commit sin: for as death bodily is good in the nature of it, though not good to a living person: so is this blindness, pravity, hardness of heart, good as expressors of divine displeasure, though not good to man, who should be conformable to the Law, and free from them; good as inflicted, not as contracted and received. 8. God doth suspend all actions which in any degree tend to hinder sin, and not onely presents things which may take occa∣sion to pervert, but also seemingly provoke by occasions of sinning. Thus by his judgements he provoked Pharaoh, whose heart was hardened: and Shimei up∣on the sight of David his poverty, was moved to curse him. The reason of all is, it were just with God to consummate spiritual death upon the creature now sinful; and therefore much more lawful to execute such a degree as is inferiour. 9.Rom. 1.19, 20, 21.22, 23. God doth punish sin with sin, Because the Gentiles did provoke God by idola∣try, he did punish them with giving them up to uncleanness. These later sins were not punishments, in regard they deserved further punishment and condem∣nation then the former, yea a further desertion of God, but in regard of com∣mitting these acts themselves. Lastly, God leaveth some for a time onely, and suffers them to fall into some particular offence, out of which he raiseth them again by the power of grace: others he leaveth utterly, and giveth up to their own lusts,Rom. 1.26, 28. Act. 5.3. and the power of Satan, Q. What is the ground of this petition? A. That God our most gracious Father is the sovereign commander of all things,1 Chro. 29.11, 12, 13, 14. Psal. 62.6, 7, 8, 9. Rom. 16 20. Psal. 12.1, 2. & 142.6. 1 Cor. 10.13. Eph. 6.10. Zech. 3.2. the sole protector of his people, of invincible power, without whose leave Satan cannot assault, and through whom his Saints that seek unto and de∣pend upon him, shall be strengthened to overcome. Q. What do we acknowledge in respect of our selves? A. That after we fell from God, we were justly cast into the state of bondage and servitude unto Satan; that by the corruption of our nature we are prone to deliver our selves into the power of the divel,Eph. 2.1, 2. Rom. 3.10. & 7.25. being inticed by the concupi∣scence of our hearts, and the allurements of this world; that we have no power to use prosperity or adversity, mercy or judgement aright; that God may justly lead us into temptation,Ps. 39.11. Ps. 103 14, 15. Eph. 6.10, 11. Apo. 12.12. 1 Cor. 10.12. 2 Cor. 11.2. Jam. 4.7. and that we of our selves have no power to with∣stand the least assault, that Satan is vigilant and watchful to tempt the world full of inticements and occasions of sin, and corruption ever stirring, and yet we of our selves are apt to grow secure, uncircumspect, careless, self-confident, and venturous as if there were no danger, we had no enemy.
CHAP. XVIII. Discovering what the blessings are that we pray for in this petition, the evils that we pray against, the wants that we are to bewail, and the mercyes for wchih we must be thankful. Question: WHat desire you of God in this petition? A. To be freed from tryals themselves so far as will stand with the good pleasure of God, and alwayes to be delivered from the evil thereof,Mat. 26.39.41 Luc. 22.40. 1 Cor. 10.13. Luc. 1.74. Rom. 16.20. 2 Cor. 12.9. that we faint not under them or be foiled by them. That if it be to the honour of God we should not live without temptations, yet he would be pleased so to joyn us against Satan in battel, as to have us alwayes in remembrance, that whether he tempt us by prosperity or adversity, or what way soever, he may never be able to sever us from him, take us out of his hand, nor diminish the blessed communion we have with him. Q. What do we ask more particularly?Job 1.10. 2 Cor. 12.9. Pro. 30.8. Zech. 3.1, 3. Rom. 16.20. 2 Cor. 12.8. Jude 6. v. 1 Jo. 3.8. 2 Cor. 2.11. 2 Cor. 11.3. Eph. 6 11. Psal. 140.8, 9. Gal. 5.12. Jo. 17.15. Mat. 15.19. Psal. 19.13. Rom. 7 24, 25. Gal. 5.17, 18, 19. Rom. 6.12, 13. Jam. 1.14. 1 Cor. 10.13. Jude 24. v. 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. Ps. 51.12. Es. 27.9. Pro. 14 27. Gen. 39.9. Neh. 6.11. 1 Pet. 5.9. Eph. 6.13. Jam. 1.12. 1 Pet. 5.10. Apo. 3.20. Psal. 131.1, 2. Gal. 6.14. 1 Tim. 6.9. Pro. 4.23. 1 Pet. 4.23. Luc. 22.40. Eph. 6.18. Mat. 26.45. 1 Thess. 5.6. 1 Tim 4.5. Ps. 60.12. Col. 1 11. 2 Thess. 2.17. 1 Cor. 15.58. Rom. 5.4. Gen. 39.10 Jud. 16.6.16.17. 2 Cor. 12.7.8. Ps. 5.3. Ps. 38.9. Rom. 8.26. Ps. 34.3. Mat. 26.39.42. & 6.4. Ps. 119.117. Mar. 25.29. Heb. 13.21. 1 Thess. 5.23. Zeph. 6.24. 1 Pet. 5.8.10. A. First, That God would of his mercy keep us from knowing temptation; and to this end we pray. 1. That seeing we cannot be tempted without the will of God, nor resist without his power, if it be his blessed will, he would give us neither poverty nor riches, nor any such things as may endanger our spiritual e∣state, but mercifully preserve us from whatsoever might be occasion of sin. 2. That he would tie up Satan, restrain his malice, and bridle his power, that he might not assail us in that kind, or else make us wise to know, and avoid his stra∣tagems. 3. That he would curbe the rage of wicked men, and preserve us from the evil that is in the world. 4. That he would kill sin, abate the power of cor∣ruption that is within us, and dry up the filthy streams of idle, vain, wicked mo∣tions, and desires. Secondly, We ask, that in temptations (if he see good to prove us, he would alwayes stand by us with his grace to keep us from falling, and vouchsafe to worke effectually by his holy Spirit, to stir up his graces in us and bring them into exercise to put good motions into our hearts, and cause us to remember his word. To strengthen us manfully in the encounter, to give us an holy use of our tryals, and to make us superiours, even conquerors in all things wherein we are tempted, that all things being finished we may stand strong, and endure stedfast unto the end. Thirdly, That God would not give us over to the lusts of the flesh, or to the malice of the Divel: but that he would have merciful respect to our weakness, and favourably keep us from the hour of dangerous and pernicious temptation Fourthly, that he woud stir us up to be sober and vigilant, standing upon our watch, prepared for the on-set, ha∣ving our loins girded with verity, and our heart furnished with the spiritual ar∣mor of a Christian. Be sober and watch, for the Divel goeth about like a roaring Lyon, seeking whom he may devour. Fifthly, We pray that God would make us poor in spirit and strong in faith, that we never trust in our selves, nor distrust in God his power and aid, Through God we shall be able to tread down our enemies. Sixthly, We crave faith, hope, fear of God, patience and consolation, that be our temptations never so many, so long or so grevious, we may hold out and stand fast, and neither presume of our wit, nor despaire of Gods mercy, but continue in prayer, and wait for deliverance in the Name of the Lord. Seventhly, That he would preserve and increase his graces in us, whereby we might the better
quell the motions of the flesh,Heb. 13.21. 2 Pet. 3.18. Ps. 51.12. Ps. 119 32. Eph. 3.16. Ph. 1.9.11. Ps. 5.8. & 27.11 & 119.117. 1 Thess 3.12, 13. Ps. 119.125.144. Col. 1.9, 10. Ps. 119.115. Eph. 5.15, 16. Helpes that further in wel-doing prayed for, be, 1 Good and holy coun¦sel. 2. Holy ex∣hortations. 3. Good exam∣amples and panions. 4. Gods bles∣sing upon all these. Ps. 119.33, 34. Is. 8.19, 20. Pro. 19.20. 2 Chr. 20 20. & 32.7 8. Act. 18.27. Psal. 119 63. Pro. 13.20. Ps. 51.12. Zech. 12.19. Luc. 22.61, 62. Pro. 10.22 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. Psal. 116.3, 4. Rom. 7.24. Heb. 13.21. Rom. 16.20. and resist the instigations of Satan; and with right judgement and holy will, constantly and faithfully cleave fast to the admo∣nitions of the spirit, walking in the way that the Lord shall shew in his holy word. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies; I am thy servant, give me understanding that I may know thy testimonies. Eighthly, that he would teach us to walk warily, accurately, exactly, honestly, and make good use of all occasions and opportunities, mercies and judgements, and that insteed of temptations to the contrary, God would afford us all helpes unto well-doing, as good examples, holy counsels and encouragements. Ninth∣ly, that when we are intangled in the snare of temptations, whence we cannot rid our selves, that he would give such an end as may be for the glory of his Name, and the furtherance of our salvation. Yea, and if he leave us at any time to our own weakness, for our humiliation, that he would not let our faith fail finally, but that he would graciously raise us up again with increase of spi∣ritual strength and courage, and so strengthen us, that we may see all the evils that we have suffered working to our good, and our selves at length more then conquerors in him who loveth us. 10. We pray that God in his time would perfectly free us from all misery, put an end to all tryals, and to these dayes of conflict; perfect the work of his grace in us, and grant us full victory over all our enemies. Finally, As we ask these things presently for our selues who are alrea∣dy in the warfare, so we wish it to all Gods Elect when they shall be called to like condition. Q. What are the evils that we pray against? A. 1. We pray that God would not deprive us of grace, whereby we should resist temptations or leave us to our selves at any time when we are brought un∣to the tryal.Psal. 119.8. Ps. 71.9, 10. 2 Chr. 32.31. Psal. 19.14. Psal. 1.9.36. & 141.4. 2 Sam 24.1. Eph. 4.18. Ps. 27.12. Ps. 38.21. Ps. 140.8. Ps. 119.37. 1 Sam. 25.32, 33. Pro. 30.8, 9. Ps. 119.133. Vers. 10. Pro. 3.5. 2 Thess. 2.11. Jo. 3.19. Rom. 1.26. 2 Thess. 2.10, 11. 2 Tim. 4.3, 4. Ezek 14.4. 1 Cor. 8.1. Ps. 81.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Jer. 44.25, 26. Ezek. 14.45. 2 Thess. 2.12 Mat. 26.8, 9. 2 Sam. 11, 1, 2. Ezek. 16.49. Jo. 12.4, 5. Mat. 26.14, 15, 16. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. I will keep thy commandments, O forsake me not utterly. 2. We entreat that we may not be given over to the power of Satan, the swing of our lusts, the will of the ungodly; that their wicked enterprises may not prevail, whereby they seek to seduce and destroy us. Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies. Forsake me not, O my Lord, O God, be not far from me. 3. That we be not ensnared with the occasions of sin that be in the world. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. 4. That we be not captivated or held in sub∣jection of any sin. Let no iniquity have dominion over me: Oh, let me not wan∣der from thy commandment. 5. That we be not left to our selves to trust in our own strength and wisdom, as did Peter, nor given over to impatience and des∣pair as Saul. 6. That we grow not secure and mindless of the craft, malice and power of our enemies, and the danger wherein we stand at all times by reason of the snares they set privily to catch us. 7. That we forget not to run unto God by earnest and hearty prayer for his gracious aid, at what time soever we find the enemy to set upon us & sollicite unto evil. 8. That we may not be presum∣ptuous to rush upon the occasions of sin; such as evil corruptions, needless entan∣glements in the world, reading scurrilous books, &c. 9. That we run not into such sins as provoke God to lead us into temptation. Of which sort are these, all refusing or slight receiving the love of the truth; abusing or not making right use of that knowledge a man hath; willingness to be ignorant of the truth, & wilfulness to practice evil presumption of our own strength; all willing casting ones self into the occasions of sin; idleness & living without a calling, allowance of secret sins & such like. 10. We pray against all motions & enticements unto sin. As the Apostle Paul did beseech God that the prick of the flesh, & buffeting of Satan might depart from
him, not onely that he might overcome. 11. That all stumbling blocks and occasions of our stay in the race of Christianity might be taken out of the way, or made no rocks of offence unto us. 12. That we might not be an offence or scandal unto Jew or Gentile, weak or strong Christian, brethren or them that be without. Lastly, We pray that God in his displeasure would not punish sin with sin, hardening the heart, and giving us over to vile affections. Q. What are the wants to be bewailed? A. 1. Our spiritual servitude, and continual rebellion of our wicked natures; the remnants of the old bondage under Satan most grievous and irkesome, the evil motions that arise from it without ceasing, as foggy mists from a muddy pond, and our proneness to yeeld up our selves in every temptation to sin and Satan. The Jews in bodily captivity, wept when they remembred Sion; How much more should we weep, when we feel the Law of our members, rebelling a∣gainst the Law of our mindes, and leading us captive to sin? 2. Our Senceles∣ness and presumption, that forget the danger wherein we live by reason of our many and malicious enemies, and notwithstanding the daily experience of their power and our frailty, we neglect to look unto God, as if we were able to stand without his aide; we presume upon our strength, feel not the want of his assist∣ance, pray seldom and coldly to be supported, disregard the motions of Gods Spirit. 3. Though we pray not to be led into temptation, yet we thrust our selves into it: for we discover our passions and lusts, manifest our weakness, rush into the occasions of sin to satisfie desire, suffer our thoughts to rove and wander up and down we know not whither, confer with the suggestions of Satan, and give them harbour in the minde. 4. When we feel Satan thrust sore at us, we are ready to faint, as if the Lord would not or could not help us; and if the sug∣gestions of the flesh be strong and importunate, we grow weary of resistance, and give place to sin. 5 Though we be compassed with enemies on every side, both within and without, yet we lay down our watch, cast off our Christian armor, and set upon the performance of many duties, and converse in most companies, as if we had none to set against us, or contrive our hurt. Q. How must we stir up our selves devotionally to make this Petition? A. 1. We must often call to remembrance the dangers in which we live, whiles the soul is in this mortal body, whom the flesh, the world, and the Divel do oppose on every side. What anger, what lust can do in us; who is not com∣pelled to feel it to his great sorrow and grief? who doth not find these pricks? is not provoked with these stings? The stroaks and assaults are so many, so di∣vers, that it is most hard not to receive some great wound. But besides these enemies which dwell and live with us, there are other most bitter adversaries, which the Apostle calleth spiritual wickedness, principalities and powers, whose hatred against us is infinite, unappeaseable, that we cannot expect any truce or peace from them, if it could stand with Christian courage, resolution and ho∣nesty to desire it. 2. Another motive is to think, to what the temptations of the Divel tend: This is the White he shooteth at, that he might make us naked be∣fore God, stripped of his favour, which is better then life. For the divel seek∣eth by them to make us dishonor God, rob our hearts of his Kingdom, fetter us so with our sin, that we may be dis-enabled from obeying him; to take away all our peace and prosperity in things outward, to fill us with fear and weariness in all the duties we go about, and uncomfortable doubtings, yea despairings touching the pardon of sin; In a word, to bereave us of all good which in the former pe∣titions we desire; and to bring upon us the contrary evils which are most hor∣rible. He playeth no small games when he beginneth his temptations. 3. We must remember how tedious his former tempting and prevailing against us hath been, for we (like children) who remember beating no longer then it smarteth) we I say, remember the bitterness of our daily falls the divel giveth us, no longer
then God letteth the sting of them stick in us; and this doth make us, that we feelingly cannot pray against that whose anguish and evil we do not remember. 4. We must consider, how we are every where subject to temptations, at home, abroad, in wife, children, servants; in good company to security and unfruitful∣ness; in bad, to sin with them in speech, gesture or consent; yea in good deeds, before we do them, when we have done them, to carelesseness, pride, security, vain-glory; at bed, at board. For as fools and children not knowing evils fear them not; so we not knowing this evil, are less fearful, and flee not so fear∣ingly, praying to have it prevented. Every where snares of temptation are laid for us, who, that should go such a way, in which he could not take a step without danger, would not go wearily, and often lift up his heart for protecti∣on? 5. We must think how diligent and watchful the divel is; he that know∣eth what baits we bite at, and will cast them out every where: he knoweth where we are weakest, and will never want occasions to provoke us. Again, we must think how mighty he is, what cannot he do with us, if God keep us not? he would carry us to any evil, as a whirlewind doth the drie stubble. 6. We must often repeat our own infirmities, how we be so far from being able to withstand him, that all we have of our own, is readier to follow then he to whistle us af∣ter him. 7. We must remember such examples of worthies as have been griev∣ously foiled, as David, Peter, &c. yea presidents we have of some hanging themselves, some tempted to it; for such examples are like the thunder, though it striketh a few, it feareth all. And are not we subject to have our minds distract∣ed, assaulted with any even the most grievous things that ever we heard to have befallen others? Lastly, We must consider what a joy it is when we go a day more freed. What an ease is it to the soul? Or if we be in a little forwardness to sin,1 Sam. 25.32, 33. yet if we be rescued seasonably, how it doth it rejoyce us? what peace doth it bring to us? Now could we work upon our hearts, the feeling of this be∣nefit when we have it, the sweetness of it would enforce us to beg it heartily; whereas not heeding the worth of it, we ask it unaffectionately. Q. VVhat are the mercies for which we must be thankeful? A. 1. We give thanks to God, who hath redeemed us from the power of Satan by his Son Jesus Christ.1 Cor. 6.20. Ps. 124.5. Rom. 7.25. Gal. 1.4. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorifie God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 2. This is a great daily mercy, when God keepeth us from tempta∣tion: Not to know a disease is better, then having it to be healed of it. 3. That he hath strengthened us in the combate, and given us victory over our enemies. Thanks be to God,1 Cor. 15.57. 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. which giveth us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. The Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, to whom be glory for ever and ever. 4. That God hath been pleased to prevent our sinning, when we were ready to fall. Not to fall when we are ready to fall, is a great favour. If one when our feet are ready to fall from us, should hold us up, we would count it a great be∣nefit.1 Sam. 25.32, 33. 5. That God hath made our tryals fruitful and profitable, bringing us thereby to the knowledge of our selves, awakening us from security, and strengthening the graces of his Spirit in us. 6. That he hath been pleased to re∣cover us from our flips, and turn our infirmities and falls to our greater benefit. To have damages advantage us, this is the evidence of power and goodness it self..
CHAP. XIX. Discovering the several Inference, or Conclusions that may be drawn from this Petition. Question: WHat Conclusions may be drawn from hence? A. 1. In this life the godly are subject to manifold and great tempta∣tions. Spots in a garment seem to spread, when they are washed: the chanell will stink when it is cleansed. Corruption will stirre when we endeavour to cast it forth. The Scriptures and Christian experience witness, that Satan ceaseth not to pursue the faithfull with temptations of every kind, that he might destroy them. No sooner do we give our selves to Jesus Christ, but the Devil by force or fraud doth labour to pervert us. The ungodly feel none assaults, because they are wholly in his power, and runne willingly whithersoever he doth allure: but with the godly, who fight under the Banner of Christ, and bear arms a∣gainst the Kingdom of darkness, it is farre otherwise, he leaveth no plot unat∣tempted to destroy them. The Devil goeth about like a roaring Lyon,1 Pet. 5.8. seeking whom he may devoure. Satan hath desired to winnow thee as wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy fail not. Moreover, the world is an enemy to all them that Christ hath called out of the world to the participation of life through him. The world favoureth her own, but hateth them whom God hath chosen as a peculiar people unto himself. And all this cometh to pass by the wise providence of God, that the regenerate might try their watchfulness over themselves, be kept from being exalted above measure, and that the power of God in preserving them from sinne, and delivering them out of it, may be seen in their weakness. 2. God doth lead us into all our temptations. It is said.Mat. 4.1. Christ was carried of the Spirit to be tempted. It is God only, who when he seeth it meet, doth bring his Champions forth, and letteth the powers of darkness encounter them. Nei∣ther can the Devil stirre, neither we bid battell of our selves. Can the Lyons stirre till the Keeper bring them out? Can a Dog run till he that hath him in a lease loose him? So it is, God he hath them chained up in his Almighty power, yea thrown down to the prison of Hell: farther then he doth loose them, and bring them into the earth, where this shew is represented, and battell to be seen, they are not able to do any thing. Again, we cannot on the other side, being set upon, buckle with the adversary power till God doth lead us to it. The Kings Champion is not to play at his own pleasure, no more are we farther then God designeth it. But how can God lead us into those temptations which he seeth will certainly bring us into sinne? Answer, Because sin it self is not absolutely evil, but only in respect of man sinning, who would in so doing pervert the di∣vine order, though he be unable; as who accomplisheth Gods will, when he doth contrary it, for ought he knoweth. Again, as Vipers are evil substances or natures, which yet are good to that art which maketh antidotes of them; or any poyson which is evil, as it is poyson in it self considered; yet is good as it is poyson, to a skilfull Physician: and as a blister on the flesh is a natural evil, as a blister, yet a blister as a blister is good when a cunning Physician doth draw it, and may see it for good use: so is sin to God. God hath an holy, over-ruling and disposing hand in the temptations and evils to which men are subject.1 King 22.23. 2 Sam. 16.10. Joh. 12.40. The putting of a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets; Shimeis cursing of David; the blinding of the eyes, and hardening the hearts of the Pharisees: the
giving up of the Gentiles to vile affections: All these, saith the Scripture, were of God,Rom. 1.26. 1 King. 12.14. or from the Lord, as it was of him, that Rehoboam hearkened not to the people. But cause in that place, doth not signifie the proper effecting of a thing causally, but a disposing of the proper causes so as they did produce this effect. And from this Doctrine we are admonished not to cast our selves into temptations. He that loveth danger shall perish. We must not make our selves poor as those Hereticks that renounce all their substance, that in voluntary po∣verty they may commend themselves to God. No man should choose his dwel∣ling among those of a sinfull profession, as a chast man among stews, a tem∣perate man among drunkards, belly-gods, &c. Christ offered himself into tempta∣tion: but herein we must not follow his example: for he was carried extraordi∣narily by the power of his God-head into the desart to be tempted for our sakes, that in his Victory we might overcome. Again, this must teach us contentment in all our temptations: not that we must prevent repentance by this considera∣tion; but we must when we are truly humbled by this meanes, keep our selves from being swallowed up of sorrow. For Gods will, and Gods turning all to good; the Devil will whisper them so as to make us pass by all exercise of a broken spirit in those things wherein we have offended. Moreover, from this consideration we must walk in fear before our God, who as a Shepherd setteth his Dog on a stray Sheep, so can he set the Devil on us to hound us home if we stray from him. Lastly, we see from this to our comfort, that the Devil cannot come against us at his pleasure: for we are in the hands of our heavenly Father, who hath an over-ruling hand in the temptations and the sins of all men. Satan therefore cannot winnow us, nor buffet; no he cannot touch us, but as he hath leave of our heavenly Father, the Lord of Hosts. This we understand further by the case of Job, Peter, and Paul; Satan could not assail them untill God did permit him: and when he had leave to do his worst, the grace of God was suf∣ficient to preserve them, that either they did not fall, or it did recover them out of their fals, and in the end caused them to die Conquer ours over Satan, over their own lusts, and over whatsoever opposed it self to the obedience of Christ in them. Moreover, If Gods Children do sinne, he can order and dispose of their sinne to their good and to his own glory, for many of Gods Children have gained more benefit by falling into some sinne, which through Gods mercy hath humbled them, than they have by doing some good duties, whereby they have grown exceeding high-minded. Have we not cause therefore to rejoyce that we are under the safe conduct of such a leader? But let no man abuse this comfort, and pervert it to his harm, by taking liberty to sinne, because God can work his own glory, and good to man out of it. What though the skilfull Physician can make triacle of poyson, and can tell how to apply poyson to his Patient for his recovery; yet if the Patient hereupon be too busie with these poysons, they will prove his death. Let us be glad our God can draw good out of evll, but let us not be doers of that which is evil. 1 Cor. 10.13.3. Gods sufferance is not to be understood without his action: he is a volun∣tary Agent in these things which he suffereth. We must not think his per∣mission is a pure permission, either without his will, or working in the thing permitted, as often mans is; for man may be said partly to suffer this, not to do it, because other causes have their activity without him, and dependancy on him; but it is otherwise with God. 4. All our strength against temptation is in God only; He only dissolveth the works of the Devil, trampleth Satan under feet, keepeth him that he can∣not so much as be disturbant to us; when it pleaseth him, we are down with the least blast. Were we in state of innocency, we would not stand a moment. Let us therefore trust perfectly on his grace, put on the Shield of Faith only. Our fore-fathers acknowledged that God, not their strength, gave them all sal∣vation
against corporal enemies; How much more must we confess it against spiritual? Who knoweth the power of Satan, or the infirmity of their own flesh, that will not confess this most intirely? But what serveth the Armour for? Answer. Onely to this end, that we may be able to get and hold God with us, fighting for us. 5. It is the duty of all Christians to pray, that they be not led into temp∣tations; that they be not inticed or drawn into evil. For of our selves we are unsufficient to think a good thought, much more to resist the powers of Hell when they assault. before conversion we are dead, and in the very power of sinne and Satan, who taketh us captive at his pleasure.Psal. 103.14. Joh. 15.5. Jer. 10.23. After conversion we are frail, and disposed of our selves to return to our former evil conversation, if the Lord do not support and excite us with his grace. The way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps. If a man cannot or∣der himself in the smaller things which concern the outward man, much less can he dispose himself in the greatest which concern the inward, in the matters of sanctification. God is the only giver of grace, and upholder in temptations. This gift is so Divine and so excellent, that God hath in his wisdom reserved it to himself, as a part of his Divine Prerogative, to bestow it with his own hands. For he knew well that if man could conferre grace, or could attain it by any means with him, all the praise thereof would be given to man, and God should have none: and man would grow so proud, that he would claim Heaven by merit; and flesh would glory in his presence, if God were not his strength and sanctification, as well as his redemption. The Adversaries un∣to holiness are most subtile and mighty, they are principalites, powers,1 Chro. 21.1. Job 1.13. & 2.7. and spiritual wickednesses, that if they be not resisted by a stronger, even by the power of Gods might, they will prevail unto ungodliness. Nor doth their power and craft exceed their vigilance to take all advantages that may be gotten, either from a mans natural disposition, or from his sex,1 Pet. 5.8. Mat. 26.70. or from his different condition of life and calling; from his estate in the world, be he rich or poor, noble or base; or from his estate in grace, be he a babe or strong man in Christ; or from observation in what thing a man is least armed; or from ob∣servation what a man doth esteem or disesteem most, also from place, time, solitariness, company, and whatsoever particular circumstance shall fall out, it shall be taken to the greatest advantage to further the temp∣tation, making use of the infinite varieties of evil unto which, and of the ma∣nifold varieties of meanes by which a man may be tempted. Great is the power and efficacy of Prayer; by it we keep Satan at the bay, that he cannot come nigh to annoy and trouble us. Pray, that ye enter not into temptation:Mat. 26.4. By it we obtain help and aid from Heaven, when he setteth upon as. Where∣fore we must crave the aid of God generally in all temptations,Psal. 86.11. Psal. 5.8. & 25.4, 5. Psal. 119.29, 35, 133. Psal. 119.5. Vers. 18. Vers. 36. Psal. 141.3, 4. and specially in every affliction or assault we must runne unto him: as David did in every kind of temptation. O that my waies were directed to keep thy Statutes. Open mine eyes, that I may behold wonderous things out of thy Law. Incline mine heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Incline not mine heart to any evil thing. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and grant me graciously thy grace. 6. Whosoever would be preserved from sinne, he must resist temptations. The Devil did deceive Eve through his temptations, and Adam was likewise drawn into the transgression by the inticement of Eve. Temptations and motions to sinne are the very seed and kernels of sinne, which if they may be entertained, so as to receive any warmth in a mans heart, there is presently a conception of sinne, which will cause him to be in labour and travell of it,Jam. 1.14, 15. untill he have brought it forth into act. There are no creatures so apt to bear
issue, nor ground so rank to bearweeds; no Tinder or Gunpowder so ready to take fire, as the heart of man is to conceive sin, and be inflamed with lust by evil motions and temptations: wherefore all that would avoid sinne, have cause to resist it in the temptation. To resist beginnings of the evil of sinne, is a rule as needfull to be observed against diseases of the soul, as to withstand evils of pain in the beginning, is needfull in diseases of the body. Now that we may withstand temptations. First, We must look to our own heart, for that is the hold and fort of the soul; if that be not true to us, we are sure to be foyled in every temptation: wherefore we must have it in an holy suspicion, so far as to cause us to examine and search it daily to find out those trecherous and deceiveable lusts that lurke there; and when by the light of the Word we have found any, let us not stay till they assault us, but let us assault them by the power of Christ, and use martiall Law presently to condemn and crucifie them. And let us never leave purging the heart, untill we can say, it is not set upon any earthly thing,1 Tim. 6.9. either to love it, or fear it; or if it be, as he that will be rich, so he that will have pleasure, and will have glory of men, shall fall into temptation. Nothing will bring the heart to a firm resolution to will in all things to live honestly, so soon as this course. Secondly, The understanding, which is the watch-man and intelligencer of the soul, must be well informed. For no resolution can avail, if judgment be wanting to discern betwixt good and evil. It must be able to discern between good and evil, between things not sinfull and sinfull: and of good things to discern which are good but in part, which every way good; and what things are good only to sense and appear∣ance, and what is good in truth: and so on the contrary: that the baits to draw unto sinne, taken from the gain, pleasure, and glory of this world may not move us, because they be but uncertain, van and transi∣tory. Thirdly, We must alwaies set the true danger of sinning, and the true good and glory of well doing before our eyes:Heb. 11.25, 26 and it will cause the heart to choose the good and refuse the evil. If we can but judg aright of the joy that is set before us in the course of holiness,Heb. 12.2. it will make us with our Saviour Christ endure the Cross, and despise the shame which in this world doth accompany Christianity; and we shall with speed runne the race that is set before us, notwithstanding the impediments that we shall meet withall. 4. There must be a continual watch set, and faithfully kept; wherefore the eye of the mind must be alwaies awake, to see and observe what particular temptations do arise a∣gainst us,1 Pet. 5.8. 1 Cor. 16.13. Mar. 13.17. either from within or without. Be sober, be vigilant; Watch and pray. Fifthly, When by watchfulness the temptation is discovered, then we must buckle all the Christian Armour about us. Sixthly, being thus armed, we must animate and fill the heart with courage and resolution to resist even unto the death. For which cause, we must make an Oration unto it, such as wise and valiant leaders will make to encourage their Souldiers; we must mind our hearts of the odiousness and hurtfulness of that thing to which we are tempted; how that it is a lust of the flesh and of the Devil; how it is enmity to our God, and a deadly enemy unto us; how that we must kill it, or it will kill us. Let us mind our hearts with this; that it will be to the dishonour of our King and Countrey to be overcome; that to yeeld to any temptation is contrary to our vow of allegiance, which we entred into when we first professed to fight under Christs Banner. Let us tell our selves of the equity of our cause, how that our warre is just; think also of the wisdom and valour of our Captain Christ, assur∣ing our selves, that how hard soever our conflict may be, yet if we do not yeeld, in the end we shall overcome, and be more then Conquerours. 7. We must stand fast in the faith, quit our selves like men, and be strong. In the Conflict two evils must be avoided. First, We must not trust to our own wisdom: for then sinne will be too crafty for us. Secondly, We must not resist
in the power of our own might, for then the Principalities and powers will be too strong for us. We must therefore resist by the wisdom of the Word, and power of God, so shall we put Satan to flight.Iam. 4.7. CHAP. XX. Of the Second Clause of this Petition, viz. But Deliver us from evil; Discovering what it is to Deliver, and what is meant by Evil. What it is we desire of God in these words; with the Conclusions that may be drawn from thence. Question: WHat is the second Clause of this Petition? A. But deliver us from evil. These words are understood by some Divines, as a distinct Petition from the former: but they rather seem to be an explanation or correction annexed;Jansen. har. evng. cap. 41. Maldonat. in Mat. 6.9. as the Particle [but] in other sentences insinuateth. But the matter is of no great importance, when in the exposition of the words, both sorts agree. Q. What is it to Deliver? A. The Greek word doth signifie to defend, protect, keep and save from evil,Homer. Ili. 10. & 15. that we fall not into it; and to free, deliver and pluck out of the evil, in which now we stick. The seventy Interpreters render those Hebrew words which signi∣fie to deliver, free, and pluk from the hand of the enemies. In the New Testa∣ment the Apostle doth comprehend both significations in one place: Even Jesus (saith he) who delivered us from the wrath to come, that is, who hath freed,1 Thes. 1.10. Rom. 5.9. and doth preserve or keep us from the wrath to come And so in this place it implyeth these two things, First, Preservation from falling into sin. Secondly, Help of God to rise out of sin by repentance. Keeping from evil in Christs Prayer,Ioh. 17.15. and delivering from evil in this Prayer, have one and the same meaning. When Paul saith, Who shall deliver? He meaneth,Rom. 7.24. who shall give me power against this body of sinne? And that Gods giving of repentance is deliverance from evil, that of the Apostle maketh it manifest, where Gods giving men repentance,2 Tim. 2.25, 26. Col. 1.13. is all one with recovering themselves out of the snare of the Devil. Q. What is meant by Evil? A. The Devil, because he is of himself so exceeding evil, and doth make it his work to infect all men with evil, is called the Evil or the Evil One.Mat. 13.19. Mat. 13.34. Maldonat. in Mat. & Piscat. in Mat. 6. Beza annot. ibid. So he that is called the Evil One in the Greek is by the same Evangelist in that Chapter, and by others in the same Parable, called the Devil. And thus some Divines, antient and modern, popish and protestant would restrain this word evil, that it should mean the Devil, as if he only were prayed against in this Petition: and that be∣cause this word evil in the Greek hath his Article joyned with it, which giveth an emphasis to evil, pointing at some special evil one, which is the Devil. To which may be added, that in the New Testament the word is seldom or never put in the neuter gender absolutely, for adversity or what is hurtfull to us: but some other word is annexed unto it; as evil thoughts, an evil heart, evil times, evil men, evil works.Eph. 5.16. But though the Articles do give a special force sometimes unto the words to which they are annexed, yet for the most part, the Greeks use to adde them rather for a grace and ornament of speech; and are so used seven or eight times at least in the Lords Prayer.Gen. 39.9. 1 Sam. 18.8. And the Greek Interpreters use the word to signifie whatsoever is hurtfull or evil, as sinne, danger, loss, damage,
adversity, and such like. In the New Testament it is used for wickedness. In this very sense are the words of Christ to be understood:Joh. 17.15. 1 Joh. 5.19. Gal. 1.4. Rom. 12.9. Father keep them from the evil, or from wickedness. The world lyeth in wickedness, that is, it wholly ly∣eth buried as it were in sinne. And that of the Apostle is without exception; Abhorre that which is evil, cleave to that which is good. By evil in, this Petition is meant that which maketh us worse, not in regard of our feeling only, but in truth, and before God: as which doth harmefully separate our union or diminish our communion with God, who is our only God and All-sufficient Portion. Q What desire you of God in this Clause of the Petition? A. 1. Whereas Satan goeth about seeking whom he may devoure, we pray that the Lord would mercifully defend, save, keep and protect us from and a∣gainst his snares, tentations, traps, and tyranny. Or if he hath caught and in∣tangled us in his snares,2 Pet. 2.9. that he would deliver and free us from them. 2. We pray that God would keep us from all sinne and every evil work, that we fall not into offences, or if we be fallen into any sinne, or lie under the power of any corruption, that he would powerfully snatch us out of it, and inable us to walk in new obedience before him.Jer. 31.18. Rev. 2.5. & 3.2, 3. Untill sinne be crucified, a man is as it were manacled, or as a Bird touched with lime-twigs: it taketh away the life and comfort of spiritual exercises: he cannot set about them with any nimble∣ness of spirit while he lyeth in any sinne. Sinne lodging quietly in the heart, taketh root, and infecteth further and further: it will increase it self, and be∣get other sinnes. And while a man lyeth in sinne, he may look every hour when God shall inflict some fearfull judgment or other, and then the remem∣brance of a sinne unrepented of proveth more heavy, and more stinging then the judgment it self. Whereas, though a man have sinned, yet if God have given him repentance, and have recovered him out of the sin, he may come before God with boldness and can perform exercises of religion with cheerfulness, and shall either prevent crosses or remove them, or they shall do much good to his soul, while they lie upon him. 3. We pray to be delivered from the evils of this life, dangers, losses, discommodities, so farre as the Lord know∣eth them to be hurtfull for us. 4. In this life our deliverance is imperfect, and we lie open to new incursions of Satan, sinne and adversity, therefore we desire to be translated out of this world, where Satan is Prince, where in the valley of miseries, the earth bringeth forth the thornes and thistles of adversity,Rom. 7.24. 2 Tim. 4.16, 18. Ezek. 28.10. Psal. 34.21, 22. Joh. 8.24. Apoc. 14.13. Rom. 14.8. into the Kingdom of Glory, where we shall be free and safe from all miseries, where we shall feel no motion of sinne, nor assault of Sa∣tan. 5. We desire that our heavenly Father would keep us from an evil death, that we die not the death of the uncircumcised, that we be not taken unpro∣vided in our sinnes without repentance, but that God would grant us a comfortable and happy end: for the death of the godly is the beginning of eternal blessedness, but the death of the wicked is the beginning of torments endless and remediless. Q. What Conclusions may be drawn from hence? A. 1. Satan and sinne are the greatest evils. Satan is that evil One that imagineth evil, nothing but evil, all manner of evil, and that continually without ceasing. Sinne is a shamefull evil, giving denomination unto all things that are truly evil, causing them to be called evil: the world is therefore called evil, because it is a sinfull world: men are called evil men, because they be sinfull men.2 Tim. 3.13. Mat. 13. And because the Devil exceedeth all other in sin, he is called the the evil one. Goodness is conformable to God the Author and Fountain of all good: but sinne is repugnant to the will of God, and so the greatest evil. Nor is it only evil in it self, but the cause of all evils that any creature is subject unto: for sinne brought man under the curse, and will hold him under it, except the mercy of God, through the death of Christ, do deliver him.
2. He that watcheth continually, striveth to grow in grace, nourisheth the motions of Gods Spirit, fighteth with good courage, and denying his own strength flyeth unto the Lord for help, shall be mightily supported against evil. He that doth these things shall never fall. The godly,2 Pet. 1.10. as may be observed in them that were foiled grievously, did fall, when they neglected their watch, not when they were most strongly assailed. The reasons ordinarily why the godly are grosly overtaken, are; either they make not resistance at the first, but are prevented by the temptation before they be prepared to withstand it, or being weary of resistance, they cast away their weapons. 3. In all evils and calamities God is the chief refuge of a Christian: the Saints acknowledg him to be the only Authour of all good, and their sole De∣liverer; the power that is in any means to help or heal, they know to be of him, and that they profit as it pleaseth him, but not otherwise. God deliver∣eth out of evil many waies. First, When he stoppeth calamities hanging over our heads, that they shall not fall upon us; as Jacob was delivered from his enemies, whom the slaughter of the Sichemits had stirred up against him.Gen. 3.. Se∣condly, When being brought into great danger, he doth preserve them safe and sound; as Daniel in the Lyons den, and his three Companions in the fiery fur∣nace. Thirdly, The comfort that God gives to his servants when they are op∣pressed with evils, is to them instead of deliverance.Psal. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Fourthly, When he turns the temptation to our good, and makes what is evil in it self to become beneficial. We must therefore learn to yeeld obedience, and bid our God smell a sacrifice for the bitterest things we taste, so farre as they are his disposition; taking shame to our selves in them, as they are the fruits of folly. 4. No temptation shall be able totally or finally to separate the Saints from God; fot that we are taught to pray agreeable with his will, we are heard in that. Now this were the greatest evil, not only in regard of our seeming, or appearance to us, but of the matter it self. 5. The faithfull must live in hope and assured confidence to be delivered from all evils, though not in this life, wherein they have received but the first fruits of the Spirit, yet in the life to come, when they shall be replenished with ful∣ness of the Spirit. For that cause our most bountfll Father hath commanded us to beg deliverance, that in him we might have hope to obtain what we ask. The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth them,Psal. 34.17. and delivereth them out of all their troubles.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Confirmation, viz. Thine is the Kingdom, &c. The mean∣ing of these words; And the Conclusions that may be drawn from thence. Question: WHich is the Confirmation? A. For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever and ever▪ Which words, though not repeated by St Luke, nor interpre∣ted by some of the Antients, are yet expresly mentioned by St Matthew; and interpreted by them that followed the Greek authenticall Co∣pies; and therefore causelesly and without warrant omitted by the Church of Rome,Rhem. Pref. in New Testa- and wickedly charged to be a superfluity. Q. What is the meaning of these words? 1 Chro. 29.11. 2 King. 19.15. Gen. 14.19. & 17.1.A. 1. Kingdom signifieth Gods absolute sovereignty over all things, to whom only it pertaineth of right to forgive and to give at his pleasure. Or rather it noteth the special sovereignty of God over his select and peculiar people, whereby he doth guard and protect them for the glory of his Name, and their eternal happiness. 2. Power signifyeth that All sufficiency in God, whereby he is able to do all things according to the good pleasure of his will.Luk. 1.37. Psal. 115.3. Many have King∣dom, so that it pertains to them to help their Subjects, but want power. But the Lord hath all power of himself, and there is no power but of him. 3. Glory is that high estimation, honour and praise which is due to God for his infinite goodness and surpassing excellency.Psal. 29.2. Psal. 96.7. Luk. 2.14. Dan. 2.37. Jud. vers. 8. Psal. 82.6. & 2.11. Rom 13.1. Prov. 8.15. Job 33.23. 1 Tim. 1.17. d. vers. 25. Jam. 1.17. Psal. 145.13. Isa 41.4. 1 Tim. 1.17. Rev. 1.4. Rv. 3 7. Eph. 3.20. Psal. 35.27. Psal. 119.49. Gen. 14.19. Psal. 24.1, 3. Dan. 4.34, 35. Psal. 50.2. 1 Tim. 6.15. Psal. 16.2, 28 & 103.19. & 145.13. 4. When we say thine, and for ever, we exclude all creatures from fel∣lowship with God, in these attributes: because howsoever Kingdom, Power and Glory are communicated unto some creatures (namely Princes, as Gods Instruments and Vice-gerents:) yet God alone claimeth them originally, of himself, absolutely without dependance or controll; eternally without be∣ginning or end. The Kingdom doth now and ever shall belong unto him; He is now and shall for ever be able to help them; He hath now and shall for evermore have glory and praise ascribed unto him. Q. How is this a close of Confirmation to our requests? A. Because we do not only in general ascribe Kingdom, Power and Glory unto God, as his due, but also with respect unto our Prayers, and suits; believing and professing that he, as King of Heaven and earth, hath Authority to dispose of all his Treasures: as Omnipotent is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think: Finally, as the God of Glory is interessed in the welfare of his Servants, for the maintaining of the honour of his Name, and truth of his Promises. The Reasons, why we come petitioning to our heavenly Father, contained in these words, are three. The first taken from the Sovereignty of God, who is the right owner, the Supream and absolute ruler over all things in Heaven and earth: there∣fore all blessings are to be craved at his hands, for of right it belongs to him to bestow them upon us. Or it may be drawn from the special
Sovereignty of God over his people, thus;1 Thes. 2.12. Deut. 30.6. & 31.6. Exo. 2.24. Psal. 46.11. Psal. 29.10, 11 Psal. 84.3, 8. Psal. 70.5. Psal. 2 9, 10, 11, 12. It is the Office of Kings to hear, defend and protect their Subjects against all their enemies. Now therefore, O God, sith thou art our King, most rich in goodness, more powerfull than all our enemies, we pray thee be present with us, for we are thy Subjects, and under thy defence we shall be safe. The Bles∣sings we ask are the benefits of thy Kingdom, which we have not of our selves, nor by any means of our own can obtain: therefore according to thy Commandement, who hast charced us to ask, and thy promise to hear the Prayers of thy poor people, we direct our supplications unto thee: for whither should Subjects fly but to their King. Thou hast institu∣ted thy Kingdom, because thou wilt distribute blessings temporal and spiri∣tual in it, thou hast commanded them to be asked in thy Kingdom, and promised to hear the request of thy Subjects. Thus faith sheweth in these words, that she is certain of the good will of God towards us, and doth profess that she doth rely upon the sole grace of God in Jesus Christ, not up∣on any dignity or merit in our selves. The second is taken from the power of God, who is able to do whatsoever he will, and will do whatsoever shall make for the glory of his Name, and the good of his people: who hath in his hand and power the things we ask,Isa. 55.11. Jer. 44.29. Psal. 135.6. Apoc. 9.6. Mat, 7.7. & 8.2. 2 Chro. 20.6. Jer. 16.19. Psal. 89.8. Job 9.19. 2 Cor. 1.20. Zech 8.6. Gen. 18.14. er 32.27. Luk .37. Eph. 3.20. Col. 3.17. Phil. 4.20. 1 Tim. 1.17. 2 Tim. 4.18. 1 Pet. 4.11. Psal. 79.11. Psal. 50.15. & 30.11, 12. Mat 7.11. Luk 11.13. 1 Sam. 12.22, 23. and can solidly and savingly give them to whom he will: who can give what∣soever we stand in need of, and strengthen us against any sinne, and unto any duty, though the power of Satan, the world and the flesh oppose it self. Hear, O God, and give us what we ask because thou art able, and thou only art able. This power joyned with will, doth reside in thee only; for of our selves we are able to do nothing, we have no strength but from thee. The third from his Glory; who ought to be glorified by us in all things, gaineth glory by hearing the Prayers of his people, and for his glory sake will not deny them any thing that shall be good. From thee the only true God and absolute Sovereign, we ask and expect all good things: for thou art the Author and Fountain of all goodness: Hear us for the glory of thy Name, and for thy glory vouchsafe to give the things we crave: for what we ask doth serve to thy glry. Q. What Conclusions may be gathered from these words? A. 1. None is to be invocated or called on, but he who hath the King∣dom, Power and Glory. For as one lacking this or that in a house which is the Masters, cometh in by the back door, if he pray a servant to give it whose it is not, who hath no power so to do, &c. So if we seek our necessaries temporal and eternal, at Angels or Saints, which are servants to God, who have no power to do any thing farther then beckned unto by God, we take a wrong way to the wood. But the Papists think all is made whole while they do call upon Saints or Angels, not as the principal Authors of the things they ask, but as secondary Patrones, who under God work these things for us. To which is answered, that not only to do religious adoration in any kind to them, as the principal and chief power, is sinne: but also to call on them, or trust in them, as being some Secondary Divine powers, al∣though inferiour to God. The Angel-worship among the Colossians, did not differ thus much, as if they had been the chief Divine powers; and yet is condemned. Nebuchadnezar did not enact that he should be worshiped as the highest God; yet because he would have honour in some degree Di∣vine, Daniel did decline it as flat Idolatry. Again, this distinction with which they would salve their fact, may be turned upon them, as making against themselves. For therefore these may not be called upon, neither
may be trusted to religiously, because they are secondary workers of things under God who is the principal agent. 2. We see what may confirm us in the assured hope to receive our re∣quests, namely, to think that God hath the Kingdom over us, that he is powerful and glorious. There is a respect between Kings and their peo∣ple, which bindeth them mutually one to another. Hence it is that we promise our selves protection, maintenance in our life, the benefit of sub∣jects from them, because we are their subjects, and they have the King∣dom over us. That God who by reason of this obligeth sinful men to seek the weal of all their people, because they have received a Kingdom over them; himself will not fail on the same ground, to procure all good to us, who live under the regiment of his Grace. Yet because it it not enough that God should have the regal authority over us, unless he had the power also of working all things for our weal, therefore this is joyn∣ed,Psal. 62.11. Dan. 2.20. Nah. 1.2, 3. Rom. 11.23. & 14.4. 1 Pet. 5.6. Is. 51.12. & 40.28. 1 Io. 4.4. 2 Tim. 1.12. Ph. 3.21. Thine is the power What were subjects the better to be under a gracious Prince, but weak, having as short hands to do them good, as a large heart to wish it them: So should it fare betwixt God and us, if he were not Almighty, able to subdue all things to himself; our faith were shaken. For we cannot expect the treading of Satan under our feet, the quickening of us in our souls to every good work, the justifying, the protecting of us; we cannot expect these things from one who hath not all power. Thirdly, Had God the right to help us, had he the power also: yet were it a thing that made not for his glory, respected not the advancement of his honour, our belief might waver: which now it need not do,Ps. 25.11. & 43.11, 12. it being Gods honour to perform all good things for his chosen. Honor is with men the spur of actions: have men right and pow∣er to effect this or that, notwithstanding if it conduce not to their honor and glory, they will not move a finger to it. But now there is nothing that wanteth to our assurance, while we know that we are such to whom God hath right; such for whom he hath all power; such whom to pro∣tect and bless with all things spiritual and corporal, is his great glory. The case standing thus, how can we doubt of receiving the things we ask at his hand in the Name of his Christ. 3. The godly must put up their Petitions with strong and good reasons. Thus did Jacob when he prayed to be delivered out of the hands of his brother Esau. In like manner David,Gen. 32.9, 10, 11, 12. 1 King. 8.23, 24, 25. Io. 17.2.3. Solomon, and Christ himself. For reasons in prayer do much confirm faith, and stir up fervency and good affection. When a man can assure himself that he hath good warrant to ask, and hope to obtain, he will break through all the discouragements which the divel or a mans own heart can cast in to hinder him. Good reason to the affections, is as oyle to the fire, that caus∣eth it to burn vehemently. And though God need no reasons either to inform him of their need, or to move him to supply their need: yet he doth delight that his children should yeeld reasons of their requests, because therein they shew proof of their faith, knowledge, confidence, and other graces, which is much pleasing to their Father. 4. We learn in prayer to abase our selves before God, and utterly to deny all that is in us. Kingdom power and glory is all his, not ours: we are no better then rebels and traitors to him: if we have any good thing, it is from him, e∣ven the grace whereby we pray. And he that in prayer will not confess this, shall no more be heard, then the insolent begger that will not acknowledge his want.
5. In prayer we must be perswaded of two things, and build upon them, Gods power, and will: His power in that he is able; his will, in that he is care∣ful to perform our requests. These are signified by Kingdom, power and glory: for all the promises of God in Christ, are yea, and Amen,2 Cor. 1.20. unto the glory of God? 6. Whatsoever we ask, we must refer it to Gods glory: This is the first thing we are taught to crave, and the last we are to perform, Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, I will do it, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.Psal. 115.1. Io. 14.13. Ier. 33.9. It makes for the praise of Gods mercy, power and goodness, that he doth vouchsafe to hear our prayers, and grant us those things that we ask according to his promise and commandment, as Citizens of his kingdom: And we begge that God of his meer grace in Jesus Christ, to whom pertaineth the Kingdom, would be pleased graciously to give what we ask, for the manifestation of his power, glory, and great goodness. As we believe, that God for the glory of his truth, grace and power, will grant our desires: so we promise to refer the things which we obtain by prayer to the glory of his Name. This is the end for which all benefits are to be craved, and to this end all blessings ob∣tained must be referred and used. All thy works praise thee,Ps. 145.10, 11. O Lord and thy Saints blss thee. They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom; and talk of thy power. 7. When we are to perform any work, as to do service to God, we must believe that God will inable us to do it, and must ask power at Gods hand that we may be strengthened to walk uprightly before him, and do our duties. 8. If we would have a good report and praise among men, we must a∣bove all things seek Gods glory, not regarding so much our own. If he give praise among men, give him thanks, if not, be content, because all glory is his.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Conclusion, viz. Amen. The inferences that may be drawn from thence. The principal use of the Lords Prayer; And why we are neither to refuse, nor confine our selves to this form. Question: WHat is the Conclusion in the Lords prayer? A. Amen: whereby is expressed the right disposition of the mind and heart of a man when he prayeth, which is indeed the very life of prayer. The word Amen is Hebrew, and remaineth for the most part untranslated in Greek, Latin, English, and all other Languages. Q. How is Amen used in Scripture? Rev. 3.14. 2 Cor. 1.20.A. 1. Amen is sometimes a title of Christ, because of his faithfulness and truth in performing all promises. 2. In the beginning of sentences it is an asseveration or corroboration of speech, and confirmation of that we are about to say, and that very ve∣hement if it be doubled. Some take it for an oath, but it is onely a confirmation of what we speak;Io. 3.11. & 6. Mat. 24.47. Luk. 12.44. Mat. 5.18. Mar. 3.28. Jo. 14.12. & 16.20. Mat. 16.28. Luk. 9.27. Mar. 12.43. Luk. 21.3. Luk. 4.24.25. Jo. 16.7. Mat. 23.36. Luk. 11.51. Apo. 22.20. Iam. 5.12. Mat. 5.37. Full. miscell. l. 1. c. 2. Maldonat. in Mat. 5.18. to which our English word verily, in∣deed, or in truth, answereth. This is manifest by sundry places of the Evangelists compared together: for where one hath Amen, another hath surely, truely, or verily; and in one and the same place these words are used one after another as signifying the same thing. Sometimes we shall finde Amen and yea used promiscuously, as words of the same significa∣tion. The Arabicke Interpreters never retain the word Amen, so oft used by our Saviour, and kept by other Interpreters, but render it by a word that signifies surely, assuredly, as a proper and clear interpretation. Aquila (as it is noted in the Romane Edition of the Seventy Interpreters) doth translate it credibly, faithfully, firmely; or as it is found in some Manuscripts, it is firm or stable. 3. When it is added in the end of blessings and prayers, the repetition of the promises,Num. 5.22. Deut. 27.15. Ps 41.1. Neh. 8.6. Jer. 11.5. & 28 . Rom. 1.25. 1 Cor. 14.16. Apo. 7.12. 1 Chro. 16.36. Apo. 1.7. Rom. 16.27. 2 Tim. 4.18. 1 King 1 36. Apo. 19.4. Deut. 27.15. Psal. 41.13. 1 King. 1.36. Num 5.2. Ier. 21.5. Ier. 28.6. Neh. 8.6. 1 Par. 16.36. Rom. 9.5. or imprecations, it implyeth both a desire of the thing so to be, and confidence that so it shall be. That Amen is a wish or de∣sire of what was spoken before, it appeareth out of many places of Scri∣pture; as by the answer of Benaiah to David, when he had appointed Solomon to be ruler over Israel and over Judah, saying Amen, which he doth explain by these words, The Lord God of the Lord my King say so too. The Seventy Interpreters do render this word, sometimes Let it be, or God grant; sometimes they translate it, truely; and sometimes they keep the Hebrew particle Amen. That Amen sheweth a perswasion of faith touching the thing before spoken of, is evident by that of Paul, where having said of Christ, that he was over all, God blessed for ever, he addeth Amen, that is, he was assuredly perswaded that it was so. 1. So that Amen in this place, doth presuppose the under∣standing
of what was asked; for every man must say Amen to his own prayers, as well as to the Petitions that others do make for him: But a man cannot say Amen to his prayers, if he know not what is said. 2. It is an asseveration,1 Cor. 14.16. Neh. 8.6. Ps. 106.46. 1 Cor. 13.13. wish or expressing of earnest longing to obtain all the things in this prayer above named. 2. It is a profession of our faith and confidence, that we trust in God through Jesus Christ, that it shall be un∣to us according to his promise and our prayer. True it is, we thus flie unto thee, O Lord, be it according to our desire and faith in thee. Q. What Conclusions may be drawn from hence? A. 1. Christ teaching us to end our prayers with Amen, doth thereby admonish us to pray with understanding, truth, intention of heart, and fervour; as also to believe that God presently heareth, and will certain∣ly in due time grant our requests: so that ignorance, sloth, wandring, coldness, wavering and distrust are to be striven against. Lord I believe,Psal. 47.7. Psal. 17.1. Ier. 29.13. Ps. 119.10. Isa. 37.17. Dan. 9.19. Mar. 1.24. Iam. 5.16. 1 Tim 2.8. Iam. 1.6. 1 Io. 5.14. Mar. 9.24. Psal. 42.5. help my unbelief. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, why art thou dis∣quieted within me. 2. We see what an excellent work prayer is: in which two most excellent graces of a Christian man be shewed forth, hungring after mercy, and faith whereby we believe the obtaining of it. And when in praying men speak to God, the Ma∣jesty of God is after a manner that cannot be expressed, nearer to him that prayeth then to others, whom he doth adorn with singular gifts: that they who pray holily unto God, may be compared unto them who do come unto the fire: who are made hot if they freez, and are made to boyle, if they be warm: for their minde is inflamed to the glory of God, their soul is enlightened in an admirable manner, and they are enriched with divine gifts. The more earnestly that men pray, the more comfort∣ably do they feel how sweet the Lord is, and how blessed are all they that hope in him: and being compassed about with that clear light, they commit themselves to the bounty of God, nothing doubting, but that embracing them with his fatherly and admirable charity, he will abundant∣ly supply unto them all things necessary to life and salvation. By hope and confidence it hath come to pass, that the Saints of God beginning to pray in anguish and trouble have ended in joy and comfort. It is admir∣able how the prayers of David have excelled in this kind: He beginneth often with complaint, Lord how are mine enemies encreased that trouble me: he concludeth in triumph, I will not be afraid of ten thousand,Ps. 3.1. Ps. 4.. Ps. 6.1, . that shall beset themselves against me round about; I will lay me down in peace, and rest in safety. Depart from me ye wicked, for the Lord hath heard the voice of my prayer. Q. What is the principal use of the Lords prayer? A. The principal use of the Lords prayer, is to direct Gods Church in making their prayers in all places, at all times, and upon all occasions though their prayers should be innumerable. In the using of it there be three things required. The first is the knowledge of the Lords prayer, and all the parts there∣of. He that would pray by it, must understand the meaning of it, the wants therein to be bewailed, and the graces to be desired. 2. There is in the second place required thus much skill, that he be able to refer every want and grace to one of the Petitions; for example, feel∣ing in himself pride of heart, he must be able to say this is a want in the
first Petition: and feeling a rebellion and slowness in doing Gods Com∣mandments, he must be able to say, this is a sin to be prayed against in the third Petition. Thus every want he must refer to his proper head. Again, he must refer every grace to be desired to one of the Petitions: as strength in temptation to the sixth; affiance in Gods providence to the fourth; patience in adversity to the third; sence of comfort in the pardon of sin to the fifth; knowledge of God to the first. In the third place he must before he pray, consider what be his wants and imperfections which most trouble him, as also the graces which he would obtain: then for helping of his memory, he must go to the Petiti∣ons, and he must set those things first in his minde, which concern the first Petition; those which concern the second Petition; must have the se∣cond place in his mind; and so he must proceed in order, as he shall have occasion. Thus a man keeping in minde the order of the Petitions as they stand, shall be able by referring every grace and want to his pro∣per head, to make distinct prayer, and to vary it as time, place, and o∣ther occasions shall move him. But it is not necessary that we follow all the Petitions in conceiving a prayer: but onely those which do principal∣ly belong to the time, place, and occasion. Again a Christian man may make an excellent confession of his sins by this prayer:Col. 1.9, 10, 11 if he shall, keeping the order of the Petitions, confess and bewail the sins which every Peti∣tion requires us to pray against. And it serves to furnish us with matter of thankfulness, thus: let a man remember all the graces which he hath re∣ceived from God, let him then refer them to the Petitions and give thanks to God after the order of them, turning every Petition into a thansgiv∣ing. Q. This form being so absolute, what need we use any other words in praying? A. Because as to refuse this form savoureth of a proud contempt of Christs ordinance, so to confine our selves to these words alone, argueth extream idleness in this duty, wherein variety of words is required for the pouring out of our souls before the Lord,Hos. 14.3. and oftentimes, according to the occasion, some one Petition is more then the rest, to be insisted on and importuned.Mat. 26.41. Wherefore our blessed Saviour hath commended this form unto us, as an excellent copy or lesson, to be both repeated, and as we may,Jo. 17.1. Act. 4.24. imitated, or at the least aimed at, by us his Scholars; for which cause, both he himself, and his Apostles, are recorded to have pray∣ed in other words, which yet may be referred to these. Finally, The liberty, which the Lord affordeth us, is not to be abridg∣ed, or despised, who admitteth all languages, words, and forms, agree∣able to this pattern, whether read, rehearsed by heart, or presently con∣ceived;2 Chro. 29.30. Ps. 90.1. Num. 10.35. 1 Cor. 14.15. so be it, we pray both with spirit and affection, and with under∣standing also. FINIS.
Balls Power of Godliness.
