C3376 21.h.1[163] R214924 R226626 99884455 188317
HONI · SOIT · QVI · MAL · Y · PENSE DIEV · ET · MON · DROIT By the King. A PROCLAMATION FOR Prohibiting the Imbezlement of His Majesties Stores for Shipping. CHARLES R. WHereas notwithstanding divers good Laws made and Enacted for the preventing of the Stealth and Imbezlement of His Maje∣sties Stores of War, and for the punishing the same, His Maje∣stie findes by experience, that whether by the negligence or un∣faithfulness of His Officers, or through difficulty of the work, those Frauds, Stealths, and Imbezlements are not prevented (as they ought) but are daily practised, particularly in Stores relating to the Navy, not only to the great prejudice of His Ma∣jesties Service, but likewise to the hindrance and discourage∣ment of such Tradesmen, whose profession and livelihood it is to make and sell such Stores and Commodities to Merchants Ships; who finding a cheaper way for furnishing their Ships, by buying the Stores pur∣loyned and imbezled, as aforesaid, decline the lawful sellers of such like Provisions. For the preventing these and the like abuses for the future, His Majesty is pleased hereby strictly to Charge and Command all His Officers, not only to endeavour the discovery of the said abuses (as aforesaid) but also strictly to prosecute the persons offending, according to the rigour of the Laws in such cases provided. And for the more easie discovery of the same, and to the end the receivers of such stolen Goods may not pretend ignorance, His Ma∣jesty doth hereby Command, Publish and Declare, That all the Rope-makers who shall hereafter work in His Majesties Yards, or shall elsewhere make any sort of Cordage for the use of His Majesties Navy, shall make the same in manner following (viz.) All Cables, Hawsers, and other Cordage of the larger sort, shall be wrought with one small hair-line through every strand thereof; all Coyls of smaller Cordage shall have two strands compos∣ed of even threads, and the third shall have one odd thread. The Sail-makers, working for the use of His Majesties Navy, shall table the Sail with white Twine, whereby they shall be distinguished from such as are made for the use of Merchants Ships. And for pre∣venting the abuse which hath been of late practised concerning Flags, Pendents, and other Ornaments, His Majesty doth hereby strictly prohibit and forbid the use of His Majesties Colours in Merchants Ships, and doth Authorize and Command all Commanders and Officers of any His Majesties Ships of War, not only to take from Merchants Ships all such Colours, but likewise to seize the Commander of such Merchant-Ships wherein after the First day of April next they shall be used, and to bring them to condign punishment. And His Majesty hath appointed that the Flags, Iacks and Pendents of His Majesties Ships shall henceforth be made of Red, White, and Blew, to the end the Offenders herein may not pretend ignorance or mistake. And His Majesty doth further Command, That on all other Stores, where it may be done without prejudice to the said Stores, or Charge to His Majesty, as Nails, Spikes, and other the like Stores, That the broad Arrow be put on some part of the same, whether by Stamp, Brand, or other way, as shall be par∣ticularly directed by the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Majesties Navy, to whom the care thereof is committed. And His Majesty doth hereby forbid all Artificers to make any Stores or Provisions so marked, except for the use of His Majesties Navy; and doth likewise hereby Command all His Majesties loving Subjects, that they forbear to buy or receive from any person whatsoever, any Stores marked as aforesaid (without particu∣lar order and leave from the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Majesties Na∣vy) upon pain of being proceeded against as Receivers of stolen Goods, and as Imbezlers of His Majesties Stores. And to the end that His Majesties Officers may not be negligent in the performance hereof, or for any indirect considerations omit to place and affix the marks and distinctions, as is above, or shall be hereafter directed, His Majesty doth recom∣mend it to the care of His most dear and entirely beloved Brother, James Duke of York, His High Admiral, that such Officers or Workmen who shall neglect or disobey the Directi∣ons herein contained, be discharged from their Imployments, and be further punished as their offence shall deserve. And for the better discovery of such as shall notwithstanding this His Majesties Proclamation, Imbezle any of His Stores as aforesaid, His Majesty is pleased to Declare, That any person who shall discover to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Navy, any Cordage, Iron-work, or other Stores imbezled or pur∣loyned out of His Majesties Yards, Stores, or Ships, shall receive as a reward and encou∣ragement for such his discovery, one full third part of the value of such Stores so discover∣ed; Provided that he likewise discover either the Imbezler and Purloyner of them, or at least the Receiver of the same. And for the better and more certain publishing the Marks which are not herein particularly specified, His Majesty doth hereby enjoyn the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Majesties Navy, with all convenient speed to cause Patterns of them to be sent to Shipwrights and Ironmongers Hall respectively, there to remain for the in∣formation of such as are concerned in the knowledge thereof. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Nineteenth day of November 1661. in the Thirteenth year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, 1661. At the KING'S Printing-House in Black-Friers.
