P2689aa [ocn]625256555 211306
A POEM ON THE CONVENTION Assembled at Westminster, Jan. 22. 1688/9. Ultima Cumaei venit jam Carminis Aetas, Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur Ordo, Jam redit & Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna, Jam nova Progenies caelo demittitur alto— Aspice Venturo laetentur ut Omnia saeclo. Virg. Licensed, January 21. 1688/9. YOU British Bards, who Britain's Glory Wrote As warmly as our British Heroes Fought, Be still assisting to your Country's Fame, And in my daring Song revive your Flame. Now I behold our bright Assembly plac't, With Noble Birth and Nobler Virtues grac't, Transported with a Vision Sublime, My thoughts recall the Pride of Infant-Time; I think how the Immortal Senate sate, In New-created Heavens Transcendent State, The Stars yet wondring at each others Fires, And all the Sons of Glory rank't in Quires. As various Streams from distant Regions fall, And in the Deep their great Convention Call, Transmitting thence supplies to every Source, And fail not to maintain their rowling Course; So from our bright Assembly here combin'd, Each Province do's new Life, new Vigour, find; Remotest Places are with Plenty Crown'd, And in our spacious Isle no Barren Spot is found. Justice as plenteous as our Thames shall flow, In Peace the Sailer Steer and Peasant Plow.
Gasping for Liberty we lately lay, Our Laws, our very Consciences, a Prey, To Savage Priests and Arbitrary Sway. While Vermine to the Palace did resort, And Mushroom-Favourites profan'd our Court, Whose dark Cabal a Pregnant Monster seem'd, And ev'ry Hour with Britain's Ruine Teem'd. While thus upon Destructions Brink we trod, What Mortal Aid, or what Descending God, Dispels our Fears? — Behold! the great NASSAW Shines forth, and makes the threatning Storm withdraw. Illustrious Prince! Among the numerous Vows Of Pious Hearts that your just Cause Espouse, Forgive a Zeal, that by no flatt'ry fir'd, No Malice Arm'd, or Factious Rage inspir'd, Instructs an English Muse this harmless way, Her's and the Nation's Wishes to Convey. Nor those alone she brings you, for no less Than Europe's Fate depends on your success. The Thames, the Mase, the Tagus and the Rhine (Whose distant Streams their Common Intr'ests join,) In suppliant manner from your Arms Implore That lasting Peace you only can Restore. Urge then your Fortune, On, brave Sir, Advance Your Sword into the Heart of Trembling France, And to their Flatter'd Monarch make it clear, How ill his Falshood serves to prop his Fear. Then shall the British and the Belgick Fleet No Rival in their Common Mistress meet, But with United Force by Sea and Land, The Trade and Empire of the World Command. These Benefits and greater, we believe, Europe shall from your Conqu'ring Hand receive, For, faithless France entirely to subdue, Fate has reserv'd for Britain and for you. FINIS. Printed by Edw. Jones. MDCLXXXIX.
