S2207 [ocn]489265460 208715
Seasonable ADVICE and necessary CAƲTIONS to the Citizens and Livery-Men of London, touch∣ing the Election of a Lord-Mayor for the Year en∣suing. 1. IT is not thought convenient that any Person who was for Surrendring the City-Charter, and would blindly follow the Dictates of a Popish Prince, ought to be chosen Chief Magi∣strate of this famous City. 2. Whether an easy and unsteady Person, that has been several times imposed on already, to act contrary to the known Rights of the Citizens, in two several Ward-motes in the Ward of Bishops-gate, at ten Years distance from each other, (viz. before the City-Rights were invaded, and the first Year after their Rights were restored) be a fit Person to be chosen Lord-Mayor? 3. Whether Sir Jonathan R—d, whom the Jacobites and Non-Swearers are so zealous to promote to the Chair, in full Assurance from their constant Familiarity with him, that they shall manage him as they please, to the prejudice of the Present Government, be a fit Person to be elected Lord-Mayor in so critical a time as this is? 4. Whether he that was a Steward to the Tory-Apprentices Feast, which was managed by the late Lord Jefferies and Sir Roger L' Estrange, in order to corrupt the Apprentices of this City, and to animate them against their Masters, be a fit Person to be intrusted with the Chief Magistracy? 5. Whether it may not be reasonably supposed that Sir Jonathan R—d was for Surrendring the Charter of London; because af∣ter Judgment was entred against it, eight worthy Aldermen, who would not comply therewith, were turn'd out, and seventeen or eighteen kept in by Commission during pleasure, of which number Sir Jonathan was one? 6. Whether Sir Jonathan R—d, who came from the Sessions-House to the King's-head Tavern in Leaden-hall-street, Anno 1683, and with great Joy told some Gentlemen there, that the Jury had con∣victed my Lord Russel, and that they had done like honest Men, be a fit Person to be Lord-Mayor of this City? 7. Whether Sir Jonathan R—d, who recommended a Jacobite Par∣son to preach at Tunbridg-Wells to the Nobility and Gentry, in the Year 1692, who omitted praying for King William and Queen Mary,
(for which he there received a severe Reprimand from a Person in great Authority,) whether it may not reasonably be supposed Sir Jonathan to be a Jacobite, who preferred such a Man to preach before such an Audi∣tory? Likewise his Son, Sir Gemmitt R—d, pays double Taxes for not taking the Oaths to their Present Majesties, and keeps one Hart a Non-swearing Parson for his Chaplain, who quitted two Preferments ra∣ther than he would comply to take the said Oaths. 8. Sir Jonathan R—d lately going from the Jacobite Rendezvous at Bath, to Bristol-Fair, and being in company of Mr. John Bub, the late Sheriff and others, began K. James's Health; and whether this may recom∣mend him to be chosen Lord-Mayor by all such as would be thought Friends to the Present Government? 9. Sir Jonathan R—d keeping near an hundred Pounds of Dissenters Money, due to the Crown, in his hands for above ten Years, till Captain Henry Baker, who with others was commission'd by the King to enquire into all Frauds of that kind, discovering of it, obliged him to pay it; whe∣ther it was kept for the use of the Orphans, or rather for maintaining Ja∣cobite Parsons, is left to the Consideration of all good Citizens. 10. And now consider whether so weak and easy a Man as Sir Jona∣than R—d is by his very Friends esteemed to be, [Witness Mrs. James's Paper on the Election for last Michaelmas, who is a great Stickler for Sir Jonathan; and did not question but God would give him Wisdom when he came into the Chair, thereby implying that he had it not be∣fore,] and who is solely under the Conduct and Government of the late Deputy L—m, and the rest of the Jacobite Party, be a fit Person to be chosen Lord Mayor for the Year ensuing. Now, Gentlemen, consider the Character of the above-mentioned Person in these few things (of many) offered to your serious Considera∣tion. And it is also evident that the present Cabals of the Jacobites are to use their utmost Endeavours to carry him for Lord-Mayor of this Ci∣ty; that so if any Accident or Difficulty should happen to the present Government, (which God prevent) he may be ready to assist them in re∣storing the late abdicated King James. Gentlemen, We hope you will always esteem and have a due Regard to those Citizens who have approved themselves faithful, and shewed themselves zealous for the maintaining of the Rights and Liberties of this famous City in the worst of Times, and are of known Loyalty and Affection to their present Majesties; among the Number of which none are thought more fit to be recommended to your present Choice than Sir William Ashhurst and Sir John H, Knights and Aldermen. THE END.
