10817 S115035 99850254 15443
A RELATION OF A NEW LEAGƲE MADE BY THE EMPEROVR of GERMANY, with other Princes, Potentates and States Catholicke, against the Enemies of the Roman CATHOLICK-RELIGION, WITH The Names of those Princes. AS ALSO, The true Numbers, both of Horse and Foot, which euery one of them of∣fereth to set forward so great a Designe. Vnto which is added the Copie of a Letter sent by the King of Spaine to Pope VRBINE the 8. Printed according the Spanish Copie set forth at Madrill. Ʋnto all which is likewise added: The Discouerie of a New Spanish Armado, threatning with Fire and Sword to Inuade ENGLAND. Printed for Mercurius Britannicus. 1626.
A RELATION OF THE League, made by the Emperour of Germany, with other Princes, Potentates, and States Catholicke, against the Enemies of the Roman-Catho∣lick-Religion. A Noueltie of so high a nature as this is, (in which all Christendome, or the greatest part of it, standeth interessed) should not Present it selfe to the world, without the Noble at∣tendance of Probabilitie and Possibilitie, the one to confirme the Truth, the other to enable the Action: Both which (to cleere vnderstanding eyes) are Wayters vpon this. For if wee consider the Hate which the Spaniard and his Colleagues beare to our Kingdome; It is a likelihood sufficient to
perswades vs, that he is preparing Forces: and if we looke, but vpon his Indian trea∣sure, his Commaund ouer seuerall King∣domes, his Armies in seuerall places, and the desires which his Subiects haue to set footing in our Countrey, wee may finde strong arguments of his Possibilitie, to begin an Inuasion, or any attempt else. But because our Nation, are not apt to feare any Spanish danger (how lowd soe∣uer it speakes) vnlesse they heare it roa∣ring at their doores; It will bee no great losse of time, to listen to this short Storie, which the Spaniard relates (to this pur∣pose) in his owne haughty Language. The Spanish Relation. BLessings from Heauen, and good wi∣shes on Earth, be euer attendant on All those, who are zealous in the seruice of GOD, and the Christian Common-good: as also, on this League Vnited together by the Emperor, and celebrated with all the Rites in Brussels before the most Excel∣lent
INFANTA, both in regard of the Au∣thoritie, which her Altezza (or Highnes) hath in that Citie, as also, for the Scitua∣tion, honor, and commodity of the place. And albeit, I am well assured, that his Imperiall Maiestie, hath with much deli∣beration and wisdome, made tryall in his Iudgement of all those things which are comprehended in this League; yet not∣withstanding (as well to satisfie my selfe as to discharge the duty belonging to my place, which I hold vnder his Catholicke Maiestie) I will briefly set downe my knowledge in this great Businesse, be∣cause happily, some may gather the fruit of experience from it, as the Bee suckes Honey out of a bitter Flower. First then, it hath bin held a matter of great importance, that in this League should bee comprehended, his Holinesse, the Maiesties Imperiall and Catholicke, all the Princes of the House of Austria, the Catholick Electors, all the chiefe Princes, Potentates, and Republickes Catholicke, in Germany, Italy, Flaunders, &c. well affe∣cted to the Sea Apostolicall, and to their
Maiesties. Herein shewing a desire to sow Peace, Quietnesse and Iustice, amongst all those States, ouer which God hath placed them, thereby to establish a new League euerlasting and hereditary, as Friends to Friends, and Enemies to Enemies, with Penall clauses and other necessary Parti∣culars. Secondly, that this League should bee published and declared by Ambassadors or Agents, (Ordinary or Extraordinary) to all other Kings, Princes, Potentates, and States, which are Friends, albeit not well affected, or being of another Religi∣on. For this must worke one of these two Things; either they must send to this Diet (or Assembly) and enter as the rest doe into the League vpon the same Con∣ditions; or if they refuse so to doe, then are they to bee excluded and barred from any benefit which by the League may a∣rise, and so bee branded with the Notes, markes, and blemishes of Obstinacy, and euill Hearts, they of the League hereby hauing just cause giuen them, to beware of such people.
Concerning Trade and Commerce, be∣twixt those of the League, their Friends, Subiects and Vassals; the same libertie shall bee giuen them which heretofore they haue had without Exception, and without any new Customes, Impositions or other Duties, than those necessary Pay∣ments which must be dispended to fight against Rebels and knowne Enemies. What Occurrent, fact, or difference so∣euer shall happen betweene any of the Colleagued Princes, or any of their Sub∣iects; it shall bee ended and taken vp by the Soueraigne Prince to whom the ac∣knowledgement thereof doth appertaine, or by him, who with consent of the rest of the League, or the major part, shall be held fit to decide it: and what sentence hee sets downe shall peremptorily stand, vpon paine of being Expulsed from the Societie of the League, or to feele the sharpnesse of their Indignation. The Pope, Emperor, euery King, Prince, Potentate, and State, which enters into this League, shall giue the Number of such Forces (Horse and Foot) which wil∣lingly
they intend to furnish; aswell those which they haue already raised, and paide in their owne Kingdomes and Territo∣ries, as of any other Troupes, which they are to raise with all expedition and at their proper Charges, vpon any occasion whatsoeuer, to the due obseruance of the League, which is confederated together for Three speciall ends. 1 The first, to Conserue Peace, Ju∣stice and Amitie, amongst the Col∣leagues, and to Chastise any one that falls off, and doth not accomplish what hee promiseth. 2 The second, to prevent, curbe and bridle any other Prince, (albeit not one of the League) whensoever hee offers to Invade, directly or indirectly, any of the Confederate Princes. 3 Thirdly, to make quicke Warre vpon the Common Enemy, as Rebels, Turkes, Moores, Tartars, &c. Pro∣uided
there bee a generall Consent so to haue it done. Now, to show, that for euery Prince to deliuer vp the Number of all such men, as hee hath already leauyed and payed, (or the greater part of them) can bee to him no danger or losse, but rather a most assured safetie and profit. And it is first to be considered, that none of them can receiue any harme, seeing they haue the like interest whether they maintaine their men within or without their State. Se∣condly, concerning the perill, it is certaine that leauying in their ordinary Garrisons, for the time that may be necessary some expert Commanders, and diuers skilfull Souldiers, which euer any Prince vsed to haue without pay onely for his defence, they cannot therefore runne into any pe∣rill or danger. Now, for the third point which is Safetie, It is plaine, that whensoeuer any Stranger shall attempt to wrong any of the Confederated Princes, who punctu∣ally haue deliuered all or part of such
Forces as by them are leauyed; It is most certaine (and so resolued vpon) that All the rest shall take his part, and defend him by such meanes, as in their best Iudge∣ments shall be held fit. Hereupon it is inferred, that if in the beginning of those troubles and Calami∣ties, which set Germany, Flaunders, Italy, and France on fire, there had beene such another League with a ready and faith∣full Intelligence passing betweene those Christian Princes, which were truely just, and religiously giuen; Then, it had kept the Germanes from Revolting, the Bohe∣mians, Transilvanians, Hollanders, and Pala∣tinate from Rebelling; neither, had the Venetians euer so much as dreamed of an Inuasion to bee made vpon the Empe∣rours Townes; no, nor had the Savoyans and French, put on Armes first against Mantua, and then against Genoa, woun∣ding (in both these times) the Subiects of his Catholicke Maiestie; Neither, had the French and Venetians, spotted their Names with such infamous reproaches, for Tea∣ring from his Holines the Valtoline, which
vpon the Accord, and ingagement of the Christian King himselfe, was deliuered vp in trust to the hands of his Holines: Nay more, those other infinite Insolencies, Sa∣criledges, and Inhumanities (which for modesties sake I bury in silence) had ne∣uer beene so barbarously committed, to the shedding of so much Innocent blood, the losse of so much wealth, and vtter ruine of so much noble Reputation. Great hope therefore there is, that such a number of Christian Princes, entring together into this Holy League, there will follow not onely an amendment of Abu∣ses past, but a preuention of many Euils to come. It being held for certaine, that when this League is fully published and made knowne, all the Opposites against it, shall neuer bee able to beget a second Combination (amongst themselues) of sufficient Power to contest or contend a∣gainst the Fourth part of this.
Here followeth the Number both of the Foot and Horse, (Infantry and Ca∣vallerie) leauyed and set foorth by the vnder-named Princes. THe Pope in regard of the Churches E∣state, doth offer 1000. Horse, and 8000. Foot. The Emperor, in regard of all his States 4000. Horse, and 20000 Foot. The Catholick King of Spaine, in regard of all his Command in Spaine, Italy, and Flanders, 8000. Horse, 20000. Foot. The King of Poland, 2000. Horse, and 4000. Foot. The Archduke Leopold, 500. Horse, and 3000. Foot. The Elector of Colleyne, 500 horse, and 3000 foot. The Elector of Mentz, 500. horse, and 400. foot. The Elector of Trever, 500. horse, and 3000. foot. The Duke of Baviere, 400. horse, and 3000. foot.
The Duke of Saxony (who is a Friend) 400. Horse, and 3000. Foot. The Archbishop of Sarzburg, 300. horse and 1000. foot. The Duke of Newburg, 500. horse, and 2000. foot. The great Duke of Florence, 1000. horse and 3000. foot. The Duke of Parma, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The Duke of Mantua, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The Duke of Modena, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The Duke of Vrbine, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The State of Genoa, 1000. horse, and 4000. foot. The State of Luca, 300. horse, and 1000. foot. The Cantons Catholicke of the Swissers, 2000. Horse. Which in all amount to 22100. Horse, and 87000. Foot: a number sufficient to worke all the Effects before treated. But if at any time, occcasion should call
for a greater Army, euery Prince is to bring in his proportionable number, ac∣cording to the former agreement. So that vpon any just cause, euery Prince must send in his quantity of Artillerie, Munition, & all other things necessary fit∣ting those numbers, which he furnisheth. Then, that his Holinesse, with those Kings and Princes, who are furnished with Gallies, Ships, or other Defences by Sea, shall bee ready with them vpon any occasion offered, according to that Rate to which they binde themselues. Also, that the Princes of the League shall with one consent (aduisedly to be taken) Elect a Generall out of all this assembly, who shall bee a man of Qualitie, Valour, and Experience sufficient. By this meanes, the diuine Maiestie will assist and Crowne this holy Enterprise, It tending only to his glory and the Exalta∣tion of his holy Name; as also, for the ge∣nerall Peace and Concord, of the whole Christian world, and withall to Bridle and Confound all malicious, turbulent, and ill-affected Spirits. Printed at Seuill with Authority, by Simon Fajardo, &c.
The Copie of a Letter from the Catholicke Ma∣iestie of our Lord the King, to our holy Father the Pope, VRBANE the VIII. HOly Father: I receiued your Let∣ters of the 12. of the last Moneth, which your Holinesse sent me by the Post who came from Vrbine and Po∣land to Millane. In answer of which, I say, that before I receiued them, I was well aduertised & sufficiently informed, of all the Nouelties therin set downe, and of all those things which are comprehended in the League; for they haue beene many dayes about it, to mold it, and reduce it into Forme, (as in my writings dated the 6. of Nouember,) I haue made it appeare to your Holines. Let them performe the best of their power, & doe what they can, yet your Holinesse knowes, that God is a∣ble to effect much more: and I for my part (his diuine Arme assisting me) will (as I am bound) doe my vtmost in de∣fence of the Catholick Faith, as my Fore∣fathers haue done before me. In Millane and Naples, I haue comman∣ded my Gouernors to joyne their Forces,
to diuert the Intentions of those Here∣tickes which liue there, and to appoint the Rendevous in the State of Millane. Bee your Holinesse assured, that if you haue occasion to vse them, you may; for albeit, I giue no Cause to haue warre made vpon me, yet (though their num∣bers be but small) they haue good hearts, so that God in behalfe of the Church, will be on their side and assist them. The Horse and Foot amount to 80000. men, and if this bee not sufficient, I haue giuen order to the Duke of Feria, to Ad∣uise me with speed, who instantly and personally shall hasten to mend it; albeit it bee done with a small number of Men, part of them to bee leauyed out of these Kingdomes of Spaine, which shall rise to 80000. more. By this meanes your Holinesse may both see & know the Obedience of such a Sonne, and I the way to serue so holy a Father, whom God prosper, and guard, for the Augmentation of the Holy Faith as the Catholicke Church hath need, and I desire. Madrid, &c.
THus farre our warlike Newes, of Confedera∣tions and Vnitings so many Princes in a Holy League (as themselues Christen it) has betrayed it selfe to you in English, which so perfectly and boa∣stingly before spake nothing but Spanish. And to strengthen this Report, here is another Confirmation sent by a friend out of Spaine, to his acquaintance in London, in this manner. Sir, albeit I make no doubt but that the extra∣ordinary preparations of the Spanish Fleet, are by Letters arriued in England, yet by reason of the frequent houering of the Spanish here in Marseil∣les, I presume, you cannot meete a more exact knowledge of the Particulars, then these which I send you, holding my selfe bound to acquaint you with the Truth. The certaine place of their intended Inuasion, is not published; but common muttering whispers in our Eares, that it is for England, Ireland, and the Netherlands, yet some suspect, it is against the Venetians. But leauing that, be pleased to cast your Eye on these Particulars following, which are ac∣counted here for truths, and so we receiue them. Galleasses 200. Ships built after the English fashion 120. Hulkes 020. Pinkes 020. Catches 020. In all 330.
Land Souldiers 60000. Noblemen and Gentlemen being 8000. Voluntaries 8000. Saylers 13000. Great Peeces of Ordnance 70. Poysoned Bullets for Ordnance 47000. Hollow Bullets filled with wild-fire 20000. Muskets and Caleeuers 12000. Partizans 1000. Besides double Cannons, field Peeces: dry-fats filled with old Nayles, and broken Iron, store of Carriages: necessaries for Sea and Land, without number, three thousand Speares, Armours of Musket-proofe, Wines, Biskets, Bacon, Cheese, Beefe, Rice, Beanes, Pease, Oyle, Lampes, Pipes for fresh water, Torches, Candles, Lanthornes, Hides, large Hogsheads, Wheele-barrowes, Wheeles, Spades, Mattocks, Shouels, Galthrops, Baskets, Boygh-ropes innumerable, and thirtie thousand Pikes pointed with Iron. The Commanders of this Fleete are to meete with Spinola, who is to bee Generall of the For∣ces. With Spinola, come Tyrone, and the Earle of Argile, with a great number of Horses, and are to be transported in flat Boats. The Duke of Sauoy his Sonne is Admirall of the Spanish, Sir Robert Dudley Reare Admirall: Sir Griffin Markham, and Sir William Stanley Colonels of the Regiments, and one Neuill who termes
himselfe Earle of Westmerland, hath likewise a great command. There are lately arriued at Lisbone twentie ar∣med Elephants from Persia, for what imployment tis incertaine. And this is the most remarkable Newes of this Fleet; of which the Turke is so iealous, that hee stands vpon his guard. With so much does a Letter sent from Mar∣seilles acquaint vs, but from Malaga come these tydings. That there was neuer such warlike prouision and preparation as is now in Spaine: Wine, Oyle, and Vineger to a great quantitie, be∣ing made readie with ten thousand barrels of small shot, a thousand Kintals, sixe thousand Breames, or Bottels, sixe thousand Baskets for Pioners, with an incredible number of Spades, Shouels, Scoops, and Mattocks, with powder and wild-fire. From Dunkirke and other places in the Net her∣lands vnder the King of Spaine, are expected eigh∣tie ships to be ayders in this great Expedition. Of Spanish Ships, these are prouided. In Auero 20. In Valencia 20. In Lisbone 20. In Guinny 50. In Cales and Auero Poole 20.
In Saint Sebastians 20. In Naples 40. In Barcelon 50.   240. Malaga thus (as Marseilles did before) hauing thundred out her story of vproares and threatned deuastation: Here steps in a third Trumpetter, and proclaymes other newes, sounding as harshly as the former. Don Fredericke of Toledo is generall of the Ar∣my by Sea, and the Marquesse by land, who hath vowed to lay his bones in England. The Generall of the Cauallery, is Don Carolo of Columbo: Commissions being granted to leuy three thousand Horse, aswell Burgonians, as Lorrainers, and some out of Luremberg. If the Peace be made in Italy, the greatest part of these Forces, are to goe by Sea, and so to fall into the Spanish Army, which is to set forth on the first of Iuly. Spanish Leaders and their Companies. Don Iohn of Fuentes hath a Regiment of tenne Companies. Don Ferdinando of Arragon 10. Don Diego of 10. Coronell Bayard 10.
Marquesse of Beluedore 10. Three hundred men being in euery Company, which in the fiue Regiments, amount to 15000. besides two other Regiments, the names of whose Coronels, I haue forgotten; so that the whole Ar∣my consisteth of one and twentie thousand. Italian Leaders. Pedro Aldobrandino Companies 10. Marquesse of Gonzales 10. Pedro of Gonzales 10. Don Carolo Spinola commands all the Italians. The common rumour is, that they intend their course for Ireland; but the most knowing, say for England, the Dunkerkers (as it is reported) hauing sownded all the Sea-coast, and assuring them an entrance free from all danger. Amongst all the Engines and warlike furniture, which comes alongwith them, they also bring store of Ouens, and Mils made of Iron or Brasse, and will make their issue by the motion of wheeles, on which they are mounted. Thus this great Archer of the World (whose Bow reacheth from the East to the West Indies, and whose string is twisted together by the Hands and Hearts of Confederated Kings and Princes) shoots his Arrowes at this our Kingdome of Eng∣land, making account to come and cleane the glo∣ry
of it, and then to march backe into Spaine as a Triumphant Conquerour. This Nimrod is a mightie Hunter, and by his good will, would strike downe none but whole Nations: Hauocke hee cryes what Parke so euer hee comes into; and the goodlier the Herds are, the more cruelly does hee scatter them. Millions of poore murthered Indians being the Trophies of his bloudy Shambles. But as the beginning of the first Nimrods King∣dome, was Babell, so the end of this second (Gods Almightie Arme tumbling downe the buil∣dings of his Ambition) shall bee Confusion. What though fiue Kings complot, combine, and incorporate their Forces in One, to fight a∣gainst Iosua? Let not vs feare, but send vp our Cries to Heauen, as the Men of Gibeon (a great and Royall Citie) sent theirs to Iosua, euen to the Host at Gilgall, and as they to Him, so let vs call to God, and say, Withdraw not thy Hand from thy Seruants; Come vp to vs quickly, and saue vs, and helpe vs; for all the Kings of the Amorites (Spinolized and Spaniolized Tyrants) thine and our Enemies, which dwell in the Mountaines, are gathered together against vs. Wee must shake off our sinnes when wee doe thus, and not cry with a faint and distrusting voyce that hee will not heare vs, for if we speake to him as wee ought to doe, Hee himselfe will
say thus to our Ioshua; Feare them not, for I haue giuen them into thine hand: None of them shall stand against thee. And as the Lord kept his Word with Him, so will hee with vs: Hee will smite these Col∣leagued Enemies to his Truth and Gospell, euen to Azekah, and Makkedah, (their Gibraltars and Magellanes) and as they are chased to Beth∣horon (into Spaine) hee will (for their poyso∣ned Bullets prepared to shoote at vs) cast downe great stones from Heauen vpon them, vntill more dye by that haile, then by the sword. Then shall these Confederated Kings of Ieru∣salem, Hebron, Iarmuth, Lachish and Eg∣lon, flye to their Caues (their Spanish Dens) vntill the Chiefe Men of this our Israell by our Ioshua's command, fetch them forth to set their feete vpon the neckes of such insolent In∣sulters. Shall I reade to you, another story of com∣fort? Hearken then to it. When Benhadad the King of Aram, had assembled all his Armie, with two and thir∣tie Kings to assist him, hauing great num∣bers both of Horses and warlike Chariots, hee besieged Samaria; and sending a disdainfull message to Ahab King of Israell, thus hee commanded those that went to terrifie him, Tell Ahab (quoth hee) that thy gold is Mine, also thy women and thy faire Children are Mine; or
else, I will send my seruants vnto thee (as the King of Spaine would now his Ianizaries into England) and they shall search thine House, and the Houses of thy Seruants, and whatsoeuer is pleasing in thine eyes, they shall take it in their hands, and bring it away. But Ahab taking Counsell of the Elders, did at the second sending, refuse to part from any thing. Herevpon Benhadad in a rage fel a rauing, and said, The Gods do so to me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria, be enough to all the people that follow me, for euery man a handfull. Poore Samaria was now in a terrible feare, Benhadad roared, Israell trembled: but God casting an Eye of Compassion vpon their Ca∣lamities, and an Eye of Scorne on the others tyrannies, sent a Prophet to Ahab, who told him this good tydings (after one Army ouer∣throwne by Ahab the yeere before) I will de∣liuer this great multitude into thy hands again, and yee shall know that I am the Lord. His word was true, the children of Israell stood in the field in the day of Battaile like two little flockes of Kiddes, but the Aramites coue∣red the whole Countrey: yet the poore Handfull had the victory: the Sheepe beate the Lions, and slue in that day a hundred thousand Ara∣mites (all footmen.) It is not Number that preuailes, but good∣nesse
of the Cause. When Iustice guardes the Standard, Safetie is Generall of the Field. No matter what proud defiance, a daring Philistine throwes into our faces, there is an Arme Omnipotent can direct a Peeble-stone (beeing but put into a Sling) to sticke in the Giants fore-head, both to strike him dead, and confound the whole Armie that comes a∣long with him. Regard not the Braues of a blaspheming Rabshecay sent from Senacherib King of Ashur, to the Cities of Iuda, For a voyce from the mouth of the God of Hosts, shall come to an Hezekiah, saying thus much. As for Ashur, Hee shall not enter into this Citie, nor shoote an Arrow at it, nor come before it with a Shield, nor cast a Mount against it; but hee shall returne the way he came, and shall not come into this Citie. What followed vpon this comforta∣ble promise? The same night, the Angell went out, and smote in the Campe of Ashur, one hundred fourescore and fiue thousand men. Senacherib escaped from the slaughter, but not from Gods vengeance; for afterwards, as in his Temple be was worshipping Nisrech (his God) Adramelech, and Sharezer his owne Sonnes, slew him with the sword. Many Examples to this purpose may bee brought into the Field, of infinite Armies, of Idolatrous Nations fighting against Iuda and
Israell, and yet were then still (so long as they held in with God) by weake and wasted troupes confounded. For, God hath still a Red Sea to stand vp an end on either side of Moses and the Israelites like a double Brazen wall to guard his people, but to fall downe in rough billowes, to ouerwhelme Pharao and his Host. Yet wee must not presume too much vpon Gods fauour, as if we were his onely Darlings, and all other Nations, Cast-awayes. No there is no such excellence in vs, that hee should dote vpon our beautie, which is nothing else but a lothsome Deformitie. We haue beene scourged lately, with one of Dauids whips, but the Beating is forgotten, and therefore we were best take heed, lest this second Rod drawes bloud indeed. Our sinnes are in our hearts, when our swords are in our hands, and the mustering of the One, frights vs from striking with the other. Turne away the first, and God will teach vs how to turne the second vpon the bosomes of our Enemies. It is folly to goe into the field to fight, vnlesse God sends out his Priest, to haue vs serue vnder his Colours: Let vs take his pay and wee must needs prooue Noble Souldiers: Euery English∣man make but peace with his owne Conscience, and be carefull that it betrayes him not, and hee needs not feare any Spanish Inuasion.
Spanish Inuasion! These Thunderings and Lightnings, may bee but Terrors talked of, and not seene: or if seene, not certainly ay∣ming where to doe mischiefe: they may hurt others sooner then Vs: These Spanish Canons, happily carrie no Bullets in them, but giue one∣ly a false fire. These Rumours and Tumours, Whirle∣winds, Vproares and Combustions, filling the Christian World with Amazement, and vs with expectation of some dreadfull Monster to bee presented to all wondring eyes, may per∣chance bring forth onely That ridiculous Mouse, of which the Mountaynes were so long in labour. It is well, if it bee so: The Beati Pacifici is a string which makes heauenly Musicke in a Kingdome. Yet, if wee lift vp our heads, to obserue what eyes the Spaniard casts at vs, and what good Prayers he shoots after vs; Wisdome may soone perswade, that hee does not loue vs; if not loue vs, wee are not to trust Him, (albeit hee lyes still) no more then to trust a sleeping Lion or a Mastiffe: and therefore (not to dan∣dle our selues too much vpon the knees of se∣curitie) let vs rowse vp our English Spirits, and bee armed, against this spotted Beast doe come, albeit hee bee not comming, lest with his pawes hee teare vs in pieces, when wee are
not prouided for his dreadfull Encounters. Spanish Bulles are fierce at the stake, and worse loose, and although in Madrill, Siuill, and others Cities, they baite them for pleasure, in England they would yeeld no such pastime. If Fame therefore, hath taught her thousand Tongues to tell Truth, and that these Casti∣lian Ecchoes mocke vs not with Lyes, Is it not high time for euery man to girt his loynes with the sword, and to fight Gods Battaile, for this Quarrell is against Him? If this holy League be knit together, to teare Anointed Kings, out of their hereditary thrones, and to turne Nations out of their Natiue Coun∣tries; It is not a Holy, but a Deuillish League: A Confederacie of vncleane Spirits: An Vnion of Discord, and Hellish Musicke. Let those then, who haue commands ouer Nar∣row Seas (whose Nursing Armes most louingly embrace our Kingdomes body, busie themselues in their Nauall-Military Preparations; whilest they on Land muster together to guard our Kingdomes Heart. Let our English Nobles giue Heroicall Con∣frontations to the Spanish Grandees and Dons: the Gentry hearten on the Commons, and the Commons goe with cheerfull faces, against this Enemie, as their Fore-fathers haue done, when they fetched Honour from other Countries. Whilest the Diuine prayes at home, for suc∣cesse
abroad: whilst the Lawyer spends some of his Golden Fees, to the maintenance of Soul∣diers, in so glorious a warre: whilest Citizens open bounteous Purses, (though they goe not in Person) to defend themselues, and Country∣men: whilest the strong runne to fight, and the weake looke to their Houses at home: whilst the Rich emptie their bagges, to maintaine the poore Souldiers in good clothes and wholsome diet: Nay, whilest euen the very Blinde and Lame (when they can doe nothing else) send vp their heartie wishes to Heauen (night and day) to crowne our Land with Conquest, to con∣found all bloudie and execrable Confederations with ruine and shame, and to send home this second Armipotent Armado (if any such there be) in Tempests, Whirle-winds and Wracks, as that was in Eighty eight. To which all true hearted Englishmen will crie Amen. FINIS.
