11220 S102496 99838278 2651
The true dyfferēs betwen ye regall power and the Ecclesiasticall power Translated out of latyn by Henry lord Staf∣forde. illustrated title page
¶ To the hygh & myghty prynce Edward by ye grace of God Duke of Somerset, Erle of Hertfor be, Viscount Beauchamp, lorde Seimour, vncle to the kinges highnes of England, Gouernor of his most rial persone, and Protector of al his Realmes, dominions & Subiectes. Lieuetenaunte generall of al his Maiesties Armies, both by lande and see, Threasaurore and Erl Marshall of Englande, Gouernor of the Isles of Gar∣risey & Iersey, and Knight of the moste noble ordre of ye Garter. Henry Lorde Stafford to his grace most bounden wyssheth helth felicite with encrease of honour. AMong other great Plages that this Realme of Englande encreced why∣lest the scryptures were vnknowen (ryght excellent prynce) there was no¦ne greater thā that by mere ignorāce of godes worde by a long processe of yeres, falshed was receyued for trou∣the, euyll for good, superstytion for true religyon. Wherof ensued no lesse peryll to oure sel¦fes than manyfest dysorder in the publike estate & gouer¦naunce, whylest the people habandonyng the obedience due to theyr souerayn Lyege lorde & Kyng, dyd in stead of hym adhere and clene to an vsurper and tyrant, who not onely kepe theyr bodyes, but theyr soules also in most myserable seruytude and subiection. I meane that Antechrist and head of al abhomination the Bisshop of Rome whose bondage and thraldom yt we be now dely¦uered and made fre. The hole cause and benefyte is to be ascrybed to the illustration and setting furth of god¦des holy worde. And as the thanke therof is geuen to al¦myghtye god, who admytteth no partenets of his glori So next vnto hym aboue all Mortal mē, are we bound to the worthy Prynce of eternall memory kynge Henri the eyght. Who puttyng on the armour of gods worde
droue out of this Realme the wronge vsurpt of hys power and auctoryte Regall, and delyuered his people fro the captyuyte, wherin the Byshops of Rome hadde longe tyme kept them. Yet lyke as the temple of God in Hierusalem, was begon by Dauyd, and fynyshed by Salomō: so many kindes of supersticiō wer abolished by the sayd good Kyng and no fewer left to be reformed by hys gracyous and most lauful sonne oure new soue∣raygne lorde Kynge Edward the syxt. By whose happy and bly syd procedynge hytherto it is euydent to the world that god is his guyd directyng his passage to the parfectyon of al vertue and godlynes. A notable expe∣ryment wherof we haue, by the holsom and holy lawes that procede from his grace in thys hys mynoryte and chyldhed, to the aduauncement of Goddes worde, and extyrpatyon of al hypocrysy, and fals religyon. For the whyche benefyte how moche the realme of Englande to bounden to hys magesty, my pen can not suffycyently set it furth. But thys must al men confesse, that as long as the memory therof shal remayne, so long shal the ho∣norable fame and prayses of hys grace be fresshe and grene in al true Englyshmens hartes. Whych I sucke not so moche for the syngular benefytes by your grace extendyd too me preuayle, as for the greate wealth and commodyte redoundyng to al men vnyuersally. Wher∣fore deuysyng wyth my selfe in what wyse I myghte showe my selfe thankful, or at the least not vnmyndfull o so ample merytes me thought I could do nothyng, ey¦ther more gratefull to your grace, or more profytable to my countree than to helpe forward in this cause of rely¦gyon, And seing the manyfold errour and confusyd here¦tofore sproyng in this Realme by reason that the true dyfference betwene the power regal ecclesiastycal was eyther not wel knowen or not wel defyned. I bethought me of a boke lent me by my frend master Morison writē in the laten tongue, wherin the dyfference of those two powers, with ye lymyts of eyther of them is so playnly
set oue, so pureli explaned, and so dystinclye dysclosed by scriptures as no man (I suppose) oneles he be to set drowned in the dregges of popery and superstytion, can be in ony doubt of ye throuth the vtylyte of whych wor∣ke wel weyed with the late controuersy about the same matter, moeued me fyrst to ye translation therof, maruay∣lynge that a matter so prouffytable and necessary to be knowen shold be so longe suppressed, or that the hygher powers had not in so longe tyme prouyded to set hir abrode as well the Englyshe tongue as it is in the latyn Neuer the lese rather than my Countre, shuld be vtterly frustrate of so great fruyte as myght growe by redynge therof, I thought it a well bestood labour to euen it into Englyshe the translacion, wherof I submyt to the indyf¦ferent Iudgement of al lerned reders, requerīg theyr ay¦de where eyther I haue erred or else not parfytly rēdred the sentence of the autor. Wherfore pondryng my weyke¦nes and want of connyng I praye ayde of your grace to whome for my better defence I dedycate my labours, yt they may passe forth vnder your protection of whome yf in stead of praise I receiue pardō of my boldnes it shalbe to my suffycyent recompence. Almyhty god long preserue your grace to the aduaūcement of his glory to ye honoure of the kynges Magesty and prouffyt of his People. Amen.
¶ Here after foloweth the Table of this boke. ¶ Ambrose of the vicare of Christe. folio. ix, Augustyn. folio. xiii. All preistes in Peter receiued the keyes, of heuē. fo. xiii Another texte whereby papistes chalenge authorite for the bysshop of rome, folio. xiiii. Al bishops & prestes haue equal autorite with Pe. fo. xv An euyll preiste of his pristhed gettith rebuke, folio. xvii Alexandre and Antiochia were the seates of Peter be∣fore rome, folio, codem. Augustē of the questions of the new Testamēt, fo. xxi A priste and a bysshop al one, folio. xxvi At Alexandria pryestes chose one of them selfe to be ru∣ler and called him bysshope. folio. xxvii A saing of saint Augustin a sermō to ye people, fo. xlvi, A priuate lawe is writton in the harte of men. folio, lii. All thynges were done in the house o God at the com∣maundement of the Kinge, folio. lxvi, Almen ought to praye for Kinges. folio. lxxi. Athanasius complayneth to Constantyne. Fol. lxxvii An acte made by Kinges that no man shulde apele out of the Realme. folio. lxix A preiste for murdre and vycyouse lyuing shall be depra∣uyd of ordre and promocion folio. lxxxi Adelston kinge dyd make a lawe of tenthis. Fol. lxxxii Aluredus Kinge, folio. lxxxiii A prest that denyeth baptime shal dye. folio. lxxxiiii Abbotte of batel may saue a thefe. fo. lxxxvii .B. ¶ Byshoppes that were mooste vertuouse toke leeste vppon them Folio. v Bysshoppes of Rome symonyackes. folio viii By Peter is vnderstādid the vniuersal church. Fol. xiii
Bysshops haue suffred the contrary to their lawe to be kept and knowe it. folio. xl Boniface the thyrde gate prymacye by the helpe of the Emperoure Folio. xxx. Boniface dyd arme ye see of rome with the sword, fo. xxx Bysshoppes of rome haue labored to bynd men to kepe theyr decrees. Folio. xxxix. Bysshopes made a lawe that clarkes shuld not be ued before a seculer Iudge Fol. xi Bysshoppes of Rome subtile, Folio. xii. Bisshops of rome affirm that they haue al power. fo. xli Bysshops of rome went far backward frō Christ. fo. lvi Boniface the .viii. loued prehemynence. Folio. xlix Byshopes were electe by the cathedrall sees. fol. lxxxxii. Bysshops of rome Scribes and Pharisees. Folio. C Bishops of rom hath maried ye church of gētils. fo. eod. Bysshopes of Rome called the father of the churche of England but not in dede. Folio. Ci Bysshops of rome vse to exalte theyr kinsmen, Fo. C. ii Bysshopes of rome chalenge asmoche to e theyr owne as they lyste, Folio. eodē Bysshoppes of rome made lately execrable ordinaunces for stipendes Folio. C. ii Bishops of rome hath set the church in darknes. fo. c. iii Bysshopes of rome ponyssheth men after they be dede and is an enemy to Englande, Folio eodem .C. ¶ Crisostome in his sermone, Foliō. x Congregacion in the actes, folio. xi Christ chose Peter before he was bish. of rom. fo. xviii Chryst forbade to swere by Hierusalem, folio. xix Christ chose Hierusalē to byld his temple, Folio eodem Children be voyde of ambicion, Folio. xxii Clarkes maye appele frome theyr dioces, Folio. xxix Causes shuld be determinid within their prouīce, fo. eod Christ forbad superiorite amongest his disciples, fo. xxxi Consilium Chartage Folio. xxxv
Christe payd tribute to ye king or Emperure, Folio. lxvii. Christe and the Apostles dyd euermore obeye the Ciuel powers Folio. lxix Constantin to the bishops in the coūcel of dyre. fo. lxxvii Constantyne the Emperoure caused hethen men to ho∣nour god and knowe god. folio, lxxviii Childernt sucke the mylke, Folio. lxxxxi Clerus Anglie gladium Petri habet, folio. lxxxxv Correccion of the clargi cōmitted to the bish. fo. lxxxxvii D ¶ Difference of the ecclesiasticall & regall power, fol, iiii Deuision of thys worke into .iiii. partes, Folio. vi Dystin .xl. chapter multi, Folio. xxi Desyre of primaci causeth confusion, fo. xxii Distin .lxv mos antiquo folio. xxvii Distin .iiii, cap statuimus, Folio. xxxviii, De consecratione, Folio. xxxix, Dygnites of the church were geuen to Aliens, fo, lxxxx. Deuotion is decayed. Folio. eodem E ¶ Eneas siluins, Folio. x Ecclesiastica historia, Folio. xxiiii Englonde dyd resist the popis prouisions, Folio. xxxix Enterpretacion of this worde clarkes, folio. xliiii Ezechias king put away the abuses of the ecclesiastical power, Folio. lxii Ezeckias cōmaunded the prestes and leuites to puryfy themself Folio. lxiiii Ezechias commaunded the people to offer, Folio eodē Euery man that confesseth chryst to be the sone of god maye be called peter, Folio, ix, Euery man that seketh the worde of Peter is the seat of Peter, folio, xvii Ezechias commaundid the people to geue part of theyr goodes to the prestes Folio. lxv Edgarus kinge made spiritual lawes, folio, lxxii, Edmundus kinge made spirituali lawes, folio, eodem,
Epistel of kyng Wyllyam Conqueroure to the bisshop of rome, Folio. lxxxix. Episola Cassidori, Folio, C Exortacion to the reders to loue the truyth, Folio, C, vi .F. Fathers of the primatiue church shrunke from ye vnite of the primacy fo, xxvii Fraeltie of men is euermore compasing & busy. fo. xlix. .G. God by ye prophet saieth I wil dwel in Hiel'm. fo. xix. God some tyme suffreth tyrranycall power to punishe his people. Folio. xx. God gaue bysshopes authorite but no dominiō. fo. xxxi. Gregorye wolde not be called the hed Bysshoppe. fo. l. Gregorius ad felicem. Folio. liiii. G by his owne mouth made kinges rulers. fo. lvii ē Gouernaūce kīges appereth by natural thīges. fo. eodi. Gregorius ad mauricium, Folio, lxxii. Gregorius was obedient to the Emperoure. fo. lxxii. God shal requere it of the kinges whether ye peace and faithe of ye church be encreased or diminisshed. fo. lxxvi. Graūt of ye king to ye monasteri of Glastōburi. fo, lxxxiii Gentlenes ouer moche oppressid and greuid seketh for the truthe. Folio. C. v. .H. Hieronimus super mathe .xvi. Folio. ix. He proueth bi a similitude of the Emperour that the successors in the seate of Peter can by no reason cha∣lenge the prerogatiue of Peter. Fo. xvii. Howe moche chryste sette by Hierusalem. Fo. xi. Howe kynges serue god as kynges. fo. codem. He called the churche of England our mother. fo. lxxxx. Hit is expedient for the kynges and the nobles of the realme to defend ye church from Tyranni of ye bysshop of rome. Folio. C. iiii Here he prayeth god to brynge the Bysshope of Rome oute of ygnorance. Foli. codem
Hit is lyke that the primacy was lefte in Herusalem. folio. xx. Hierusalē was cōsecrate with the blod of Christ, fo. xx Hieromunus ad Ioginiarum folio, xxi, Hit is lyke that the councel of Nicen dyd althynges iustly, Folio, xxiiii. Hit is lawfull for no man to name hymselfe vniuersal or hye Bysshop, Folio, xxv. He y• nameth hym self vniuersal priste or hye bysshope goeth before anticryste. floio. xxvi. He that is made bisshop without consent of ye metropo¦litan shulde be no bisshop, fo, xxviii Hit was decrede in ye councell in aphrica yt the bysshop of rome shulde not be superior to al other, Folio, eodem He yt is excomunicate in one dioces ought not to be re∣ceyued into another Fo, xxviii. He that wylbe hyeste shalbe loweste. fo, xxxii. He that doth notrenounce al that he hath cā not be the dysciple of christe Fo, xlvii, He yt clymeth hiest must nedes come downe warde ag∣ayne Folio, l. He yt is ladde with ye sprite of god is at lybertye. fo, lii. Hit is to be feard yt ye cānō law lose his autorite, fo, liiii Hit belongeth to kinges to minister Iustice, Folio. lix. Here is noman exempte from the obediens of kynges Folio, lxviii, Holye scryptures of ye newe Testamente geue pristes no iudicial power. Fo, lxix How so euer yll be commytted the coreccyon longeth to the regal power. Foli, lxxiii He serueth god otherwyse bycause he is a mā & because he is a kinge, Folio, lxxiiii I In Hierusalem only was the hye pristehod. Folio. xix. In consilio mileuitan. Fo. xxviii. If the byshop of the mother church be negligent. fo. odē Iohn Bysshop of Constantynoble was the furste that
named hymselfe vniuersall bysshoppe. Folio, xxx, Yf decrees of bysshops do bynd our cōscyens, fo. xxxvi In the primatiue church the decrees of coūcelles were called cannons Fo, xxxvi If Bysshoppes haue authorite of god to make lawes, Folio. xxxvii If possession of the churche be of god it shal stande, fo, l In doubteful matters the hye priste and the hy Iudge at hierusalem gaue sentence fo. lxiiii If kinges and rulers were Iudges of the lawe of god moch more of the lawe of man. Fo. eodem In salomons tyme prestes were born prestes. Fo. lxvii. Iustinian Emperoure made lawes to confyrme ye law of god. Fo. lxxix, In Fraunce they eate flesshe all Saterdayes betwene Chrystinas and Candelmas. fo. codē K Kinges shulde be chosen of the same nacion, folio, lviii King Saul gaue sentēce of deth vpon chymeleche the hye bysshope folio. lxi. Kinges dyd put in and electe the hye preyst. folio. lxvi. Kinges made & ordeined bysshops .fo, lxxxiiii. Kynges dyd institute Iudges as leuites. fol. lxiii. L Lawes of popes be innumerable. folio, xxxvi Lawes be two, folio, lii, Laurence Archebysshop of Cantorbury dyd refuse all such foren power fo. liiii Lawes made by kinge Camula concerninge spyrituall thinges. folio. lxxxi Littera willi regis. folio, lxxxvi Landes geuen to the churche of Englande. fo. lxxxxi. Letters wrytten from the parliamente of Englande to the bisshop of rome. folio. lxxxxvii. M Magna est veritas foli. i Mark ye word of Gre. to the church of Englād fo. lv
Many shal receue ye Sacramēte, iii, in the yere. fo. lxxxx Many resisted the bysshoppe of Rome. folio. C. v Many be rycher when they be religious mē then whē they wer secular. folio. xlv N Nother power ryches nor humilite can make a Bysh. hyer or lower. fo. xxvii. None ought to be called the chefe or bed bisshop or his prest. folio. xxviii. Negligence in the seruice of god and mysbehauor in ye clerge. folio. lxxxxiiii Nabugodonosor correcte by miracle made a lawe that no man shulde blaseme god, folio, lxxiii Noman can dispence with the lawe of god, folio. liii. None expoundeth this texte of the ecclesiastical power but papystes. &c. folio. lxx. .O. Obediens is necessary in the bysshop of Rome. foli. xi. Our father dyd not admitte al the cannons, fol. xxxvii Of fornicacion with a mans wyfe. folio. lxxxiii. Of seruauntes working on the sonday. foli. eodē Oratio regis Edgari. folio. lxxxxiii. Of them that were within orders. Folio. lxxxii Of tenthes payeng. folio. eodem. Of sorcere and wytche crafte folio. eodem Of a wyfe commyttyng aduoutery. folio. lxxxi Of hym that cōmitteth theft being in orders. fo. lxxxiiii. P ¶ Peter nor his successores were not they agaynste whome the gates of hel dyd preuayll but the confession of Peter. folio. viii Peter was cōpelled to make aunswer of his faith. fo. xi Peter made solemp sermon. folio. xviii Peter was Bysshop of Antioche before rome, folio. xix Patriarkes were not subiecte one to another. foli. xxiiii Phecas Emperour. folio. xxix.
Prelates shulde not medell with ye Emperor. fo. xxxiiii Paul was Iudged before lay Iudges folio. eodē Powere of punishement longeth to kinges. folio. lxi Pristes and prophetes were the expounders of the law of god. fo. lxiiii. Popes require & dyd extort tapis in portable. fo. lxxxxii, Paul apelid to Cesar the Emperor. fo. lxxv. Pope Adryā gaue clarkes auctoryte to chuse the bys∣shope of Rome. folio. lv. Q Quomodo regibus anglie cōpetat authoritas in rebus diuinis. folio. lxxix. Quicquid cōcedit regali Autoritate concedit et estendit regalē autoritatē. fo. lxxxvii. R Rome is called Babulon. folio. xx. Ryches and possessions which draweth mānes mynd o god. fo. xliii. S Super omnia venit benignitas fo. i. Sume graunt power geuē to bisshops but by mās law folio. v Symon is interpretate obedyence fol. xi. Some good men that were Bysshoppes of Rome dyd refuse primaci. foli. xxix Salomon condemned the bysshop Abiathares. folio. lxi Salomon did ordre ye office of pristes. fol. lxii Some by the swerde vnderstand power ecclesastical. folio. lxx Some say there was no power geuen to kīges in spiri¦tual thynges. fo. lxxi. Some bysshops of Rome dyd not deny but gaue kīges power Ecclesiastical. fo. lxxxiiii Saynt Dunstan gaue councell to the kīge to buyld ma¦ny monasteris, fo. lxxxxvi Scotlād hath alwais pertained to Englād. fo. lxxxxviii The dyfference of the regall and ecclesiasticall power
must be sought by scrypture. folio. iiii The opynion of them that interpretate scripture sumpti of Ecclesiastical power. fo. eodē The church was not bild vpon ye persō of peter, fo. viii The text of Mat. was not spokē of ye persō peter. fo. ix The church is the multitude of faythfull people. folio. x The nomber of Chrysten people is of more superiorit then the Citie of Rome. folio. xii The power of bindyng and losing was geuen to all the Apostles. fo. eodem To fede the shepe of Chryste is to confyrme them that beleue in Chryst, folio. xiiii The thyrd text wherby they chalenge prymacy. fo. xiiii That was spokē to Peter was spokē to al ye apo. fo. xv There was but one flocke which was fedde of al the a∣postles. fo. eodem The Gospel is the seat of peter folio. xvi They yt tech their one tradiciōs be fals prophets. fo. eo. The seat doth not make the priest. fo. eodem They that teach not the law of Christ syt in their own chayres, and entring at the window as theues. fo. eod. The Gospell is the seat of peter. fo. eodem There contynuyth succession in the seates but not in vertu and merites. fo. xviii. The miracles of peter in Hierusalem. .fo xix The apostles stroue for superiorite. folio, xxii The appostles were equal. Folio, eod. The dygnyte of the apostles was estemyd by priorite of tyme. fo. xxiii. The interpretacion of this worde patriarke. fo. xxiiii The bysshopes be superior to preistes by custome & no by the lawe of god. fo. xxvi. These dyd contynue at anynion a long season. fo. xxxi The churche hath no power to constrayne fo, xxxiii The kyngdom of god is not of this worlde, fo, xxxiiii The offyce of a bysshope, fo, xxxv The ordynāces of ye apo. were not al receiued, fo, xxxvii
The Canons haue not shoyre authorite by the maker, Folio xxxviii The clarge kepeth not ye faste of, lx, dayes before Ester Folio, eodem The power was deuyd with kynges & prynces, fo, xii, The largenes of theyr power is lyke a streme of water Folio. xlii. The clargye shulde refuse possessyons, Folio, xliii The interpretacion of this wordy clarke, Folio, xliiii, They that be seperte of our lorde can possesse nothynge besides the lorde, Fo, xiv. The power of ye Cyty of Rōe is not so large by god. fo. l The comen lawe geueth place to ye priuate lawe, Fo, liii The see of Rome cannot dyspense norchaunge statutes of the olde fathers, Folio. eodem The good of ye church are ye goods of ye power, Fo, xlix The hye prestes called the kynges theyr lordes, Fo, lx, Thurstan Archbysshop of Yorke, Fo, lxxx The examynacyon of the manners & lyuing of the clar∣ge partayneth to the kynge, Fo, lxxxxiii, The whole perliament denyeth to aunswere before the Bysshope of Rome. Fo, lxxxxix. The Shepcherd that hath dyspersed the Peple of god shalbe greuously ponysshed, Fo, C, iiii, Thelesphorius ordeyned the clergy to fast, xl, dayes be∣fore Easter fo, xxxviii They put downe kynges when it pleaseth thē & set vp other fo xiii. The papystycal power hath oftentymes troubled Eng¦land, fo, liiii The pope calleth the kynge vycar of god, fo lxxxiiii. The vowe of Wyllyam conquerour, fo. eodem. The power of the bysshope of Rom neuer stode a mans lyfe wythout resystence fo, xxxix The opynyon of the papystes concernyng the power of the bysshope of Rome, fo, iiii The opyniō of thē yt make al mē equal with smal wisdō
confyrmed, fo, v The power ecclesyastycal was geuē to al Apostls, fo, xxi, The bysshops of ye east resyst ye bysshopes of rōe, fo, xxv The bysshopes of Rōe wer not content to haue the ten∣the. fo. C. ii. The tyme is hy whan men may se the trouth, fo, Cvi W ¶ What is comprehendyde vndre the Ecclesyastycall power, fo, vi, Wydows shal not mary within .xii monethes, fo, .xxxi, We must be Iustifyed by fayth whych worketh by cha∣ryte, foli, vii What soeuer is the foundacion of ye church chryst must be the hedde, fo, vii What is vnder standed by the gates of hell, fo, viii, Whē he was called peter which was called Symon be¦fore, fo, ix, What is vnderstandyd by ye sete of Moyses, fo, xv Why peter was called the hed of the apostles, fo, lxviii Why bysshopes were ordened and made fo xxvi. What partayneth to a bysshop, fo, xxxv, What the crowne of prest betokeneth, fo, xliiii, What is laweful for laye people fo, eodem What thyng a prest muste forsake, fo, xlvi, What authoryte is geuen to kynges by god, folio, lvi We shuld not abhore the true name of honor, fo, li What lōgeth to akīg or a prince & what to a P, fo, lviii What the duetye and authoryte of a kyng, fo, lix, What is the proper offyce of a kynge, fo, lxxv What authoryte kīgs had ī cōsecraciō of Bys, fo, lxxxv Vrban made an act that no clarkes shulde take any pro¦mocyon spyrytual of any kynge and Lay men, fo, eodem What thyngs be more spirytual fo, lxxxv What pertayneth to a kyng of a realme fo, lxxxxiii, What text of scrypture is prynted in the hart of the bis∣shop of Rome fo, Ci ozimus bysshop of Rome, fo, liii Finis tabule.
SYth it weth is of suche preemynēce & dingnitie that she nether gyueth,Super omīa vicit veritas iii, esdre, iii place to tyme Auctorite nor power but alwaies residēt ī hir hygh {per}fection & trone giueth eueri man an entre oftymes surely very harde & also encombryd by mānes malice & manifolde forsenses and yet neuertheles blameles in ye iud¦gement of god and also laudable by ye confessyon of mē if any wold ernestli and wt good intent labour to come therto,Magna est veritas quo preualet,, iii, hesdre, iiii, this labour which we take vpon vs is not to be disa∣lowed syth the honour and zele of reuerende treweth hath moued vs to treate the thynges that followe here after with diligence & mature deliberacion. The thynges which we entend to spea¦ke of, shall wante the entysement of Nouelties, But euen the asiste∣ryte and roughnes of the treweth
shal sufficiently contente the good nether is it taken as a thing ratifi¦ed bi iudgement whan ani sentēce is pronoūced against the truth we shall therfore thynke it sufficiente to pleade the truthes cause to take our way to hir Iudgement seate, & to bestowe our labour in ye Illus∣tracion and settynge furthe of hir name, so that all Dyssymulacion, Dysdayne, enuy, pertinacyte with al'maliciouse and Corrupte afflec¦cions be exiled from vs, whiche we for our parte do most abhorre, but yf none of these thynges canne be imputed to vs lette those impedy∣mentes of foryn iudgementes be also remoued from vs, whiche we Laufully obiecte and lay agaynst the yll & frowarde, lest thorough pretense of the truth, while they set forth their awne malice, thei distur¦be ye publike quieter let the former Iudgemētes of the good stop the
mouthes of ye ill, that it be not lau¦full for euerye man, to entre medel with euery thinge, but that, that is done with godly entente that, is set fourth wt moderaciō & soughte with great reuerence, let it also pro¦cede furth wt gret fauour & liberti so yt we beare no blame for reher∣synge those thinges whiche other men haue both writen and done wt prayse, we wil not leaue to our ow¦ne Iudgement, we will not folow our owne brayne, we wyl invente nothyng, we wyll fayne nothyng, we wyll nothyng blame, or {per}uerte vniustly, but faythfulli, sincerely, & incorruptelye we shall reherse the holy Scriptures, and the sentēses actes and dedes of other men, whi¦che Determine and agre vpon the thinge that we propone. ¶ Nether take we this studi with oute avisement, ne came to this la∣boure and prouince bi his enduced
by sensual affections but religion moued vs, charite dyd exhorte vs & a zele of the truth draue vs forth and compelled vs beinge otherwy¦se lothe to medle For he dyd certen¦ly se in how laborious busynes in howe inextricable maase thys po∣wer named ecclesesiastical hath en¦tangled manye mē, which of what soeuer beginnynge it sprange vp first, surely nowe it is depraued, & corrupted with wily crafte, we we∣re not ignorante that the malice of men, is great vpon erth, and that nothing is so good vnder the sone which ye iniquite of al persones do¦th not subuerte. But there with al it came to our remēbraunce that god dothe greatlye regarde those thynges which he him self hath pe∣culiarly ordened that he hath geuē his holy Scripture contaynynge that ys necessarye to be Knowen, & most vndoubted professores of the
treuth further that though the ry∣ches of goddes wysedome be depe and vnsercheable yet it is geuē by Scrypture to mannes knowlege that some time by the frut we mai know the tre and after that proue the Spyryttes whether they be of god or of men and yf it be in your power to proue & to discerne good from yll it is no maruel if relygiō hath moued vs charytie hath per∣swaded vs finali zele of the treuth hath thus for dryuē vs as profoū¦dely to study depely to caste in our mynde furste what may be the rea¦son of the ābiguite of this power and after that to marke well and considre whether al thyngs be con¦sonante vnto the rule of the verite that is to saye to the testymonyes of Scripture whereby thys eccle¦siastical power and what soeuer at this tyme is contayned vndre that apellaciō is bolstard vp, & stayed
For thus thought we with our sel∣ues, yf thys power was fyrste con¦stituted by the ordynaunce of god hauyng so larg and ample funda¦cyon & if so huge a buildinge was so reared vp with so ample funda¦cion, as in this time it semeth to be vsurped than list we only to make this exclamacion, the inserutable deuises of god whose providence we se not in these bodyes full of darkenes. But if this auctorite ha¦th been only permytted by god, for our trāsgressyons that we myght be scourged and that we might be wayle our sinnes we ar in blīdnes yt we see it not, that dysease is very perylous whiche we fele not, & vn¦miserable is our condicion yt wher as god doth seuereli punnisshe vs we enterpretate it as gentle dealīg with vs and accepte this vngodly & Tyrannicall power as a greate benifitte, vndoubtedly all powere
is of god as the apostle sayth and whosoeuer resisteth the power re¦sistith the ordinaunce of god But it is a verye noysome error to put no dyfference betwixt power geuē of god and Tyranny permytted of god and that we bering fauour to our owne sīnes wil not acknow¦lege the very vengeaunce of god.Rom, xiii, The differēce of the ecclesi∣astical & regal power muste be sought by scrypture. ¶ But at the laste it came, to our remembraunce that the sure disso¦lucion of this ambiguite shulde be requyred & sought out of the holy Scripture wherein euer at this day liueth & breatheth that confor¦tyng spirite that chryst dyd promy¦se to sende to his to teche them all veryte for other wyse if we shulde leaue to mennes traditions ye mat¦ter hath ben diuersly demed ¶ For sondry men haue haue had sondry opiniōs,vari opiniōes be potestate pont, Roma. The opinion of them that ī¦terpretate sc∣ripture synce ele of the ec∣clesiastical po¦wer. some as it semeth leauing to the syncere sence of scri∣pture & after the dyscrypcyon ther¦of
measurynge the foundacion of this power. do dyffyne and limite the ecclesiasticall power only to be ye ministracion of the worde of god and they affyrme the bysshop of Rome with other bisshoppes to be geuen instede of the apostles whi∣che shulde obserue goddes worde after the lymyttes of his cōmaun¦demente & shoulde teach & preach that that is taught in the scripture adding nothing thervnto ne takīg any thyng therof away as though the deuyne prouidence neded anye helpe of mannes industry wherbe he myght the better prouyde for the helth of man other so inlarge,The opiniōs of the papists concernyng ye power of the byshop of ro∣me, and extende the lymyttes of the Ecclesiasticall power, that the ap∣pointe the endes therof hyme and his submyttyng to that power al holy & prophane thynges, heauēly and wordly as for the bysshope of rome thei make him not aministre
of the worde and a seruaunte but the vicare of god They geue vnto hym autorite of Dominyon, that he may do all thyng saufe that is not his pleasure to do that he may Iudge al men, & that none ought to Iudge hym that he hath domy¦niō ouer Emperoures, and kings and infewe wordes that he hath {pre}¦emynence ouer all men & is more ouer aboue a general counsel som other make al christen men equal and yt was spoken vnto ye apostles with small dyscresion,The opiniōs of them that, make all men equall wyth smalle wysdō confyrmyd they applye to all Christen men, Confounding al orders of christen people being cleane repugnant vnto the othere sorte and as the other without al∣measure dyd attribute to the bys∣shoppes of Rome al power,some graunte power geuen to bysshoppes but by mānes lawe, some cō¦tende it to be geuen by God so the¦se with no lyke faute seme to take al power awey. Therbe some that graunte a power, but not with stā¦dyng they dissente in ye cause & the origine and where as the bysshop
of rome wolde calenge hys prema¦cye by the lawe of god, they styfly affirme that it was ordeyned by ye lawe of man. Bysshopps yt wer most ver¦tuous take lest vpon thē¶ The romaine bysshopps theyr selfes do not agre amonges them selues, amonge whome as euerye on did exselle the other in hollines of lyuyng and religion, so he dyd require and take vpon hym yt lesse power, and some agayn coud not refrayne ther hādes from almost holy thyngs nor forbere the scrip¦tures of god.wherof ye au∣thorite inten∣dyth to proce¦de apon, Whyche altercacion of opynyons and conflicte of sen∣tenses in themselues disagreinge, do geue vs iuste and laufull occa∣sion to serche out ye origine, of this so great, so ample & so myghty po∣wer that we maye clerely se, when∣se it came how it did procede, how large it was geuen, how it was ex¦tendyd by vsurpacion, what was graunted by god, & what was ad∣ded
and adiected bi the wyl & plea¦sure of mā, finaly what bysshops haue taken from pryncys, & kīgs, & what thei haue vsurped to them selues, the certaintie of all whiche thynges must be taken out of the holye scrypture, whyche ys mooste syncere and incorrupte testymonye and yf the sense of scrypture shall so plainly appere, that no man can doubte therof, ¶ That it shall not be dysconue∣nyente to confyrme the same with recyting the dedes and actes of o∣ther men wherfore we shall furste of all assaye to serche furth,Diuiso ope∣ris The deuision of this worke īto, iiii, partes & pon¦dre howe the ecclesiasticall power as it is vsurped nowe adayes, ha∣th not hys authorite by the lawe of god. Secundly in what facion thys power is extended by the law of god? Thrydly howe moderatly
good bysshoppes haue vsed this power fourthly howe far ye power nowe called ecclesiasticall partay¦neth proprely vnto kinges and fo to go in hande with ye thyng why∣che we dyd propounde in the furst place ye shall furst vnderstande,, i, et, c, tran¦slato de cōse, what is com∣prehendyd vn¦dere the eccle¦syastycall po∣wer and it is vsurpyd now adayes ye vnder ye appellacion of this eccle∣siastical power now a dayes, is cō¦tayned authorite to make lawes & statutes, which may bind al christē men with authorite to compelle al men yea euen kinges and princys so yt they shal make theyr answers in al maner causes (yf any offence be pretendid)the fyrst part Cap nouit de iudice before the bisshop of rome & make ther plees in maters of trauerse before hym to depose prynces out of ye admynystracyon theyr realmes to absolue subiec∣tes of the othe of theyr obedyence set vppon other whome it shal ple¦ase hym to excommunicate,Cap ad oppo¦stolice de sen & reiudi libra, vi, to en∣terdicte to caste downe from aliue
into hel or other whom it shal plea¦se him to sende vp in to heauen,de sent, ex, per tot, & breffely to conclude to do al thīgs and more to and they go aboute to confyrme this power bi certen pla¦ces of holye Scripture whyche textys we wyll examyn syncerly. ¶ And in honest sorte and the chef place is math .xvi.The examina¦cion or the tex¦tys of scriptu¦re wherbi the papists chalē∣ge this power of the fyrste, texte math. xvi. Thou art peter and apon this stone I wyll edifye my churche and the gattes of hell shal not preuayle agaynste it of yt whych texte if it were graunted yt thys were the intelleccion therof yt it shulde sygnify the churche to be buyldid apon peter thā shuld folo¦we as they sey manyfest probaciō of full powere whyche thynge for al that is not to be graunted for al thoughe Peter were chyfe & hyest of the Apostles and the churche edified vpon hys pryuate person,
(whych were an inconuenyente as we shall herafter shewe) yet what soeuer fundacyon the churche of chryste had,what soeuer, is the founda¦cion of ye chur¦ch christ must nedes be hyr bed by whose bloud it was redemed and norysshed by fayth in christ it must neuer theles be redemyd by the blode of chryst and grewe vp by fayth in chryst, consiste and be ioined to gether by the lawes of chryste of the whych chryst yf the church be the trewe & propre spouse she muste haue hym only as her lorde in souerayne ly∣berte, in him as in hir hed she must cōsiste, in hī she dependith, by whō it is brought to passe that we be no longer vnder the lawe, but vn∣der grace bi his fre gifte, so waxīg bigge, that we beynge delyuered & loused from the charge of the scole master, and inspired with the holy gost thorough his grace.we muste be Iustyfyed by ayth whyche worketh by chart. Of hym we may be iustified by fayth whi∣che worketh (not by coercyon, not by imposicion of ponysshementes not by thretenyngs and terioures /
but by vnfayned loue. ¶ But it semeth not to be proued by that texte that the churche was buylded vpon peter.The churche was not buyl¦ded vpon the persō of peter Onles vnder the name of peter ye vnderstande ye vniuersal congregaciō of fayth¦ful, and true chrysten people or el∣les the verye confessyon of peter, for what coulde be spoken more than that the gates of hell shulde not prauaile agaynste the church? ¶ But if the gates of hell (which after the mynde of hierom orygen and ambrose be vyce & synne) can∣not preuayle agaynst the churche no man can sey that this is vnder¦stand of the bysshop of rome,What is vn∣derstand by ye gates of hell, whi∣che is a man and mortal:Pro, xxiii, sith it is wrytten that seuen times in ye day offendyth a iuste man,Heb, v, & as saynte paul sayth euery bysshop takē frō amongs mē is cōpased wt īfirmite & therfore he is bound to offer for
Synnes aswell for hys owne part as for ye peoples & thus ye muste also considre ye of ye Bysshops of Rome many haue ben symoniaksSome of the bysshoppes of rome haue bē symonyakes, Some ydola∣ters some sys∣matickes som heretyckes, sōe withother vices¶ Some idolatres other sysma∣ticks other hereticks othere wrap∣ped in other vices and some almost culpable in all as the Cronicles testifye which contaynyng ye actes of ye bishops romaine of whom th∣ough all or manie did repente of their format leude life at ye last and therefore against them bi reasō of their faith in christ ye true fundatur of ye churche, helgates. & sume pre∣ualed not in ye ende, yet ye same pre∣uailed against other which died no better then they lyued, but heapīg synne vpon synne had amore on∣happye dethe thā they had life wh∣ose yll ende dothe make vs ama∣nyfesse certificat yt peter & hys suc∣cessors in the churche of rome.Peter nor his successors we¦re not they a∣gaynst whom the gattes of hell dyd not preuayle but the confession of peter, We∣re not they Agaynste whom the
gates of hell shulde not preuayle, but the fayth, and ye confessyon of peter,Ambrosius de incar domini sacramento for as saynte Ambrose sayth in hys boke of the mysterye of the incarnacion of our lorde, yt is not spoken of the person of Peter,The texte of mathew was not spoken of the peron of Peter but of his confesso∣res, but of his fayth for ye gates of hel shal not preuayle agaynste it, and the same ambrose apon the epistle to ye Ephesians, our lord sayd to peter vpon this stone I wyll buylde my church,Ad ephesios capitulo, ii, yt is vpon this confession of the catholyke fayth, I constytute faythfull people to lyfte Iesus, chryst being the hed corner stone in whom euery buyldynge cowplede to gether groweth vnto an holye temple in our lord in whome ye al¦so are buylde to gether and made an habitacion, for god in ye spirite.Hierom super math, xvi, This sayth he is the sence wherof our lord spake vpon this stone I wyl buylde my churche / and saynt Hierō wrytteth ye after the symili∣tude
of a stone it is conveniently spoken. I wyll buylde my church vpon the whych sentence saynt, au¦gustyne confyrmyng sayth,Augustinus, vpon the wor¦des, diuini ser¦monis, vpon this stone whyche thou hast confes¦sed, vpon this stone which yu kno∣west, saing thou arre chryst ye sōne of the lyuynge god I wyll buylde my church, that is to say vpon my selfe the sonne of the lyuynge god, I wyl buylde my church vpon me I wyl edifye the and not me vpon the,Why he was called Peter whyche was named Simō before. for as he was named Symon before after yt (as Hyrom, & Bede do saye) for the strengeth of hys fayth and the constance of his con¦fessyon our lord gaue him ye name of Peter / so likewise we,Hieroni super math cap, vi Origenes su∣per math ho∣milia, i as origē saythe, yf we by the reuelacion of the father to vs which is in heuen do confesse that Ihesus chryste is the sone of the liuynge god,Euery man yt cōfeseth christ to be the sone of god may be called peter, we are callede conuenyently by the name of peter, for the stone is euery man
that foloweth chryste The stone is chryst our lorde and sauyour whi∣che after the saing of Bede to him that knewe by fayth,Beda super, math, cap, xvi to his louer / to hym that confessed hym dyd ge¦ue the perticipacion of his name. That is to saye that of this worde Petra ye stone,i, or, iii, he shulde be named Peter, vpon the whiche stone the church is buylded, for no man can lay any other foundacion but that that is layde all redye, whiche is christ Iesus this stone is so firme this foundacion is so substancial, that it wyll not suffer that is buil∣ded vpon it ani time to fal or elles to shrinke. For it is a coruerd stone a constant streghneth a substācial stacion a fyrme foundacion of the churche and so we rede it called in many places of holy scripture,Chrisostum ī sermone de pē¦thecost, And also Crysostome in the Ser∣mone of Penthecoste vpon thys stone he sayth not vpon this peter
for he dyd not buylde his churche vpon mā but vpon his faith, what is this to saye vpon the stone, that is to saye vpon the confessyon, for yf chryste by these wordes had so vnderstanded as the church shuld haue been buylded vpon Peter, ye it shulde haue ben gouerned after ye pleasure of hym & his successors Also in what place he sayd, if thy brother trespasse against the shew it vnto ye church,Math, xviii, that betokeneth vnto ye multitude of faythful peo∣ple,The churche is ye multitute of faithful peo¦ple or ye iudge institud by ye multitute or elles, vnto the Iudge insti∣tute by the multitude, or vnto the generall councell, he wolde haue sayd, shew it to Peter and his suc∣cessors,Eneas silui∣us other wise called pope pius ye second which sins Eneas Silui{us} doth reiect saing on this wyse, the yock of chryst is easy and the bur∣den of chryst is lyght. But tell me how lyght? yf chryst commaund yt is impossible, if he shuld cōmaund all cristē people to go vnto Peter,
in al causes of contēcion he shuld comaūd yt is inpossyble for howe coulde Peter seke for the churche so sore disparsed and al christen mē from dore to dore by townes and vyllages,Congregaciō in ye actes of the Apostles were called ye churche, ex regest lib. iiii, epistola. xxxviii wherfore in the actes of the apostles congregacions which were had were called the churche saint Gregory also vpon the same matter wryteth thus. yf I be dis∣pleased when I reprehende other then it remayneth that I shulde shewe it vnto the church. ¶ Furthermore eneas silui{us}Eneas silui{us} vpon this wordes tell it to the churche expoundīg ye church to be ye general councel,Peter, was sēt to ye coun∣sell as to hys superiour, sayth thus lo Peter was sent vnto the counsel, The veryte sent the high bysshop vnto ye coun¦cell, and wherfore was that? surely that the popes of Rome shuld not dysdayne to knowe some power in erth aboue them which they shuld aske counsell of in hygh matters
and to be obedient to theyr deter∣minacions where of as RabanusRabanus, thynketh, Peter otherwayes was called Simon which after the in∣terpretacion of the Ebreu tonge is to saie obedience that euery man mayght perseaue that obedyence is necessarie in the bysshoppes of rome.Simon is in∣terpretate obe¦dient obedience is necessari in ye bisshoppes of Rome, Garson, Gerson in his boke of obla∣cion of the spowse of the churche, doth approbate this sentēce sayng in times past peter bi dissimulaciō dyd folowe the ryte of Iwes,Gal, iii and Paule dyd manyfestly resyst and holde agaynst him. Peter brought in newe facions into the church of god,Act, x, &, xi, entrynge into a Centurion a capten of a hondreth men beynge a gentyl, wherfore grete murmure arose in ye church of god ī so moch that Peter was cōpelled to folowe ye doctrine which scripture teacheth that is to saye that he shulde pre∣parePeter was compelled to make answer of his faythe and belefe be¦fore the coun¦ell,
him selfe before al the whole church to geue thē manifestacion and a certitude of his beleue and of hys hope, so SimachusSimachus, so bles¦sed marcellius,Marcelline, so Gregorye his selfe & so many other did submite them selues vnto the Iudgemen∣tes of ye counceles,Gregory not of humilite and voluntarye condiscendinge therto as some do Imagen but be¦cause they were obligate & bound therto. And saynt HieromHierom wryting to Euagrius doth affirme that as touchinge authoryte the hole nom¦ber of chrystē people to be of more superiorite than the cyte of Rome & that in thes wordes shewe it to ye church,The nombre of chrystē peo¦ple is of more superiorite then the cytie of rome. ye multitude of chrysten peo¦ple is sygnifyed the apostle dothe proue saynge. I haue surely thus determyned, that he yt hathe thus comytted you beynge gathered to gather with mispryte)i, Coryn, v. be takē to Satan
& vpon the same text saynt augus∣tineAugustyne maketh thys exposicion, I ha¦ue iudged of this maner that you (he speketh to the multytude) con¦gregate to gether in on wt out any dyssencion, with whome my auc∣thoryte and ye vertue of christ shal worke to gether, be take such a mā to satan bysydes that,Bede super mathe. xviii, that this po¦wher of the church was graunted vnto Peter in the name of ye mul∣titude. Bede vpon ye xviii chapiter of mathew) vpon this texte if thy brother trespasse against the) doth proue writinge in this maner this power of ye holi church was special¦lye comitted to bysshoppes c. But generaly, suerlye it is supposed to be geuen vnto the vniuersal chur¦che.The powere o ndynge & lowso was geuen vnto al the Appostles For where as in another place our lord doth geue vnto peter this power of binding & lowsing of a trewth it is not to be doubted but
in peter wich bare the figure of ye church it was geuē vnto al thapost¦les,August super Iohan the whiche wryttynge saynt Augustine vpon Iohn doth shew in these wordes Peter who he toke ye keies dyd signyfye ye holy church For yf the foundacyon of the chur¦che were not in Peter our lorde wold not haue sayde vnto hym I wil geue the the keies of ye kindom of heauen saynte,Peter signify¦eth ye hol chur¦ch Augustinus Hierom & saynt Augustyne do proue the same vp∣on this texte, take ye the holie gost whose offēces you remit they shal be remytted vnto them and I wil geue to the the keyes of the kyng∣dom of heauen, whych Augustyne nameth the sciens and power to dyscerne but also Ambrosein his boke of the dignyte of prestehode. doth affyrme that in saynt. Peter the apostle all preestes receyueyd the keies of the kyngdome of hea¦uen, lykewyse orygen sayth.All prestes in peter ar ye ke∣yes of heuen. Thin¦kest
thou that the keyse of ye kyng¦dome of heuen were geuē onlye to Peter and ye none other good men shall receyue them.Origin super math homilia, l, ¶ But if that is spoken is cōmen amongest al men, I wyll geue the thy keys of ye kingdom of Heuen, howe is that, that althyng whiche we haue refrreed before vnto peter do not apere to {per}tayne vnto eue¦ry man (For in the Euangelist Iohan̄e Iesus geuing the holye gost vnto his discyples,Iohan ii. brethinge vpon them dyd saye, receyue you ye holye gost, whosoeuers synes you remette, they shalbe remitted vnto them, whosoeuers synns you reta∣yne they shalbe retained, as though he had spoken to al those that were constitute as Peter was & wheare as in another place Christ spake, Peter I haue prayed for the that thy fayth faile not,Luc, xxii but when thou
arte conuerted, strength thy bre∣therne,Another terte wherby that papistes cha∣leng aucthory¦te for the bis∣shop of rome, August ī quest note q, lxxv doth this be token the pre∣eminence of peter as though it we¦re peter onlye vpon whome ye chur¦che was edifiede all other beinge excluded, saynt Augustyne sayth did he praye for Peter and prayed not for Iohan &. Iames I holde mi peace of other Therfore it is ma¦nyfeste, that in Peter, all the other be conteyned. For chryste in Iohn doth saye, I praye for them yt thou hast geuen vnto me,By Peter is vnderstand ye vniuersall churche, wherfore it is manyfest that by Peter we vnder∣stande the vnyuersall church as it euidentli appereth in mani places by saynt Augustyn,August super psall, specialy whe∣re he sayth certaine thinges be spo¦ken whiche although they apere to partayne peculyerlye to Peter the Apostle, yet haue they neuer many∣est sence but when they be reffered nto the churche, whose person in ygure Peter dyd represente
as it is apertely knowen, but now lette vs come vnto the wordes of chryst in the last chapter of Iohn,Iohan vitimo whiche wordes,The, iii texte waer by they chalenge pry∣macy these that affyrme this hygh power do so ernestly re∣garde that is to wytte, peter louest thou me, Fede my shepe To fede ye shepe of chryst after the saynge of BedeBede is to confyrme them that be¦leue in chryst that they shrynke not from the fayth and Instantly to labour and dylygence yt they dayli more and more take encrease in ye faith Therfor they as saint Augu¦stē doth saye yt fede ye shepe of christ in thys mind that they wolde haue them to be theyr shepe and not the shepe of chryst do confound them selfe that they do it not for ye loue of christ,To fede the shepe of christ is to confirme them that be∣leue in chryste and to encrea¦te they fayth, August, super Iohan, vltimo but for couetousnes ether of glorye or dominion, or of lucre. Not for obedyence,August de a∣go, christo, cap xxxx, not for intente to help thē or for loue for to please god, & in this boke of the agony of
a chrysten man, he saythe that it was not without cause amongest al thapostels that peter dyd repre¦sent the person of this catholyke churche,that was spo∣ken to peter, was spokē to al thapostles, and that the keyes of the kyngdome of heauen were geuen to thys churche, and whan it was spoken to him it was to al, louest thou me, fede mishepe, ād so these wretches while they in peter do not vnderstand the stone and wyl not beleue that the keys of the kyng∣dome of heauen were geuen vnto the churche they haue lost thē oute of their hādes. Bede also vpō this last chapiter of Iohn sayth thus yt was spokē vnto peter was spokē vnto al the dyscyples of chryst for the other of the appostles were the same that, Peter was,There is but one floke whi¦che was fed of al thappos¦ses with God consēt who peter receuyd with  with  they very sheperd al ther is but on flocke she¦wed whiche was fedde of all ye ap∣postles wt out agremēt or cōsent & syns that tyme is fed by the sucessors of them with mutuall &
comine dyligence, bysides this am¦brose in his boke of the dygnyte of presthodde vpō these wordes fede my shepe,Ambrosius doth assente vnto the sen¦tence before rehersed, saing which shepe and whiche flocke not onely Peter them receuyd but he receuid them with vs,Glosa ordina¦ria math, xvi, Al bysshopps and preestes haue equall, aucthoryte with Peter & why peter re∣ceuyde them specially, and all we receuyd thē with him, But wher as all bys¦shoppes and preestes haue equall aucthoryte with Peter. ¶ Not with standinge Peter rece¦yuyd it specyallye that euery man myght perceyue yt he that sepeta∣teth hym selfe from the vnite of ye fayth, cāne neyther be absoluyd of his synnes, nor entre into the kyng¦dome of heuen. And saynt HieromHierom sayde, from the vnyte of the fayth not from the vnyte of peter,What is vn¦derstand by ye seate of moy∣ses and by the seat of peter, of the Bysshoppes of Rome, but whoso¦euer supposeth rome to be the seat of peter, or anye other place, maye well appere yt he doth interpretate amysse the wordes of chryst, in the
xxiiii. chapiter of mathew, For whē chryst doth saye,Math, xxiiii, the scribes and ye phariseis dyd sytte in the seate of moyses, bi the seat of moyses ther is no man doubtes but the lawe of Moyses geuen by god & the pure doctryne therof is sygnyfyed and non other exterior seate. So ye seate of peter is rather the seat of christ in ye which Peter and al the other apostles satt is manifest to be no∣thyng elles but the pure gospel of chryst.The gospell is the seate of Peter, And euen as chryst dyd ad∣monishe his, yt they shulde beware of the leauen of the pharyseis whi¦che is theyr lernynge besydes the lawe so he doth commaunde vs to beware of false prophetes that is to saye frō them that teache theyr owne tradicions and not the wor∣des of christ, which interpretacion,Thei that tea¦che there one tradicions he false prophe∣tes, August super Iohan tract xlv. i, augustyn vpō Iohn doth cōfirme expōding thes wordes ye scribes & pharises sit vpon ye seat of moyses
do as they saye but do not as they do. ¶ What thyng elles dyd he saye sayth augustyne but here you the voyce of the shepeherd by the hy∣red seruauntes,Try ye teche thir owne tra¦dycyons seke not yt is chris∣tes but there owne. for syttyng apon the seate of moyses they teche the lawe of god, than foloweth yt by them god tech yt yf they wolde tech theyr owne tradicyons here it not. do it not, for suerly suche seke that is ther owne, and not that is chris∣tes wherof it is manifeste that the seate of moyses is ye lawe of moy∣ses & the seate of chryst in ye whych peter and the other apostles sate, is the gospel, and al suche that tea¦che not the lawe of moyses nor the worde of god syt not in the seat of Moyses nor in the seate of chryste or Peter or of the apostles,They that tea¦che not the la¦we of chryste st in ther ow¦ne chares and enter in at the windowes as theues but in ther owne chayres and seates whi¦ch cōing before chryst and enterīg in bi the window & not by the dore
whych is chryst, be theues and rob¦bers and taketh honour vnto thē selfes, not called of god as Aaron was vpō which sētēce chrysostome writing sayth euery chrysten,Chrysostome ho. xxx. s. man that taketh the worde of peter is ye seat of Peter,Euery man yt taketh y• wor¦de or peter is ye ee o peter and Peter sytteth in hym and lykewyse in a nother pla¦ce. Take ye hede my bretherne ho∣we ye set vpon the seate,Item, xl, dist. apite, bid hiom ibidē cap, iii, for ye seate doth not make the preest. But the preest the seate, nor the place dothe sanctifye the man, but the man the place,The seate do∣th not make ye preest but the prest the seat. he that sitteth well vpon the seate, taketh the honour of ye seate he that syteth yl doth iniurye vnto the seate,An il preist of his presthode geteth rebuke and therfore an yl preeste of his presthedde getteth rebuke & not dygnitye. ¶ If we shulde graunte thus al∣so that the seate of Peter were the place or the seate where he before sate, Gregorye,Gregorius  regu, lib, v, cap, xx. neuer the lesse doth
the church of Alexandria or of an∣tioche the seate of Peter, aswel as the church of Rome,Alexandria & anthioche we¦re the seate of Peter before ome therfore (of yt we haue shewed before) it is ma∣nyfest that, that the power ecclesi∣astical which some enlarge and ex¦tende so ample in the bysshope of Rome hath not hyr foundacion in the scriptures whiche ar alligate, for if the priuate person of Peter be not the foundacion of the chur¦che as we haue proued before, but vpon Peter as representynge the person of al, or as pronounsing the confession of the fayth of christen men whych is the fute and substā¦ciall foundacion of the churche,He proueth by a similitu∣de of ye empe∣roure that ye successors in the sete of pe∣ter can by no reason chalen¦ge ye preroga∣tiue of peter it hathe no more reason wherfore by that title of Peter his successors ī his cathedrall seate or Bysshope∣ryche shuld chalenge any preroga¦tyue of Peter, more then he which shal succeade the Emperour in the kyndomes of Spayne, shal there¦fore chalenge the empyre of the ro¦mayns,
because ye king of Spayn whyle he lyued had that dyngnite for Peter was not,Why Peter, was called hedde of the apostles, therfore called chyfe of the apostles or foundaciō because he was hede of this chur∣che, or that but for aspeciall prero∣gatiue of his merites he was elec¦te alone of al ye other, which shuld stande in stede of the other, whose confession nother flesshe nor blod hath reuelate but ye heuenli father which is in heuen, euen as nother cesar at this tyme is Emperour of rome, because he is king of spayn But bicause he was electe of them in whom is ye acthorite of eleccion ¶ Chryste chose Peter,Chryste those Peter before he was bissho¦pe of rome before he was bysshop of Rome, which pla∣ce it is put in dowbte whether he e¦uer sawe or no christ cōsidered his qualites & not his person,There contai¦neth successyō in the seates, but nowe in ye vertue and merites, in there setes & bisshoprichis, they contayn ethsuaession, but in their vertuse & merites there is no successyon, and they that be good do succede the ill
And the yll succede the good. yf Christ had geuen this authorite vnto the seat of rome it shulde ha¦ue remayned after the death of pe∣ter nowe vereli sith ther is no men¦cion made of rome whie do we ge∣ue rome su{per}iorite before authioch and why do not we prefarre authi¦oche whiche seat peter fyrst obtay∣ned but wherfore doth not Hieru∣salem excel al other where the seat of peter was mani yeres before he saw Rome where he receuid ye holi gost wher first he enflamed wt the spirite,why be not hierusalē and authioche pre¦ferred before rome. Act, ii, Peter made, iii, solemne ser¦mons, began fyrst to put in exer∣sice his office of preaching ye word of god, and where he made fowre solem Sermons,Act, i, one of the elecci¦on of mathias to be apostle in the Rowme of Iudas,Act, ii, a nother of the sendynge downe of the holy goost The thirde vnto the people where he restored his lymbes to hym whi¦ch was borne lame of his motherAct, iii, Act, iiii,
The fourth vnto Annas and Cay¦phas & the residewe of the preystes seniors and scribes, what shall we saye that in Hierusalem he dyd so many miracles that they brought furth in to the stretes theyr sicke people and laide them in their bed¦des and cowches that when Peter came bi the shadowe of him at the laste might come ouer them and ye multytude of thother Cyties nere vnto them ranne also to Hierusa∣lem bringing there sycke people & such as were vexed with vnclenly spirites, which were healyd all,Act, v, The miracles of peter in hie¦rusalem, al∣so to this that chryst euermore sett so moch bi Hierusalē. That when he sent furth his apostles into al ye worlde to preache remission of sy∣nes not onely to the Iwes,Nowe mache chryste sett by hierusalem but al∣so to al nacions of ye worlde he cō∣maunded them to begyne at Hie∣rusalem he forbadde yt they shulde not swere by that Cytye because it
was the cite of the grette kyng, of this cite Esaias dyd before tyme prophesye,Luc. xxiiii, out of Sion shal come a lawe, and the worde of god oute of Hierusalem.Mathew, v, There oneli in old tyme was the hie preisthode,Christ forbad they shuld not swere by hie∣rusalem there was ye temple & ye aulter, The holy of most holy sacrifices and oblaci¦ons,Esaia, iii syth the tyme / sayth our lorde that I brought my people out of ye lande of Egipte I haue not electe any Cytye wherin any house shuld be buylde in my name,In Hierusalē only was the hyghe preest∣hode with in the temple but I haue chosen Hierusalem that my name shulde be in it,Christe chose Hierusalē to build his tem¦ple i, and he sayth I wyl geue Hierusalem an Euangelyste and wysdome (by whome autours wil that christ the sone of god and the seconde deuyne person is beto∣kened) sayth in the holy cetie I ha¦ue rested & in Hierusalem my po∣wer,Gal, xxiiii, zachar, viii God by the prophete saith I wyll dwel ī Hierusalem, and by Sacharye our lorde speaketh I wyl dwel in ye myddes
of Hierusalem. And Hierusalem shalbe called the cytye of veryte lo I wil saue mi people of ye est parte and of the weste parte and I wyll brynge them and they shal dwel in the myddes of Hierusalem, & they shalbe my people & I wylbe theyr god in verite and Iustice and all the whole scripture is replete with the laudes of the Cytye of Hieru∣salem contrarye wyse rome is cal¦led babilon to whome our lorde ī ye apocalips doth threaton maledic∣cion yf we wil gyue credence vnto Hierom or Tertulian it is moche more lyke that this primaci or su∣periorite was laste vnto Hierusa∣lem whiche cytie god alwayes did moost fauour of the whiche cytye chryst speciallye toke cure of whi∣che he lefte to peter by name & not Rome,Rom, is called babilō to whō god threate∣neth maledic∣cions, It is lyke ye the premacye was laste at Hierusalem, Peter was bysshop of an¦thioche before rome, but also he toke the byssho¦pryche of Anthyoche before the
Bysshopriche of rome. ¶ Wherfore if it be that peter for soke fyrst Hierusalem and after ye anthioch, and than came to Rome Then we maie say that the elecion of Peter dyd constitute the prema¦cye, and not ye confession & graunt of god, and the premate authorite in that churche is by peter, a man as they say and not of christ being god, hauyng no foundacyon in ho¦ly scrypture but as they maye con¦tende it to be by the sufferaunce of god.God somtime suffereth tir∣ranical power to ponishe the people, By whiche reson al power cō¦myth of god, asmoche as tirranni¦cal power, whiche verely god som¦tyme doth not hinder or let but suf¦fereth for to afflycte and punisshe the people and somtyme doth send it, but if they contende the prerago¦tiue of peter to be at Rome rather then ani where elles bi the reason yt it was consecrate with the blod of peter why shulde not the church ofHierusalem, was cōsecrat with the blod of chryste as rome with pe¦ters blode
Hierusalem, by that reson moche more expel, whiche was santifyed & consecrate with ye blode of christ But nowe we wile come to speake of that power ecclesiastical which we purpose to speke of in ye .ii.Of the power taken after ye second maner pla¦ce whiche doubtles is confyrmed by holy scripture & semith to haue taken the limittes of her power bi the same, fyrst I wyll shewe howe ye this power ecclesiastical is not soo,The power ecclesiasticall was geuen, equally to all thapostles the takē as graunted vnto one before al other but equallye geuen vnto all thapostles, after yt I wyl shewe you, howe it was geuen me sureable so that it pertayneth not to those thynges whiche be vsur∣ped at these dayes vnder ye title, & that this power was not geuen to one but to manye diuerse exposy∣tors of scripture do testifi,Math vltimo Iohan, ii. for whē it is in scripture. Go you & teache al people, and receiue you the holy goost, and whose synnes you shall
remitte. &c. They write on this ma¦ner what authoryte sayth Chrisos¦tome can be founde more vniuer∣sal or greater after the mynd of au¦gustyne by these wordes the lawe and power ecclesiastyall is vnder¦standed to be geuen and by the sen¦tence of hierom and Ciprian al the appostles equallye toke authorite and pastural cure al indifferently vpon on daye that is to saye in pē¦thecost as sayth Augustyne)Augustinus, de quest noui, testam q, lxxxx in, Hierominus ad Ieniuian, Cipren desun¦plicitotepre lator, the lawe was geuen vpon whych day the holye gost come down vpon ye disciples they shuld take authorite and knowe to preache the lawe of the gospell what thinge coulde more manifestlye showe the equa¦lite of Peter & the other appostles than those elocucions so generally expressed besides this whē the dis∣ciples dyd aske Iesus who shulde be hyest in the kyndome of heuen.August de qu¦est noutest, q lxxxxv, Math, viii, By & by he set a childe in the mid∣des amongest them & sayd verelye
I saye vnto you onles ye be con∣uerted & become lyke chyldren ye shal not entre into the kyndome of heuen. Therfore who soeuer dothe humble hym selfe he shalbe moost in ye kingdom of heuen.The apostles ste for su∣perorite Bede doth sae that this question was asked of ye apostles for because they stro¦ue for ye prymace or superyoryte, & therfore chryst dyd sitte a childe in the middes amonges them.Childer be wī¦de of ambion & desire of pre¦eminence, That they myght learne that they shuld not seke for superiorite for childrē be cleane voyd of ambicion desire of preheminence & al affeccions of enui,They that be Amious cō¦not to heuen onles ye repent and ye glose doth interpretate this place of this fasshiononles ye be cleane conuerted from your ela¦cion and indignacion in the which ye be nowe & al become as innocent and lowlye by vertue as litle chil∣dren be. By ther age,Hieronimus, super matheu cap, xviii ye shal not en¦ter into the kyndome of heuen, hie¦rom dothe saye that althoughe that sentence maye be generall a
Agaynst al them that offende anye man yet after the dependinge of ye texte it may be vnderstanded to be spoken also againste the apostles, whiche by askinge this question who shulde be hiest of them in the kyngdome of heauen dyd appere to striue & contende of preemynēce of dygnite, and if they had contyn¦ued in ye offence they might by ther offending haue lost them, whome thei brought vnto theyr fayth, seīg the apostles dispute amonges thē selues of honour & prymacy crisos¦tome agreinge to the same saythe,Disto, xl. capi multi whosoeuer desireth primacy in er the shal finde confusion in heuen,Note, nor he shalbe commited amonges ye seruauntes of christ,Desire of pre¦macis causeth confusion. whosoeuer medlith of supiorite or preeminēce and therfore saynt cipryan & ana∣cletusCiprian ana∣cletus dyd agre & consent that all the appostles receyued equallyte of lawshype and eterenal honourthe appostles were equall,
honer & power and Paule writteth vnto ye corinthyans, I was in no¦thing inferior vnto ye hieste apos∣tles & thus speketh of him self whi¦che being so excelent apostle wolde not haue spoken if he ought to ha∣ue knowen any superioryte ī peter And in another place agreinge to the same sentence I thinke my self nothinge inferior vnto the othere apostles,ii. cor, iiii, & in another place agayn he wryteth on this maner, let a mā esteme vs on this wyse, as ye mini¦sters of god, and disposers of the secretes of god, & vpon these wor∣des of the same paul in his epistle to the galathians where he saythe that he did conferre or comen of ye gospel with the other apostles the gloseGlose interliniat addithe I haue not lerned of other as of my supe¦riors.Ad galathi, 1 But I did comen of the gos¦pel wt them as with misrendes &
coequalles & saynt ambrose vpon these wordes of Paul when peter came to anthioche I wt stode hym in ye face,Ambrosius ad gal, ii, he saythe he durst not ha¦ue done so, onles he had knowē hī¦self equall with him for they dyd adde nothinge vnto me but I ad∣ded to them vpon, this wordes of the same Paul. Iames and Iohn which semed to be pyllers gaue to barnabas and me theyr ryght han¦des of felowshipe that is to say of equalyte and he saythe they gaue their right handes & not commaun¦dement wherby verelye equalite might be perceiued saynt ambrose confyrmeth the same saynge other apostles semed to be superious be¦cause they were before this Paull lost because he was called last ve∣reli not in meites or authorite but betokeneth the dygnite of the apos¦tles to be estemed by reason of ty∣me as though in other thinges theAmbrosius, ii, oren, xi, xiii, c glosa ordi∣nar in cap, i, ad gall The dingnite of ye apostles, was estemede by plente of tyme
were equal of this that is rehersed before it is manifeste, what pow∣er and howe greate was geuen by chryst vnto men of ye churche yt is vnto his apostles & geuen to all ye, apostles of one measure & not ge∣uen for entent of primaci which is chalenged nowe at this daye,The prima¦ne church d not admite or hed or prema For if by ye ordinance of god one shuld haue bene superior or hed vnto the other howe chaūced yt that in ye be∣ginning of the church the contrari was obserued doth not the storye ecclesiastical beare witnes yt when the holye bysshoppes dyd mete to¦gether in ye councel in Nicen there were .iii patriarkes present there.Ecclesia. i histor  h, iii,  At the  of ien  were at  time  ¦kes,  there  pa  rome  sent be ¦der  ¦der, And the bysshop of Rome whiche was the fourth in order was ab∣sent. If one by the lawe of god is father of fathers and al moust be reduced into a vnite whye by the worde patriarke whiche is halfe greke,The ter ¦tation of  worde p¦arks halfe laten are there rekned
foure patriakes ye is to saye fou∣re Fathers of Fathers whiche be ioyned together by nomutual rela¦ciō īton other,The patriar∣kes were not subiect one to another, but as thoughe they by diuersite of power were rulers of othere men & they subiect to no man And in that order the bisshop of Rome ys hinder most. ¶ Whom if he ought to be ye hiest by ye lawe of god it was vncha∣ritable done to put him so hinmost in order & if he were hiest he lawe or constitucion of mā, it was done vniustly, But in so holye a coūcell as was then at Neceny it ys more like ttwith yt al thinges were obser¦ued done & constituted very iustli and equally and yf the bisshope of Rome ought bi ye law of god to be taken hedde of ye church,It hys lyke ye the councel of Necen dyd al thynge Iustli & in counted most holy and lawfull Founda∣cion of ye churche, Chiffe of ye chur¦che, The onlye & supreme vicarre of christe it is not credible those holye fathers to be so ingnorant,
yt they knowe not what they ought to do Nor so vngodly yt they wold not do that they ought to do. But ye councell is counted of euery mā to be most holyest,Libro, ix, cap et historia ec∣clesiastia libro v, ap, xxiii, and moost lawe¦fully congregate. And as it appe∣reth by the storye tripertite ye.The byshops∣pes of the este did resiste the Bysshopps of rome Bys∣shops of the este did resiste the bys¦shop of Rome boldeli. And as con¦cerning the obseruāce of ester The Bysshop of Rome coude obtayne nothing of the Bysshop of Londō Also pelagiusPelagius, the seconde writeth yt it is lawful for no man to calēge vnto him.It is lawful for no man to name him self vniuarsalle or hye Bysshop, The name of ye vniuer∣sal Bysshop his wordes contayne one this maner. Pelagius Pope writeth to al Bysshopps sayng let non of ye patriarkes take vpō him the name of ye vniuersal Bysshop.lxxxxix, disto cap millus For if one of them be vniuersall ye name of patriarks is diminisshed or taken away from thother. But god put away this (saith he from
the prestes do knowe them selfe b the custome of ye churche to be sub¦iecte vnto him that is made ye hed gouernoure,The bysshop∣pes be superi¦ours to prysts by custom and not by ye lawe of god, so let ye bysshops kno¦we yt they be superioures vnto the pristes more of custome than by any ordinance by the lawe of god. And the same Hierom in a nother place conserninge his sentence be∣fore in a pystle to Oceanus sayth.Hieronimus, ad Oceanus, Amonges our olde predicessores prestes and Bysshops were al one For ye one is the name of dignite ye other of age.Whye Bys∣shoppes were ordeyned and made And to Euagrius he wryteth thus. It is manifestly pro¦ued a prest and a Bysshop to be al one. But after where as one was electe which shulde be superior of the other it was done to put away sismis. Leste euery one drawinge after his minde ye church of christe shuld perturbe & corrupte it. For at Alexandria from ye tyme of mar¦ke ye Euangelyst vnto the tyme of
Heracla and Dionisius bisshopes ye prystes alwayes chose one amō∣ges them and set him in a hiegher place degre & called him Bysshop Euen as the oste shuld chuse them a captayn:At Alexandria prestes chose one of thē self to be ruler & called hym bis¦shope, or as if the deacons a∣monges them shulde chuse one in genius man and call hym archdea¦con or chefe deacon and a litle af∣ter. Where so euer the Bysshoppe is, other at Rome, or at Engubii,Neyther po∣were ryches, nor hmylyte cā make a bis¦shope hyer or lower, or at Constantinople, or at Rgim or at Alexandria, or at Taue he is of one ye same. And the same prest∣hode, nother power of Riches nor humilite of pouertye cane make a Bysshop hier or lower But al be ye successours of ye Apostles,Anacletus In consiliis i¦sidori de ordin episcoporum & where as anacletus shew with if these be nacletus works that are ascribed to him that the see of Rome is the first & these of Alexandria seconde and so furthe. When he doth make them al & cal them patriakes, it is
manifeste ye they be rulers or hed∣des of other and not subiecte vnto other, and where as one patriarke is chefe,The fathers of the pryma∣tiue churche shronke from ye vnite of pry¦macie ye other haue non authori∣te ther, in so moche that by this ma¦ner of distruccion of ye patriarches it mai wel apere yt the first fathers of the church did shrinke from the vnyte For in the councell of nicē ye wordes that folowe be had,In historia ec¦clesiasti libro x, chap, vi, it is or¦deyned that at alexandria and in the cyte of rome the olde auncient custome be obserued that the one haue the ouer syght and cure of Egipte and the other to haue the ouersyght of the churches with in the diocese of RomeDist, lxv mos antiquis, et in cōcilio niceno ex Isydoro ¶ Which in other bokes is writē with these wordes, let ye olde cous∣tome be kepte in Egipte Libean & penthapolys so yt the bisshope of Alexandria haue the power ouer al them, for the bisshope of Rome hath lyke maners and customes.
Likewise at anthioche and other prouinces let theyr preuyleges be obserued in theyr churches,di, lxv, cap v & thys is manifest and clere generallye,He that is ma¦de bysshop wi¦th out consent of the metro∣politan shulde be no bysshop yt whosoeuer be made bysshop with out the consent of the Metropoli¦tan the grerte sinode or councel ha¦th determyned that he shulde ou∣ght to be no bisshoppe but and yf he be made by the comen and rea∣sonable decre of all and approbate after the ordinaunces of the chur∣ch of two or .iii.dist, lxv, cap sane, It was decre¦ed in the coun¦cell in aphrica that the bys∣shope of rome shulde not be superiour to al other, Inconsilio a¦phrica, iii, cha xxvi, disto, lxxxxix, chap. primo after theyr proper contencions saye against him lett the sentence of the more perte take effecte, and in the councel of Affri¦ca many Statutes ar founde whi¦che playnlye shewe that it was in∣acted and obseruyd that one Bis∣shop as the bisshop of rome shuld not bere rule ouer al other. Fyrst it was decred that ye bisshop of ye first¦se shulde not be callyd chefe or hed¦de of all prestes,Non ought to be called they chiffe or hede bysshope or he preist, or the hyest preest or any suche name but onelye they
Bysshop of ye fyrst or chefe see. For there was at that tyme thre patri∣arkes of whom euery one was cal¦led Bysshop of the hiest see,In cōsilio my leuitan that is to say the Bysshop of Antioche of Alexandrya & of rome,He that is ex∣communicate in on diocesse ought not to be reduced in to another di¦ocesse, as Gyrald doth wryte in his Cronycles, and in the councel of Mileuitan in the xviii. Chapiter. Whosoeuer be ex¦communicate in Aphrica yf they gopreuely into other partes beyon¦de the see, there to be taken or receuid into comunion of christen men he shal therby lose his clarke shyp and Runne into Daunger of Irregular & in ye xxviii. chapiter. And if so be that in ye mother chur¦che ye bisshop be necligent agaynst heritickes let the other Bisshopes nighe aboute him diligentli assem¦ble them selfes to gether,If ye Bysshop of the mother churche be nec¦ligēt he shuld be warned of the other bys∣shoppes nighe aboute, & warne him of his necligens that he maye not excuse him selfe. But if it so be that wt in sixe monethes after this
assembling If the excucion therof be in his {pro}uince, he do not labour and sewe to conuerte them to the vnyte of the catholyke faythe lett him not receiue or minister Sacra¦mentes tyl the tyme, he fulfil it. If the doctor or executour com not to the places let not the wyte be ascri¦bed to ye bysshop, And in the .xxiii.Clarkes may Appeale from diocese vnto ye bysshoppes next aboute & from thē to ye coūcels or pri¦maces of the prouynces chapiter also it pleaseth vs yt pres¦tes deacons or other inferor clar∣kes in causes as shall chaunce thē to haue yf they cōplayne of ye Iud¦gement of theyr own Bysshop, let ye Bisshops ye be nye vnto thē here thē and finisshe betwixte thē what mater soeuer it be, so they be chosē bi them and wt consent of theyr bis¦shops, & if it shalbe thought neces¦sari to apele also frōthē ye shall not apeale but vnto ye coūcels of Aphri¦ca or else vnto ye primaces of there prouinces. And whosoeuer will a∣peale vnto other perties beyond ye
sees shal not be suffered in Aphri∣ca to receyue the communion of christen men.Conci niceuo cap. v And ye councel of Ny¦cene hath ratyfied yt causes shulde not be determyned out of ye prouī∣ces where they began,Causes shuld be determined within ye pro∣uinces where they begonne, and whoso¦euer were excommunicate in one pro¦uince shulde be receyuid of no mā in cōmunion in ani other prouince & the bisshop of rome is not except Of this matter treatyth an Epistl of the councel of aphrica vnto po∣pe Celestyne,In concicarta¦ge vi, in fine in so moche sureli yt this day ye churche being wel encre¦ased doth forbydde nowhyt but (si the suche vnite is not necessarye)Vnite is not necessarie but there myght be, xx, heddes, there might be twentie constituted whiche thinge it is very lyke that the bysshops of rome did feare lea¦ste hit shulde haue come to passe.Phocas empe¦rour, ¶ And therfore boniface did sew vnto the emperour Phocas that ye prymacy of the churches of Rome hauing then nosure ground workeSome good mē that were bysshoppes of
might be constituted and confyr∣mid by his commaundementes & lawes for olde bysshopes of rome dyd refuse that vniuersal primacy and prorogatyue offered frely vn∣to them in the councel of chalendo¦nense andone of them vsed the sa¦me honour,rome dyd refu¦se the prymaci offered to thē frely in ye coū¦cel Paulus de¦cimus de gest rone, li, xviii, Gregorius in regist, li, iiii, & fyrst of al that durst name himselfe the vniuersall bys∣shop was Iohn bisshop of constā¦tinoble,Iohn bisshop of constantino¦ble was the fyrst yt named hym selfe vni¦uersal or hede bysshope for the which cause he ga∣te him gret enuye and troubled all ye worlde with his contencion, but the Bysshoppes of rome resysted hym stiffely fyrst pelagius and af¦ter gregorius & yet they toke not vpon thē that honour. But onlye they thus suppressed the entent of Iohan.Bonifacius ye iii, gat the pri¦maci by ye hel be of the Em¦perour phocas Tyll at the last arose Bo∣nifacius the .iii. whiche by the aye¦de and helpe of phocas the empe∣rour gate vnto him and his succes¦sors the chefe honour and prima∣cye But not without great conten¦cion & striffe because ye bysshop of
constantinoble did stiffeli affirme that ye preuilege belonged to hym here maye Rome vnderstande yf she be not vnkynd & or forgotting of benefites done to her, howe mo¦che she is bound vnto bonyfacius the .iii,De inā et obe¦diē in extrera cap, vnā sāct & the .viii. of the whiche .ii. bonifacius the fyrst dyd arme his seat with one swerd ye other dyd ar¦me it with twayne,Bonifacius the, iii, dyd ar¦me the see of rome with on swerde boni∣face the, viii, dyd arme hit with twaen, Insomoch they toke away from princes there swer¦de but where as he doth permytte them of his gentylnes and so dyd amplyfye his domynion. With so greate and extreme desyre to beare rule that he was not content to be ruler of one worlde,The bisshops of rome were not cōtēt with the rule of one world but yt y mouste spoyle purgatori and rule, ii worlds as the sainge is of Alexandria, but he began, to Raygne in hel that by his authori¦te he wolde Robe or spoyle purga¦torye & so haue domynion of two worldes. But the fyrst bonifacius did obtayne his primace by ye com¦maundementes of and Statutes
of Phocas. Constantinus had or∣deyned ye same before as Martine doth wryte in his Cronicles,Phocas empe¦rour But in dede Iustinian ye good Empe∣rour doth shew in his lawes,Cōstantinus, Emperour, that ye cyte of Constantinople .iii.Iustiniam em¦per, spiry¦tuall thinges dyd enioye the preui¦lege of olde Rome. And after that tyme in the prouynce of Auynion the prerogatyue dyd contynewe & consyste Successiuelye whiche is called the seate of Peter,These did cō¦tinew at aui∣nion long sea¦son and is cal¦led the seat of peter, which pre¦rogatiue yf it had be, belongynge to any place and the proper Iuris¦diccion of the cytie of Rome bi the lawe of god it could bi no meanes been translated thense. But & that prerogatyue were personal it was exinete with the person of Peter But as we in peter do vnderstand his confession or else the person of a bisshope in whiche case it shulde be consequent yt, ye power doth not pertayne belonge to them that syt
in the seate of peter but to them yt succed vnto his confession or into his dignite.Hieronius ad Euagriū, That is to say, as sait hierom reherseth, that that power shulde be vnderstand to be geuen to bysshops by god in what place so euer they be,God gaue bis¦shops authori¦te but non do¦minion, not withstandyng whē he gaue them this authorite he gaue them not domynion wtall For where as he speaketh of domi¦nion he sayth thus luc .xxii. kin∣ges of the gentilles haue domyni∣on ouer them but it shall not be so with you,Christ forbed¦deth superiori¦te amongeste his dysciples, but whosoeuer is hiest a¦mongest you lett him be as the lo∣weste & he that is chefe as he that doth minister, of the which words barnarde doth playnelye affyrme that the apostles were interdute al diminion and thus doth he inuay or speake agaynst them that wold chalenge to them dominion,Barnards de consideracion ad engeniū li, ii. he say¦th then go to be bolde and vsurpe as a lorde, ye office of apostle or else
beinge apostle, take vpon the lord shippe & dominion for surely thou arte prohibite from bothe yf thou wylt haue both attones together thou shalt loose both or elses thou shalt be of that nomber of whome it is spokē they haue raygned but not by me. ¶ Vnto thys agreethe verye well that,Ex quadrunio that is wrytten inquadrunio let him vse the swerde that hath re¦ceuyd authoryte of the swerde. For verelye Authoryte or power was constitute by god that they shulde take the sworde to the punischemēt of the ill doers, And vnto ye prayse of them yt do wel, of them ye vsurpe or take vpon them the swerde it is wryttyn euery man that taketh a swerde shall perishe with the swer¦de, ponder there the wordes of ch∣ryste yf thou professe thy selfe to be ye discyple of christe, Prices of ye
gentiles beate rule ouer them and they that haue, authorite ouer the ar called gracious lordes, but you shall not be so,He that with highest sayth chryste shalbe lowest, but he that wylbe highest amongest you lett hym be your seruaunt. ¶ If thou take vppon the, they ministery of seruis of christ if you refuse not the yoke of our lord abi¦de in the same estate in which thou waste called,i. Pretri, v and suffer lay men to haue the dominion of the people. Lykewyse blessed Peter in the .v.Petri, v, chapiter of his fyrste epistle sayth, I desire you prystes which am al∣so a preest my self, as moche as lye¦th in you, fede, the fllocke of chryst haue ye ouersight and cure therof not as compelled therunto, but wt a good wil not desiring vnlawful lucre, but with a good mynde, not as excusinge dominion or authori¦te ouer ye charge but that ye geue
god the example vnto the flocke. And Barnardus vpon these wor∣des of Peter wrytyng vnto Enge¦nius sayth thus Dyd he leaue do¦minion vnto his successors?Barnardus, de consideraci one li, ii Here peter him self, not berynge rule he sayth and lest he shulde thynke he spake yt onely for humilite & not for trewth it is the sayinge of our lord in the gospell.Peter left no dominion, to his successors Kinges of the gentilles beare rule ouer them. &c. Furthermore paule in his seconde epistle to the corinthians saythe.ii, Cor, i We be not as lordes ouer you vn∣der the title of fayth but we be hel¦pers of your ioyr.Chrisostō, li, ii, dialog cap iii, Chrisostome cō∣fyrminge the same sentence sayth. We haue no dominion, for these yt be without seculer Iudges Ime∣ane, when they haue subdued all lewde and yll persons do shewe & excercyce great power agaynst thē and refrayne them whether they will or o from theyr olde and vy∣ciouse
maners and vnthristines. But in the churche it is necessarye to conuerte them that be wyllyng and not by coaccion or compulciō for we haue no power geuē to vs by the lawe that by aucthoryte of sentence we maye constrayne any mā to refraine from his offences and vices:The churche hath no pow∣er to cōtrayn or to ponishe, vnto the which senten¦ce hierom in his epistle to Helido∣rus in ye exitaphe of Nepotianus doth agre and assent sainge a kīg ruleth men whether they wil or no A bysshop them that be willinge. The kynge maketh them obedien¦te and subiecte with feare or drede the Bisshop is geuen to serue mē. Besides this Gregory bysshop of rome dyd commytte the examinaci¦on of worldly causes to them whi∣ch had knowlage and lernynge of exterior thinges,Gregorye in Iob cap, xxxi, Worldly cau∣ses longe to la¦ye Iudges & not to sperytu¦all men, as seculer and ci¦vill causes. And from them that be endewed with spiritual goods
he taketh away all busines & solici¦tude of worldli thinges that they maye the better entende to serue & order the superioure goodes whē they be not compelled or bounde to dispose the Inferioure goodes. What thynge coulde more playne¦ly declare that bysshopes and pre∣lates shulde not intermedle with Empire or dominion than those wordes of chryst in the Euaunge∣lyste Iohn.Prelates shul¦de not medle with empire or dominion which pertay¦neth to kyngs Iohan, xviii My kyngdome is not of this worlde. That is to saye, af¦ter the commen glose, I am not to rule or raygne as with temporall dominion, for that is the offyce of kynges as ye maye gethe of the∣se wordes in the actes of the apost¦les.Actes, xxvii ¶ I stande at the Iudgement se∣at of Sesar where I ought to be Iudged also I apele to cesar bi yePaule was iudged before saye Iudges and dyd apele to thē power
which wordes the comen glose, do∣th vnderstand the place of Iudge∣mentes of Emperours & kinges, to be singuler and peculyar and yt al compulsiue Iudgement of the prestes ought to be cleane taken a waye. For chryst in Iohn doth tea¦che his apostles,The kīgdom of god is not of this world that is to say tho∣se that are sent, and also other whi¦che take vpon them the doctryne & aucthorite of thapostles ought not to chaleng or enterpryse here any kyndome or domynion, for he say∣eth, my kyngdome is not of thys worlde of the which I came to tea¦che as the comen glose saythe, as thoughe he wolde say as saint Au¦gustyne sayth here you Iwes and gentilles,Augustus  Iohan tracte xxxv I do not let your domi∣niō in this worlde what wolde ye more, come you by fayth vnto the kyndom which is not of this worl¦de for what is his kindome. But those that beleue one hym. Where
fore let bysshoppes and prestes o∣uerse and loke to those thynges yt partayne to god,The office of Bysshoppes i, Paralip ts as we rede it com¦maundid to Amarias the preist in the olde testament, and after Hie∣rom vpon the boke of Leuiticus, These .ii.Distin, xxxvi, cap, s thinges be the office and excercises of a bisshoppe to larne of god, Redinge ye holye screpture And with moche meditacion to te∣che ye people and teche them those thingis which be larned of god. & not of his awne mynde not by the vnderstondyng of man, But by ye wiche ye holye gooste teachith, also in ye councell of Carthage the iiii.Consist car∣thage, iiii, A bisshopp shulde onlye geue him self to studyeng prayer, and prea¦chynge of the worde of god. And in Secular and wordli busines let them be obedient to princes & pote¦states,i, Tim, iii, o beinge the Commaunde∣mentes of them, And redye to all good workes. So Paule dyd war¦ne
or councel Titus, The thinges rehersed before do confirme the ec¦clesiastical power. But it deniethe dominiō they geue aucthorite but noe Iurisdiccion To admonishe,What pertay¦neth to Bys∣pe, to exhorte, to comforte, to desire, to teche to preche, to mynyster sacra∣mentes, charytablye to rebuke to blame or finde faute with. To entreate for goddes sake to en∣crease and augment the hope and truste in god, to feare sume by the terryble threteninges of Scriptu¦res is the proper offyce of them, yt are in the stede or place of ye apost∣les, and also of them vnto whome it was sayde, whose synnes Som¦euer ye Remytte shalbe remytted &c. And lawes, ponysshementes. Iudgementes restrayntes. Sen∣tences,What longe to princes kin¦ges and empe¦rours and suche othere longe to Emperous kinges and other po∣wers which enterpretacion of holi scrypture, dothe most agre vnto ye
preachinge and techinge of chryst of the libertye of the gospel. Or el¦se if christe had mente thus yt euen as in the olde testament Moyses,Gal, iii, and the lawe were geuen vnto the people of ye Iwes in stede of scole masters:If decrees of bysshopes do bynde our con¦science we be ī worse case thā the Iue in ye olde lawe, so the Bysshop of Rome a mongest chrysten people shulde haue that office that he shulde ma¦ke and put vnto the people, lawes and Instruccions (as they cal thē) which shulde holde & bynde mens consciences. Then Christ had not permitted or chaunged seruytude or bondage with libertye, but bon¦dage with bondage in verye yll & heuye condicion, That is to wyte where as the Iwes did folowe the lawe, commaundid by the mouthe of god, and that a certen lawe: we that be christen men shuld be com¦maundyd to be guyded by the la∣wes of menne beynge of dyuer∣sytye of myndes. And ofte tymes
mutable, whose lawes also be mo in numbre,The lawes of Popes be in∣numerable ād intollerable, than ye capacite of man an other vnderstande or elles re∣member. But that power to make and ordeyne lawes is added and adicte vnto that other power gra∣unted by god, of yt which we speke before, and the yoke of chryst whi∣che chryst hym selfe in the gospell doth cal so gentle and lyght,Mathew, xi, the bysshoppes of rome haue moche more harde better & intollerable thā was the bondage of the Iwes and therfore the fathers of the pri¦mytiue church when they had In / In the primi∣tiue church yt decres of coū¦seles were cal¦led canons or rules and not lawes uented honesti and holsome tradi¦cions by the which the rude Igno¦rante and confyrme people might be ordred. Thei did make differēce betwene theyr tradicions & lawes with moderacion of theyr name, & lest that they shuld appere to take vpon him more then they thought they had by ye graunte of god, they dyd not name thē lawes or statutes
but canons that is to saye rules or Instruccions as contayninge ordinaunces profitable vnto a ch∣rysten lyfe as they supposed & yet not vtterly necessarye, for al haue not obserued thordinaunces made by thapostles.The ordinan∣ces of the apo¦stles were not all receued & the lawes of bisshoppes be as ye rules of Benet Frācis and suche. But after the opini¦on of some men they be counted a mongest those which be not autho¦rised and euen as the rules of Be∣nete / Fraunces, Dominicke. and Augustine be receiued & admitted of some and haue not ye stryngthe of lawes. But as we binde our sel¦fes vnto them nor we receyue thē as lawes with necessite of obedyē¦ce, but as rules and informacions honestye and vertuose, pleasant & acceptable to god and we that like them, do professe them. ¶ That we goynge the same step¦pes and folowynge these good fa¦thers as they folowed christ shuld leade our lyfe in the spiryte of hu∣militie with sobernes & mekenes.
So our fathers did admitte the ru¦les of the bisshops rome and theyr Informacions as longe as they semed vertuose and to set forward onely the glorye of christe and not al but some,Oue fathers dyd not admit al the canons of the bisshop¦pes but some as they thou∣ght good and vertuose, that is to saye as eue¦ry prouince (as ye rules or Canons contayne) dyd folowe theyr owne myndes. Nor they receiuyd thē as lawes and statutes but as thei pre¦tende by theyr name, that is to say, as rules and Informacions. For they were called euermore Rules or informacions. Till bysshoppes that came after dyd adde and put vnto them the name or terme of la¦wes that they might therby vsur∣pe necessite of obedience, and gett it by vse and custome, by whyche wayes it was brought to passe yt it is called the canon lawe.If bysshopes haue aucthori¦te of god to make lawes & bynde menes consienses all men are boūd to kepe them, but ye cōtrary is obserued, For yf it be geuen to them by god to hym aucthoryte to make lawes whi∣che shulde bynde, and onerate the
conscience of men it shuld folowe with al that if they haue aucthori¦te by god to make lawes yt other men are bound to obeye them whi¦che thinge if it were trewth no ma¦ner custome contrarye or repug∣nant to the canon lawe myght by reasons be diffended and yet the same canon lawes do consent and confesse that notwithstandynge suche customes contrary may con¦syste and stande,Distin iiii cap statunnus. for vereli Thelel¦phorus Archebysshope of the cytie of rome hath ordeyned that al clar¦kes shalde abstayne from flesshe.Thelesoho∣rus ordened the clargy to fast, xl, dayes before Ester, vii. wykes wholye before Ester. But this decre, as gratianus say∣the because it is not approbate bi the custome and maners of people doth not condemne thē yt do other wyse as gylty of offēce or trāgres¦sion wherbi it is manifest yt the ca¦non lawe byndethe no man of ne¦cessite, yt nowe ye canō lawes as we cal thē haue not theyr streighneth
and vertu by ye auctoryte of Bys∣shoppes that be the makers there¦of.The Canons haue not ther authorite bi ye makers but by ye consent of ye receuers Lawes reqe obedience. But by the people receyuinge them willīgly, where as otherwise vertu and strength of the lawes is suche yt it requyreth of other men necessite of obedience, lest the Auc∣thorite to make Lawes shulde by contempte, be had in derysyon or lytle regarde. And so it is the beste and moost surest conclusion if we be not bounde in payne of deadly syne, bi the cōmaundement of god to receyue all theyr ordinaunces. Then ye bysshope of Rome or any other Bisshope hath not auctorite to institute suche Canons vnder yt or suche payne. Agayne if we be bounde to receyue them all of the Clarge ar bound at thes daye as manye as ar called vnto the lotte of our Lorde to obserue the faste of .lx.The clargi ke ith not ye fas¦te o l dayes before ester, dayes and because they kepe
it not, it is offence whiche by conty¦nuaunce of tyme is not minisshed but augmēted. Notwithstanding they consent of all chrystente for ye moste perte hath by longe vse and custome Iudged the contrarye,De consecra∣tione distin iii, cap sabate, In fraūce thy eate flesshe all saterdayes be¦twene chte ma  as de & Gratian doeth defende them that kepe yt not from ye payne of trans¦gression, which thinge also ye chur¦ch of Fraunce not keping the fast of the Saterdaye betwene the na¦tiuite of christ and the purificaci∣on of the pure mayde and mother mary. Althoughe it were comaun¦did by pope Innocent that it shul¦de be kepte euerye weke doth euy¦dently proue the same for as it is writton in a nother place as we ha¦ue rehersid before euery prouynce or coūtray is abundant or stidfast in his owne, meaninge nor at this tyme al Canons which we cal the Popes lawe, haue not therr hole
streinght and vertu in euery place with al men, In the which thinge if god be offēdid if ye power geuen of god be violate theyr is very gre¦at slackenes or sufference in them whyche moche regard that thinge that, is it not lawfull for the bys∣shope of rome by the Popes lawe to prouide for promocions or bene¦fices in all places and with euery man whiche lawe of theyrs ye bys∣shoppes of rome in tymes past ha¦ue labored ernestlye that it myght be receyuid as a lawe whiche shul¦de binde euery man that shulde in¦tende nothing to the contrary nor make any resistence or repugnan∣ce agaynst it,The Bysshop¦pes of Rome haue laored to binde men to kepe there decrees & notwithstandynge in England after it had obtayned and taken effecte longe all men wt stode it,England dyd resist ye popes prouisions for pomocions & made a lawe to the cōtrarii so that there was a lawe made agaynst the transgressors & estabished with seuer commaund¦ment amongest whome there is no
doute but there was manye good men / & there be some yet that coul¦de not awaye with these popes la∣wes in that behalfe vnles the bis∣shop of rome dyd certyfy or shewe yt they were wirtton bi the hande of god,Bysshops ma¦de a lawe that clarkes shuld not be suyed before secular Iudges but ye contrary was alwaies obser¦ued. also bisshopes of Rome haue decreed that clarkes shulde not be brought before seculer Iudges for any maner cause, But this sta¦tute is kept no where. And althou¦ghe many lawes and canons con∣cerning that matter be publisshed with grette and daungerous pay¦nes yet the contrarie is euery whe¦re obserued without any daunger or feare, wherbi it manifestly appe¦reth yt these canon lawes (as they cal them) Be nothinge else but ru¦les and informacions whiche are wonte alwayes to take place or ef¦fecte as ye people doth admytte thē or dissanul them, for by ye same rea¦son yt some maye be reiecte, al may
be contempnyd and forsaken, for it is not in the choise or eleccion of the people or subectes that thei ma¦ye determyne to whiche they wyll obey, to whiche they will not, but if theyr aucthorite be of god, and yf we maye apply to this entent, this sainge of the gospell. They syt in the seate of Moyses which teache and do not but do you as they say but do not you as thei do,Mathew xxiii al we ar wrapped in gret peryll and daun∣ger of helle which haue contenned the preceptes and lawes of the bys¦shoppes of rome some one wayes. But euery one in some maner po∣ynte and that not by Ignorance. But we haue obserued the contra¦rye knowinge willinglye and sein¦ge,Bysshopes ha¦ue suffered ye cōtrary to the¦re lawes to be kept and kne¦we hi. and yet the bysshopes of rome heringe perceyuynge senge, and fe¦lynge these thynges by dissimula∣cion haue suffred the pastoures or Sheperdes of the churche whiche
without anye doubte yf they had thought so (for the cure and charg of soules that thei haue) other wol¦de haue broken & adnihilate their owne lawes which make so many christen men offenders or else they wolde haue takē payne to se them obseruid with more dilygēce. But where as nother of these thynges hath ben done with suche diligens and cure as the grauytie of cause requyreth. Doth it not wel appere that the Bysshops theyr selues do doubte of the aucthoryte of theyr lawes? & that they haue thought that theyr lawes might not be ad∣mytted of euery man without any daunger of soule? or whē they my¦slyke them, they myght be forsa∣ken or reprobate of thē which they cal theyr subiectes,The Bysshop is of Rome Subtell. but grette was the police and subteltye of the bys∣shoppes of rome / for whome they
dyd fyrste go oboute to abtayne ye chefe Empyre and supremyte, thei dyd deuyde the power and iurisdic¦tion with kinges with verye louin¦ge and gentle termes or titles,The power was deuyded with kinges and prynces, and so that they might be made lordes in spirituall thinges they dyd per¦myt to kinges all temporall thin∣ges. For other wyse ye hie bysshop¦pes do caleng both the swerdes,The bysshop∣pes of Rome affirme that thei haue al po¦wer and that the temporall power descen¦dyth from thē to kynges, & they do affyrme that they haue all power and Iurisdiction in theyr authoryte: and that the power whi¦che we cal temporall is deriued frō them to kinges, that is to say Ce∣sar hath thempyre deuided wt Iu¦piter and where as they haue ta∣ken away many thynges from prī¦ces bilonge vsurpacion and haue translated it to thē selues, yet they handell it soo that they make it as theyr liberalyte and gyfte what so euer power or aucthoryte kynges
haue nowe a dayes. And when it shal please them they put downe:They put do∣wne kinges when it plea∣seth them and set vp other, some kinges and set vp some, and they do gret thynges for they be myghtye. And the swerde (whiche they haue sharpened by the gentil∣nes and permission of prynces & endewed with worldly riches and possessions by the gentle and lybe¦rall gifte of princes) they excersice & drawe it out agaynst them whē they thinke best. ¶ Sekynge that is theyr owne pleasure not that is chrystes folo∣wynge in theyr doing not that the father of heuen hath shewed eueri man in his holye scripture as in example or a make that we shuld folowe. But that, that the flesshe & blode hath reuelate vnto them pre¦ferringe an humayne and worldli counterfette felycyte in berynge
rule before the trewe and perfecte beatitude in christ, and by this me¦anes, ye gretnes or largenes of this power dyd encreese.The largenes of ther power is leke astre∣me of walter, Which lyke a grette streme of water passynge o¦uer hir bankes or damime hath flo¦wen and Corrupte all the worlde. Let me not be enuied for speaking the trewethe. No man cane serue two maysters or lordes whylle he loketh to thoue he lytle regardethe the other he that serueth god dispi¦seth Riches. And paule sayth, No man that serue god wyll entreme¦dle or trouble him selfe in worldly busines.ii, Timothe, ii Whiche thynge the forfa¦thers of the churche perceyuynge, althoughe thei knewe that there is no yl whiche a man maye vse well yet neuer ye lesse euen as paule do∣the wrytte to all men of wyne.Eptes, v, Be you not ouercome & inebriate with wyne, in whome is lecherye. And that they shulde abstayne not only
from that else But from that, ye ha¦the lykenes or contagion of yll,The clargie shulde refuse possessions & haue nothing proper, and shulde vtterly avoyde all cau¦ses and occasions of yll. So these fathers inducyd by the aucthorite of scripture, do ernestly conclude, that the clargi shulde vtterly refu¦se faculties & possessions as they cal them, and that they myght the more effectuouslye perswade & en∣duce them to contemne them, they dyd manifestlye denye yt this was conuenient ye for them to haue do¦minion or proprietye. Not becau∣se that ryches is yl or because that they onelye do corrupte a man, for that, that entreth in at the mouthe or suche other exterior thynges do not defile a man but that that com¦meth out of the mouthe doth of tre¦weth defile, and hath infecciō.Math, xv, Ryches and possessions which draw¦eth a manes mynde frome, god But bicause ryches and possessions do other whiles moue away mannes
mindes from theyr places and sea¦tes, and bringe them downe from the contemplacion of heuenly thin¦ges vnto the vile busines and con¦sideracions of worldlye thynges & other whiles so doo tangell them that they can scantlye oftetymes ryde and lyfte vp them selfes (as our lorde,Math, xiii doth playnelye shewe in a parable. Wherfore with agret & whole consēt thei toke away from the clargi al propriete and domini¦on) for that entente (as Paule wri¦teth) that they taken from amon∣gest men as bysshoppes shulde ap¦pere constituted and ordeyned for men in those thynges that apper∣tayne to god.Ad hebreos, v i, q, i, ca quest duo sunt So writeth saint hie¦rō to acertyen leuite. There is two maner of christen men one maner or kinde is the whiche is ordeyned & mancipate to serue god to con∣templacion and praiet for whomeTwo maner of christen mē Spirituall & temporal
it is mete and conuenient to sease and not intermedle with anye cor∣poral busines,The enterpre¦tacyon of this worde clarke which is a lot or part as clarkes and reli¦giouse men and conuersis. Cleros in the greke tonge that is to saye clarkes in ye latē tonge signifieth a lotte, and therfore such men are called clarkes as chosen by lotte, for god chose them al for his. The¦se surelye be the kynges that rule them selues and other in vertue & so they haue theyr kyngdome in god and that betokeneth the crow¦ne vpon theyr heddes this crowne they haue by the ordinaunces of ye church of rome in the token of kī¦dome which is loked for in christe and the shauige of theyr heddes betokenyth ye forsakinge of al tem¦poral thinges for they beinge con¦tented with meate drynke and clo∣th shulde haue nothynge proper a¦mongest thē but althinges shulde be comō.What the cro¦wne of ye prest doth be token, What the sha¦uinge of there hedds betoke¦neth, A nother maner of christē
men ther is as laye men, for laos in greke is in Englishe people, for them it is lawful to posses tempo¦rall thynges but onlye for to vse them for there is nothing more mi¦serable thē for money to condemne god to them it is graunted to ma∣rye wyfes to tyll ye grunde to Iud¦ge betwene man and man to plea∣de causes to set oblacions vpon the aulters to geue the tenthe and so they maye be saued if by well doinge they auoyd all vyces.What is lau∣ful for lay peo¦ple. xii, q, i, cap, cle¦ricus, Hie∣rom to nepotianus confirmeth the saue. Therfore a clarke which ser¦ueth the churche of chryste, let him fyrst enterpretate his owne name and when he hath the enterpretaci¦on the dyffinicion of hys owne na¦me let hym labour to be agreable or lyke vnto yt he is called. For cle¦ros in ye greke, in laten is called a lotte or parte, therfore they be cal¦led clarkes other because the be of
the lot or parte of our lorde or bi∣cause our lorde hymselfe is the lot or parte of the clarge and whoso∣euer other is him selfe the parte of our lorde or hath our lorde for his parte shulde so behaue him selfe yt he myght bothe possesse our lorde and be possessed of our lorde.The that be they parte of our lorde can posses nothīg besydes they lorde, Who¦soeuer possesseth our lord and do the saye with the prophete my par¦te is our lord he can haue nothing bisides our lorde. For and if he ha¦ue anye thynge besydes our lorde then our lorde is not his parte as in this example yf he haue golde, siluer possessions chaung of hous¦holde stuffe, god wil not be conten¦ted to be his parte with these par∣tes but if I be the pate of our lor¦de and a particion of his inherita∣unce and take no parte a monge o¦ther tribes. But as a leuyte and a preist do lyue of the trueth and ser¦uith
the aulter liue of ye oblacions of the auter hauynge meate dryn∣ke and clothe I wylbe content wt this, & the bare crosse I wyl folo∣we bare and pore therfore I praye the and I wyll repete it agayne & agayne and admonyshe the that thou thinke not the office of a clar¦ke as a maner or kynde of your ol¦de excercise. That is to say that in the seruyce of chryst thou seke not worldlye lucre, and haue no more in possession than whan thou be∣gannest to be a clarke lest it be say¦de to the. Theyr clarkeshype shall not profette them manye be rycher when they be religiouse men then when thei where secular,Many be ry∣cher whē they be religios mē thē when thei were secular, and some clarkes waxe riche and possesse ri¦ches vnder pore chryst which they had not vnder the deuyll ryche & deceatfull that the churche myght sorowe to se them riche, whych the
worlde had before in pouertie, also saint Ambrose of the forsaking of ye worlde writeth thus,Ambrosius de suga secuie, ca¦pitule, ii he that ha∣th god of his porcion shulde take hede of nothing but of god lest he be letted wt busines of some other office for that labour that is spen∣te aboute other busines is plucked awaye from the honour of religiō and from this our office.What thing a preist must forsake This is ye very thinge that a prest shuld fle for he yt hath chosen to serue god must forsake his housholde mey / nye he must absent or put from hī those that he loueth most and ab∣sent hym selfe from his frendes. Hillarius vpon the .xxxix. psalme confyrmeth also the same sentence on this maner the childerne of Le¦uie shall haue no portion or lot in ye middes of theyr brother for our lorde god is theyr parte. Therfore the lawe geuen wolde no parte of worldlye possessyons to be geuen
to them that serue god. Bicause ye god was theyr parte. ¶ And also Peter the preacher of the gospell doth proteste that he had mo parte of humayne or worl∣dlye possession when he answered to hym that asked hym almes sa∣inge I haue nother golde nor syl∣uer but that I haue I geue ye Pos¦sidomus also of the lyfe of saynt Augustyne sayeth thus As it hap¦pened as it is wonte that ye people enuyed the clargye,ctorū, iii, Aseane of sai∣nt Augustyne in A srmon to the people for sakyng posse: ssions, because of the¦re possessions he spake vnto ye peo of god saing that I had leuer liue of the giftes and collacions of the people of god, Than to abyde the charge and ministracion of these possession and that he was re∣dy to do after theyr myndes that al the seruautes and mynysters of god myght lyue on that fassion as it is redde t tholde testament.
that they that dyd serue at the aul¦ter shulde take parte and lyue of ye alter & after that we knowe that he did refuse certē possessions not bicause that they were vnprofita∣ble for the pore but bycause he tho¦ught it iustice and equite that it shulde be possessed rather of the chylderne or parentes or of the kinflolkes of them yt were deper∣ted whome they wolde not bestow it vpon there death bedde and af∣ter he oftymes sayed that it was more sure and of lasse Ieoperdye for the churche to receue the be∣questes of them that were deper∣ted geuen to them there possessors full of busines and hurtfull & the bequestes rather to be offered and profered than to be by extremyte required. Also in his boke named of the comtempte of the worlde
the same Possidomus hath these wordes yt here after folowe. Who∣soeuer doth not forsake & renoun∣ce all that he possesseth cannot be my disciple he yt speketh to euery man that wolde that his disciples shulde haue nothinge proper,He that dothe ot renewouce all that he ha∣th can not be the discyple of chryst, he yt possesseth any thynge in erth is cle¦ane remoued from the doctryne of Crist had they an ithing proper to whome theyr maister had com∣maundid ye contrarye take noting with youe in the waye of whome Luke the Euaungelist doth shewe that they had al thynges commen marke what peter sayd to Iesus. Lo we haue forsaken al and haue folowed the. They which had lesse althynges had reserued nothynge for them selues. Then howe can they take vpō thē aucthorite to lo∣wse & binde which do  sume to ha¦ue any possession in erth whiche be not ashamed to saye our lorde is
the parte of my inheritaunce whe¦re is this sayinge of the apostles what concorde hath christ with Be¦liall whye do they eate the synnes of the people which wyl not leaue worldi possessions? If they recey∣ue the tenthe, with the children of Leuie howe can they take any par¦te amongest ye other tribes yf they wolde consider the Interpretaci∣on of theyr name, whithei be called clarkes or lottes. But bicause our lorde is ye lotte or parte of and heri¦tage of them,Barnardus  declumationi∣bis super eu¦angelio dixit Simō petrus ad Iesum. saynt Barnard lea¦nynge to this sentence sayth that clarke that hath parte in erth shal not haue perte in heuen. Also yf a clarke haue any thynge besydes our lorde,That clarke that hath his parte in erthe shall haue no perte in heuen our lorde shall not be his parte, as in example if he haue syluer if he haue possessions if he haue abundance of houshold stuf¦fe our lorde dothe not vowchsaff to be his parte with these thinges
and after he sayth let hym lyue of the aulter let him not waxe proude let hym not be rioutouse lett hym not waxe ryche let him not buylde him goodly palaces of the goodes of the churche chaunginge square bulding to rounde let hym not fill his coffers therof let hym not spende it in vaniteis and superflu¦us thinges let hym not extoll his kynesfockes with the goodes of ye churche let hym not therwith ma∣rie his necis I wil not saye his do¦ughters it is taken to be a cryme or offence moche lyke to sacrilege not to geue to the poore that that is the goodes of the poore suerlye the patrymonye of the poore, be ye goodes of the churche and it is wt holdō from them with vncharita∣ble crueltye whatsoeuer the mynis¦ters and bayliffes and not lordes and possessors take to them selues besydes meate drynke and clothe,
do you here in these wordes before that they be called the goodes of ye church and denyed to be ye good¦des of ye clargye?The goodes of the churche be the goodes of ye pore whi¦ch to kepe frō the power is moche lyke sa¦crilege. and yt he hath no¦thynge confyrmed to them whose perte or porcion god is which thin¦ges if they be spoken of al the clar¦gye generalli, shal it not moch mo¦re be spoken of ye bysshoppes? If the bysshop of Rome be not alaye man, after the mind of Hierom: he must nedes be a clarke which ma∣keth but two maner of chrystē mē if he be a clarke he hath renounsed not onely al that he had in possessi¦ons but by his owne delecciō whē he chose to be a clarke he semethe to haue refusyd all dominion and propriete as those holy fathers thī¦ke and say whome we haue recited before. Let bonyfacius the .viii.Bonifacius ye viii, loued pre¦emynence and named him sel¦fe lorde of all the worlde. re¦uyne agayne frō death of, Diotre∣phes of hys tyme which desired &
loued to haue preeminence in the church and pleade his matter and make a reasonable answere whye he named him selfe lorde of all the worlde, which coulde chalenge no¦thinge as his owne in al the worl∣de, onles he make or can proue the bysshop of rome to be a thryd ma∣ner or kynde of mē cleane differēt from clarkes and laye men.The frayltye of mā is euer more compasī¦ge and busye, But this is the condicion and frayltye of man that is euermore in contu∣nial mocion compasing entēdinge & busines. For whatsoeuer come∣th of affeccion it neuer resteth but as longe as ani matter remaineth it is euer busye. They that desyre dygnyte, honour, and ryches, ha∣uynge no measure therin euer la∣bour to come to the hiest and supre¦me preeminence, and whē they can clymbe nor go no farre they must nedes come bakewarde. Whosoe∣uer
hath redde the stories of ye bis∣shoppes of rome shal playnly per¦seaue and see what tyme fyrst they set theyr myndes to honour digni∣te, and possessions:He yt clymeth to ye hiest must nedes come downwarde a¦gayn, and to haue la∣bored alwayes in that thinge that they might come to the hiest and yt they toke more hede and diligence vpon Temporal thinges than vp on spirituall thynges.If possessiōs of the churche be of god it shal slande yf not it shal no continewe And this is as other humayn thinges, whiche albeit they go forwarde pleasantli in sight yet haue not they any con¦tuance scripture bearinge wytnes If it be of god it shall stande, if it be of mā it shal faule. And yt these thinges which bysshopes haue ta∣ken vpon them in this behalfe are not of god The authorite rehersed before do manyfestiye confyrme & ye ende yt it is lyke to come to at the¦se daies is like to proue ye same, ful vnaduisedlye they take vpō them
dominion of al thinges which by ryght can take dominion of nothī¦ge. But it was worthe a mans la¦bour in pondering this papistical power to consider also that thinge which we promised to speke of in the iii.The power of the citie of ro¦me is not so large by god, place whether bysshoppes of rome somtime haue so behaued them selfes that thei also haue she¦wed by wordes and dedes that the authorite of the see of Rome was not so ample and large by the la∣we of god, nor that it was compe∣tent for them to haue so vniuersal a power as we se it vsurped nowe a dayes, whose sentences yf they myght take effecte and myght ta∣ke awaye from the bysshop of ro∣me and eueri one suppose in this case or that whe shuld manyfestly se that Esope tellethe of the crowe in his fables apoore naked and wt¦out fethers.Dist i, lxxxxix. cap nullus Gregorie wol¦de not be cal∣led the hedde bysshoppe, Fyrst of all gregorye
toke awaye the name and titles of honour and as it semeth the pre¦rogatiue of preeminence for he wol¦de not suffer him selfe to be called vniuersall or hed bysshop, whiche thinge surelye he wolde not haue done onles in his consience he had thought (when he was bysshop of rome) that he was not the vniuer¦sal bysshop.We shuld no abhore the tre¦we names of honour. Where as if that were not whe are taught by holy scryp∣ture that whe shulde not abhorre from the trewe names of honour specially when chryst did answere vnto his disciples,Ihoan, xiii you cal me mai¦ster and lord and ye say wel for I am in dide. Therby it is manifest that Gregorye the bysshoppe was moued by no other cause yt he wol¦de not be called nor writon vniuer¦sal or hed bysshop thē lest he shuld offende scripture in that parte whe¦re it is sayd let no man take vpon hym honour but he that is called
of god like as aron because he kne¦we hym selfe not vniuersall hyest bisshop he wolde not be called vni¦uersal or hed bisshop nor be called yt he was not when he myght not answere I am so in dede.Heb, v, xix, q, ii, cap, due, Pope vr¦ban wryteth thus there be two la∣wes he sayth one canon / There be, ii, lawes the ca∣non lawe and a priuate lawe the other priuate that is a comen lawe whi∣che was confyrmed of ye holye fa∣thers by writinge as the canon la∣we which was made and institute for transgression as in example it is decreed in ye canons that a clar∣ke shuld not go out of one bisshop priche into another without lette testimoniall of his bysshop which was institute for vnthristes & vici∣ouse persons lest ani bysshop shul¦de receyue Infamus persons for they were wonte when they coulde not be suffered in ther one bisshop priche to execute theyr seruyce in a nother whiche was forbidden and dissanullyd by lawes preceptes &
writinges a priuate lawe is which by the inspiracion or mencion of ye holi gost is writton in mennes har¦tes as the apostle speaketh of so∣me which haue ye lawe of god writ¦ton in theyr hartes and in a nother place where as ye gentles haue no lawe yf they by nature fulfyl that that is ye lawe they be the lawe to them selfes.A priuate law is writton in the hartes of men. If any suche retayne the people in his church vnder the bisshop and lyue secularlye. If he be Inspired with the holy goost & wyl saue him selfe in any abbay or reguler conuent bicause he is In∣duced or moued by a priuate lawe reason wyl not constrayne hym to be bounde to the comen lawe for ye spirite of god is a lawe & they yt be ledde by ye spirite of god be ordred after the lawe of god and who is he yt cā resiste ye spirite of god wor¦thely,He that is led¦de with ye spri¦te of god is at liberti althou∣gh his bisshop saye yt cou¦rye and rs hym & therfore whosoeuer is led bi this spryte let hym go at lyberte
by our authorite althoughe his bysshop saye the contrarye for the lawe was not made for Iustmen but there as is the spirite of god ther is liberte and if ye be ladde bi the spirite of god ye be not vndre the lawe of which texte it apertlye appereth that by the sentence and opynion of Vrban that these thin¦ges partayne not vnto the consy∣ence of men which ar decreed bi the bisshoppes commaundementes or lawes but that they are frustrate by the lawe of the conscyence for the comen lawe geueth place vnto the priuate lawe.The comen la¦we geueth pla¦ce to the pri∣uate lawe, Innocentius, papa, No man can dyspense with ye lawe of god they mai with ye lawe of man¶ Pope Innocente doth so lymit¦te the popes power that he can do nothing against ye lawe of god for this he dyd write there is so grette difference betwene goddes lawe & mannes lawe that agaynst ye lawe
of god no man can dispende and in the lawes of man dispensacion maye be had as necessite and prof¦fitte shal require,zozimius Bys¦shop of rome, xxv, q, i, cap cō¦cro, zozimus pope do¦th yeat more straytlye lymytte the power of ye bisshopes of rome whi¦ch thus writeth to make ordeine or to chaunge any thinge agaynste ye statutes of the olde fathers partai¦neth not to the authorite of this se But let antiquite be in strenght & vertue with vs without contradic¦ciō by whose sentence al thing shul¦de be brought vnto the olde & pris¦ciue state of the churche and those thinges which bysshoppes of ro∣me haue ordeyned or constituted si¦the ye tyme shulde bereprobate and reiecte:The see of ro∣me can not dis¦pence nor cha∣unge the statu¦tes of the olde fathers, At whiche tyme yf the au∣thorite and cure were distributed into diuerse and sondrye pertes so it shulde procede and go forwarde at this tyme and gregorye wrote
to Philip ye bisshope agreing to ye same sentence.Gregorius ad felicem in re∣gistir libro, xii episti, xxxi, If I shulde vndo or distroye these thynges that my predecessors haue constituted I might be well proued to be not a builder with them but a puller do¦wne the voyce of ye treweth berin∣ge witnes. Euery realme deuyded amongest them selfes shal not stā¦de and al sience and lawe deuyded agaynst it self shalbe distroyed:It is to be fea¦red that ye ca∣non lawe lose his authorite. in which thing it is to be feared that the same Gregorye be proued a tre¦we proffecte: And that the canon lawe at this day by doubtefulnes and proplexite of contrarityes be dissolued which by labour of ma∣ni yeres was made and builde the stones not well Ioyned together this papisticall power trulye of ye see of rome hath oftetymes so far gonne from her owne coste yt it ha¦th ofte times Iniuriously hādled vexed & perturbed this realme ofThe papysti∣call power ha¦th ofte times trobled Eng∣lād, But good bysshopes did resist and de∣fēde ther own Iurisdiccion & excludid al fo∣ren power
Englād verry farre distante from them whiche power not onelye sa∣ge and wyse kinges. But also the prudent and the holye bysshoppes of the realme repelled and put bac¦ke nor wolde not suffer it to take his pleasure but they kepe & defen¦ded there owne Iurisdiccion & au¦thorite and excludid all suche forē power as it may euidently appere to euery mā which haue rede ouer the Cronycle of England,Laurence ar∣ch Bysshop of Cauntorberie and dunstone archbisshoppe of the same & Grosted aper∣fitte man bys∣shop of Lincol¦ne dyd refuse al suche foren power, in whi∣ch it is had manifestli. Howe Lau¦rens Archebisshop of Cantorburi & saynt Dunstan archebisshop of the same see & Grostede a very per¦fecte man bisshop of Lyncolne did refuse and forsake all suche foren power. Gregorye writynge to au∣gustine in a nother place doth ma¦nifestli shewe ye same that ye lawes or canons of ye se of rome take noe effecte wt al men and yt men shuld not take more regarde to obseruexii, distin cap, nouit,
them then of they edifininge of ye fayth of people in chryst. These be the contentes of his wordes:Marke the wordes of gre¦gori to ye chur¦che of Englā∣de, You knowe brother the custome of the churche of Rome in which ye remē¦ber yt you were norisshed and brou¦ght vp in / but it is mynded yt wher soeuer ye haue founde other in the church of rome or in the church of Fraunce or any other churche that may better please god that ye shal instructe and enforme the churche of England whiche is newly and latelye come to the fayth and now in the setteling with the chefe and most godliest ordinaunces that ye can gether of all other churches, for ye thinges be not to be beleued for the place. But the place for the thinges therin. Therfore of euery churche whatsoeuer it be that that is godlye that is vertuose that is iust and good chuse out and binde
them together in a bundel & graf or prynte them in ye myndes or har¦tes of Englishe mē by custome, of which texte also this appereth that these canon lawes haue not obtay¦ned strenght by exacte obedyence but by inticementes of there good for so wryteth gregory that they ga¦thered to gether in a bundel shuld be inculked in the mindes of ye peo¦ple of England by custome & not to be required or extorte by censu∣res or compulcions nor it is not to be let passe that Pope Adryane in his synode celebrate at rome gaue vnto charles authorite and power to chuse and electe the bysshope of Rome and to ordre the apostolical se but here I sesse rehersing the ac¦tes and sainges of good bysshops for it is long of scarsy of good bis¦shoppes that we vse no more exā∣plesDistin, lxiii. cap adrianus, Pope Adria∣nus gaue clar¦kes aucthorit to chuse ye bys¦shop of rome & to order the Apostolicalse,
in this maters, for after that the apostles whiche (yt they myght better entende preachinge the wor¦de of god and prayer) did leaue seruinge ye tables although it we∣re a verie good worke and,Acth, vi dyd cle¦ne alienate them selfe from that sa¦inge it is not mete for vs to leaue the worde of god and serue tables Veri sureli singnifieng that it per¦tayned chefely to other office that they shulde geue all other labour & the dylygens in preachynge the worde of god after these I saye & a fewe other in the primatiue chur¦che the foloweres of them all the bisshoppes of rome almost so fare went backewarde from christ that was there chefe example In there liuing and institucions as they we¦re behinde him in tyme.Bysshopes of rome went so far backewar¦de from christ in vertue as they did in ti∣me. But if the¦se thinges whiche we haue reher∣sed before shude be layde agaynst the bysshoppe of rome at this day
& if that power shulde be estemed after the sentencis of the good bis¦shopes shulde not they be compel∣led to vndo many thinges that he made & done lest it shulde chaunce that Gregorye wryteth vpon the wordes of our lorde That euery Realme deuyded amongest them selfes shal fal & be distroyed. ¶ But nowe we wyl in hande wt that thynge whiche we promysed to speake of in the fourthe place. That is to saye what auctorite is geuen to kynges other by the law of god or else by ye permissiō of mā in spiritual or holy things.What auctho¦ryte is geuen to kinges by god, or else by the permissiō of man, In whi¦che matter fyrst we wyl entrete of al kinges generally & after yt pe∣culiarli of ye kings of Englād fy∣rst it shalbe shewed ye god not on∣li wt most euident signes in ye who¦le order of nature dyd expresse his wyll of ye authorite and power of
kynges but that he dyd declare it also with manyfest wordes in the holye scriptures both of the olde testamente and the newe, and that god did gyue wt his owne mouthe Kinges to be rulers of his people and the power of them largely ex∣pounded he dyd confirme.God by his owne mouthe made kynges rulers of hys people, In the example of nature amongest ye chif philosophers plato aristotle and appolonius did perseaue and considre that as in the whole worl¦de one is the hie creature and ruler of al thinges as amonge the ster∣tes ye some precelles al other,The gouernā¦ce of kynges apperethe be naturall thin∣ges & by scrip¦ture also, amon¦gest the beese one kinge ther is, on belwether the flocke dothe folowe And one leader the herde & the cra¦nes folowe all one, lykewyse in a cōmunalte shulde be one king as hed to whome ye members shul¦de agre and this consideracion of the communalte shewed by the in∣clinacion of nature. And by ye wor¦ke
of nature drawen out and pryn¦ted with more obscure tokens god hath aparteli manifest to vs in ho¦lye scriptures oftentimes making mencion of kynges and playnelye approuinge the power of them by his owne mouth appointing them which shulde raygne and fede his people.Genesis, xvii, But let vs beginne at ye bo¦ke of Genesis or of the creacion of the world in which boke it is thus writton.The laude is ye kinges and princes. The laude of the preistes which ye kinge gaue them by whi∣che wordes it manifestly appereth that the laud was the kinges and was geuen by them to the preistes and that the dominion of erth per∣teyneth to kinges in that, that thei were kinges of whose handes the prestes receyuid al that laude they had and in the .xvii.Deutoronomi xvii, chapiter of ye boke of deuteronomi. When thou shal entre into ye lande whiche the lorde shal geue to the & when thou
shalte saye I wyl constitute a kīg ouer me as al nacions nere about haue, yt shalt constitute hym why∣ch the lorde god shalt chose amon¦gest the brethern and after that he shal sit vpon the seate of his king¦dome he shall wryte hym oute in a boke this seconde lawe taking ex∣ample of the prestes of the tribe of the leuites of which texte it mani∣fystly apereth that all nacions at that tyme had kinges.Kinges shuld be chosen of ye same nacion & haue a booke of the lawe & se the lawe ke¦pte, And yt they were constytude at the fyst amon¦gest the people of god by the elecci¦on of god to whome hit was com∣maunded that they shulde write ye boke of the lawe of god that is to wrytte not onelye for yt entent they shulde haue it and kepe it wt them without any other vse of it. But yt they shuld commaunde that lawe to be kepte & obserued insomoche that it longeth to them to correcte
and to punyshe and it longethe to the preistes only to preache and to geue other example of the lawe yf it were required & further to shew the preemynence of a Kynge it is wrytton in the thryde boke of Es∣dras in the .iiii.What lōgeth to a kinge or prince & what to a preist and of the preemy¦nence of a kin¦ge, chapiter the kinge is superiour of al and beareth rull of them and all that he commaun∣ded them they do.iii, Esdre, iiii, ¶ And he sende them to warfare they go and breake downe hilles, walles, and towres, they are kylde and kyll other men, and ouer passe not the kinges worde and yf they get the victorye, they bringe to ye kinge al the spoyle lykewyse al o∣ther that medle not with warres nor fyghtinge but tyll the ground when they reape they bring tribu∣te to the kinge. And if the kinge a¦lone do but commaund to kyl they kyl. If he commaunde to forgeue
they forgeue. If he bid strike they stryk, if he saye dryue awaye, they dryue away, if he say builde, they builde if he commaunde to breke downe they breake downe yf he sa¦ye plante they plante, and all the comens and rulers are obediēt to him, and the king in the meane ti∣me sitteth downe eateth, drynketh, and taketh his rest and they kepe watche rownd aboute him & none of them dare gette him out of the waye to do his owne busines but must be obedient vnto the kinges at a worde and in the fyrst boke of ye kings our lorde sayd to Samu¦ell shewe to them the dutie of a kī¦ge that shall raygne ouer them he shal take away your synnes your fildes your vyneyardes your oly∣uetres and he wyll take the tenthe of your corne and of your flockes and you shalbe his seruauntesi, Regū, ix What is the dutye and au∣thorite of a kī¦ge,
and in the seconde boke of Para∣lapomenō or Cronicles:iii, Paralope∣meno, xix, rauadias a ruler in the house of Iuda shal be ouer al causes that appertayne to the kinge also they psalmist sai¦eth nowe ye kinges be ye wyse be warned ye that are Iudges of the erth betokeneth that it belongeth to kinges to Iudge the erthe.Psalmus, iii, It belongeth to kynges t minister Iusti¦ce and Iudge¦ment, ¶ Also in the .xxxviii. chapter of duteronomium it is writton thou shalt constitute a kinge ouer the.Deutoronomi¦um, xxxviii And in the first boke of the kinges ix.i, Regū, q chapi when Samuel had loked vpō saul our lord said to Samuel this is he hath I told ye of,ii, Regū, ii, ii, regū. v he shal be ruler of my people and in ye .iii chapiter of ye seconde boke of kin∣ges our lord sayth the man of Iu¦da haue noynted me to be theyr kī¦ge, and it folowith in the seconde boke of the kinges .v. chapiter the seniors of Israel came & ennoyn∣ted Dauid to be theyr kinge and
our lorde sayed thou shalt fede my people and thou shalt be capitaine vpon Israell. Salomen wryteth in his prouerbes by me kinges do raygne throwe me prynces make Iust lawes thorowe me lordes be are rule and all Iudges of the er¦th execute Iudgement and in the,Properbiorō, viii, vi chapiter of the boke of Sapi∣ence or wisdom.Sapientia, vi O ye kinges here and vnderstande geue eare ye that rule multitudes for power is ge∣uen to you of our lorde and stren∣gth of the hiest whiche shall trye your workes and searche out your Imaginacions and a wyse Kinge is the vpholdinge of his people & in the boke of Exodi the .xxxii.Exodi, xxxii, cha¦piter it is redde. Aaron ye high pre∣ist sayd to Moyses where he was in the roume of the prince and kin¦ge,The hye pres∣tes called the kinges theyr lordes and thē selfes their ser¦uauntes whi∣che proueth kī¦ges to be supe¦riours as to ye hye prestes, let not my lorde be angry with me. &c. And Achimelich ye hye prest
called himself ye seruaunte of kīg Saull in the fyrst boke of the kin¦ges in .xxiii. chapiter the kinge sēt to cal Achimelech the prest the son¦ne of Achetobe & all his fathers house that is to saye ye prestes that were in Nobe, and they came al to the kinge and Saul sayd to achi∣melech here the sonne of Achitobe and he sayde here I am my lorde. Saull sayd to him whye haue ye conspyred against me thou and ye sonne of Isaye. &c. and achimelech answered god forbedde this from me, let not the kinge suspecte anye such thinge agaynst his seruaunt in al ye house of my father for they seruaunte knewe nothing in thy matter nother lesse nor more. ¶ Then there as the hie bisshop∣pes did cal the kinges there lordes & thē selfes ye kinges seruannts it
maye wel be gathered that kinges be superiours to the bisshoppes, & that the bysshops ought to be sub¦iecte to kinges. Saynt Peter vsi∣th ye same maner of argumētaciō in his fyrst epistle .iii.i, Petri, iii, chapiter pro¦uynge that Sara was subiecte to Abraham bicause she called hym lorde after the example of whome other women shulde be subiecte to their husbandes & Christ by no o∣ther maner of argument dothe she¦we in the .xxii.Math, xxii capiter of Mathew yt Dauid was inferiour than our sauiour but bicause he called him his lorde sainge our lorde sayde to my lorde. But there is to be noted also in this place that ye kinge did geue sentence of death vppon the hiest bysshop.Kinge saul ga¦ue sentence of death vpon a chimelych the hye bysshope, Saing thou shalte dye, achimeliche and the house of thy father nor he is not blamed by cause he gaue sentēce of death vp∣on a prest but bicause he gaue vn¦charytable
and vniust sentence a∣gainst him that was gilteles salo¦mon lykewise which belike autho¦rite did condemne to death the hie preist Abiathar was hitherto bla∣med of no man bicause he gaue a wortye sentence agaynst him yt de∣serued it.iii Regst, ii Salamon con¦demynid yt hy bysshop Abia∣th to deth by like authorite Saull of treuth is to be noted therfore because he gaue sē∣tence against him that did not de∣serue it and in ye .xvii.Indicū. xviii, et vltio chapiter of Indicū and the last chapiter it is shewed at those dayes there was no kinge in Israell but eueri man did that thinge yt he thought best by these wordes it semeth that the power of punishing did onely per¦tayne to kinges and princes and not to the preestes,Power of pu∣nisshemēt lon¦geth to kīges for no dowbte there were many preistes without doubte at that tyme. But bicause they had no kinge not leader eueri man lyued aftex his owne pleaser
and desire, because ther was no su∣{per}iour regal power by whose swer¦de they might be refrayned from vice besides that in the .iiii.iiii, regū, xviii booke of kinges xviii. capiter this is con¦teyned.Ezechias kīg put away the abuses of ec∣clesiastical thī¦ges & pulled downe ye bra∣sen serpent Sette vp by Moyses and commaunded by god when he so it abused Ezechias put awaye ye hil∣aulters and brake the Images & cutte downe the groues and brake the brasen sarpent which Moyses made, for tyl that tyme the childrē of Israell dyd offer to it Ensence. And whie maye not nowe the abu∣se of ecclesiastiall thinges and of al thinges that be with in the chur¦che pertayne to examinacion and correction of the kinges maiesty if it be manifestly perseaued that it be against the honour of god as ye good king Ezechias did to whom ther was none lyke amongest al ye kinges of Iuda in kepinge all the commaundementes of god he did extende his power within the ban¦des of the churche. And by hys
newe commaundementes toke a∣waye the broken sarpente set ther by the cōmaundement of god whē he sawe it honoured contrary to ye honour of god. If a kinge coulde chaunge that thinge which god cō¦maunded to be done if it come to yll ende and that with in ye churche howe moch rather might he chaun¦ge these thinges which commaun∣ded by ye cōmaundemēt of man be yll abused it maketh for this pur∣pos that is wrytton in the .ii. boke of Cronicles .viii.ii, Parali, viii chapiter and ye kinge Salomon did ordeyne ye of¦fices of prestes in theyr mynisteri∣es after ye ordinaunces of Dauid his father and the leuytes in there order that they shulde geue than∣kes and ministre before the prestes after the ryte or cussome of euerye day & the porters in there ordre by gate and gate.Salomon did order the offi∣ces of preies and ministers in the churche
for so commaundyd Dauyd the seruaunte of god and nother the prestes nor leuites dyd breake ani thinge of ye commaundement whi¦che the kinge commaunded them it agreeth with this that is writtō in the booke of the Cronicles .xix.ii, Paralipoū, xix chapiter Iosaphat dyd constitu∣te Iudges of the erth in all Cites of Iuda.Kinges did cō¦stitute Iudgs as leuites and prestes rulers of famylies to here and Iud¦ge the causis of theyr brethe¦ne, Of Iuda walled by eue¦ry place and comaundid them sa∣inge take ye hed what ye do for ye haue not in hande the Iudgemen¦tes of men but the Iudgmētes of god and what soeuer ye Iudge it shal redownde to you let the feare of our lorde be with you & do you althynges with Iudgement for there is no iniquite with god nor acceptacions of persons nor desi∣re of rewardes also in Ierusalem Iosaphath dyd constitute leuytes and pristes & rulers of the saumli¦es of Israel that thei Iudgement
and cause of our lorde to al the in habitauntes therin & he comaun∣ded them sainge ye shal do so in ye feare of our lorde faythfully and with a pure & parfecte hart al cau¦ses of your bretherne whiche shall come to you which dwel ī ther Cit∣is betwē kīred & kired whersoeuer ani question is made of ye lawe of comaundement of Ceremones of Iustificacions shewe it vnto thē yt the offende not against the lorde & that the displeasure of god come not vppon you and your breterne for so doinge ye shall not offende. Amarias your Bysshop and prest shalbe ruler our those thynges yt partayne to god. Further zabadi∣as the sonne of Ismael whiche is captayne in ye house of Iuda shal ouerse those things that appertay¦ne to ye office of a kinge & ye haue maysters leuytes before you take
ye conforte and worke diligently & our lord shalbe with you in your goodes nowe let vs laie this to ge¦ther breeflye the Iudgementes of the people of Israel were the Iud¦gements of god & al thinges were determyned after the prescripcion of the worde of god of the whiche lawe of god the prestes and ye pro∣phetes were expounders and the Iudges therof were such as were electe & masters in eueri tribe in al ye cities onles there were any dou∣btfull matter for than that matter was referred to Ierusalem to the prestes and Iudge whiche shalbe rulers,The prestes & prophetes we¦re expoūders of the lawe of god & the rule¦rs of ye tribes electe wer iud¦ges therof, In doubtefull matters ye hye preest and the hye Iudge at Ierusalem ga¦ue entēces to¦gether, and thei shal geue sentence to gether, nor it shal not be lawful for any man to dyspyse or forsake theyr sentence. For whosoeuer did so, it was death to him of this fas∣shion Iudges ordred them selfes in other Cities sawe in Ierusalem when Iosaphath the king dyd cō∣mitte
al Iudgement to the prestes leuites & rulers of families ioyn tell wherfore if kinges and rulers were Iudges of the lawe of god & of those thinges which are prescri¦bed by the worde of god of whiche they were nether makers nor tea∣chers howe moche more maie they be Iudges of al thinges which ar cōstituted by mans lawe.If kings and rulers were Iudges o the lawe of god moche more of ye lawe of mā To this purpose maketh that is in the secō¦de boke of Cronicles in the .xxxix capiter euen the same yere & fyrste moneth of his raygne dyd Ezechi∣as open the gates of the house of our lorde and prepared them and he brought in the prestes & leuytes & gathered thē together into ye este strete & sayd to them here me you leuites and purifye your selues & halowe you the house of our lorde god of your fathers & beīg al ye fil¦thenes out of ye holy place & after∣ward thei gathered,ii, Paralip, xxxix, Ezechias com¦maunded the prest and leui∣tes to purifye them selues & ye house of god and to make sacrifice and offerynge for synne, there bretherē
and they dyd puryfye them selue & they went in after ye commaun¦dement of the king, that bi the, and that by the worde of our lord they myght clense the house of our lor¦de and ye prestes wēt into ye templ of our lord for to clense it & the bro¦ught forth. &c. And after: for ye kīg comaundid yt the burnte offeringe shulde be made for the sinne of all Israell And he did set leuytes in the house of our lorde with cimba¦les and saiterys and harpes accor¦dinge to the comaundementes of Dauid the king & of god The kin¦ges feare of visious & of Nathā the prophete. For it was the com¦maundement of our lorde by the hande of his prophetes. And the le¦uites stode holding the organs of Dauid and ye preistes triumpheth and Ezechias commaunded them to offer burnte, offeringe vpon the aulter. &c, & after, Ezechias & the
prīces comaundid the leuites they shulde prayse our lorde with the wordes of Dauid and Asaph the leer of visions.Ezechias com¦maunded the peple to offer. Whiche did laude god with greate gladnes & hono∣ur him with kneling Ezechias mo¦re ouer addid this. Ye haue filled your handes to our lord come ne∣re and offer the sacrifices & than∣kes offering in ye house of our lor¦de ☞ And then al the multitude offered. &c. When prestes in ye chur¦che and in the holye place dyd all thinges after the cōmaundement of the kinges and princes and did obey them in offerynge sacrifices in the purifyinge or halowinge of the house of god and the sanctuari and in the prayers that were ma∣de in the churche it semeth that it longeth to kinges and princes to commaunde the preistes in suche thinges and that it longeth to the prestes to be obedyent to them.ii, Parali, xxx
Ezechias wrote epistles to al Isra¦ell and Iuda to effraim & manas∣sen that they shulde come to ye hou¦se of our lorde in Ierusalem to of¦fer passouer to the lorde god of Is¦rael.The kinge sēt to bydde the peple to offer & helde a {per}lia∣mēt in Hieru∣salem where ye decred that  feast of pas∣ouer shulde be kepte ye, ii, mo¦neth And the king helde a councel with his lordes and al the congre∣gacion in Hierusalem and they de¦creed to kepe the feast of passouer in the seconde moneth and after & the mensengers went with letters bi the commaundement of the kin¦ge and all his lordes to all Israel and Iuda showing to them accor∣dinge to the kinges commaunde∣ment. Ye childrē of Israell turne again. &c. And after that, and ther vnto the hande of our lorde was in Iuda to make them of one ac∣corde to do the commaundement of ye kinge & the captaynes accor∣ding to the worde of our lord & mo¦che people where gathered in Hie∣rusalem to make the solemnite of
swete brede in ye seconde moneth & they arose and distroied ye aulters in Hierusalem & they cast downe althing where anye sacrifice was to ani Idol and threwe it into the water Cedron, at the commaunde¦ment of the king thei kepte the fe∣astees of passouer & of swete brea¦de after yt in the .ii.ii, Paralipom xxxii, boke of Croni∣cles, xxxi. chapiter be those wordes that folowe. Ezechias set the preis¦tes and ye leuites in theyr order to waite by course euerye man accor∣ding to his office as wel ye preistes as leuites for the burnte offerīges & pease offrīges & to minister & to thāke & to sing in ye gates of ye lod¦ge of our lord.Ezechias com¦maundyd the people to ge∣neperte of the¦re goodes to the preistes & leuites yt they might attende the seruis of god the tenth and fyrst fru∣te wih thut they had vo∣wed, And after also Eze¦chias commaundid to the people yt dwelled in Hierusalē yt thei shul¦de geue parte to the preistes and le¦uites yt they might attend ye law of god & after yt Ezechias cōmaūded yt they shulde prepare storehouses
in the house of our lorde whiche thinge when they had done they brought in the fyrst frutes & ten∣thes and whatsoeuer they had vo¦wed faythfully And the ouersear of them was Chonenias the leuite & semey his brother was the second after whome were Iohiel and Aza¦rias, Naathin, & Asael, Hierimoth Iozabad. Eliel. Iesmachias. Ma¦ath, and Bauay as rulers vnder ye handes of Chōenias and Semey his brother by ye commaundement of Ezechias the kinge and Azari∣as the bisshop of ye house of our lor¦de to whome al thinges parteyned & after.Al thinges we¦re done in the house of god at ye cōmaun∣dement of the kinge. And Ezechias did althīg which we haue spoken in all iuda and did that whiche was Iuste & godly before the lorde his god in all maner obseruaunces in the mi¦nisteres in the house of our lord ac¦cording to the lawe & cerimonies intending to serue his god in all
his harte and he dyd prospere, mar¦ke howe this good king dyd assyg¦ne and deuide to the prestes and the leuytes there offices and howe he wrote of the tenthes and the first frutes and those thinges that pertayned to the offices or to ye ry∣ght of the preestes asmoche as in the excersise of the ministeris in ye house of our lord were done at his biddinge & commaundement fur∣ther it is wrytton in the fyrst boke of the Machabeis x,i, Machabeo∣rum, x, chapiter Alex¦ander the kinge wryteth to Iona∣thas sainge nowe we haue consti∣tute yt this day to be the hye prest of the country and that thou shul¦des be called the kinges frende.Kīges did put in and electe the hye preest and put them out, &c.i, Machabeo, xiiii, Likewise Demetrius did gyue to Simon the hie preisthode also he did constitute Alchimus ye prest and Anthiochus fyrst gaue the hic presthode to Iason & after he put hym out & gaue it to Menclausi. Machabeo∣rum, vii,
and after put him out to & made Lilimachus hie prest so alwayes the assinent and translacion of the hye preist did partayne to ye kings Whether he wyl whē preistes were not create but borne preestes as in Salomons tyme or else when yt were desired by the voyces of thei people as in the tyme of these prin¦ces.In Salomōs tyme preistes were borne preistes in the tyms of some princes ater ye chosen and clee, But nowe contraryewyse the hye preistes saye yt they maye geue realmes and Empires to whome the lyste whiche was neuer harde nor rede ye the did before nother in the old Testamēt nor in the new. ☞ And this power of the kinges we haue read confyrmed in ye new Testament for Math sayeth this They cam to Peter that were wō¦te to gether poll money.Mathew xvii Christ payde tribute to the kng or Empe¦roure therby shwed that Kinges shlde be honored And chri∣te sayd to Peter of whom do kin¦ges of the erth take tribute and so furthe but lest we shulde offende them goo to the See and caste
in a boke and take that fisshe that cometh vp fyrst & open his mouth and thou shalte fyne a grote take that and geue it fore me and the: dyd not christ by this example sho¦weth that the aucthorite of kinges shuld be honerred vnto whome ha¦uinge the rule of the comen weale mē ought to geue poll money and tribute yt he that hath ye ouersight or charge of al men shulde haue a rewarde or recompence of his dili¦gence & labour lykewise it is wryt¦ton. Geue yt is Cesars to Ceser & Iesus answered to Pilate.Mathw, xxii, Thou couldest haue no power agaynste me oules it were geuen the from a¦boue furthermore the kinges of ye gentilles bere rule ouer them and they that be the states do exercise power vpon thē,Iohan, xix, Mathw iii, Rom, xiii saynt Paule wi¦teh agreing to ye same sētēce let eue¦ry mā be obedient and subiecte to
the superior powers for the kings be not to be feared of them that do well but of them that do yll, for he beareth a sword not in vayne. And there ye comen glose doth interpre∣tate the sworde to meane power in Iudgementes. And in the same place he that withstandeth the po∣wer, withstandeth the ordinance of god and therfore he that by vio¦lence or disseate resysteth ye power that is, the man put in authorite as the glose sayeth resisteth the or¦dinince of god.Here is no mā exempte from the obedience of kīges with out dominatiō Here I thinke best to tarye awhyle and diligentli to ponder & discus this place whi∣ch doth meruelously confyrme the regall and riuell power to whome he byddeth all men to be obedient he excepteth no man at all nether Peter nor Paule no preest no bys∣shoppe no Cardinal, no patriarke no Pope onles any man be willīg to get his damnacion. But if ther
be anye man that thynketh ye this was not ment or spoken of the Ci¦uel or laye officer. Let him fyrst re¦member that chist taught ye preis¦tes to flee & refuse superiour auc∣thorite furthermore that he calleth them of whom he speketh here, lor¦des or princes and sayth ye they be to be feared of them that do yl and this name or worde prince is not wonte in ye newe Testament to be ment or takē for prestes onles ther be somewhat addid ther to as the prince or hyest of preistes prince or chefe of the Sinagoge or prince or hedde of the worlde or some other thinge lyke,Mathew, i, and chryst dyd teache that god shulde be feared which after the death of the bodi hath power to cast the soule into ye fyre of hell And the kinge is to be feared of them that do yll whome he doth punishe and correcte wyth
his Sworde. And prestes & prea∣chers of the worde of god in ye wri¦tyng of the Euaungelystes do re∣buke sinners and counforte them that amende agayne.Holye sciptu∣res of ye newe Testament ge¦ue preistes no Iudiciall po∣wer, But nother the Scriptures of the Euaunge¦lestes nor of the Apostles do geue them Iudiciall power nor courte to make examynation or determi∣nacion of ponishement. Now that foloweth he bereth not a Sworde without cause, who wyll expound or meane of the successors of the Apostles, dyd the Sergeantes or Cachepolles goo aboute them be∣ryng Swordes or Maces. But a Croche and a Myter. And further he monished them to geue trybute to those officers of whome Paule speketh of here. But they payed trybute to Christ not to the bishop And by manye other reasons hit maye be proued that this place is to be vnderstanded of the ciuil or
laye officer to whome he wollde al men to be subiecte as moch as the hye bysshopes. And this īterpreta¦cion with a gret consent and agre¦ens confirme both the lerning and the lyffe of christ and his apostles whiche did alwayes knowe and obey the Cyuyll and laye power if it commaunded nothinge con¦trari to god and with this interpre¦tacion holde the most impiant and best alowede Authors.Christe and ye apostles did ¦uermore obey the ciuyll po∣wers if it co¦maundyd no∣thinge contra¦ry to god Amongest whome is origen expounding ye sa¦me texte of saynt Paull where he sayth. The Iudges of the worlde do fulfil the most parte of the law of god for al those offencis which god wolde haue punished he wold them to be punyshyde not by the bisshopes and the rulers of chur¦ches but bi ye Iudges of ye worlde And Paule knowyng this dydde Iustlye name him the mynyster of god and Iudge vpon hym
hym that, doth that, that is yll and saynt Augustyne agaynst the epis¦tel permenianus to the fyrst boke Therfore for what entente doth he beare a sworde ye is called the offi∣cer or minister of god to take ven∣geance on them yt do yll onles per∣chaunce as manye take this place yt be vnlerned contentuosli sainge that it was ment of ecclesiasticall dingnityes so ye the worde shulde betoke spiritual ponishement whi¦che doth cause excommunicacion where as ye wyse and cyrcumspec∣te apostle in the nexte clause of the texte folowinge doth playnlye she we what he ment for he dyd adde for bicause of that ye paye tribu∣tes and after that he wryteth this paye to euery one his dette to whō ye ought to paye tribute paye cus∣tome to whome custome is dewe honour to whome honour belon∣geth feare to whome feare partay¦nethSome by the sworde vnder¦stande power ecclesiasticall, contrary to ye trewthe.
and Theophilactus expoun∣ding this place to the romayns e∣uery soule be obedient to ye hier po¦wers saith thus he instructes eueri mā whether he be prest or religius man or apostle that they shulde be subiecte to the princes and ther is scante any man that otherwise do¦th expounde this place onles it be such as be hye bisshopes therselfe or such as long to them for fauor of whom they corrupt & deprauete althing and wrest scripture vio∣lently being cōtrary to them.None expoun¦des this texte of ecclesiasti∣cal power but such as be pa∣pist is in fauo∣ur of the bys∣shoppes of Ro¦me But nowe let vs reherse other textes of scripture that make for this mat∣ter.i, Timoth, iii, Paul writing to Timothe bed¦deth vs entreate and pray for kin¦ges and al other that haue preemi¦nēce or dignite that they may lyue vnder thē peaceabli & quietli.Barnab, i, So hieremias bed them praye for the helth of Nabugonosor & his chil∣dren,
further it is rede in the fyrste epistle of Peter the ii. chapiter sub¦mit your selfe to al thordinaunces of god where the glose sayth set in authoritye and it foloweth in the same texte other to the kinge as hyest or supreme hed or to ye lordes or officers set by them for punishe¦ment of the yll for so is the wyll of god,Al men ought to pray for kī∣ges and prin∣ces and be the good be the yl to obey them, the comen glose doth adde yt we shulde be obedience to them be the good be the yl, and if the regal power of this maner be so ofte a∣proued in the olde testament. Let it be so receuid & confirmed in the lawe of grace. Let it bealowed ye kinges haue in ther person domi∣nion, authorite, preheminence dig∣nite ponishmentes & correcctions. And in ye clargy let it be disalowed Doth it not apere bi the veri same lawe yt was taken from ye apostles and Bysshoppes was geuen to
the kinges it was spoken to the a¦posteles go you & preache the gos∣pel to al maner creatures,Marc vlti Iohū vitimo. fede my shepe. And whose sīnes you remit shalbe remetted thē,Iohn̄, ii. and so let thē preache & minister ye word of god but in ye meane time let thē not for¦sake ye subiecciō of prices.Mathw. xi. But lett thē geue ye, that is cesars to cesar & that, that is godes to god. Some perchaunce wyll saye here that al∣thoughe ye places rehersid do wit∣nes that power was geuen to kyn¦ges yet do the not shewe al maner power geuen to kinges.Som say ther was noo po∣wer geuen to kinges in spi∣ritual thinges And ther∣fore there is nothing prouid bi the¦se Scriptures whye we shulde graunte anye power in spirituall thinges to be geuen to kinges or princes. But fyrst let vs se what ye sincere sence of scripture wyl geue thē. And after yt howe ye vse & excer¦cise in ye anpiāt & laudabel sipliciti
of man hath confirmed it, and sure¦lye in the scriptures we do confyr∣me and stablishe the aucthorite of kinges as we shewed before for they feat them yt do yl bicause they beare a swerde in these scriptures spoken Indeterminatlie theyr can be no other sence. But that whoso¦euer whan soeuer and howsoeuer he do yll he shuld feare the kinges swerde, or it is not conuenient for vs to saye that yf one offende in a smal thinge he shulde be punished and if he offende in a gretter thin he he shulde haue no punyshment and that the kinges shulde be dili¦gent in ye obseruacion and keping of worldly thinges and shuld not in things longinge to god. Nor it is not mete to aplye that by distinc¦cion to a fewe whiche was spoken indifferently, al scipture speakethe to al men it vnderstandeth & mea∣neth it of al men and in these wor∣des
of yl doynge he putteth no cer¦ten cryme nor cause, but howe so∣euer yll be commytted it wyll that the Regall power shulde be redye which shuld Iudge correct which shulde punishe which shulde euer be Ruler for the edificacion for ye belt that that thing might be amē¦ded that was done amisse & that yt whiche by there busines offende ye good.Howe soeuer yll be commyt¦tid the correc¦tiō longeth to the Regall po¦wer. Gala, vi. After ye saing of saynt Pau¦le might be cut of because ye trou∣ble other men.Gregorius ad mauritiū Au∣gustum. And so Gregory in his .iii. boke named Registrum in his Epistle to Maurici the Empe¦rour sayth thou wast my lorde be∣fore thou were lorde of all. Lo by me his hindmost seruaunt & you∣ers, chryst wyl answere sayinge I made the of A notarye Erle of the watchmen, of an Erle I made the cesar, of cesar an Emperour & not that onlie but also I made the fa∣ther of Eperours, I haue commit¦ted
my prystes to thy handes and takest thou awaye thy warryers frome my seruyce.Gregory was obedien o ye Emperour & fullfylled his cōmaundemēt which did not agre with the lawe of god, I was obedi∣ent to youre byddyng, and caused youre lawe to be sente to dyuers partes of the worlde. And by∣cause that lawe doth agree with the almyghtye God I haue certi∣fyed my honorable Lordes by my Suggestion writinge in my let∣ters: therfore in eythere place I haue done my duety, which dydde obey themperour, and dydde not holde my peace. But showed that I thoughte in goddes cause,Gregorius ad theodorū epis¦tol, xxiiii, And in anothere pistle folowing writtō to Theodorus a phisiciō hath this sentence. Me thinkes ye very hard that the Emperour shuld wtdrawe his warryers or saruauntes from the seruyce of him whiche gaue hī all, and gaue him aucthorite not only ouer ye Sowldiers but ouer all preestes, it appertaynethe also
to this that saynt Auguste wrote, whose epistle treateth of this ma∣ner,Augustin{us} ad bonifaciū, whosoeuer wyll not obey the lawes of thēperours whiche were made for trueth of god getteth hī grette punishment, for in the tyme of ye Prophetes, Al kynges which amongest ye people of god did not forbed nor breake that was Insti¦tuted against the commaundemēt of god were blamed and yt they did forbide,Daniell, iii or preased aboue the mery¦tes of other, And the kyng Nabu∣godonosor whē he was ye saruaūt of Idolles made an vngracious lawe.the cōmaunde¦mēt of the kīg Nabugodono¦sor compellīge mē to honour Images and Idolles. That an Image or an Idol shulde be honored. But they that wold not obey his wicked and vn∣godly constitucion dyed godly & faythfully. But ye same kyng cor∣recte by the miracle of god made agayne a godly and laudable law for the trewthe that whosoeuerNabugodono¦sor correcte bi myracle made agayne and laudable lawe that no mane shuld blasphē god,
dyd speake anye Blasphemy aga¦ynst ye trewe god of sidrac, Misac, and Obdenago shulde vtterlie be distroed wt al his house And after thē howe can kings serue our lord in feare onles the prohibeth and punishe with a godli seueryte that that is done contrarye to the com¦maundemēt of god For he serueth otherwyse because he is a man. And otherwyse in somoch as he is a King.He serueth god otherwy∣se because he is a man and bycause he is a Kyng, For bicause he is a man he serueth hym liuinge faythfullye. But bicause he is a kinge he serue¦th god making and eratifieng la∣wes with cōueniēt strenght which commaunde ye thynge that is law¦full and that forbide those things that be contrary to Iustice As Eze¦chias dyd serue god distroyinge ye Groues and ye Temples of Idol∣les & the Illaters whiche were ma¦de contrarye to ye preceptes of god As Iosias dyd serue doinge veryiiii, regū, xviii How kynges serue god as kynges, iiii, Regū, xxii
lyke thynges, as the kyng of Ne∣niue did serue compelling the who¦le Citye to pacifie and please our lord as Darius did serue geuing the Idoil in the power of DaniellDaniell. to be broken,Ione, iii, and putting his Eni¦mies to Lyons to be deuoured. ❧ As Nabugonosor did serue of whome we spacke beforr.Daniell. Forbyd∣ding with a fearefull ordreadfull lawe all that were in his Realme from the blaspheming of god. In such thynges kinges serue god in somoche they be kinges. When yt do that thyng to serue god which none can do but kings.Acte, xxi, And after Paule ye apostle dyd not consyder or regard his transitorye lyfe but the churche of god. When he dyd bringe it to passe agaynst them yt had conspyred to kil hym that the councel of them shulde be vttered to the Sherefe, or Officer wherbi it cam to passe yt he was brouhgt
with harnessed men to ye place whe¦ther he shulde be brought leest he shulde haue suffered bi theyr decei¦tes and he dyd not doubte to apea¦le to the lawes of Rome shewinge that he was a Citisē of rome who¦me it was not lawful to be beaton or scorged.Actor, xxv And called or desired ye helpe of Cesar lest he shulde be ta∣ken to the Iwes that desired to kil him which Cesar was ruler of Ro¦me & not a Christian prince,Paul apealed to Cesar empe¦rour of Rome and a Hethen man. whe∣re he sheweth wel what or after the myn ysters or bayliffes of Christe shulde do when they had Christen princes or Emperours. If ye chur∣che were in Ieoperdye. And after. If we possese priuately so moche as is sufficiēt for vs the residewe be not oures but the godes of the pore ye procurement and bestowīg of the which we haue and chaleng nothing by damnable vsurpacion And to this purpose maketh that
Augustyne wrote in another place agaynste Crestonius the .iii. boke.Augustinus cō¦tra crestonī libro, iii, chap, li, In this poynt kinges, (as it is cō¦maunded to them by god) do ser∣ue god in somoch as they be kings If in there realme they comaunde yt is good & forbide yt that is yl not onely that pertayneth to the felaw¦shyp or societe of man. But yt per∣tayneth to the fayth of god and al in vaine thou seiste. Let me folow fre libertye wherfore in Muder, in oppressing, or Rauishīg of womē, and in al maner Mischeuos & vn∣graciousnes doest thou not crye to be suffered to folowe the free liber¦tye and yet it is verye profitable & for ye comen welth yt suche thinges shulde be prohibet & let by Iust & good lawes / And ye same Augusty¦ne in another place doth testifi yt it is ye proper office of a kinge to mi¦nister iust is & to deliuer & saue out of ye handes of extortioners thē ytWhat is th proper office of  kynge
be vyolentlye oppressed. And fur∣ther saynt Thomas doeth confyr∣me ye same in his boke of the Rule or ordringe of princes.Thomas de regimine prin¦cipium. In the fyrst boke .xii. chapiter. Lette the kinge knowe that he hathe taken vpon him this office that he shulde be in his Realme as the soule in the bo∣dye or as god in the worlde. Whi∣che if he diligently consider by the one he shalbe enflamed with loue of Iustice when he considerethe yt he was set in dignite for ye entente that in stede of god he shulde mi∣nister Iustyce in his Realme by ye other he shulde lerne to be mercy∣ful and gentyl were as he doth re∣pute and counte all men that be vnder his dominion as his owne proper members it agreeth to the same that we reade in the boke of ye church called quadruuium.Quadruuium eccle. The churche of god was cōmytted by Christ to the princes or lordes that
ye shulde saue and defende it. And whether the peace and fayth of ye churche be encreasead or dimini∣shed.God shall re∣quyre is of kī∣ges whether the peace and fayth of ye ch∣urche be inire¦sed or dimini¦shed. He shal aske accounte of yt in the powers of whome he dyd com¦myte his church Therfore lett the princes of the worlde knowe that are bounde to make Acounte to god for ye churche which they toke of Chryst to gouerne and defend And IsidoreIsidore, wryteth one this ma¦ner of ye cure charge & authorite of kinges. The that be within ye chur¦che and do agaynst the fayth and ordinaunce of the churche must be feared bi ye Rigore of princes And the supreme power most ley or put vpon the neckes of them ye be pro∣wed or stubborne ye same disciplin whiche the humilitie of the church is notable to excercise, and yt they maye deserue honour let them put forth the vertu of theyr aucthorite and in another place he saieth Se¦culer
princes do knowe ye they are bounde to make accounte to god for the church which they haue ta∣ken vpon thē to defend. And thys is the proper and chefe cure of prī¦ces which ye Tripartite stori doth showe that constantinus toke vpō hym.tripertita his∣toria libro, iii, cap, iii, Where these wordes be that folowe. The deuoute and victori∣us Constantine to the bisshoppes assembled to gether in the Citie of Tiro.The epistle, of cōstantin to ye bisshops of in the councel of tiro, I am Ignorante what was decreed in your troublos & hastie councell. But it appereth that the trweth is opprest and troden dow¦ne bi some sedtcious and vndis∣rete reasoninge. ☞ For you do not consider yt is pleasinge to god but for the contencion and altera¦cion whiche ye haue against your neyghboures ye contende to haue your desires & mindes inuincible & mutable. But we haue nede of
ye goodnes & prouidence of god ye this contencion manifestly espied may be euacuat and remouid yt it may playne apere to vs if your as¦sembling there haue done anithin¦ge without grace because of your sedicion and varience, wherfore I wil that al you with al spede come before my magestye that ye maye certyfye & showe me your selues ye verite of those thinges that ye ha∣ue done. But for what entente I wrote this to you and haue called you to com before me bi mi letters ye shall knowe by those wordes yt foloweth. As I was going to the Citie bearing my name in my for∣tunate countrey.Athanasius c̄¦playeth to con¦stantine vpon his wronge t sustained As I was takin¦ge my horse sodenlye Athanasius bysshope with certen preistes with him in the myddes of the strete ca∣me to me so at vnwares yt I was almost sodenlye affrayde I take
god to wytnes that seth althing yt at the fyrste syght I wolde not dy¦serue who he was, onles one of mi seruauntes had showed me whoo he was and what wronge he had sustayned, and at that tyme I dyd not comen with hym nor speake to thyem and when he desired that he might be harde and I denied. And cōmaunded him to be put awaye. He with grette confidence and boldenes desired nothinge of vs. But that you myght come be∣fore vs, and that he myght before you with lamentacion show, what Iniuries he had suffered & there∣fore because me thought it resona¦ble, and conuenient for the tyme. I the more gladlye dyd commaunde this wryting to be sent to you, that al you yt were at the counsel at Ty¦ro shulde in al hast and withoute any let come before our gracious presens, that ye mai showe bi your
workes the Reclitude and sincery¦te of your Iudgement before me. Whom you wyl not denye to be ye very officers of god. And therfore the name of God is peaceablelye honered in euery place,Constantine, Eperour cau∣sed hethen mē to hour god & knowe god, and wholy Blessed by my seruice and diligēce to god asmoche as amongest He¦then men whiche tyl this tyme did not knowe the treuth. For this is manifest, yt he whiche knoweth not ye trueth, can not knowe god. But further as I showed before. The Hethen by me the faythfull mini∣ster of god haue knowen god, and lerned to feare god. And it is play¦ne bi mi workes that god is mi de¦fendour and helper. And therby ye chefely knowe god, and they for ye feare that we haue to god do feare and honour god, And you whiche seme to minister to his mercifull goodnes wholye misteries I wyll not saye kepe them you, I saye do
nothinge else but that is manifest pertayninge to contencion, And to speake playnly that that is lyke to be the distruction of mankynde. But as I sayd haston you quicke¦lye to come to vs and knowe you that I wyl labour with al my po∣wer that those thinges that be in ye lawe of god maye be chefely obser¦ued without ani stumbelinge or er¦ror And also al such thinges that may be without any offence or sus¦picion of yl. And that al Enemyes of the lawe of god maye vtterli be dyspised distroyed and banished which vnder pretence of that holy name do norishe and mayntayne diuerse blasphemies and Heresies and of a treweth Iustinianus em¦perour of Rome dyd let nothinge vnconfyrmed and enacted by hys lawe that longeth to the obseruan¦ce & preferment of god & so he dyd make lawes & ordinauces of faithIustinian em¦perour made lawes to con∣fyrme the law of god,
of Heritikes, of holye churches of bysshoppes and clarkes of religi∣ouse men, of Mariages and of al suche causes speciallye whiche at this daye be exempte frome the po¦wer of kinges & make a grete au∣thorite of ecclesiastical power whi¦ch thynge surely Iustinian wolde not haue done onles he had had ex¦ample of his predecessors and on¦les he had verelye thought yt they had partained to his office and au¦thoryte.Quomodo re∣gibus anglie comeeuit au∣thoritas in re∣bus diuinis, In Englond there be ma¦ny thinges that testifi that kinges went aboute to kepe there owne ri¦ght and authoryte and there vnto made mani prouisions and lawes First of a statute of apelles we fin¦de in this maner.An acte made by kīges that no man shulde apele oute of ye realme with out licence of the kinge If appelacions chauce to be had they shal appeale from the Archdeacons to the bys∣shoppes and from the bisshoppes to the archbisshops & if ye Archbis¦shoppe be slowe or necligent in
mynistring Iustyce then ye shal Apele to the kynge, That by his commaundement in the courte of the Archbyshop the matter made be ended so that it shall not proced nor be Apealed forth withoute ly∣cens of the Kyng. And in an other place, it shal not be lawful for Ar∣chebyshops, Byshops, nor othere persons of the realme, to goo oute of the Realme without lycence of the Kynge. And yf he wyll goo furth, & haue lycence of the King, He shall fynde surtie that ney∣ther in goyng, nor in tarying they shall procure any yll or harme no∣ther to the Realm, nor to the King Besydes that Turstane electe Ar∣chebysshoppe of Yorke gotte ly∣cence of the Kynge to goo to the councelle called by Calyxt,Turstā arche¦bysshoppe of yorke goynge to the councel made an oeth he shulde take no benedictiō of the pope, But making an oth before yt he shuld not receiue of the pope no episto∣pall benediction wherfore if he
made promes yt he wolde receyue no benediction of the pope, Is it not manifest that he supposed the preheminence of the regall powre in cōcernīg ye Libertys of ye realm to be superiour than ye pope which could bynd the bysshope by vertu of the othe yt he shuld not admytte the Iurisdiction of the Pop, ein ta¦kyng his Benediction, which thīg the inferior can not execute agaīst the superiour. And if it be your pleasure to be doing wt examples it shall manifestly aper ye kinges of England ordered ye Realme by the Imperiall power, dydde take vpon them the cure and busines yt they dyd make ordinaunce to the people of the ordering & reseruing of Sacramentes & spirituall thin¦ges.Camitu re angli Among whom one king Ca∣mytus most diligently & valyantli dyd execute his office and duetye in ye behalfe, and made such lawes
& ordināces as hereafter do folow Lawes made by kinge Ca∣nutus concer¦ning spiritual thinges,¶ It is iust and lawfull that the money of buryalles be payd wher¦as the grounde openede, If my course be brought from his owne paryshe churche into another,of Buryalis, the money of his buryall by the lawe shuld pertayne or long to the same church al goodly institucions and al holy cerymonyes of god shalbe obserued as it shalbe thought ne∣cessarye & nede of them requereth Whe forbydde that vpon the son∣dayes ye shal vse no marchandise no plees,Vpon ye Son¦ay shalbe v∣sed no Mar∣cēdis plees in Cowrtes, no Huntynge nor other such excercise, of Cowrtes, no Hun∣tyng, nor any other suche seculare acte or excercise, Euery chrystē mā so shal prepare himselfe to receue the Sacramēt of theaulter at the lest thryse in ye yere,Men shall re∣ceyue the Sa∣crament thrise in the yere. so that he may receyue it to his soule helth, & not to his damnacion, yf a minister of the aulter kyll a man or else verye
moche do misuse hym selfe in yl & vicious liuinge lette hym be depre¦ued of his order and of his promo¦cions.A Preyst for Murder and vicious lyuēg shalbe depre∣ued of his or∣der and pro∣mocion, If a wyfe her husband be∣ing alyue comytte adultry, and of it be puplished let her byde shame of the worlde and lose here Eares and her Nose.Of a wyfe cō¦mitting Adul∣tery, ¶ Wydowes shall not mary within .xii. monethes. Eueri widowe shal be without husband .xii. monethes and she mary in that time, she shal lose her doure. Also we haue redde certen lawes made bi kinge Ethel¦drede whiche hereafter folowe. ¶ That is to show you,Etheldrede e made cer¦ten lawes con¦cerning spiri∣tuall thinges which here fo¦loweth, you shal honour and loue on god aboue al thynges And al mē shal obey ther kinge as the forfathers dyd afore¦tyme & with hym the shal defende the realme. Also he ordeyned that men shuld cal for ye mercy & helpe of god wt fastinge almes doinge wt lauds & praise to god abstīence
and that euery preist shulde go wt his people. iii dayes a precession barefored and that he shulde saye .xxx.Edgarus rex made spiritu∣al lawes of ke¦pinge the son∣day of teythes and festes, masses. Further king Edgar dyd institute these lawes. That ye tenthes shulde be payde to the mo¦ther churche. And that the sonday shulde be kepe holyday, from .ix. a clocke of the saterdaye tyll it were daye lyght vpon ye Monday. And that all other festes shulde be kep¦te as the were commaunded bi the preistes. Also kinge Edmunde did call a gret conuocacion of men of the churche secular and regular at London at the feast of Easter.Edmōdis rex made spiritu∣al lawes also in a conuocaci¦on called a ō¦don, At whiche congregacion were Edo & vlstam archbishop and many bis∣shoppes mo, which king diligentli enquering for ye soule helth of thē that were subiecte to him, dyd ma¦ke actes and constitucions on this maner. Fyrst of al that the whiche be in holy orders and shulde teach
the people of god shuld kepe them chast,Of them that were within orders And geue good ensample of lyuyng accordyng to ther degre & order, or elles they be worthy of yt thing that is spoken of in ye canō. We commaunde that he that will not pay his thenthes shalbe excom¦minicate,Of tēthes pa∣inge, of hym yt com¦mitteth forni∣cacion with a Nunne He that commytteth for∣nication wt a Nunne or any Reli∣gious woman shalbe punished as a Murderer. who so euer shall cō∣myete Pariurye shalbe for euer desseuered from the compayne of god.of Periury Adelstāus rex Also kyng Adelstan did pro∣clame and make certayne constitu¦cions consernynge Ecclesiasticall thinges ye euery man shulde geue his tenthes to god as Iacob saide I wyll offer to the tenthes of all thinges that thou sendest me.Of thenthes. Gen, xxviii And our fayth in the gospell, to euery man that hath shalbe geuen and he shal haue abūdance & of Serti¦lege witches and such as tel mensOf Sorcerye & witchcraft
fortunes yf they kyl a man yt shal∣be Iudged to deth, also therby la∣wes made by Iro the king of west Saxons whiche apere to concer∣ne spiritual thynges.Iro, rex. And they be constitute in this wise. I Iro by ye grace of god kīg of west Saxons hauing cōsideracion vpō the helth of the soule and of the state of my Realme do constitute lawfuly ma¦trimony & right Iudgement to be kepte, and that ye ministers of god obserue and kepe the rule and tea¦ching of holi scripture If a seruāt worke vpon the Sondaye by the commaundemēt of his master let hym be blameles,Of a seruante working vpō the sonday Of baptisme of childri, let the chylde be baptised within iii. days after his byrthe in payne of .xxx. s. If any man feght in the church he shalbe marsed in vi.Of suspendīg of churches Of false wit∣nes, pound. If any man before the bysshope do beare false witnes or recorde he shalbe mercid in .iii. s. And the same king hath graunted to the Abbot and couēt
of glastenburi ye al causes of mur¦der of sacrilege of wichecrafte,The graunte of the king to the monastery of Glastōbur of thefte, of rape, or extorcion, In the dysposicion of the churches, In ye ordinacion of clarkes, in al exami¦naciōs longing to ye court shuldbe endid after ye sētēces or ordināces of them, & he forbade bi thaucthori¦te of peter & paul & al sayntes yt no bysshope shulde set his cathedral seate wtin ye Iurisdiccion of ye mo¦nasterye. Also the constitucions of King alureddo manifestly declare That in olde time kinges of Eng¦lād had grete authorite ī spiritual thinges.Almebus rex, Of fornicaciō with a mānes wyfe, And this kīg made these lawes, yt if ani man comyt fornica¦cion wt another mans wyf he shal paye to ye husband .xxx. s. for amen¦des. If any mā in lēt season do lye the holy oyle in any open or comenpla¦ce or in his house he shalbe merced in .xxx s. yt cristē mē may loue god
& forsake there infidelite. If anye man do forsake his chrystyndome and folow infidelite he shal louse his lyfe.Of hym that forsaketh he i christendome, If any man being in ho¦ly orders do steale or comytte per∣iury let hym be punished,Of him that cōmytteth theft being ī orders yf a prest at conuenyent tyme do not sende for creame, or yf he denie baptyme when nede requyreth let hym dye for yt If .ii.A prest that de¦nieth baptym shall dye, brether or kynsmen do comite fornicacion wt one woman let them be mersed a certen epistle of eleutheri{us} writon to luci{us} king of britton on this wise doth testify that diuers bysshops of Rome in tymes paste dyd not onelye not de¦nye to kinges of England this ec¦clesiasticall power,Some Bys∣shoppes of ro¦me, dyd not de¦nye but gaue kinges power ecclesiasticall, but also that yt did geue it to them and that yt did confesse that it was ye proper office of kinges in theyr Realmes so to do. Eleutherius, Lucius kinge of Brittons benediction in chryste ye desired vs to sende to you ye lawesEleuthery pa¦pe epa lucio egi britannia
of Rom and of themperour which ye might vse in the lande of Britō The lawes of Rome & the Empe∣rours lawes whe maye oftetymes reproue, ye lawe of god we can not. You haue receyuid by the promis¦sion of god in the realme of Bry∣ton the lawe and fayth of chryste. Ye haue with you both the Testa¦mētes in your Realme, take of thē by the grace of god and councell of your realme a lawe and therby by the sufferance of god Rule and gouerne your Realme of Bryton for ye are the vicar of god in that realme as Psalmist sayth The lā¦de or the erth is the our lordes. &c.The pope cal¦led the kinge ye vicar of god Vicarius dei regē appellat, Further it playnlye appereth by a boke of the actes of the bysshopes of Durham that kinges of Enge¦land had great authorite in the or¦dinacion of bysshoppes. For it is hade in ye boke that Chadde was made Bysshoppe of yorke by theKingeg made and ordeyned bysshoppes.
commaundement of king Oswen and Kynge Egfryde caused the re¦uerent Cutberte to be consecreate bysshoppe of Durham. And that Edmonde preest nominate by the meruelous voyce of Cutbert was brought wt grete honour to kinge Knute of whose ellection he was very glade and commaundid him to be consecrated solemlye, besides that it is manifest by Mathew pa¦rison what authoryte kinges had in consecracion of bisshoppes For he doth showe that kinge Henrye dyd geue ye Archebysshop of Can¦turbury to Raffe bysshop of Lon¦don and dyd consecrate hym by a∣ryng and a crowche, And the same king as the same Mathe saith ga¦ue ye bysshop ryche of Wynchester to Wyllyam Gyfforde and bi and by put him in possession of al thin¦ges pertayning to ye bysshopriche and dyd consecrate hym as werWhat autho∣ryte kīgs had in consecraciō of bysshoppes in tymes past,
folowing ye brothers as folowing the fathers steppes Notwithstan∣ding that Vrbā bisshop of Rome had made a statute and forbiddon with ecclesiasticall censure that no clarke shulde take any dignite of the gifte of princes or othere laye men,Vrban made an acte yt no clarke shulde take ani mo¦cion spirituall of any kinge  layman Innumerable examples of such thinges are brought to remē¦braunce of men by suche as wrote the actes of Englishmen. And yf any man wyll make cauelacion yt those lawes whiche we haue reher¦sed concerning spirituall thinges made the anxiant Kinges of Eng¦land to pretende a temporall, and not spirituall authorytie. Let him knowe that LinwodLynwod. vpon the con¦stitutyon prouyncyall doth agree to vs with those wordes These thynges sayeth Lynnewode be more spyrituall that be not myxte with any tēporal thynges.What thing be more spiri∣tual. As for∣nycacion, adultery, baptyem, bau∣dry, heresy, & suche othere, After
the sentence of ye epistle that Eleu¦therius wrete to kinge Lucius al∣so wylliam kyng of England that was duke of Normundye whiche by conquest obtained the dominiō and realme that he myght make ye place where he had victorye to be in remēbraunce to his aftercōers dyd builde a monastery in ye same place for the perpetual and deuote remembraunce of his soule & dyd make the letters of ye foundacion on that tenure yt he myght playnly showe. That the supreme aucthori¦te of Spirtual & Temporal thin∣ges did remain in prynces. Whose letters be of this tenour. In ye nāe of ye blessed & indiuisible Trynite I wyllyam by the grace of god kynge of Englande wyl it be kno¦wen to al mē aswel them that shal come after as those that be nowe,Letera Whil¦helmi regis Anglie defun∣datione mōtis debell. Archbysshops bisshopes. Abbots Erles, Barons, & al faythfull peo¦ple
both of England and Fraunce that when I was come into Eng∣lād agaynste my enemyes whiche wronfully were a bout to kepe frō me the kingdome being in harnes at the entring of battayl before mi Barons, and Kynghtes, with the fauour of them all, to coumforte ye hurtes made a vowe to buylde a certen Churche in the honour of god for the sowle helth of all men If by the grace of god we myght obtayne Victory.The vowe of Wyllyā Con∣querour, which when we had gotton we dyd performe our voue & build a chucrh in ye honour of the blessed Trinite and saynt Marten Confessore for my soule helth, and the soule helth of kynge Edwarde my predecessor, and of my wyfe quen Matild{us}, and for ye soules of misuccessors in mi real∣me, and for the soule helth of all them bi whose labour and helpe I dyd optayne the realme and most
special for the soules of them whi¦che dyed at that batayl. And bicau¦se in this place where it is builded god gaue me the victory I wylled that place to be called battel in re¦membraunce of the victorye.Quicquid con¦cedit regali au¦thoritati con∣cedit vt osten∣dat regalem authoritatē et ad spiritualem pertinere And therfore to this churche of saynte Marten in battel I giue & graun¦te these libertes by my regall au∣thoryte that they may haue a cour¦te of ther owne in all causes, and yt they maye haue fre & regal liberti and custome to kepe courte of ther owne matters and busines and to mynyster Iustice themselues.ota quod ab piscoporum sub iectiōe ex imetur rex. It shalbe for euer fre from the subiec¦cion of al bysshopes and from the dominion of al persons as cristes church in Canturbury and yf ani felon or murderer or giltie in any offence flee for feare of death and com to this church he shalbe hurt in nothnge but shalbe let go at liberte, it shalbe lauful for ye abbot
of that church in euery place to sa¦ue a theffe from hanginge If he chaunce to come by at that tyme Also I geue and graunt to the sa¦me church a leyg compas about it fre and quiet from al gylde and scotte & Hidage, Denegeld,The abbet of battel maye s¦ue a thef whe¦re so euer he cometh, Brige worke, Castell worke, Parke pa∣lyng, Clawsutes. From fyndinge men of warre, al aydes and plees al Playntes, Shires, hundredes, with sare soce, tol heam, & Infang¦thes. Warpene. Lestage. Hāsocun Forstal. bludwytte and chilwytte, Felony and libertye from al custo¦me of wordlye bondage and from al exaccion or tapis of bysshopes. Therfore to this churche of saynt Martin of battel I geue mi regal manyer called Wie wt al thapper∣tenaunces longinge to my regall crowne, with al liberties priuelegi¦es and regal customes as fre and quyet as I hadde hit fyrste and
and queetest as frely as I beinge kynge myght geue it That is to saye frō all Gelde, Scott, Hidage Denegild, Brigeworke, Castel∣worke, Proke worke, inclosinge & fynally from al custom of worldli bondage, And from all Felonye or Thefte if it chaunce, lykewise I geue .ii. d. of all forfettes & playes of all ye Hundredes that partayne to the Sommoning or Lordshipe of Wye, And indingnariis which is on menbre of wye. Also I geue to ye sayd churche of saynt Martē the church of Radinges, ye church of Culcunton, the church of saynt Olauide in Oxforde with landes and Tenthes and al other thinges partaynyng to the same churches. And if any of my Baranes or mē wyll geue any of theyr owne to ye said church as in almes, I graunt the same lybertie to thē as I gaue to this thinges which I gaue my
selfe to the same churche. And I confyrme it with my present wry∣tyng, and with my regall autho∣rytie aforesayd: Guylliam kynge Lauftance Archebysshop of Can¦tuatbury, Thomas Archebishop of Yorke, Maurice bisshop of Lō¦don, The bysshop of Wynchester, Exceter, and Rochester. The Er∣les of Chester montegue and of ware, but oftymes is there greate chaunge and varyabylytie of ty∣mes and wyttes,The bisshop of rome be al∣ways subtue, and as bysshops of rome dyd alwayes excell in wyt and subtilty and coude get any oc¦casion to amplisye and enlarge ye circutes of there power, so the dyd alwayes with grette diligence la∣bour that the might vsurpe & brin¦ge to there handes all power, and abuse to ther owne profet the gen¦tylnes, patience and simplicite of other men, otherwhyles puttinge them in hope of more profette and
commodite. But bicause that the are gone from god and go aboute styl to amplisy that exceding and confuse power set vp with yll and vnsubstancial fondacion lyke the tower of Babilon,The power of the bysshop of rome neuer stode a mānes lyffe without resistance and contradiccyon it coude not stā¦de long without resistance nor ne∣uer yet stod a mans lyfe clere and quyet without any busines, prin∣ces haue suffered moche And the stories do testifie that some haue bine more bolde then some, and as euery one felt hym greued, so they were more quicke and bolder shar¦pely to speake to the hye bysshops for there ryght, and warne them of ther offices. And the dyd them dis∣simule with many thynges which were not cōuenient to medell with al that season. But the same king Wyllaym wryte to the Pope, of this maner, because he dyd abuse his promissyons, in the realme of
England, the kyng to the pope. &c ¶ The lorde of al lordes Ihesus chryst which doth gouerne and ru¦le both celestiall and terrestriall,Alia carta eiu¦dem withelmi regis, The epistle of kyng wylliam conquerour to ye hye bysshop of rome, thinges for euer hath of his deui∣ne goodnes exalted you to the ap¦postolical dygnite for to remoue & put awaye all offensions, to put a¦way al Iuperdies, & to set forwar¦de the profyt of his people. ¶ Therfore we desiring (as we ar bounde) to prouyde that, that is necessarye, and withstand and put awaye al maner Iuperdis from ye People of god of whome by ye suf¦feraunce of god I am ruler, wol¦de also gladly defende & encrease in our tyme the honour and liber∣ties of ye noble church of England and that that is our ryght, by in∣heritaunce which our predecessors
worthe of eternal memory did no∣bly defēd, wherfore certen thinges specyallye before all other whiche troble our minde in puryte of spri¦te, we haue opened and certified to your holines.He calleth the church of eng¦lond our mo∣ther The church of Eng¦land our mother which amongest al other churches of ye worlde doth excell and abounde in Tempo∣ral possessions, & in the seruis and honour of god, and in ye diligence of deuoute ministers in ye workes of mercy and hospitalite and euer hath florishede with prerogatiues of noblenes and honur wyle the a¦bundance therof was at ye dispen¦sacion of her owne chyldrē, to the seruis and ministers therof which were called to those dygnities,The promissi∣ons of the bys¦shops of rome intollerable here in Eng∣land, not bi ambicion, but by god. Nowe by Importable Tapis and exceding prouisions, made by the apostoli∣cal see, indifferently as wel to strā¦gers as to Englishemen we being
had in suspecion and hatred for ye most parte our peticions made for euer lerned and discrete & well be loued vtterly contemned it is so wasted kept vnder, diminished, & fortroubled because the profettes of mani dignites & fate benefices be geuen to Aliens and foren per∣sons which be not resident vpon ye promocions,The dignites of the churche were geuen to Aliens where¦by cam moche decaye of ver∣tue and great hurte to ye re∣alme, and know not them selfe, and vnderstand not the tong but oneli seke for there Temporal lucre, & I wyl not speake of other shamefull vices. Therby comethe and riseth moche sclaunder, and ye profeccion of the ecclesiasticall dis¦cipline is lytle regarded the charg of soules is neglecte, the honour & seruyce of Chryste is diminyshed The habitacions of the clargy go to decaye, whych the predecessors dyd sumptuously buylde hospita¦lite is lest, and the almes that were wonte to be geuen, be kepte awaye
by whiche the deuociō of many is fallē awai. Was this ye first entent and wyl and the liberall minde of the founders and prences that the almes and patrimonies of kinges and other which were assined and geuen to the ministers of ye church for ye excercise of ye honour of god and for workes of charyte shulde come and remayne to the profette of Aliens or straungers.Was landes geuē to ye chur¦che of Englād to fede Aliens and let ther own childer in hunger and penurye, Is this pleasyng to god that the church so endued with possession which brin¦geth forthe so manye dyscrete and wyse chyldēr profetable and neces¦sary to take cure and ministracion of here shulde let her owne childer be in honger and penury and geue her pappes to Aliens and straun∣gers not onely to take sucke of thē but rather to teare and pulle them in peces for the chylder sucke the Mylke, strangers wringe oute
the blod letting nothyng remaine that they may smatche and plucke amongest whome we do not mene nor speake of the ryght reuerente fathers Cardinalles of the church of Rome which being assistent a∣boute your holynes,The chyldrē sucke the myl¦ke straungers wring out the blod, may ease and heale the mothers dyseases & help her continualye, for when the trea∣sure of the Realme is spente and wasted, & the church therof dystroi¦wed the Realme shulde be moche weaker in aduersityes,By suche pro∣misions the re¦alme is made moch weaker and porer which thīg perchance ouer enemyes do crafte¦lye coniecture and cast. ❧ Wherfore we seynge before these grefes and other such incom¦modites whiche if we shulde dis∣anul any longer, myght be occasiō of gretter. Wherfore by the aduise & councell of our faythfull people & lerned councel gethered together we beseche your holines wt meker
and humblye prayers that ye wyll ponder the primissis in ye balaun∣ce of right Iudgemēt wt abundās of paciens and deuocion and were as we and our realme ouer clargi and our people hetherto haue bene before al other obedient to your se Therfore your holines of your no¦bilite and weldisposed kyndnes ought to fauour and releue & not to opresse them that ye of your cus¦tomable benignite which doth sup¦presse Auerice and abhorreth Si∣mony wold vochesafe so to mode∣rate your reseruacions and proui∣sions,Popes requi∣red and did ex¦ort tapis in∣portable and the goodes of thē that dyed intestate and money beque∣thed to the ho¦ly lande with other thinges o chefely for Alyons & stran∣gers and suche tapis by your holi¦nes required and oftymes extorte bi inportune calling vp on of them that be ambitius, and other com∣myssions for the goodes of them that be ded vnder colour that the dyed intestate and of suche money
that is bequethed for the socour of the holy land, and al suche goodes as be bequethed vncertaynlye by whyche our people by the subtiltie of your officers I wil not say ma¦lice contrary to your minde, as we trust hath ofttymes wrongfuly be wexed that ye Cathedral churches and other churches of our realme may haue fre elections and effica¦cite after the grauntes and confes¦sions geuen by our aunceters kin¦ges of Englonde and confyrmed by the apostolical se.Bysshops we¦re electe by ye cathedrall ses. And that clar¦kes that be patrones lose not liber¦tye of there patronage, and that this burden whiche werethe they shulders of the chyldren maye be taken awaye, leeste that necessyte cause them at the laste to caste of those burdens whyche can not be borne longe withoute ouermoche detriment ¶ But that the deuocion of vs &
ours maye encrease to ye apostoly¦cal se, we instantly desire you that the grefes and burdens maye cea¦se for we can not alwayes be slug∣gardes but as we are bounde for our power, we must auoide and ex¦pel al suche grefes and daungers And therfore kyng Edgarus that he might showe the rule and gouer¦naunce of his people in suche cau∣ses to partaine to him,Oratio regis edgari ad cle∣rum Anglie, made to his clargye an oracion whyche here fo¦loweth consequentli. Bycause our lord god hath abundantli showed his mercie amongest vs it is mete reuerent fathers that we shuld be correspondent to his innumera∣ble benifittes in worthye workes. For we do not possesse the erthe by our Swerd or power,Psalmus, xliii our strenght hath not showed vs, but his right hand, his holi arme, it pleased him so to do for vs. Therfore it is righ
that we shulde make our selfes & our soules obedient and subiecte to hym that dyd put subiecte al∣thing vnder his fete, and we shall dyligently labour that the that he hath made subiecte to vs shalbe subiecte to hym and so his lawes. And it pertayneth to me to ordere the laye People with equite & Iu∣stice and to geue right Iudgemēt betwixt neighbour and neighbour to punishe trāgressors to kepe do∣wne rebelles to saue ye weake from ye oppression of thē yt be bygger to defend the pooer and nedye from the spoylets of them.What partay¦neth to a king of a realme But also it longeth to my charge to prouyde necessatyes for ye mini∣sters of the church for the couenth of religiouse men for the congre∣gacion of Nunnes.The examina¦cions of the maners and l¦uing of the clargye partay¦neth to ye kīge And to proui∣de yt they may haue peace & qietnes
the examinacion of whose maners and leuyng partayneth to vs. ¶ If he liue chastly, If the beha¦ue them honestlye to them that be without. Furth If the be diligent in the seruice of god. If the be bu∣sye in teaching of the people. If yt be sober in liuing, If the be mode¦rate in there behauour, If the be dyscrete in there Iudgementes. I speake by your licens reuerent fa¦thers, yf ye had loked vpon and in¦quered those thinges diligentli we shuld not haue harde so moch vice and abominacions by Clarkes. I lete that passe that the haue no∣ther open crowne, nor conueniente consure, and that wantones in ly∣uinge, pryde in behauour, lightnes in communicacion, do manifeste ye infame of your soules and hartes Besides that howe gret negligēce is there in the seruice of god,Negligence in the seruice of god & misbeha¦uour in ye clar¦gye. when ye scante vouchsaue to come to
church onhalowe euens. When at the Masse tyme ye seme rather to come to gether to laughe & playe then to singe, yet wyll I tell you that good men be sory, for yll men do laughe at hit. Yet wyll I tell it being sory for yt, yf it may be told howe the abounde and runne at large in Banketing, & Dronkenes in slouth and vnclenlynes that no¦we the houses of clarkes be coun∣ted the hospitalites of Harlottes the couentes of gesters & players, ther be dyce and cardes, ther is sin¦ging / and daunsing, there is wat∣thing with showting and cryinge tyl mydnight, so the patrimonies of Kinges the Alines of princes ye and that yt is more The pryce of his Preciuos blode is spente and wasted, dyd our fathers wast and spende theyr treasours for that en¦tent? did the kinges treasure house decrease by withdrawing of moch
Rentes for that end dyd the libera¦lite of kinges geue landes and po¦ssessions to the curches of chryste for that, that harlottes shulde be trimode bi the abundance and wā¦tones of ye clargy, for to make sum¦ptuos feastes to kepe houndes & haukes and other pleasures, this ye men of warre crye out vpon, ye peo¦ple murmuris at it. Minstreles sī¦ge and Ieste of it, & you care not for it, you fauer them, you take vp on you ye know it not. Where is ye swerde of leuye?genesis xxxiiii Where is the zele of Simeon whiche dyd dystroy ye sychymytes althoughe they were circumsised bycause the dyd mis∣use ye doughter of Iacob as a har¦lot, which sichimites bare ye figure of them that pollute the church of christ with vicious liuing.Exodus, xxii Where is the spirite of Moises which did not fouour his owne kynsmē that
honered the hed of the clase, where is ye Sword of phemees the preest yt dyd stycke him that commytted fornicacion with the modianite,Nūerorū xxv & bi that holi zele pacified god whē he was angri.Act, v, Where is the spirite of Peter, whyche by hys vertue dystroyed Auaryce, and dyd con∣demne symoniacall herysye,Act, viii folow you priestes folowe youe the way¦es of our Lorde and the right wy∣senes of our god. ❧ It is tyme to do agaynst them that dystroye and dyssipate the la¦we of god our Lorde.Clerus anglie gladium petri habet vt non sit necesse a roma petere, I haue the swerd of Constantyne, and you ye Sword of Peter in your handes, let vs Ioyne handes togethere & Swerdes that the lepers maye b dryuen out of the Tentes that th house of God maye be purged and that the CHILD of leuy
of Leuy may minister in ye Tem∣ple whiche sayed to his father and Mother I knowe you not and to his brother I wott who you be. I praye you take hede dyligentli lest we repent vs of that we haue don and that we haue geuen yf we se it spente not in the seruice of god but spente in ryot and misliuinge of onthriftes by suferance wtout punishment. Let the reliques of Sayntes moue you whome ye lea∣pe before, let ye holy authors moue youe before whome they playe the madde men. ¶ Let the meruelus deuotion of our predecessors mo∣ne you, whose almes the vnthristi∣nes of the clargye doth misuse, my grette grauntfather as ye knowe dyd geue the tenthe of all his lan∣des to the churche and monisteris Alfredus of holye remembraunce my gret graunfathers father dyd not entende to spare nothere hisThe king ga∣e the tenthe of his land to the churche,
treasure nor patrimony no maner charges or rentes for to enryche ye church, it is not vnknowen to you fathers howe moch olde king Ed¦warde my granfather gaue to the church, and ye ought to remember howe gret giftes my father & his brother gaue to ye churches. O fa∣ther of fathers dunston beholde I praye you ye eyes of my father shi∣nynge vpon you from heuen here his complayntes with moche pety sowning in your eares O fathere dunston dydist yu geue me councel of building of monasteris of redi¦fieng of churches thou wast a hel¦per & a laborer wt me in euery thīg I chose the as a bisshop & sheperd of my soule and enformer of my maners,Saynt dunstō gaue councell to the king to bilde mani mo¦nasteris to whome the kī¦ge was obedy¦ent in al thīge when dyd not I do after the, what treasure dyd I set more by then thy councell, what possessi¦ons dyd not I neclat at thy cōaun¦dement yf thou willest any thinge
to be geuen to the poore I was re¦dye If ye thought any thing to be geuen to the churche I dyd not de far it. If ye dyd say that religius men or clarkes lacked anye thinge I did socour theyr necessite. Thou diddest saye it was a perpetuall al¦mes and that there was no more profytable than that geuen to mo¦nasteris & churches for with that the clargye is sustayned and the residew geuē to ye power. O good lye almes. O worthye prece of our soul. O holsome remedi for our sin¦nes which from the bosome of Si¦billa stinkes in the skyn of astrāge mouse, that trymmes her eares yt becomes her fingers, that bindeth her delicate body in sylke and pur¦ple. O father is the profette of my almes is this the fecte of my desire and of your promise, what answer wyl ye make to the complaynte of my father. I knowe this well, yf
thou sawest a thef run thou didest not run with hym, nor thou dydest not take thy parte with adulters / thou hast rebuked, thou hast desi∣red for goddes sake, thou hast bla¦med, thy wordes be not regarded. We must come to punishement, ye haue here with you ye reuerent fa∣ther Edward bysshop of winches∣ter.The correctiō of the clargye commytted to the bishops to put out ye vicē¦ous & to put in them that be good, Ye haue ye honerable bishop of Worceter. Oswalde. I commytte this busines to you, that by the au¦thoryte of the bisshops and power of the kinge the that liue viciousli be put oute of the church, and they yt lyue wel be put in ther sted. Besi∣des that also the temporall lordes and the perliament of England (when the bysshoppe of Rome was aboute to take vpon hym that he wolde knowe of the tytle for ye kīg¦dome of Scotlād which ye king of Englād did chalēge)The leer wrytton from the perliamē of England to the bysshop of rome, wrote letters to ye bysshop of rome on this wise yt foloweth The holimother church
of Rome by whose mynistery the Christon world is gouerned in his actes. As we fyrmelye beleue and holde, doth alwaye procede with mature deliberacyon, soo that it wylles too be preiudycyall to no man. But lyke a louynge mother wolde that all ryght and Iustyce of euery man, aswell in other men, as in herself shulde be conseruyd incorrupte and withoute breeche In a parlyament lately sygned at Lyncolne by oure mooste gracy∣ous and noble lorde Edward by the grace of god Kynge of Eng∣lond. Oure gracyous lorde dyd cause certeyn letters Apostolycall whych he receuid from you concer¦ning certayn busynes aboute the condicion and stare of the Realme of Scotland, to be deliueryd to vs and ernestly to be expounded and pondred. Which letters hard & dili¦gētli vnderstād, we hard such thin¦ges cōteīed in thē as we merueled
at & suche thynges as was neuer fo harde of before.Scotland, ha∣th alwais par¦tayned to the kings of Eng¦land, We knowe holye father & it is manifest in the parti¦es of England / and openlye kno∣wen to many other, that from the fyrst institucion of ye kingdom of England yt as well in the tyme of the brittons as you the time of the Englishmen ye very certen & trewe dominion of Scotland by successi¦on of tyme hath {per}tained to ye kīgs of England & to ye same realme in temporalites & bi no tytle or right {per}tayneth to ye church afore named But also ye same Realme of Scot¦lād of olde time hath bine tributer to ye ancestors & progenitoures of our forsayde lordes yt were kinges of England & to him also. Also ye kynges of Scotland & the realme were neuer vnder aniother then ye kings of England or were wonte to be subiecte to ani other Nor the kinges of Englād vpō ther ryght in ye forsayd realme or any otherReges anglie de statu regu corā nullo li¦gare cogūtur,
themperaltyes of theres haue an∣swered or weare boūde to answere before any ecclesiastical Iudge or seculer Iudge bi the reason of his fre peminence of his state & regal dignite & custome obserued wtout any contradiccion, wherfore wt di¦ligent councell & mature delibera∣cion vpon ye contentes in your let¦ters spokē of before this is ye holie comē & one consēt of al & singuler of vs & shalbe for euer wt the gra¦ce of god wtout variacion. That our forsaid lord & kīg shal not wt in any Iudiciall corte answere be¦fore you,Negani respō¦dere cord epis¦copo romano, vpō ye right & tytle of his Realme of Scotland or ani other temporalties of his nor be obediēt to Iudgment in any wise or bring his forsaid ryght in any doute nor shal sende any proctors or messen¦gers to your presens specially be∣cause yt the premisses shulde mani¦festli be to ye disheriting of ye right of ye Crowne of Englād & the kin¦gesThe whole {per}¦liament deny∣eth to answer in anye suche cause before ye bysshop of ro∣me for it shuld be preiudicial to the realme,
dignitie & the manifest subuer¦sion of the state of ye same realme and also preiudicial to the libertis customes and to ye lawes of our fa¦thers, vnto ye obseruacion & defēce of the which we ar bound by our o¦thes geuen which also we wil hold wt al our power & defende with al our strenght by ye helpe of god nor also we wyl not suffer nor we cane not, nor we ought not to suffer our forsayd lorde & king althoughe he were wyllinge to do or any wayes to atemte such premisses not vsed, and we ought not to do preiudicial & neuer harde of before wherfore humbli desyre your holines yt whe¦re as our forsayde lorde & king of England hath euer more behaued him self faithfull & catholike amō¦gest all other chrysten princes of ye world & euer obedient to ye church of rome yt ye wyll louingly suffer him quietli & peaceably to possesse & to remaīe īcorrupt al his riches
liberties custōes & lawes wtout ani dimuniciō & dysquietnes inwitnes wherof our seales as wel for vs as for ye holecōmunalte of ye forsayd realme we haue set to this present writing geuē at Lincolne the yere of our lord .M.CCCCCx.Epistola. Cassiodori there is also a Epistle of one Cassidore to the church of England of the a¦busis of ye bysshops of rome after these wordes To the noble church of England doyng seruice in lime and stonne Peter the sonne of cas¦siodore a christen knight a deuout chaunpion of chryst wysseth helth and the abaccion of seruitūde and bondage and the receyuinge of ye reward of libertye to whome shall I compare ye or els to whom shall I lyken yt my doughter Hierusalē to whome shal I matche ye virgin doughter of Syon for thy contri∣cion is grette as the se.Iherō, i, Thou arte lefte alone with out solace,Iherō, ii, all day wasted with sorowe, thou arte put
in his handes whence thou canste not ryse without helpe of a lyfter vp.The bisshops of rome be cal¦led scribes & phariseys. For the scribes and pharyseis fytting vpon the seate of Moyses the lordes of rome be enemyes to the & set abrode ther philacteris & go aboute to enriche them selfe wt the mari of the bones, the laye bur¦thens ouer heuye and importable on the neckes of they ministers & further then is comly or conueniēt thei set the vnder tribute which in olde tyme wast fre.The bysshope of rome hath maryd ye chur¦che of the gen¦tyls and so is mad father to the churche of England but he is vnkynde lyke a steppe father Put awaye al maner of maruelinge for they mo¦there the ladye of the gentilnes after the fasshion of wydowes is spoused to her subiecte and hathe ordeyned him to be thy father that is to saye the grett byshope of the ceti of rome. which yet in nothing showeth the kindnes like a father. vpon the he enlargeth the borders of his garmentes by experince do¦th showe yt he is the mothers hus∣band he oftymes remembreth the
prophetical words which is surely prīted & roted in his hart rote take yt a gret boke & write in him quicke¦ly wt the hāde of mā,Ezay. viii, What text of Scripture is printed in the harte of ye bis∣shops of rome hast yt to spoy¦le & sped ye to robbe doth ye Apostle saye that he was ordeyned for that entent where he wryteth euery bis∣shop assumpte from amonges mē is ordeyned for men in these thin∣ges ye longe to god.Hebreos, v Not to spoyle not to leye on them Annual tapys not for murdering of men but to offer gyftes and sacrifice for sinne which also can haue cōpassiō vpō ye ygnorāt & be oute of ye waie,What is the office of a bis∣shope. and it is redde of Peter a fyssherman whose successer he saith that he is that after the resurrectiō of chryst he retorned agayne to his excercise of fishing wt other apostles which when he coude take nothing one ye lefte side of his bote at ye biddinge of chryste he turned to ye ryght side of the botte and drawinge his net to ye ground ful of gret fyshes ther¦foreIohn, xxv, The ministers of the churche is profitable if it be excerci∣sed on the ry¦ght side.
the ministery of the church is profitably to be excercised in the ri¦ght side bi which the deuil is ouer come and manye soules are taken to chryst, surely the labour on the lyfte syde is not so. for on that side fayth Wauers / Sadnes raynethe whan yt is sought for is not found Whe can thinke that he can serue god and Mamon at ons at one ty¦me and folowe his owne pleasure And folowe the desires of ye fleshe and blod / and offer to chryste con∣digne or worthy rewardes. And wt¦out doubte ye sheperd, that wyl nat watche a vpon the edifinge of his flocke doth prepare another waye the ramping lion sekinge whome he may deuoure.The bishop of rome is called ye father of ye church of eng∣land but he is not in dede Se doughter ye actes / & doinge of him yt is named thy father, suche as thou hast not harde before which putteth awaye good sheperdes from ye shepe cots
& putteth in the stede of them to be rulers of them & not for to good or profet to them his owne nepheues his kinsmen and his parentes and some that haue no lerninge,Bysshopes of rome vse to ex¦alte there kins¦men with the good of ye chur¦che althoughe they be vnlar¦ned, & som that be as domme and deaffe that can not vnderstande the tonge of his flocke and such as care not for the bytyng of wolues, but lyke hy∣red seruauntes beringe awaye the fleses, and that reape yt other men haue sowen whose handes be euer in takynge the coffynne and there backes turned a way from ani bur¦den of whiche it is manifest that ye preesthod is prouerted nowe a da∣yes The seruice of god is withdra¦wen and the almes geuen is mis∣used by which thinges the holy de¦uocion of kinges,Psalmo, viii, prynces, and of al christen men, is decayed Ought not euery mā to meruel that where as Chryste commaunded tribute to be payde to kinges for him self & for peter he doth labour to make
subiecte to his power Realmes & kinges & rulers of Realmes con∣tray to the mind of hym whose vi¦car he saythe that he is which dyd refuse and put fro hym realmes & the Iudgementes of the worlde,The bysshops of rome chalē∣ge as moch to theyr owne as the list to wri∣te to be there owne, & the bi ye dominion of his stile or pē for the calengeth al yt he wyl write to be his, what dothe he more dou¦ghter to ye.The bisshops of rome were not contente with the tenth but the wolde haue also the fyrst frutes ¶ Lo he taketh away fromme the what he lyste and yet he holdeth not himself contēt yf he take frome thee the tenth parte of the goodes onles he also haue the fyrst frutes of the promocions of ministers as thoo there were ne¦we patrimonye geuen to the same for him and his bloode,Bysshopes of rome made la¦tely execrable ordinaunces, for stepend of Messengers & Postes, the wyllis of the founders beinge litle regar¦ded, and nowe lately he hath made cursed and exerrable ordināces for stipend of messengers and postes whome he sendeth to Englād whi¦ch cari away not ye liuing of ye and thyne & there consecracions but ye
teare there fleshe & felles lyke dog¦ges. Is not he to be likened to Na¦bugodōosor ye king which distro∣weth the temple of god and robeth them of all there syluer and golde vessels, that he dyd doth now this felow,iiii, regum, xxxiiii, he robbeth ye ministers of ye house of god & lafte ye house with out necessaryes.The bysshope of rome maye be likend to kī¦ge Nabugodo¦nose The same dothe this tirāt, yet in better case be they yt dye with swerde, than ye that dye for honger, for the dye shortly. and those be consumed by ye batannes of the grounde let al those that go by the way haue compassion one ye doughter for there is no sorowe ly¦ke to them, for nowe by excedinge Sorowe and continual effusiō of teares thi face is blacker than ani coles. And therfore because ye are no more knowen in ye stretes, Thy forsayd superiour hath sett the in darkenes, and hat fedde the with Wormewode and gal.
¶ Here good lord the affliction & syghinges of the people Se good lorde and come downe for ye harte of that forsayd man,The bysshope of rome hathe set the church in darkenes & fedde it wyth gall. is moch more indurate & hardened than the har¦te of Pharo. For he wyl not let thy people go awaye fte,The bysshope of rome puni∣sheth mē after the be bed & is a newe enemy to england but with the power and strenght of thy hande. For he doth not punishe them mi∣serably vpon Erth. but also after there death, for he stendeth to haue al the goodes of them that dye vn¦testate. Therfore let ye commens of England consider howe in tymes past Frenchement casting there co¦uetous eyes vpon the Realme of England whent aboute to Sub∣due it to there power but that that ye coulde not bring to passe, it is to be feared lest the forcast & subtilty of that forsaide man our newe ene¦mye fulfyl. For when the treasure of the realme is wasted and spente and the churche dystrowede the
realme most be moche impotent & weaker agaynst our enemyes, ther¦fore doughter lest thou & thy mini¦sters be broght to longer misery it is expedient that for thy safegard and helth of thine, also thi most no¦ble cristoned kinge and the nobles of the Realme whiche haue ende∣wed the with gret benefites which in this case shuld defende you and there benefites,It is expediēt for the king & the nobles of the realme to defēd ye churh from the tyra¦ny of the bys∣shope of rome shulde resist ye poli¦ces, consperesis, arrogancye, pre∣sumpcion & pryde of that forsayd person, which hauinge no respecte of god ernestly laboreth wt a newe maner of dominiō to scrape away al the treasure of England for to enriche his parentes & like an Eg¦le to set vp on heyghte his neste or stocke by suche tapis and burdens layd vpon the by the same person leest that the simplicite of the real¦me dissimmuling in this matters shuld cause subuersion therof and
lest it be to late or ye prouide for re∣medy. ¶ Lorde of all power put awaye the couering from the hart of that man,Here he pray∣eth god to brīg the bysshop of Rome oute of Ignoraunce & to make hym to be louli & to knowe his of∣fyce. and geue him a lowli and a contryte hart and make him know the steppis of god, by which he maye be rydde frome his ygno¦rāce and compelled to geue, vp all suche sinistre and noughty labors and ententes aforesayd / and that the Vineiarde which was planted by the right hande of god may al∣wayes busely be replete and excer¦cised wt faythful people let ye wor∣des of our lorde and ye prophecies of Hiereme hartē vs to put away & withstande the ententes of this man, which words be these.Hierē. xxiii. The sheperde that hath dys∣persed the peo¦ple of god shal be greuesly pu¦nished, Thou sheperde yt hast dyspersed my peo∣ple and dryuen him oute of his ha¦bitacions Lo I punishe vpon the malice of thy studyes & entēs, and there shalbe none of thy stock that shal syt vpon the seate of Dauid,
nor that shal haue any longer po∣were or authorytie in Iuda. The nest shall be deserte and forsaken and clene subuerted & dystrowed lyke Sodome and gomor. And yf by these wordes he be not feared and scase from his purposes, and make no restitucion of yt he hathe extorte and receyued.Psalm, C, viii Let them sin¦ge for him yt is indurate the .Cviii Psalme to god to whō all this is open eueri day with a lowde voice and good deuocion in chryst, deus laudem. &c. And verely as fauour Ientylnes, beneuolence, doth ma¦ny thynges remytte,Gentylnes o∣uermoche op∣pressed & gre∣uid seketh for the trewth de¦siringe to be reed from bō∣dage and put of the yocke & come to liberti & lytle regard so gentilnes ouer moche oppressed and greuyd whyle it desireth to be redde & seketh easement laboreth to com to the veri cognicion of the treuth and where as it is greued it putteth of the yoke & payne all maner waies yt it can. And so these of whome we haue spoken before.
Where as the medled but wt fewe thinges, yet euery on perceauinge them selues som ways and in som parte greued as the tyme required & conueniēt oportunite was geuē verye sorye to se suche importable burdens layde vpon them by the churche of rome,Mani resisted the bysshopes of rome and were aboute to resist. But ye treuth was so sha∣dowed and kepte vnder wt the dar¦kenes of Ignorance and bi errour of the people, that of treuth some shranke and gaue ouer, that is to say they gaue ouer that the began wel. And submytted them selfes to ye bysshops of Rome being of mo∣re power, not enduced or brought therto by vertue of the treuth but bi power of man. And so put ye hed¦des agayne in the yocke of that in tollerable seruitude & so ye treuth was opprest as the tyme required & where it was hyde of longe con¦tinuance it cometh to light agayn.
Which treuth hath not his vertue & stablishement bicause mē wrote so but they wrote so bicause it is treuth and bicause tyme was cor∣rupt and people coulde not abyde the austeryte of the treuthe, it was thought more agreable to reason to defend & saue wordly thīges let¦tyng the treuth for a whyle vnder silence thā to take vpon them the defence therof & put them selfes in Ieoperdye & danger of bodye and goodes in whiche doinge they dyd shewe them selfes men as they we∣re in dede, whiche do not all tymes folowe & prosecute that is well be gone, nor wolde not for the setting furthe of the treuth put themselfe in danger of lif, goodes, honour & other humayne thinges In which cause this worlde is veri fortunat & happy where as men leaue ye old doting & haue there eares opened to here ye trewth & be diligent to re¦seue ye persuasiō of ye same syth itThe tyme is happye when mē may saie ye treweth with out any dāger
is lawful for thē to shew the treuth without any Iuperdi or offension Nowe sythe yt is so that the trewe limites of both the powers be with so playne & manifest reasons sho∣wed and proued onles men lyst to wynke from the lyght at none day¦es.Exortation to the readerg to layne to ye tre¦wth. Good and welbelouid reders a¦wake let doublenes and Ignoran¦ce geue place to the trewthe let the lyght of trewth expel & put awaye darkenes yt ye be not ladde aboute willingly wt diuerse and straunge doctrynes. But after the councell of Peter nowe ye be warned. Kepe your selues yt ye be not plucked a∣waye & seduced by the arror of the wycked and fal awaye from your owne stedfastnes. ¶ But growe in grace & in the knowlege of our lorde and sauiour Iesus Chryste to whome be glory both nowe and euer. Amen. ☞ FINIS.
¶ Imprynted at London in the Fletestret at ye signe of the Rose Garland by Wyllyam Coplād. ¶ Cum gratia et priuilegio ad mprimendum solū,
