11597 99838621 3006
Great Brittans little Calendar: OR, TRIPLE DIARIE, In remembrance of three daies. Diuided into three Treatises. 1. Britanniae vota: or God saue the King: for the 24. day of March, the day of his Maiesties happy proclamation. 2. Caesaris Hostes: or, The Tragedy of Traytors: for the fift of August: the day of the bloudy Gowries Treason, and of his Highnes blessed preseruation. 3. Amphitheatram Scelerum: or, The Transcendent of Treason: the day of a most admirable deliuerance of our King, Queene, Prince, Royall Progeny, the Spirituall and Temporall Peeres and Pillars of the Church and State, together with the Honorable Assembly of the representatiue Body of the Kingdom in generall, from that most horrible and hellish proiect of the Gun Powder Treason. Nouemb. 5. Whereunto is annexed a short disswasiue from Poperie. By SAMVEL GAREY, Preacher of Gods Word at Wynfarthing in Norff. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Beale for Henry Fetherstone, and Iohn Parker. 1618.
NOBILISSIMO, ET Honoratissimo Domino, GEORGIO Marchioni Buckingamiensi, Baroni de Whaddon, Regio Hipparcho, praenobilis Equestris Orcinis periscelidis Sodali, à Secretioribus Regijs Con∣siliario &c. Pietate, & virtute clarissimo, Bonarum Artium admiratori, & Patrono, Domino mihi vnicê colendo. INter praeclaros Dominos quos Anglia plaudit, praecipuum retines ordine, honore locum. Nobilis es animo, virtute notabilis omni, dotibus excellens ingenij, & genij. Omnibus heroûm Splendescis laudibus, omnes admirantur, amant, magnificant que, colunt. Inter praecones, quorum sacra buccina cantat laudes condignas, infimus ipse sono. Primus at in votis, sipossim, posse sed imus, in votis primus, voce sed imus ego, Primus an imus ero? placidâ cape mente laborum primitias, humili dat mea musa manu. Honori Tuo addictissimus, obseruantissimusque; Samuel Garey.
TO THE RIGHT Honorable, George Lord Marquesse of Buckingham, Maister of his Ma∣iesties Horse, Knight of the most Noble or∣der of the Garter, &c. LYeurgus enioyned the people to offer little Sacrifices vnto their Gods, for (saith hee) they respect more the inward affection, then the outward Action: So in a De∣dicatory imitation, I presume to present this little sacrifice of my future seruice, (oh were it worthy of your Honors acceptance) vnto your Honorable selfe, hoping your Honor will more regard the inward deuotion, then the outward Oblation: and happy is this little la∣bour, if it may merit the portion of your Noble pro∣tection, much more of your Approbation, that so be∣ing graced with the mild aspect of so propitious, and Noble a starre of Honor, it may be the more wel∣come to the world; and others inuited to read it for your Honors sake, though not for the worke sake. And vnder whose Honorable shadow may this Treatise, Britanniae vota, or, God saue the King, more surely, and safely shelter, then vnder yours, who
night and day deuoutly say, and pray, God saue the King: whose approoued fidelity in Kings-seruice hath mooued God and the King to promote you to great dignity, which you grace with such Christian, yet Courtly humility, that both in Church, Court, and Country, you are highly and worthily honored: Heerein your Honor followes those Noble patternos Celarinus, and Aurelius of whom S. Cyprian writes, Epist. 34. In quantum gloria sublimes, in tantum vereoundia hu∣miles, dum nihil in honore sublimius, nibil in humilitate submissius. Proceede (most Honorable) with such pious Graces, and Christian vertues to adorne your eternall minde. Emeliore luto finxit praecordia Titan. Your excellent eminency in the endowments of Nature and Grace, in whom vertue, valour, beauty and bounty, Armes and Arts are conioyned, hath made all men ioyfully congratulate the amplificati∣on of your deserued Honor, whose merits march with your pursuits: So that not onely genus, but geni∣us, makes you Nobilem, & Notabilem. Vndemagis, magtsque viri nunc gloria claret. The world bestowes vpon you that worthy, not vndeserued, Character of vertue, free from the asper∣sion of Court staines, that I may borrow the Poets verse to put you on in your vertuous progresse: Quô tuate virtus ducit, ipedefausto, Grandia laturus meritorum praemia.— Accept into your Honorable Patronage according to your accustomed gentlenesse, this weake Worke of your deuoted seruant, who craues pardon for this ambition, in desiring to obtaine your Noble fauour and protection, imitating Aeschines to Socrates hauing;
no meete thing to gratifie your Honor withall, I am willing to giue that I haue, euen my selfe: who will alwayes desire to be at your Honors seruice, —Donec haurietomnes Xanthi Phoebus aquas. And euer will pray to God, to giue you happy in∣crease of fauour with God and men, and that your Noble name and same, may long flourish on earth, and be eternally blessed in heauen. Stet Domus hac, donec fluctus formica marinos Ebibat & totum Testudo perambulet orbem. For which multiplication of grace in this life, and consummation of glory in the other, my humble prayers are, and euer shall be powred forth to God for your good Honors great happinesse in either World. At your Honors seruice, and commandement I rest euer in all duty, Samuel Garey,
TRI—VNI DEO Ʋotiua Britannica Tria. QVod varijs Triplicem Regem (Deus alme) perîclis incolumem liberes in columen patriae: Caelesti vt Regitriplices tria munera Reges Baron: annal. tom. 1▪ ad an. 1. fol. 53. Math. 2. 11. Aurum, Thus, Myrrham, Symbola sacra ferunt: Sic (ter-Magne Deus) tua magna Britannia sacrat officio summo Trina sacrificia: Aurum, firma fides; Thus, est tibi victima laudis; optima Myrrha tibi, flere, dolere mala. Aurum, Thus, Myrrham: Credendo, precando, dolendo: Turba Britanna sonat, credo, precor, doleo: Credo, precor{que} Deum gentis peccata dolenda condonare? fides, laus, dolor: ista Deo. Samuel Garey. 24 Martius, 5 Augustus, notus{que} 5 Nouember in annos, omnibus Angligenis candida festa bonis: Martius, Augustus, quintusque Nouembris ab Anglis sint semper precibus festa sacrata pijs. S. G.
To the Christian Reader, sauing Grace. READER, accept this imperfect worke with as thankefull an hand, as it is offered with afaithfull hart: if any thing in it please thee, giue God the praise; let none of his glory cleaue to vs earthen Instru∣ments. Si quid in hoc (Lector) placet, assignare memento Walafri: Strabo lib. de rebus Eccles. Id Domino, quicquid displicet, hocce mihi. I cannot expect, or hope for in this criticall Age, but that this Booke will fall into the hands of Carpus, as Paul left his Cloake, Bookes, and Parchments with him at Troas: 2 Tim. 4. 13. Yet a∣gainst the scourge of maleuolent tongues, I am armed with patience, and doe put on the resolution of Epictetus, Si recte facis, quid eos vereris qui non recte reprehendunt, If thou doest well, what nee∣dest thou feare them who say ill? and as Martiall said to Laelius; Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. And there are many enuious drones, who neither like to labour themselues, or loue that others should bring any hony to Hiue: but, Vindico me ab illis Solo contemptu: Among the Popish Sectaries this worke will find an harsh incounter; yet God is my Record, I haue not (to my knowledge) wronged them, their owne writings, Axioms, and Actions, haue (as it were with a line) chalked mee out the way, wherein I haue walked. The Romish Iesuites I know will raile, and rage at it, whose censure I regard, not as Cicero censured of a Gen∣tlewomans dancing; The better the worse: but of their censure I say, The worse, the better: Malis displicere, laudari est saith Seneca, Epist. 77, to displease ill men, finds praise with good men. Onely I craue a fauourable and friendly acceptance of the iudici∣ous, sober, and indifferent Reader, acknowledging this labour requi∣red more maturity, retired, and second thoughts, then my publick and priuate paines in my ministery could affoord me: so that, Festinans ca∣nis
caecos parit catulos; This worke is not (as it were) Elephantis partus Long in conceiuing, breeding, and bringing forth. It is ra∣ther vrsi partus, An vnformed Embrio, some bred, and brought to light. Whatsoeuer it is, reade it ouer, before you iudge; and then say with the sonne of Syracke, Ecclu. 24. 39. Behold, I haue not laboured for my selfe onely, but for all them that seeke wisdome. If men lacke this labour, it shall not much hurt me; if praise it, their praises are but Apocri∣phal: 1 Cor. 4. 3. for I passe not for mans iudgement; if the Lord praise it, it will be then praise-worthy. Bonum est laudari, sed praestantius est esse laudabilem, saith Le mori∣bus. Seneca; It is good to be praised, but it is better to be praise-worthy. Farewel, and helpe me with thy mutuall prayers, and follow it with thy practise; and so I commit it to thy Christian Conscience, and thy Conscience to God. Thine euer in the Lord, SAMVEL GAREY. Ad Authorem. CAelica vota Deo pro Rege inserta Libello, Omnibus insculpat mentibus illa Deus. Summa Salus Regis, Regni sacra vota Britanni, Vt longê Laehesis regia fila trahat. Fundunt vota Patres, proceres, plebs, vine Iacobe, Dulce Decus populi praesidium patriae: Hoc diadema diutene as cum prole perenni, Nati & natorum Sceptra Britanna regant. Prodiat hic labor, & si liuor mordeat illum, Liuoris dentes frauget & iste labor. Prodiat hic Liber, & si liuor perdere tentet, Ipsum liuorem destruet iste Liber. S. W. Sacrae Theol. Doct.
Britanniae Ʋota, OR God saue the King. For the Kings day, the 24. day of March. This is the day of our King. Hosea 7. 5. This day is a day of good tidings, and wee hold our peace. 2 Kings 7. 9. CHAP. I. IOASH the sonne of Aha∣ziah, being hidde by Ieho∣sheba the daughter of King Ioram, sixe 2 Kings 11: 3. yeares in the house of the Lord; because bloudy Athaliah, the mo∣ther of Ahaziah, whom 2 Chr. 22. 9. 10. 11. Iehu killed, had destroyed all the Kings seede of the house of Iuda, excepting onely Ioash, whom Iehoshe∣ba the wife of Iehoiadah the Priest had preserued: In the 2 King. 11. 4, seauenth yeare Iehoiadah the Priest seeing Athaliah to vsurpe the Crowne, calls forth the Captaines, and gathers
the Leuites out of all the Cities of Iudah, and the chiefe Fathers of Israel to 2 Chr. 23. 2. Ierusalem: and hauing first bound them with an 2, Kin. 11. 4. oath of Allegiance, then presents vnto them the sacred spectacle of their Regall Soueraigne; Ecce filius 2 Ch. 23. 3. regis regnabit, Behold, the Kings sonne must reigne. He sets a 2 King. 11. 6. 11. watch, and guard to secure and safe-guard him. Lo how dangerous is the chaire of State: all like officious Subiects stand to withstand the treachery of Traitors; then in a regall Solemnitie they bring forth the Kings Son (the ioy & Iubilie of al their harts) the wished & welcome pro∣geny of Iehoshaphat, descended longo de stemmate regum, of an ancient line of Princedome: they put the Crowne vpon his head, they giue him the testimony, they 2 Chr. 23. 11. make him King, 2 Kin. 11. 12. Iehoiada and his sonnes annoint him, they all clapt their hands for ioy, and with their hands their hearts, and with their hearts their tongues, till their many, yet vnited voices euen reuerberate the aire with this heauen∣piercing eccho, this eucharistique gratulation; God saue the King. So when the daies of that admired A queene ouer men, a queene o∣uer her selfe for a maiden queen. Queene (O quam te memorem virgo?) were on earth concluded, our late de∣ceased Soueraigne Queene Mundi totius v∣na decus: Beza E∣pigram: in class: hisp: Anno 1588. Elizabeth (of most famous and blessed memorie) then the Foxes of Babilon, who had lyen in hoes XLIIII yeares, began to threaten, as Esau did his brother, Gen. 27. 41. Ad certum tempus sunt Christiani, po∣stea peribunt, & redibunt Idola: ve∣rum tum cum ex∣pectas miserinfide∣lis vt transeant Christiani, transis ipse sine Christia∣nis, Aug. in P s. 70 The daies of mourning for my father will come shortly, then will I stay my brother Iacob: the day of her death the dawning of their desire: for then they thought, like Bustards in a fallow field, to raise vp them∣selues vi turbinis; the Papists hoped then to haue raised their religion by a whirle-wind of rebellion, but our paca∣tor orbis, which was Constantines praise and title, frustra∣ted their bloudy hopes: and as Paterculus saith of the Ro∣mane Empire after Augustus death, that there was great expectation of much troubles, but, tanta fuit vnius viri maiestas, vt nec bonis, ne{que} contra malos opus foret armis; there was so great a Maiestie in one man, that there was no vse of Armes for good men, or against bad men; So the great Maiesty of our succeeding Soueraigne King Iames,
as learned, vertuous, and religious a Prince as any vnder Quo nil praestā∣tius orbe; nobili∣us{que} nihil nostro sol aspicit aeuo. the roofe of Heauen, calmed all the stormes, and imagi∣nary tempests which were feared and expected; so that the world did see, Sol occubuit, nox nulla secuta est: Our Sunne did set, and yet no night did follow: the ene∣mies Mortua regina & quasi non est mor∣tua, quia reliquit similem, plus quam fimilis hic. of England saw it then to their griefe, who hoped that when the Sunne went downe, some erraticall starre should shine; but still the Planet keepes his course, Phoe∣nix-like a new, and yet the same renewed: So that Pytha∣goras transmutation herein holds, eadem anima in nouo cor∣pore, an alteration in sexe, yet of the same condition: both peerelesse Paragons, and princely patternes for the perfe∣ction of Princes. To leaue the one, who now liues a glori∣ous Queene in Heauen, behold our dread Soueraigne, the Augustus of this latter world;—praeteritis melior, venien∣tibus author: a King not onely virorum, but sacrorum, a defender of men, and Defender of the Faith, Rex idem hominum, Christi{que} sacerdos. Now to our great ioy, and comfort of great Britannye, his Maiesties happie and auspicious day of that most wel∣comed & applauded proclamation (God saue King Iames) hath annually xv times rowsed, and reuiued—toto diuisos orbe Britannos. The Quem beneficia accepta memorem non reddūt, is gra∣uius suppliciū me∣retur. Chrysost, de Sacerd. lib. 4. remembrance of the blessings it hath brought by Gods great mercy with it, both spirituall and temporall, should mooue all that liue vnder the wings of his peaceable dominions, to lift vp harts and hands to the King of Kings, to multiply his daies as the daies of Hea∣uen, to saue him from all conspiracies, treasons and rebel∣lions, to pray for him, as the Christians prayed in old time for their Kings yet heathens, wishing them vitam prolix∣am, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, sena∣tum fidelem, as Tertullian writes, Tertul. in Ap∣log. c. 30. A long life, a quiet Em∣pire, a safe Court, strong Armies, a faithfull Counsell; yea with Dauid Psal 132. 18., that God would clothe all his enemies with shame, but vpon him his Crowne to flourish. Let the vni∣ted voices of his Maiesties populous Kingdomes send vp to Heauen their cordiall and continuall acclamations,
God saue the King; let the eccho resound in Heauen as ser∣uently, as the noyse of the Romanes did in applause of Flaminius, generally calling him, Sauiour, Sauiour; the noyse whereof was so violent and vehement, that (as Plu∣tarch Plut. in vita Flaminij. writes) it made the fowles of the ayre fall downe dead: or as the 1 Kin. 1. people of Israel did to Salomon, when he was created King in Gihon, and anointed there by Zadock with an horne of oyle taken out of the Sanctuary, the 1 King. 1. 40. peo∣ple piped with pipes, and reioyced with great ioy, so that the earth rang with the sound of it, 39. blowing their trum∣pets and saying, God saue King Salomon. So let all the peo∣ple within his Highnes Dominions lift vp their hearts and hands, blow their trumpets, ring their bels, frequent their Churches, saying and praying, God saue the King Corporally, Spiritually, Politically. CHAP. II. AND surely we are fallen vpon the times, wherein Proditor est mar∣tyr, coeli certissim{us} hares. by some, rebellion is counted a spice of deuotion; Traytors encalendred for Saints or Martyrs: —vis proditoria nomine vocatur nou, Romana virtus. In the Iesuites Schoole nothing is so rife as the theoricke and practicke of Princes Murther. Mariana Mariana de reg. lib. 1. c 7. prescribes to Traytors rules and cautions for poysoning Kings, and highly commends King-killers, praeclare cum Maria. p 60. Vid: orat: sixt: Qt habit: in consisto∣ria, & Saunders: Fra: de Verone: Azorius: Philopa∣ter: Allen, & aly: rebus huma∣nis ageretur si multi &c; It were a merry world if there were many of that kinde: so Sixus Quintus makes a long oration to praise that Frier who killed Henry the third the French King, stiling it rarum, inanditum, memorabile faci∣nus. Dolman, Cymanea, Rosseus, Fewardentius, Bellar. Be∣canus, Suares and others hold the like traiterous asserti∣ons, Subditos posse depriuare reges à Papa excommunicatos, vita & regno: Subiects may depriue Kings of their liues
and kingdomes; thinking of Kings royall bloud, as Maxi∣minus Tertul: in Apol. said of Christians bloud, Christianorum sanguinem dijs victimam esse omnium gratissimam; the Christians bloud is the most acceptable sacrifice to God: as Seneca falsly Spolia opima Joui: Sen. Prosperum scelus vocatur virtus. thought, that there is no sacrifice more acceptable to God then a Tyrant offered in sacrifice; and most wickedly Guig∣nard called the murder of Henry the French King by poysoned kniues, committed by two Iacobin Friers, he∣roicumfactum, & donum spiritus sancti, A most heroycall Act, and the gift of the holy Ghost. So that the vpstart Champions of the Church of Rome, hauing contemned Gods precept, Nolite tangere &c. 1 Chr. 16. 22. Touch not my annoin∣ted, and both by pen and practise labouring to be the De∣uils empericks to let out the bloud of Kings; it is the duty of all good Subiects duely and daily to pray vnto God, to reueale and reuenge all the mischiefes and machinations of the sonnes and seruants of the purple whore Reu. 17. 46. which is drunken with the bloud of Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Christ Iesus; Machau: Princ. c. 11. Purpurati pontificij omnium matuum authores sunt, &c. The purple Romanists haue bin the prime instruments of most pernicious actions. And therefore let all the people of great Britanie ioyne as their loyall obedience bindes them to their necessary seruice) both in hearts and voyces to almighty God, (the protector of Kings) to Psal. 21. 8. 9. find out all his enemies and make them like a fiery ouen in the time of his anger, to confound all their conspiracies, making them like the grasse Psal. 129. 6. on the house tops, which withereth before it come forth; saying and praying; God saue the King. CHAP. III. THE causes and motiues to induce all good sub∣iects to this Christian seruice and loyall duty (to pray continually for the preseruation of the King) be many and manifold; I will but touch some of them, and leaue the rest to Christian remembe∣rance: for Breuitas sermone tenexda.
The first is the Apostle 1 Tim. 2. Pauls precept, ante omnia, be∣fore all, that Supplications, Prayers and Intercessions, and giuing of thankes bee made for Kings &c, and renders a powerfull motiue to perswade all, consisting of three be∣nefits Tribus argumē∣tis ostendit orandū esse proregib{us}, quo∣rum duo sumpta sunt ab effectu vtili: Pisc: in locū. arising from it: 1. a quiet and peaceable life: 2. in all godlinesse and honesty: 3. this is good and acceptable in the sight of God; The Kings preseruation is our preser∣uation, his welfare is the weale of our Common-wealth; reip. foelicit as non potest esse abs{que} Principis foelicitate, saith Plinie, Plin: 2 Panegy. ad Traianum. A Country is vnhappy vnder an vnhappie King; so that if people desire to liue a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and honesty, let them like dutifull members pray for the prosperity of the supreame head, for if he fall vpon the rockes, they are like to come to ruine: Rex sapiens est sta∣bilimentum po∣puli. Wisd. 6. 24. Ʋt ratis in scopulos errat peritura latentes, Nullus vbi celsa puppe magister adest: As a shippe whose Pilot perisheth, is driuen vpon the rocks, and so is cast away; euen so, how can the shippe of State sayle with a prosperous winde, whose regall Pilot suffers ship wracke? Regall aduersity is the harbenger of popular calamity, wherefore if Subiects desire to be happy themselues, let them continually pray for the happinesse Rex si bonus est, nutritor est tuus, si malus, tentator tuus est: Aug. ser. 6. de verb. dom. secund: Math. of their Soueraign, whose prosperity is the Axis or Cardo, the very foundation of their temporall felicity. 2 Motiue is the great difficultie in the right managing of the regall office, and therefore had need to be assisted with the frequent and feruent prayers of the people, im∣ploring diuine wisedome, to direct the heart of their Soue∣raigne, for it is Ars artium, the Art of Arts, rightly to rule Bellua multorum capitum: homine nullum morosius animal nec maiori arte tractandum: Sene. and gouerne common-wealths; this many-headed multi∣tude so diuided in Faction and action, scarce two, quibus vna vox, aut votum, of one minde or mould; Peace plea∣seth Cato, Warre Pompey: the Souldier cries Arma virum{que} cano; The Merchant, da pacem Domine: Brutus desires a Common-wealth, Caesar a Monarchy, Ciceroes counsell is, seruiendum tempori, but Lentulus thinkes that the voice of a flatterer; in the Quot capita tot sententiae, quot ho∣mines tothumores, quot humores tot mores: Lipsius. popular sort, as many heads as hearts, Scinditur incertum Studia in contrariavulgus:
So that to reconcile, and to reclaime to vnitie and vnanimity this Babell of men, had need of Exod. 18. 19. Iethroes head; Be wise O yee Kings, and learned yee that are Iudges of the earth, Psalm. 2. 10. saith Dauid: they had need of great wisedome who are rulers of such popular flocks; and therefore Salo∣mon shewed himselfe wise, who in the entrance into his regall throne 2 Chr. 1. 10. craued of God wisedome, and knowledge to iudge the great people; that I may say with the son of wisedome, Wisd. 6. 21. If your delight be then in Thrones and Scep∣ters, O Kings of the people, honor wisedome, that you may reigne for euer. Dauids prayer should be the suppli∣cation of all Kings; difficilis est gubernatio mea, ne me dese∣ras domine senem. The office of a King as it is glorious, so it is Magna seruitu est magna fortuna, nam ipsi Caesari cui omnia licent, prop∣ter hoc ipsu multa non licent. Seneca consolat. ad Polybium. Reges vigilant, cum Subditi dor∣miunt: &c Plut co, ad principem in∣doctum. laborious; Caesar sleepes not all the night but makes a Tripartite diuision of it; one part to rest, the second part to studie, the third part to military matters; Agesilaus had no leisure to be sicke (as hee said) such was his regall im∣ployments; The regall Diademe is subiect to sundry cares, which moued Tigranes King of Armenia, to say that if the perils and perplexities which accompany it, were duelie weighed, Nemo coronaem humi iacentem tolleret: None would lift vp the Crowne to the crowne of his head. In∣deed the Crowne brings content, commaund, pleasure, profit: Iuvenal: Quicquid conspicuū est pulerum{que} ex aequore toto resfisciest, vbicunque natat: What delicates soeuer the world affords, the Crowne Dadema spinaru, & gemmarum. Miseros esse prin∣cipes si intelligent sua mala, miserio∣res si nō intelligūt: Erasmus. commands, but withall, many perils and cares wait vpon the Crowne, night and day troubled with publique af∣faires, to preuent foes abroad, and foes at home; wee of the inferiour ranke take our rest, when as they that sit at the sterne of State haue broken sleepes. And therefore as the Eph. 6. 18. 19. Preces sunt arma caelestia quae stare faciunt, & tel∣diuina omnes ho∣stes vincere. Cypr. lib. 1 epist. 1. Apostle desires the Ephesians, to pray alwaies with all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseuerance and supplication, for all Saints, and for himselfe, that vtterance may bee gi∣uen vnto him, to open his mouth boldly, to publish the secret of the Gospell; so ought all good subiects to pray
alwaies with all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit, that God would enlarge with heauenly wisedome, the heart of our Soueraigne (and the Kings Prou. 21. 2. heart is in the hand of the Lord) and furnish him with all blessed gifts, sutable to performe his royall Taske, making him as wise as 2 Chr. 1. 21. Salomon, as religious as Psal. 27. 4. Dauid, and as zealous as the good King 2 King. 22. 19. Iosias; defending him from all forraine, or do∣mesticall conspiracies; saying and praying, God saue the King. CHAP. IIII. AND truely there be fiue things (to name no more) which all good Subiects owe vn∣to their Soueraigne: 1. is Prayer. 2. O∣bedience. 3. Honor. 4. Seruice. 5. Tri∣bute. And if any subiect denie any one of these, the King may take him by the throat and say Math. 18. 28. Solue quod debes, Pay that thou owest. 1. First is Prayer; to pray for the Kings preseruation on earth, and saluation in Heauen. The heathen Chaldeans may learne Christians this lesson, who cryed to their King Dan. 3. 9. Nebuchadnezar, O King liue for euer. As King 1 Kin. 8. 34. 36. Salomon prayed for his people, so ought his people pray for him, saying of their Lord the King, as King Dauid speaks of the Lord of Israel, Blessed Psal. 106. 48. be the Lord God of Israel for euer and euer; and let all the people say Amen: saying to the King as Amasa and his company said to Dauid. 1 Chr. 12. 18. Thine are we O Dauid, and with thee O son of Ishai; peace, peace be vnto thee, and peace be vnto thy helpers, for thy God helpeth thee. That tongue that will not pray for the peace, prosperity, and preseruation of their annointed Soueraigne, is such a tongue as the Apostle Iames Iam. 3. 6. speakes of, fire, & a world of wickednesse, and is set on fire of hell: for, Iustus nunquam desinit orare, nisi desinit iustus esse, saith Austin, the iust man neuer ceases to pray, vnles he cease to be iust: much lesse should hee cease to poure forth feruent and
faithfull supplications for the King, that vnder him wee may leade a peaceable life in all godlinesse and honesty. Such vngodly and vndutifull subiects as will not vnloose the strings of their tongues to pray for the safety and feli∣city of the King, wee wish that they were like the men at the riuer Ganges, who (if wee credit the report of Strabo) haue no tongues: Math. 5 29. better it is to enter into the kingdome of Heauen losing a member, then hauing such an vngodly member to be cast into hel fire. But herein many times the tongue is more officious then the heart; with tongue they cry Hosanna Matth. 21. 9., but in heart, like Iewes wish crucifige; with a verball seruice many abound crying and cringing, Aue Rex; but withall Aue Maria, and that will neuer make a good prayer. A King had need call to his subiects, as God to his seruants, Prou. 23. 26. Quod cor non fa∣cit, non fit. da mihi cor, giue me thy heart; the world is full of faire tongues, but false hearts: none but the great searcher of the heart, hath a window in the heart to see who honour with lippes, and their hearts farre from him. So that Kings had need examine their Subiects as Iohn▪ 21. 15. Christ did Peter thrice, diligis me? dost thou loue me? The world hath bredde so many professors of the Popish doctrine of diuellish equiuocation, and so many Parasites profound in the Art of dissimulation, that many men are like Goodwin Sands, in dubiopelagi terraue, doubtfull whether belong to sea or land; temporizers or neuters, like the Reu: 3. 15. Church of Laodicea neyther hot nor cold, eyther Prince or Pope please them, they will heare a Masse next their heart for their morning sacrifice, and our Churches Sermon or Ser∣uice for their euening Incense, like the Camelion —tetigit quoscun{que} colores: Assume any shape fashionable to the time: to whom God will one day say, Because thou art Reu: 3. 16: luke-warme, neyther cold nor hot, I shall spue thee out of my mouth. I haue read Lipsius Politic. 3. c. 20. how a certaine King of Tartaria, writ to the Polo∣nians then wanting a King, that if they would choose him their King, he would accept it vpon these termes, Vester pontifex, meus pontifex esto, vester Lutherus meus Lutherus esto; but the Polonians reiected the request of this Luke-warme
King (and yet in Poland arc sundry religions, so that if a man haue lost his religion, he may finde it there) with this wise and worthy answere, Ecce hominum para∣tum omnia sacra, & Deos deserere regnandi causa; behold a man ready to forsake both God and Grace to get a King∣dome. Such as these study Machiauell more then the Gospell, Machiau: princ. c. 3. temporis liberalitate fruendum esse, fashion themselues to the fauourable fortune of the time, and thinke themselues happy (as he Mach: prin: c. 25. counts those Princes hap∣pie, illum felicem principem existimo, cuius in administrando consilia temporum conditioni respondent, whose counsels are successiuely correspondent to the condition of the times.) The prayers of such temporizers (whose tongues may flame, but their hearts are as cold a a stone) are abhomina∣ble in the sight of God: Esto religiosus in Deum, qui vis illum Imperatori esse propitium, saith Tertullian Tert. Apol. c. 34.. The Lord is farre off from the wicked, but he heareth the prayers of the righteous, sayth Prou. 15. 29. Salomon; God will not heare the prayers of these Church-neuters, no more then the Idola∣trous Iewes, Ezech. 8. 18. Though they cry in my eares with a loud voice, yet will I not heare them. And therefore that we may per∣forme our first bounden duety vnto the King, acceptable vnto the King of Kings, in making harty and humble prai∣ers for the protection and preseruation of his Maiestie, let all the people in his Realme from high to low, from great to small, doe this comfortable and Christian seruice fe∣uently, feelingly and faithfully vnto the Lord night and day crying and crauing, God saue the King. The Lord hath commaunded this duety to pray not Orate pro regibus etiam ijs qui genti∣titer vixerunt. Optatus Mileui∣tan: lib: 3. onely for good Kings, but euen for badde Kings. When Paul gaue that Apostolicall counsell, 1 Timothie, z. 1. 2. to pray for Kings, Caligula, Claudius, or Nero, most bloudy Pagan Emperours then raigned. Baruc. 1. 11. Pray for the life of Nebuchadnezar King of Babilon, and for the life of Balthasar his sonne, that their daies might be on earth as the daies of heauen; So the Ier. 29▪ 7. So Abraham prai∣ed for King Abi∣meleck. Gē. 20. 27. So Jacob blessed King Pharao. Gen. 47. 10. Lord commanded the Iewes to pray for the peace of the City of Babilon, where Nebu∣chadnezar raigned. If then the Lord charge and command
to pray for such Gouernors as were Pagans, Persecutors, Idolaters, Infidels; how deuoutly & deepely are all loyall subiects bound to pray and to praise God for the blessed gouernment of Zealous & Christian Kings, and to beseech Pro se orare neoes∣sitas cogit, pro alijs charitas, pro regib{us} fidelitas: Chrsyost. God with prostrate soules to defend their Soueraignes from all the trecherous traynes and rebellious plots of for∣raine foes, or homeborne parricides, corner-creeping Ie∣suites and Iudasses, and to implore the hand of Heauen to sentinell ouer them; and to endue them from aboue, with the gifts of knowledge, prudence, iustice, temperance, for∣titude, clemency, with feruent zeale of Gods glory, loue to the Gospell, and neuer-ceasing care for the generall well-fare of their publike charge? Let vs spend our spirits day and night in these prayers, that a gracious blessing may be euermore vpon our Soueraigne and his Seed, to prolong his daies with health and honour on earth, and with immortall happinesse in Heauen. Amen. CHAP. V. THE second generall duety of all subiects, is Obedience, and that before God 1 Sam. 15. 22. is better then sacrifice Obedientia victi∣mis praeponitur, quia per victimam aliena caro, per obedientiā volūtas nostra mactatur. Greg. lib. 35. mor. The enemy opposite to Obedience is rebellion, compared by 1 Sam. 15. 23. Samuel to the sin of Witchcraft, the very Chaos of confusion, containing nothing else but mischiefe and murder, discord and desola∣tion, —congesta{que} eodem Non bene iunctarum discordia semina rerum: Ouid. As rebellion is most odious and detestable, so is obedience commendable and acceptable, and this is of three sorts: 1. Obedire Deo per hominem, 2. Obedire Deo, & homini, 3. Obedire Deo, potius quam homini. First obey God by man. 2. Obey God and man. 3 O∣bey God rather then man. Wee need not write how God is to be obeyed before all, and aboue all; nullius prohibitio diuinis valet obuiare praeceptis, nullius iussio praeiudicare pro∣habitis:
Gods Precepts may not be coūtermanded by mans prohibitions, nor Gods prohibitions, preiudiced by mans precepts: God is to be obeyed in euery thing, simpliciter; man is to be obeied, secundum quid, respectiuely, so far as his commands be consonant to Gods Lawes. St Austin giues al a good rule for obedience; bonis in malo scienter nō obedias, nec malis in bono cōtradicas, willingly & wittingly obey not good men in the performance of ill, nor disobey ill men commanding things good; but God himselfe com∣mands obedience to his Rex est animata Imago Dei. breathing Images, whom hee himselfe stileth Psal. 82. 1. 6. Gods; the mortall pictures of immortall God; Dexteri digiti diuinae manus, quae regit orbem, the right fingers of that heauenly hand which ruleth all: Reges sunt homines ante deum, Kings haue a three fold image of God in them. I in their birth of freedome: 2 in their baptisme of Christianity: 3 in their place of So∣ueraigntie. dei ante homines, saith Lactantius, Kings are men before God, and Gods before men. Astra Deo nihil maius habent, nil Caesare terra, Great is the glory of that God, who makes these Gods Kings are Gods 1 by Analogie. 2 by Deputation. 3 by Participatiō A King differeth from his people in vse, not in stuffe. Basil: Doron lib. 2. . Quantus Deus est, qui Deos facit? Austen. Imperator omnibus maior est, dum Deo solo minor est, saith Tert: lib: ad Scapulam. Tertullian. The Emperor is greater in dignity then all mortall men, onely inferiour to the immortall God; and as Epist: ad Theod: prefixa lib: aduers: Iulian. Cyrillus writes to Theodosius the younger, vestrae Serenitati nullus status est aequalis, No mortall state equall to your Excellence; or as Paraenet. num: 21. Agapetus to the Emperour Iustinian, Se non habere quenquam in ter∣ris altiorem, None on the earth higher then himselfe: for as Lib: 3. contra Parmen. Opiatus, Super imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit imperatorem, Aboue the Emperor is none, but onely God that made the Emperour: or as St Chrysostome Hom: 3. ad pop: Antioch. spea∣king of the Emperour Theodosius; Non habet parem vllum super terram summitas & caput omnium super terram homi∣num, He hath no equall vpon earth, the supreame head o∣uer all men on earth. Lo, now you Popes of Rome, where were your triple Crownes? your Miters, if you had any, then stooped to the Scepters: then Rom. 13. 1. Pauls precept was in date with you, Let euery soule be subiect to the higher pow∣ers, which since you haue reiected, or neglected as Apocry∣phall: then Greg: 9. lib 1. de∣cret: tit. 33. c. 6. Gregories allegorie had beene a fond hyper∣bole, Ad firmamentam coeli, &c. in the firmament of hea∣uen,
that is, in the vniuersall Church, God made two great Papa à Deo consti∣tut{us} est super gen∣tes & regna, vt e∣uellat, & dissipet, aedificet & plātet, & quanta est inter solem & Lunā dif∣ferentia, tanta est inter pontifices & reges. Innocent in c: sol∣licitae: 6. de maior: & obed. Vide Bonif: 8. ex∣trauag: concil: tit: de maior. & obedi. lights, that is, two great dignities, Pontificall and Regall; that which rules the day, that is, spirituall things, is greater then that which rules the night, that is, carnall or temporall things: as great a difference as is twixt the Sun and the Moone, so great is there twixt Pope and Kings, saith Gregory. Indeed of latter times the Popes haue clai∣med a triple Crowne, Celestiall, Terrestriall, Infernall, in∣truding into the regall Chayre: forgetting Ber: de consid: lib. 1. c. 6. Bernards counsell to Pope Eugenius, Your authority stretcheth vnto crimes, not vnto possessions, wherefore doe you thrust your sickle into anothers haruest, or incroach vpon others limits? now they vsurpe and arrogate a place of prehemi∣nence aboue Kings and Emperors: Diuisum imperium cum Ioue Papa tenet. Forgetting S. 1 Pet 2. 13. Peters rule, though boasting of Peters right, Submit your selues vnto all manner of ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the supe∣riour &c. subijci domino temporali, propter dominum aeternum, as excellently Austen, Aug: in Ps. 124. To submit themselues vnto Tem∣porall Lords, for the eternall Lords sake. But leauing the fauourites and followers of that Reu. 17. 1. 2. great whore which sits vpon many waters, with whom haue committed for∣nication the Kings of the earth, and which hath shaken off the yoke of obedience from the Kings of the earth; Let vs looke vpon that place of S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13. exhorting all to o∣bedience, Submit your selues &c. propounding certaine ar∣guments or reasons to enforce it: Vide Piscat: anal, in locum. 1. propter dominum: for the Lords sake, Vt honoremus Deum, qui hanc obedientiam nobis praecipit; that so we may honour God who hath com∣manded this obedience. 2. vt euitemus poenas violatae iusti∣tiae ciuilis, that we may auoid the punishments of disobe∣dience to the Magistrate, sent ad vltionem maleficorum, for the punishment of ill doers, v. 14. 3. vt adipiscamur lau∣dem ac protectionem contra iniustos, that we may get praise and protection against the wicked by our obedience; ad laudem recte agentium, v. 14. to the praise of them Rom. 13. 3. that do well. So the Apostle Paul in that excellent Lecture of
obedience, foreseeing that Citie would be the mother of rebellion, and that her Gouernour like the Prince of the The Romane city first taking her o∣riginall from a traitor to his country, after∣ward founded with murder, hath spilt more bloud, then spent morter, &c. Lan∣quet Chron: fol 35. Euery soul with∣out exception, reseruation, or equiuocation. Ayre should beare rule in the children of disobedience, layes downe a generall and substantiall foundation for o∣bedience, Let euery soule &c. No Si quis tentat excipere, conatur decipere, Ber: epist. 42. ad Archiep. Sen. exception or exemp∣tion of Pope or Priest, Omnis anima subiecta essee debet potestatibus super eminentibus, ergo Papa debet esse subiect{us} Caesari, &c Pisc: anal. super locum. omnis anima &c. etiamsi Apostolus, Euangelista, Propheta, saith Saint Chrysostome vpon that place; though an Apostle, an Euangelist or a Prophet, yet let him be subiect to the higher powers, which Augustine, Chrysostome, and the best Ancients confesse and affirme to be potestates saeculares, the secular powers, and so acknow∣ledged by the Iesuite Disp: 10 in Rom. 13. v. 1. rationes ductae ab honesto, vitili, iucundo. Vti Gorran: in locum. Pererius, to be temporall powers: and the Apostle enforceth all to this obedience by three reasons. 1. Drawne, à causa procreante, the efficient or procreant cause of gouernment, For there is no power but of God, and the powers that bee, are ordained of God, vers. 1. 2. Drawne, ab effectu pernicioso, from the perni∣cious effect of disobedience, Whosoeuer resisteth power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receiue to themselues condemnation, or iudgement, v. 2. 3. Taken A beneficio, or ab effectu vtili, from the benefit or profitable effect of obedience, For hee is the Minister of God for thy wealth, v. 4. Concluding that obedience is necessary, Non solum propter timorem sed propter conscien∣tiam, v. 5. Not onely for feare, but for Conscience sake. So againe the Apostle Tit. 3. 1. Paul layes downe his Apostolicall lesson to his sonne Titus. Put them in remembrance, or ad∣monish them, that they be subiect to Princes or Principa∣lities and powers, and that they be obedient &c. Nay in∣deed it is, naturae thesis, The beasts o∣bey the Lion, the birds the Eagle, the fishes the Whale, &c. Rex vnus est apib{us} & dux vnus in gregibus. Cyprian de vanit. Idol: The Cranes haue their Cap∣taine, quem ordine literato sequuntur. Hieron. epist, ad Rusticum. natures theame to obey Princes, and of this theame Grace is the Hypothesis. Looke vpon the silly Bees, the best emblemes of obe∣dient Creatures, painefull in their labour, dutifull in their life, their king being safe, they are all at vnity, Rege incolumi, mens omnibus vna; Amisso, rupere fidem, constructa{que} mella destruere.— So long as their King is well, they follow their worke; but being lost, they leaue and loath their Hony-combes, and
when their king waxes olde and cannot flie, fert ipsum tur∣ba apum, they carry him on their wings, Et si moritur, Pet: Chry. in Po∣licrat. lib. 7. moriuntur & ipsae: And if hee die they die with him, as some write. Behold how nature hath stamped obedience by instinct to Bees, to bee subiect to a superiour in their kinde; how much more should nature, reason, and grace, stampe obedience in the hearts of Christians, knowing that without a kingly gouernment, Kingdomes are thral∣domes, remota iustitia quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia, saith Aug. de ciuit. des lib. 4. c. 4. Austen, Take away Iustice, and what are king∣domes but dens of theeues? Take away obedience to go∣uernment, and that were miscere terris Tartara, make earth and hell all one, but only in name. There is not wan∣ting diuine precepts, or diuine patternes, to allure loyall obedience: take two in stead of many; the first and best of all, our Sauiour Christ, Math. 3. 17. in whom God is well pleased: and the second, Dauid, 1 Sam. 13. 14. a man after Gods owne heart: Our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ (yet God and man) in the daies of his flesh disdained not to obey such as were in authority, Math. 22. 21. commanding to giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars, and paying Math. 17. 27. tribute to Caesar for himselfe and Peter, by the hands of Peter, though Peters supposed suc∣cessors will pay none. And though our Sauiour Christ re∣ceiued manifold iniuries and indignities from vniust and faithlesse Gouernours, yet he neuer moued rebellion or re∣sistance, but digested all with patience and obedience, knowing that the powers that be are ordained of God: telling Pilate that vniust Iudge, that his power was Iohn. 19. 11. Da∣tadesuper, giuen him from aboue; for the Wisd. 6. 3. rule is giuen of the Lord, and power of the most high: Deo obediendum est propter se, tanquam summo domino, magistratui propter deum tanquam illius ministro; saith one, Piscat. anal. in Matth. 22. 21. God is to bee obeyed for himselfe, being chiefe Lord, the Magistrate is to bee obeyed for God, as being Gods Minister or deputie. So that the patterne of Christs obedience to temporall pow∣ers, Omnis Christi actio est nostra in∣structio. must be our platforme of instruction in the duty of o∣bedience. 2. Dauids obedience to King Saul is very com∣mendable and remarkeable: Saul was a A Tyrant by a∣buse of power, not by vsurpatiō. Tyrant, & sought
without cause or colour to kill Dauid; yet Dauid often ha∣zarded his life and limmes against Sauls enemies the Phi∣listines, euermore testifying his prompt obedience and ser∣uice to his Soueraigne; and when this King Saul (like that other Acts. 9. 1. Saul) breathing out threatnings and slaughter a∣gainst Dauid, following him to the wildernesse of Engedi (where Dauid vsed pia fallacia, hid himselfe in a 1 Sam. 24. 4. Caue) and had opportunity to cut off Sauls head, as well as the lappe 5 of his garment; or if hee were timorous to dip his hand in bloud, as once a Gregory Greg: lib. 7. epist. 1. willed Sabinian to tell the Emperor, exciting him against the Lombards, Timeo Deum, & metuo habere manum in sanguine alicuius, I feare God, and am afraid to haue any hand in bloud: (oh that Popes had now hearts like Gregory, fearefull to Pope Iulius the second by his means in 7 years destroied 200000 Christiās. Geneb. shedde bloud) if I say Dauid had such a qualme of feare come o∣uer his heart, lo, the 1 Sam. 24. 8. hands of his seruants ready to haue done it, and scarce could be kept from it, onely Dauid doth terrifie them from doing it: 7 The Lord keepe mee from doing that thing vnto my Master the Lords Anoin∣ted, to lay my hands vpon him, for he is the Lords Annoin∣ted. Dum timuit oleum seruauit inimicum, as excellently Lib. 2. aduers: Parmenianum. Optatus, in fearing the annointing, he preserued his ene∣mie. But after this obedient fidelity performed by Dauid to King Saul, behold the sicknesse of that Tyrant, suspiti∣on moues Saul still to persecute Dauid, the Ziphims 1 Sam. 26. 1. tell Saul, Dauid hides himselfe in the hill of Hachilah. In a worde, Dauid might haue killed Saul sleeping, or if hee would not himselfe do it, 8 Abishai offred his seruice, I pray thee let me smite him once with a speare to the earth, and I will smite him no more; but stil see how obedience holds his hands and moues his tongue, Destroy 9 Principem occide∣re piaculum est. him not, for who can lay his hand on the Lords Annointed, and be guilt lesse? And afterward Saul being slaine, and a certaine Amalckite hoping to haue beene a happy Post in telling 2 Sam. 14. Dauid, Saul is dead, and shewing Dauid that hee hasted 10 Sauls death, (though 1 Sam. 31. 4. Saul himselfe had acted the Prologue of his owne death, this made the Epilogue of his life) and brought the Crowne in his hand, (a tempting bait to gette
praise or pardon) yet all in vaine: how wast thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to destroy the anointed of the Lord? saith 2 Sam. 1. 14. 15. Dauid; and commands his seruant to giue him legem talionis: to kill this King-killer, though by consent and in∣treaty. Sic pereant, & qui moliri talia pergunt. So let them perish, who such deeds doe cherish. What doe all these particulars summed vp together, but inferre this Ecce, Iohn 1. 47 Behold a true Israelite in whom is no guile; Behold a good Subiect in whom is no treason? Da∣uid was not sicke of the Kings euill, Treason: he was not like the Popish Iesuites, who dispute against Kings alto∣gether in Ferio; labouring to verifie Iuuenals verse, Ad ge∣nerum Cereris sine caede, & sanguine pauci—descendunt re∣ges.—All their arguments and actions like Dracos lawes, bloody: but Dauid was not matriculated in the Schoole of Traytors; euer obedient and loyall to his Soueraigne, faithfull in his obedience, aduenturing his body & blood for the seruice of Saul, in defence against his enemies, and might truly say with Scaliger in his warfare, for King Sauls welfare: Pugnaui pedes, eques, adolescens, iuuenis, mi∣les, praefectus, certamine singulari, in obsidionibus, in campo ci∣uili, in excursionibus, in exercitibus saepius vici: aliquando vi∣ctus sum, corpore, non animo, non virtute, sed facto, &c. As vertuous and valorous Scaliger writes of himselfe: so Da∣uid oftentimes fought against Sauls professed enemies, Goliah the Philistine, the Amalekites, &c: as from the sea∣uenteenth Chapter of the first of Samuel, almost to the end of that Booke, is the very muster Booke of Dauids warres for Sauls welfare: so that I may say with Lucianus in Scy∣tha. Toxaris, who see∣ing his Countryman Anacbarses in Athens, told him, that he would shew him all the wonders of Greece at once, viso Solone, vidisti omnia: so I may say, viso Dauide, vidisti satis. The obedience of Dauid to King Saul is sufficient to in∣struct a Subiect. Lucanus—Quid satis est? si Romaparum? If this be not sufficient, nothing will suffice; but the ene∣mies of Caesars will peraduenture reply and say; God saue
good Kings, but for bad Kings (say they) we pray God, or good men send them to their graues: and this doctrine de depositione regis, dispositione regni, aut depriuatione vitae, to depose a King, or dispose of his Kingdome, or depriue him of his life, if he be not (as they count) Catholicke, the reso∣lute generation of martiall Ignatius Loyola Hassenmull: lib. de ord. Iesu. Pope. Paul. 3. establish∣ed the order, An. 1540. Ignatius Loyola the first named in the Bul. Pet. Maf∣fe. vit. Loyol. lib. 2. c. 12. Potestates quae sunt, à Deo ordi∣natae sunt: hic est vt gentilem in po∣testate positum ho∣norificemus, licet▪ ipse indignus sit, qui Dei ordinem tenens, gratias agit Diabolo. Potestas enim exi∣git, quia meretur bonorem, August. quaest. ex vet. test. c. 35. Malus magistratus, est dei vicarius: A∣ret. Comment: in 13. Rom., (their first Founder) moderne Iesuites, doe with all might and maine labour to maintaine, & quod nequeant calamis, aut calum∣niis, veneficijs & parricidijs tentant: Where their Pens faile, their Pikes and Poysons follow; we will but touch it now, for we shall handle it more at large hereafter. It is an easie taske to shew, that loyall obedience is to be performed to wicked Kings, as our former instances of the best note, Christs obedience, and Dauids obedience to Saul, make it manifest; it is due to them, omni iure naturali, ciuili, morali, municipali, diuino; by the law of nature, ciuill, morall, municipall, diuine: we will onely proue it due by the last, by diuine law; if that proue it, who dare denie it? The Apostle Rom. 13. 1, makes the matter plaine. Let eue∣ry soule be subiect to the higher Powers, for there is no power but of God, &c: from which place I argue thus. All Powers that are ordained of God, must be obeyed: The higher Powers (be they good or bad) are ordained of God. Ergo—to be obeyed. VVe may corroborate these two propositions by ma∣nifold places, as Prouerbs 8. 15: By me Kings raigne, &c. Reges in solio collocat in perpe, Iob 36. 7: he placeth them as Kings in their thrones for euer. Sometimes God suffers the hypocrite to raigne, Iob 34. 30. I gaue thee a King in my anger, and tooke him away in my wrath, saith the Deus regnat per se, reges per Deum. Deus coeli & terrae vere proprietarius, reges coloni & Emphyteutae Iuni∣us Brutus quaest: 3, vind. contra Ty∣rannos. Lord to Israel, Hosea 13. 1: Thou couldest haue no power except it were giuen thee from aboue, said Christ to Pi∣late, Iohn 19. 11: Giue eare all you that rule the People, all your power is giuen of the most High: Wisd. 6. 3. Touch not mine annointed, 1 Chron. 16. 22: be they good, be they bad, touch them not; Rom▪ 12. 19. vengeance is the Lords, not mans. Man must not meddle in Gods matters, Who 1 Sam. 26. 9▪ can lay his hands on the Lords Annointed, and be guiltlesse? Though
they grow defectiue in their high office, yet still remaine Kings, because enthroned by God. Cuius iussu nascuntur homines, eius iussu constituuntur Iraen. lib. 5 con. haeres. principes, saith Iraeneus: In∣de illis potestas, vnde spiritus, saith Tertul. Apologet. c. 30 Omnes sub rege, & ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo. Tertullian; the Kings Commission is sealed by the hand of God, and though it run, Durante diuino beneplacito, yet man cannot, nay must not cancell it, for that were Bellare cum dijs, VVarre with God: —Princeps, seu bonus seu malus, a Ioue; ornes, si bonus, sin malus est, feras: Saith the wise Heathen. The power of good Kings Bracton: siue iu∣bente siue sinente deo: Aug: cont: Faust. Manich. lib. 22, c. 7 is by the speciall ordinance of God, of euill by his permissi∣on; the first are insignia miserecordiae, badges and pledges of his mercy; the second are flagella vindicta, the scourges of his fury. So Esay 10. 5 Or as one of the Fredericks, malleus orbis, or Otto, Pal∣lida mors. God called Ashur the rod of his wrath, and Attyla called himselfe flagellum Dei, the scourge of God: and Tamberlayne in his time termed Ira dei, terror orbis; the reuenge of God, and terror of the VVorld. Saul was a ty∣rant King, yet Dauid 1 Sam. 24 6 trembled to touch the skirts of his garments: what greater tyrant then King Pharao? yet Mo∣ses neither had, nor gaue any commission to the Isralites to rebell; he makes no law, or Booke, De iusta abdicati∣one, either to dispose or depose him from his Kingdome. Nabuchadnezar a wicked and idolatrous King, yet God Ierem: 25. 9 cals him his seruant, and though he commands the three children to be put into the fiery Dan. 3: 21 Aliud est seruitus animae, aliud cor∣poris &c. vid. Aug. de vera relig, c. vl. timo. Ouen, they offer no vio∣lence or resistance, Dant Deo animam, corpus regi: Com∣mend their soules to God, and committing their bodies to the King. Horat: Tollere tentat illustres animas impune & vindice nullo: Saint Baro: Tom. 11 An. 45 Peter who wrot his first Epistle in the time of the raigne of that wicked Emperour Claudius, as Baronius coniectured, exhorts all people to feare God, and to ho∣nour the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17: and that for the Lords sake, v. 13. Yet this Claudius was a most wicked Emperour, maintaining many Ethnicke superstitions and worship of Idols, he was (as Suetonius Sueton. c. 34 writes of him) Natura saeuus, sanguinarius, & libidinosus, 33. by nature cruell, bloody, and libidinous; yet to this Emperour a Tyrant and an Infidell,
Saint Peter exhorts the faithfull Iewes to obedience: Saint Paul who liued vnder the same Emperour (as Rhemist. in tab: Paul. some doe thinke) writes to the Romans the Emperors Subiects, ex∣horts all to submit themselues, not in any colourable or dissembled obedience, but propter Conscientiam, v. 4: for conscience sake. Let vs heare a voyce or two of the ancient Fathers that liued in old time: Tertullian (who as In Catalog: scrip∣tor: Eccles. Ierome saith) flourished vnder the raigne of Seuerus the Empe∣ror, who was a great Tyrant, an Infidell, and an enemy to Christianity, who in the fift persecution after Nero, trou∣bled the Christian VVorld, Saeuissima persecutione, with most cruell persecution (as Baron, An. Chri∣sti 205. some write), yet teacheth that all Subiects should both Bene velle, bene dicere, & bene fa∣cere, wish well, speake well, and doe well for the Emperor, the which three-fold Bene comprehends all loyall duties: The first Ad Cor. 2. Ad Linguam: 3. Ad opus; as the Iansen. c. 40: Con∣cord. Iesu∣ite rightly teacheth, in thought, word, and deed, to be obe∣dient. So Iustin Apolo 2: Ad An∣ton: Imperat. Martyr, in the name of all Christians speakes to the Emperor Antoninus, an infidell and a perse∣cutor Bellar: in Chro∣nol:, in these words; Nos solum deum adoramus, & vobis in rebus alijs laeti inseruimus: VVe worship onely God, and in other matters are ioyfull to serue you. So Saint Ambros. Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 33 Am∣brose would not wish the people of Millan to disobey the Emperour Valentinian, yet a fauourer and follower of the Arrian Heresie: If the Emperor (saith he) abuse his impe∣rial Iulianus Imp: Apo∣stata habebat sub se Christianos milites, quibus cum diceret producite aciem & obediebant ei cum autem dicit, producite arma in Christianos, tunc cognoscebant im∣peratorem caeli: Ambros: 11 quaest: 3: Can. Iulianus. authority to tyrannize thereby, here am I ready to suf∣fer death; we as humble suppliants, flie to supplication: if my Patrimony be your marke, enter vpon it; if my body, I will meet my torments: shall I bee dragged to prison or death? I will take delight in both; Oh Theologicall voice, Oh Episcopall obedience. These were the voices of the holy Fathers in the ancient times: I but, will some Popish Aduersary to the regall supremacy reply, the times must be considered, the people wanted power to resist. No, no, that was not the matter: when Iulian did dominere, who was an Apostate and an Idolater, as August: in Ps. 12. Austin; yet his Soul∣diers, who were for the most part Christians, did obey him without resistance in all military matters and publike ser∣uices,
yet they then had power to haue resisted him; for most of Iulians Army did consist of Christians, as their Socrat. lib. 3. ca. 22 voices to Iouinian his Successor declare, Omnes vna voce confessi sunt se esse Christianos, as Ruff. lib. 2. histor. c. 1 Regi ethnico fidem non praestare nefas. Ruffinus records it; with a generall voice they all confessed themselues Christians: So Constantius and Ʋalens wicked Emperors, and fauou∣rers of the Arrian Heresie, yet we doe not reade of any of the Orthodoxe Christianity, that disobeyed them by rebel∣lion or resistance. Then Bellarmines Bellar: lib. 5 de Rom. Pon: c 7 doctrine was not in date, Non est legitimum, &c: It is not lawfull for Christians to tollerate an hereticall King: his reasons I take to be (as De Rom: Pontif. lib. 5, c. 7 he writes) because Reges coronas & sceptra ab hominibus recipiunt, & adeorū placita tenent, Kings doe receiue their Crownes and Scepters from men, and hold them at their pleasures. Strange stuffe: for Kings receiue their Crownes Ego vnxi te in re∣gem super Israel. 2 Sam. 12. 7 from God, as Ps. 20. 3, and are enthroned by God, By me Kings raigne, Pro. 8. 15: They receiue their throne from God, as Queene 2 Chro. 9. 8 Patriarchae vel alij. Reges vnctia Deo, ante vnctionē ma∣terialem: Aug: in Ps 140. Deus est Rex om∣nis terrae: Ps. 46. 7 & Dominatur in Regno hominum, & cuicun{que} voluc∣rit, dat illud, Dan. 4. 22 Sheba tels Salomon; Diadema regis in ma∣nu dei, Esay 62. 3: Sedebat Salomon in thron dei, 1 Chro. 29. 23: Reges in solio collocat in perpetuum, Iob 36. 7; the anoin∣ting is Gods, With my holy oyle haue I annointed him, Psa. 89. 20. The Crowne, the Scepter, the Throne, their annointing, all from God; stiled by God, Vncti dei, Gods Annointed; Where is the Popes or Peoples claime? what interest haue any (except God) in Kings Crownes? who can remoue whom God appoints? who can depriue whom God approues? yet these absurd Non tenentur nec debent Christiani, tolerare regem in∣fidelem, quia de iu∣re humano est, quod hunc aut illum ha∣beamus regem Bel∣lar. de Rom. Pont. lib: 5. errors (formenta romanae Cathedrae, the corrupt leauen of Romes Pharises and Popes Parasites) are moulded out by the mouthes of Cardinals, that I may say with the Poet Iuuenal; Adscelus at{que} nefas, quodcun{que} est. purpura ducit: Sat. 13. The purple seruants or scarlet sinners of that purple woman, are become as Trumpeters to the World, to sound forth false alarums of disobedience to encourage peoples rebellion. Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum? Quaepeperit, scelerosa at{que} impia facta. But to leaue these proud Cardinals (enemies to Caesars)
who thinke their red Hat equall to a Regall Crowne who yet of late from a small beginning Resp: Epi: Eliens. ad M. Tort. in ini∣tio: Molineus in Senatuscons: Eran: num. 58. (Origine parochi tan∣tum sunt, manipulus Curatorum) or raysed specially by two Popes, Innocentius the fourth, and Paulus the second, to such an height, that now, Capita inter sidera condunt. They will write with Cardinal Wolsie, Ego & Rex, I and the King; and are too busie about Kings, eyther to ani∣mate Traytors, or alienate Subiects from obedience vnto Kings: Let vs I say, leaue them a while, and listen to Salo∣mon (who was wiser then all of them,) My sonne (Pro. 24. 21. 22. saith he) feare the Lord and the King; and meddle not with them that are seditious; for their destruction shall rise sud∣denly, and who knoweth the ruine of them both? Let vs learne this lesson from our Math. 22. 21. Sauiour, to giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars: to giue loyall obedience, for it is Caesars royall due. So our Sauiour Math. 23. 2. 3. againe com∣mands the multitude that they should obey the Scribes and Pharises, who did sit in Moses chaire, to obserue and doe what they did command. In all things (not repugnant to Gods Lawes) we must and ought to Pietatis interest, vt pij debitam ma∣gistratibus obedi∣entiam deferant: Aret. in Rom: 13. obey Kings; yet if they command contrary to Gods commands, then wee must follow the Acts 4. 19. Apostles rule and practise, rather to o∣bey God then man; and to remember S. Aug: 11. quaest: 3. Ca: qui resistit. Hîc contemne po∣testatem, timendo potestatem. Aug. ser. 6. de verb. dom. Secund. Math. Immensa est iuris∣dictio Dei; regum dimensa, illa est infinita, haec praefi∣nita, Jun: Brutus. Austins counsell, Si Deus aliud iubeat, aliud Imperator? quid iudicas? maior potestas Deo, da veniam ô Imperator, tu carcerem, ille ge∣bennam minatur: If God command one thing, and the Em∣peror another thing; what iudgest thou to be done? Gods power is greater, giue leaue ô Emperor, thou dost threaten prison, but God hell. God that made these gods ought to be obeyed before them, and duty bindes, that God who is the King of Kings, the maker and master of al Kings (om∣nes Reges eius pedibus subiecti, all Kings subiect, & subiects of that great King,) should be obeyed by them all, and be∣fore them all. Yet for all this we must not rebell against a King, if he command contrary to Gods Lawes, but imitate the three children: Daniel. 3. Regis voluntas fiat aut a nobis, aut de nobis. obey in body, and resist in spirit; Regi qui pote∣statem
habet super corpora nostra, corporaliter subiaceamus, siue sit Rex siue Tyrannus, nihil enim hoc nobis nocet, vt spiri∣tualiter bene placeamus Deo spiritu, saith Theophy: in Lu∣cam c. 20. Agents, if good Princes, Pati∣ents, if bad. Theophylact: wee must prostrate our selues to the King, who hath power o∣uer our bodies, be he a King or a Tyrant, for this nothing hinders vs spiritually to please the God of our soules. In∣deed it may happen that Potens, the Ruler, is not of God, as the Osee 8. 4. Lord complaines; They haue set vp a King, but not by me, they haue made Princes and I knew them not, As also the manner of getting Kingdomes is not alwaies of God, as Aquinas vpon the 13. of the Romanes rightly deter∣mines it, or as Aretij comment. in 13. Rom. Aretius; multa a Deo sunt, quae tamen non confirmat, sed quodammodo obiter ingrediuntur, Deo tamen sic disponente, at tamen non ordinat, hoc est, non approbat, Many things are by God which he doth not confirme, falling in as it were by the way vpon the world by Gods permission, yet God disposing so, but not ordaining, that is, not ap∣prouing them. For example, Balaeus in vi. Alex. 6. vide Mach. princ. de hoc Alex∣andro c. 18. & Guicciardine hist. lib. 2. Alexander the sixt obtained the Popedome by giuing himselfe to the Diuell; Tileman in 13. Rom. Phocas by sedition got his Empire; Richard the third came to the Crown of England (as Polyd. virg. hist: Anglic. lib. 25. Potentia a Deo, abusus a Diabolo: Musculus. Difference twixt Persons & Pow∣ers, Persons may be intruders, but Powers haue God for their au∣thor. Theoph. in Rom. 13. some write) by killing his Ne∣phewes and other of the royall bloud; and so of many o∣thers that haue aspired to thrones, viribus & fraudibus, by force and fraud: such are Rulers, rather Vsurpers, yet not of God; for God effects nothing but he effects it by good meanes, so that there is a difference twixt Potens and Po∣tentia, twixt Rulers and Powers: bad Rulers are by the permission of God, not by the ordination of God, as the Apostle saith, Rom. 13. 1. And there is no power but of God; if they be godly powers, then I may say with Austin, Aug. epist. 166. Caesari vices, & imaginem Dei in terris gerenti nos vero corde subij∣cere: Chrytreus enarr. in Mat. 210 Quod iubent Imperatores, iubet Christus, quia cum bonum iubent, per illos quis iubet nisi Christus? What Emperors command, Christ commāds, for whē they command good, Christ commands by them: and the contempt offered to such good Rulers is a contempt of God, as the Lord said o Samuel, They haue not cast thee away, but me, ne regnem super illos, 1 Sam. 8. 7. lest I should reigne ouer them: Con∣temptus magistratuum redundat in contemptum Dei: The con∣tempt
of Magistrates is a contempt of God, saith. Aret. com in 13. Rom. Are∣tius: and so the Apostle, Whosoeuer resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, qui vnum laedit, alterum laesit. To conclude, this second duty of Obedience and Al∣legiance to Kings, is by all true subiects faithfully and loy∣ally euer to be performed, being a duty necessary for two Necesse est subijci necessitate institu∣tionis diuina & necessitate naturae, quae ordinauit vt sa ieates stultis praesint: Aret: com. in 13. Rom. respects: 1. Necessitate praecepti: 2. Necessitate finis: First God by manifold precepts commanded obedience to be giuen to Rulers and Kings. Secondly, by the benefits go∣uernment affords, without which all Common-wealths were mothers of common woes, and would become the very shambles and slaughter-houses of Christian bloud, if that obedience were not giuen to Rulers that beare the sword. The kingdome of hell (which is the kingdome of confusion) could not stand, Marke 3. 22. 26. Diaboli regnū ad∣mittit principatū sine quo non con∣staret. Corrumpitur & dissoluitur impe∣rantis officium, si quis id quod fa∣cere iussus est, non obsequio debito perficit. Gell: lib. 1. Ps. 45. Psalmus Propbeticus conti∣nens Prophetiā de Christo, cuius figu∣ra Salomon. Pisc, Ibidem. being diuided, (wanting Bel∣zebub their Prince) but should presently, as one day it shal most certainely, come to desolation. Seeing therefore o∣bedience to Kings is a duety so necessary for all subiects, acceptable vnto God, profitable to our selues, without which Kings nor Kingdomes cannot stand, Church nor Common-weale cannot long continue; Pura conscientia praestemus, quae propter conscientiam praestanda sunt: Let vs performe and practise this duty of obedience with a pure conscience, which for conscience sake must be performed, euermore honouring and obeying our dread Soueraigne, (the golden head of great Britaine) beseeching God to prosper him in his glory, and to pierce with sharpe ar∣rowes, the hearts of his enemies, as the Psalmist of Salo∣mon, Psal. 45. 5. euermore obeying and praying, God saue the King.
CHAP. VI. THE third duty of Subiects to be performed Regum cibus est e∣nos: Alphonsus. to the King, is Honor; S. Pet. 2. 17. Peter commands all Subiects, Feare God, honour the King. S. Rom. 13. 7. Paul exhorting all to submitte them∣selues to the higher powers, concludeth, Giue honour to whom ye owe honour: so the Lord himselfe in the fifth Commandement chargeth all to honor Father and Mother; in which precept as most Nomine parentum intelligūtur omnes superiores aut qui∣cun{que} nobis praesūt. Vrsin: Catech. in quinto praecepto. old and new writers well obserue, Kings and Magistrates are vnderstood, beeing politicall Fathers, Patres patriae, Fathers of the Common-wealth, Nutricij patres, Esay 49. 23. Nur∣sing Fathers of Gods Church and people. And this duety (to honor the King) obligeth all by a three-fold bond, Ex Praecepto By Commandement, Ex Maledicto By Punishment, Ex Praxi: By Practise. First by Precept, God in his Law hath commanded it. Math. 22. 21. Secondly by Punishment; for God hath put a sword in their hands to cut off such as dishonour them. Thirdly by Practise, our Lord and Sauiour with his Disciples did preach and practise obedience, honor, and reuerence, e∣uermore to be giuen to Kings and Potentates. And this word honor, signifieth al that duty whereby the renowne, dignity, reuerence, and high estimation of the King may be preserued and vnblemished, and it reacheth vnto our thoughts, wordes and workes: 1 to honour him in our hearts and thoughts: Curse not the King, no not in thy Qui de corde non venit honor, nō ho∣nor sed adulatio est: Ber. in Cant: thought, for the foules of the heauen shall carry thy voyce, and that which hath wings shall carry the matter, saith Ecc e. 10. 20. Salomon. 2 Honor him in thy wordes, seeke not by bad and wicked speeches to disesteeme the dignitie of their sa∣cred persons, for they are Gods deputies, and he that de∣spiseth the deputy, despiseth him that appointed the de∣putie: wherefore God made an expresse precept; Exed. 22. 28. Thou shalt not speake euill of the Ruler of thy people. And St.
Iude 8. Iude hath marked those for filthy dreamers, Qui domina∣tionem spernunt, Maiestatem blasphemant, Who despise go∣uernment, and speake ill of them that be in authority. Be∣ware of vnseemely, vnreuerent, or contemptible speech; which might diminish or distaine the excellency of Gods Lieutenants; much lesse reuile, mocke, scoffe, or curse them; abuses most disloyall, dishonourable, and worthie of Such were Par∣sons, ozius, Rey∣nolds, Gifford &c. slāderous Rebels of Queene and state. death. It was a wise and worthy answere of Count Charles Estate of Engl. fugit. to one at dinner, disparaging our late Queene (of famous memory) saying, his Table neuer gaue priuiledge to any to speake vnreuerently of Princes; Male de me lo∣quuntur homines, quia bene loqui nesciunt, faciunt non quod mereor, sed quod solent, saith Seneca, Epist. 77. 3. Honor the King in all thy actions, to be ready to defend the ho∣nour and renowne of our gracious Soueraigne, both by * Tacitus said to rayling Metellus, Tu dedicisti male∣dicere, ego maledi∣cta contemnere. St. Austin wrote these verses ouer his table: Quis∣quis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam, hanc mensā vetitā nouerit esse sibi: Possidon in vit: August: Gen. 18. 2. Next God, wee must honor those who are in the place of God: Herman: explicat: Decalog. word and sword. In his presence vse all lowly reuerence, (bowing thy selfe as Abraham to the three Angels) downe to the ground. It was a rare act and royall speech of Don Iohn King of Arragon, Father vnto Don Ferdinando King of Castile, both meeting at an assembly in Victoria; the Father King would not suffer his sonne to giue him the vpper hand, saying: Sonne you are the chiefe and Lord of Castile, whereof we are descended, so that our duetie to∣wards you as our King and superiour, is farre aboue that duety of the Sonne vnto the Father: —Regem— semper honorandum sic dij voluistis habere. And indeed all good people did euer honor their anoin∣ted Soueraignes; Dauid, Salomon, with the rest of the Kings of Israel, how honourable and glorious euer ac∣counted in the eyes of their Subiects. Vbi honor non est, ibi contemptus est, saith Ierome, where honor is absent; there contempt is present, and to contemne these regall chil∣dren Psalme 81. 6. of the most High, is to contemne the most High himselfe. And truely the most dishonourable contemners of Regall Diadems are the flattering Pseudoli, the parasiti∣call magnificoes of the Papall Miter: for to extoll the one, they extenuate the other; they honor, yea rather dishonor
their Pope with blasphemous titles, Gratian: can. 17. Dominus noster Deus Papae, Our Lord God the Pope; or Aluar. Pelag. de planctu Ecclesiae: lib. 1. c. 37. Vid: Greg. lib. 6. ep. 30. & lib. 4. epist: 34. & 38. 39. & 36 Papa dicitur caele∣ste habere arbitriū, & ideo etiā natu∣ram rerū immutat substnatias vni{us} rei applicando al∣teri, & ideo de ni∣hilo potest aliquïd facere gloss. libri decret, Tit. 7. c 3. Extra ius, contra ius, & supra ius omnia posse. Deci{us}. Papa participat vtram{que} naturam cum Christo; or vice-deus, supreame head of the Church. Which title one of the Gregories, named the first, called Titulum stultum, superbum, peruersum, scelestum, pro∣phanum; and stiled Iohn the Bishop of Constantinople, who affected this pontificall sublimity, Lucifer, supra astra caeli exaltabo solium; and of all flattering Sycophants (the trencher-wormes and platter-friends to Popes of Rome) were some of the clawbacke Canonists, who by hypocri∣ticall and hyperbolicall praises, were the first dreamers of Popes supremacie; and since them many Friers and Iesu∣ites haue beate their braines to make the Regall Scepter stoope to the Popes Miter, stiling their Popes superiours to all Emperours, supreame vice-gods, Gods on earth, Kings triple crowned, Iudges of all the earth, heads of the faith, the high Bishops, Monarchs of the whole world: so that Bellar: in resp. ad Gersó cōsid. 11. Bellarmine saith, it is hard to describe what the Pope is, such is his greatnesse; Yea sacrilegium est disputare de potestate Papae, saith Victor relect. 4. de pot: Papae: & concil: propos: 16. Ʋictoria, It is a kinde of sacri∣ledge to dispute or argue about the power of the Pope: Potestas spiritualis, & temporalis in vno eodem{que} summo pon∣tifice est vtraque in summo, saith Sylu: de Papa par. 2: Non de potestate Papae inquirendū, cum primae causae nulla sit causa: Baldus in cap: Ec∣clesia. Syluester, Spirituall and Temporall power in our high Pope, is in the highest point and degree. Nay it was not only the base flattery of mer∣cenarie vassals, and priuate Proctors and Promoters of the Chayre of Rome, but also practised by councels giuing the Pope, the sublimity of the true Antichrist: as the last Coun∣cell of Lateran In 9 & 10. sess. giues to Pope Leo the tenth, Omnem pote∣statem in coelo & in terra, &c. verifying S Pauls description 2 Thes. 2. 4. Ʋid. lib. sanct ce∣remon lib. 1. sect. 7. c. 6. To the Pope as to Christ, let euery knee bow: Capist∣stra: de author. pap. & concil. pag. 94. of Antichrist, exalting himselfe aboue all that is called God, and fitting as God in the Temple of God, shewing himselfe that hee is God. It was strange impudencie of that Imposter and crouching Parasite Gabriel to adde a fifth Euangelist to the foure, and to offer this title (Quintus Euangelista) to Clemens the eight; and it was as great ar∣rogancie in Clemens not to reiect it. Tom. 6. in append. Baronius acknow∣ledges it, and puts it into his Annals. It would make a
man wonder to reade the immodest and immoderate follie The Pope hath an heauenly iudgement, and maketh that to be the meaning which is none: for his will is a Law; De transtat: episc c. quanto in glossa. Omnes principes orbis terrarū pon∣tificem honorant & colunt vt summum deum. Blond{us} lib 3. Rom. instaur. and flatterie of Popes parasites; saying, That though the Pope should carry many soules to Hell, yet, Nemo poterat dicere Papae, cur ita facis? Dist. 40. c. si papa. And againe, Benedict: a bene∣dict: praefat: ad antithes. Papa volens nolens errare non potest, Though he would he cannot erre; or as Canus saith, Priuilegium infallibilitatis habet, He hath the priuiledg of not erring, which yet is in∣cident to Humanum est errare. humanity: in the Popes brest is erected the Mo∣nopolie of the infallible spirit of our Sauiour. Or againe, Papa potest conficere nouum symbolum, & multiplicare arti∣culos fidei, & in omnibus articulis multa addere, saith Sum: De excel. pont. q 59. art 2. Au∣stinus de Ancona, The Pope can make a new Creed, and adde more articles to our beleefe. Thus, thus, these pal∣try and palpable parasites would haue their Pope like the Esay 14. 12. 13. 14. The Pope hath the same power that Christ had to rule ouer all nations & king∣domes. D. Marta. part. 1. pag. 45. de iurisdict Athanes epist: ad solit. vti agentes. sonne of pride, which cast lottes vpon the Nations, say∣ing, I will ascend into heauen, and exalt my throne aboue beside the starres of God: I will ascend aboue the highest of the clouds, and I will be like the most Highest. So they goe about to make him as proud as Typhoeus the Giant, who would haue an higher firmament vnder which hee might walke, and bigger starres to giue bigger light, o∣therwise he would pull them downe and fight with Iupi∣ter. So that he is growne to that height of pride, as Con∣stantius the Emperour once said of the Pope, Quod ego vo∣lo, pro canone sit, What I will, shall stand for a comman∣ding Canon; veryfying a Tyrants voyce, like a Nero, or a Nimrod, Sic volo sic iubeo, stat pro ratione volunt as. And indeed the Popes of Rome are so proud, that they would haue Kings kisse their feet, or hold their styrrop, or crowne Emperours with one foote, and Polychronicō. lib. 7. Frederick, Bar∣barossa, Henry 4. & Rich. 1. basely vsed. strike it off with the other: tread Naucl: pag. 86. vpon their neckes, abusing that place of Psalm 91 13. Gregory the 7. sets downe these a∣mong the Popes priuiledges, that Princes must kisse Popes feet, &c. Baro. Anno 1078. n▪ 32, Greg. 7. epist. l. 2, ep, 55. Scripture, Thou shalt walke vpon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion and the Dragon shalt thou tread vnder thy feet. Henry the fourth walked three daies at the Popes gate in frst and snow bare footed: Abbas Vrsp. Platin, in vit. Gregor. 7. Dishonouring Gods high Lieutenants, de∣basing that dignity which is the highest vpon earth, see∣king to haue the superiority aboue them, to depose them
from their Kingdomes, and depriue them of their liues; witnesse the Bull of Pius Quintus against Queene Eliza∣beth of happie memorie, wherein as Gabutius a popish wri∣ter saith, In vita Pij 5. de Angl. Cogitabat Pius reginam è medio tollere, Pius did think to haue made Queene Elizabeth away; or as Catena: pag. 113 Catena another Papist, Pius omni studio faciendum curauit, vt inco∣larū animos ad Elizabethae destructionem facta rebellione com∣moueret, Pius tooke care and study to bring to passe, to moue by rebellion the mindes of the inhabitants of Eng∣land to the destruction of Queene Elizabeth. So as wee may say of Popes, as the people of Pilate, Iohn. 19. 12 You are not Caesars friend; loth that they should weare a Crowne of gold, and therefore would giue them a Crown of thornes, and crucifie to death Ʋnctos Domini, the Annointed of the Lord, at the Iewes did Ʋnctum Dominum, the Annointed Lord. The times were, you gaue Emperours and Kings more honour, more obedience, when as you acknowled∣ged your selues their vassals, and reuerenced and obeyed Waltram: Theod: Aniem: de priuil: Imperij. them for your Lords; as for a long time the Popes did to the first Christian Emperors: yea the Election of the Pope was a long time in the Emperours hands, who had the right of chusing the Pope confirmed by a Synod of the Popes to Charles the great: Liberat. breuiar. Leo the first with many of his Bishops, vsed their knees, intreated the Emperor and his VVife for a Synod. And then no doubt but you gaue them honor and homage too, and you also were forced to pay then money to the Emperor for confirmation, and this lasted 700 yeares after Christ, as Historians Sigeb: in Chro: ad ann. 683 & Luit∣prand: in vit. Aga∣thon & Anast, in vit. eiusd: Agath: & Herm: Conrad: ad ann 678. write; nay not onely elected by Emperors, but also reiected and deposed from your Popedomes (if the Emperor found any good cause for it,) as the Luitpr. hist. lib. 6. c. 10. 11. Emperor Otho deposed Pope Iohn the twelfth. Marian Scot. Si∣geb. abbas Vrsp. ad ann. 1046. & Pla∣tin. in vit. Grego 6. Henry the third, Emperor, deposed 3. Popes, as Benedict the ninth, Syluester the third, and Gre∣gory the sixt, and other Emperors haue done the like. Then the Spirituall and Temporall sword was not in the power of the Pope, (as since Gregory In C vnā Sanct. extr. de maior. & obedien. the eight said:) the Emperors had it in their owne hand, and then you feared them, if not honoured them as you ought. But after that
Gregory the seauenth, otherwise called Heldebrand, be∣gan bacchari in Caesarem & Caesareos, to play his hellish part, to seeke to depriue of his Empire Henry the fourth: for this Heldebrand was the first that euer attempted such a Luciferian preheminence, if the Otho. Frisingens. lib. 6: cap. 35 Historian doe write true: Lego, & relogo, saith he; Romanorum regum, & impera∣torum gesta, & nusquam inuenio quenquam eorum ante hunc à Romane Pontifice excommunicatum, vel regno priuatum, I reade ouer and ouer the Acts of Kings and Emperors, and I find no where any of them before this, excommunicated of the Pope, or depriued of their Kingdome: but this Popes enterprise had a sutable successe; for by the Councell of Brixia hee was deiected out of the Popedome for it, and Concilium Brix∣iense: 1083. Abbas vspergensis: Sigeber. An. 1084. Antoninus. Sigeb. ad Ann. 1085. Vsperg. in Anno, 1089. Suadente Diabolo, vt supra. vid. card. Benno: in the life of Gregory 7. being in extreamity, calles one of his best beloued Cardi∣nals to him, and confessed to God, Saint Peter, and the whole Church, that he had greatly offended in his Pasto∣rall charge; Et suadente Diabolo contra humanum genus iram & odium concitasse, By the Diuels perswasion he had raised vp wrath and hatred vpon Mankind. Well, this Helde∣brand (whose Orator was the Diuell) was the first that at∣tempted to depose Emperors; and since, that Prince of the Ayre, who beares rule in the childrē of disobedience, hath moued Peters false friends, and Kings foes, to follow the hellish steppes of proud Heldebrand, seeking to depose Kings, to dispose of their Crownes, and depriue them of their liues, to excommunicate them, to free subiects from their allegiances, to excite Armes against them, to make Martyres of King-killers, euery way labouring to dispa∣rage their sacred Persons, diminish their Regall rights, en∣croch vpon their Prerogatiues, altogether contemning Peters Precepts, yet arrogating Peters Place; Honour the King. How dishonourably and contemptibly (that Milo who bare the Pope on his shoulders) Cardinall Bellar∣mine writes of Kings; That they are rather slaues then Lords: De Laicis, c. 7. Not onely subiects to Popes, to Bi∣shops, to Priests, but to Deacons: Depontifice, lib. 1. c. 7. That Kings haue not their authority immediatly from God, nor his law, but onely from the law of Nations; De
cleric: c. 28. That Churchmen are as farre aboue Kings, as the soule aboue the body, De Laicis. c. 18. That Kings may be deposed by their people for diuers respects; De pontific. lib. 5. c. 8: That obedience due to Kings, is onely for certaine respects of order, and pollicy; De clericis. cap. 28: His workes are full of such foule and false assertions; base, bald, and blockish Paradoxes, repugnant to al Scrip∣ture, right, and reason: that he may say with the Poet; Hoc equidem studeo bullatis vt mihi nugis, Pagina turgescat.— Many of his propositions so dishonourable, and iniuri∣ous to Kings, that to confute them, Non opus est verbis, sed fustibus: Armes, not Arts should beat and breake in peeces such pernicious Paradoxes. But to leaue these Machiauelismes of the Conclaue, (de∣throning Kings to enthrone Popes) let vs learne of God, with what honourable titles, and high prerogatiues in the Booke of God they stand possessed: There they are called Ps. 82 6 Gods, and Children of the most High: The Chr. 4. 18 Lords An∣nointed, The 2 Sam. 14. 20 Angels of God, 2 Sam. 21. 17 The Light of Israel 2 Sam. 3. 1 Sit∣ting in Gods Throne, Rom. 13. 1. 4 The Higher Powers, the Ministers of God, Luke 22. 25 The Kings of Nations that beare rule; euery where with variety of such high and stately Titles, great Prerogatiues, commanding euery Rom. 13. 1 soule to be subiect to them, that he who should goe about to empaire their ho∣nour, must first infringe the Booke of God. Vnworthy is that Creature to breathe the Ayre, which denies honour to the breathing Image of God, his annointed Soueraign, or with vnreuerent action, or elocution, enterprise to de∣base their sacred Soueraignety; such tongues are worthy with Diues to be tormented, or with Progne to be cut out, or with Nicanors to be diuided in crummes for Birds, that will not honour with tongues, and honour with hearts their annointed and appointed Kings, the earthly pictures of the King of Kings. And not to trauel so farre as forraine Climates, to teach them (to honour Kings) let our speech bee bounded within the circumference of his Highnesse Countries, People (aboue all other Nations) bound to ho∣nour
and obey our gracious Soueraigne. We blessed with a King of incomparable wisdome, Rex natus & ad Regna natus, descended of blood royall: Eccles. 10. 17 A blessednes to a King∣dome, when a King is the Son of Nobles, and much more of noble vertues, prudent in a peaceable gouernement, compleate in the perfection of Learning; eares may ouer∣come eyes, to hear the wisdome of our Salomon: and which is most of all, and best of all to be extolled, sincerely, and soundly religious, labouring to make his Kingdomes, by aduancing Euangelium Christi, Regnum Euangelij: A trusty defender of the true Faith, Tam Marti quā Mercurio, both by Pen and Pike ready to defend Religion against super∣stition; Calamo & cuspide. often hath he entred into Theologicall disputes, and foyled Romes most illustrious Car. Bellar. Card. Perron. Cardinals: Yea, his Maie∣sties dinners like Salomons Table, making Auditors say with Pro. 16. 10 Salomon; A diuine sentence shall be in the lips of the King; or with wisdome her selfe, Pro. 8. 6 Heare: for I wil speak of excellent things, and the opening of my lippes shall teach things that are right. A Patron of the Church, and a Pro∣moter of the Gospell; as Cic. in Hortens. Hortensius raised vp eloquence to Heauen, that he might goe vp with her, so our dread So∣ueraigne aduances the Gospel, the Iacobs ladder to climbe to Heauen by it. Macte virtute: sicitur ad astra. I am vnable and vnfit to make the Map of our Kings per∣fections, De ipso ipsiloquuntur Antipodes; not any Zone ha∣bitable wherein his glory hath not habitation: and they say, We must praise a King as we honour God, Sentiendo copiosius quam loquendo; and herein such plenty of praise is offered, that—Inopem me copia fecit. Xenophon might see that in our vertuous King Iames, which he wished in his King Cyrus: O fortunatos Anglos bona si sua norint; Oh happy wee, if wee be thankefull for our happinesse: Nihil his bonis accedere potest, nisi vt perpe∣tua sint, Nothing can augment our earthly ioyes, but to make these lasting: and thanks be to God, our Soueraigne hath, I thinke, already out-lasted the Regency of a dozen Popes. Hominum breuis, regum breuior, pontificum vita bre∣nissima,
saith Petrarcha; Of all men the Popes haue shortest liues, but God grant our Soueraigne Nestors dayes, wish∣ing for him as Martial did for Traian, Lib. 10. Epig. 34. Dij tibi dent quicquid (Princeps Auguste) mereris, Et rata perpetuò quae tribuêre, velint. Long may this glorious Candle of Israel last, who as vpon this day was proclaimed with infinite ioy, receiued with peaceable entry, enthroned with glorious inuesti∣ture, and hath hitherto gouerned with admired wis∣dome, comfort and content of all good Subiects; so still to continue in all Princely prosperity, and to hold the Scep∣ter of great Britanny with a tripled addition of yeeres to come for the yeeres past; wishing in desire, though it can∣not be indeed Da spatium vitae, multos da Iupiter Annos Iuuen. Sat. 10 His egonecmetas rerum, nec temporapono, Imperium sine fine dedi:— Adde to his dayes of the dayes of Heauen, that he and his posterity may here sit vpon the regall Throne, so long Et caeptis non de∣crit fashus hares. as the Sunne and Moone endureth. —Haec regnd tenere, Et natos natorum & qui nascentur ab illis: That all his Subiects may euer pray for him, obey him, and honor him; aswel in deeds as words, heats as tongues, saying and praying; God saue the King. CHAP. VII. THE fourth duty of Subiects, to be duly ren∣dred and tendered to their annointed Soue∣raignes, is loyall and faithfull seruice, thinking themselues (as Tiberius said of his People) Homines ad seruitutem nati, Men borne to doe them ser∣uice: And therefore it was a commendable order (as Praef: Com. in E∣pist: ad Rom. Quireip. hostis est; is ciuis esse nullo modo potest. Cic. in Cat. 4 Me∣lancthon records it) that euery Citizen did sweare, taking a corporall Oath, Pugnabo pro sacris pro legibus, pro aris, & focis, & solus, & simul cum alijs; & ne patriam meam deterio∣rem qua accepi, posteris tradam, omnibus viribus enitar, I will
fight for Religion, for our lawes, &c: alone & with others, and I will with all my might rather endeauour to better, then to make worse my Countrey to posterity; acknow∣ledging themselues seruants to their Countrey, and vow∣ing their best endeauours to doe her faithfull seruice. So all true subiects are bound by the Lawes of God and men, to be faithfull seruants to their Soueraignes: and if they neglect or reiect this duty, I may say to them as 1 Sam. 26. 15. 16 Dauid did to Abner, Ye be worthy to die, because ye haue not kept your Master the Lords Annointed, because you haue not been faithfull seruants to your anointed Soueraignes. If any Ester 2. 21. 22 Bighthan or Teresh seek to lay hands on our graci∣ous Soueraigne, with faithfull Mordecai and Ester speedi∣ly preuent it by reuealing it: If any 2 Kin. 6. 12 King of Aram takes counsell with his seruants against the King of Israel, with faithfull Elisha reueale it to your Caesar, euen the words he speakes in his Priuy Chamber; nay, not onely reueale it, but reuenge it; In reos Maiestatis & publicos Hostes omnis homo miles est (saith Ter. Apol. c. 2 Tertullian) against Traytors and pub∣like enemies euery man is a Souldier; yea, in this kind and sence, we may and must in fortitudine nostra sumere cornua, with 1 Kin. 22. 11 Zedekiah make hornes of iron, to push these trea∣chercus Aramites vntill wee haue consumed them, giue couragious resistance to treacherous violence, vntill they may receiue deserued doome by Iustice. And for the per∣formance of this loyall seruice to their appointed Soue∣raignes, no condition of men vnder the Sunne can pleade immunity, neither Popes, Priests, nor People; the Pope cannot pleade priuiledge, if he will stand to his owne and Humilitas in voce, superbia in actione, Greg. Seruus seruorum, Tyrannus Tyran∣norum. old title, Seruus seruorum, A seruant of Seruants: but he carries himselfe now adayes as if his Prentiship were out, and would change his stile to be Dominus Dominorum, A Lord ouer his Lord; as the old Illyric: Poem de corrup. stat. Eccle∣siae. Poet tels vs, Roma tibi quondam fuerant Domini Dominorum, Seruorum serui nunc tibisunt Domini. For he disclaimes in action his old appellation, the ser∣uant of seruants, & neuer vses it but by way of equiuoca∣tion. But to let him goe: for Senex psittacus non capit feru∣lam, Ita aequivoci, vt vniuoci raro.
He is too old to learne, and happy are those Kings, that haue least part of his seruice; but if it please the Pope to be like the High Priests, (and I thinke that title is high enough for him) they were content to call themselues ser∣uants vnto Kings, as Abimilech accounted himselfe Sauls seruant; 1 Chro 29. 22: 7 1 Sam. 22. 15 Let not the King impute any thing vnto his ser∣uant, &c. And Zadocke 1 Kin. 1. 33 the High Priest, called by Dauid his seruant: So Exod. 32. 22 Aaron to Moses, Ne indignetur Dominus meus, Let not the wrath of my Lord waxe fierce. In a word, Summi sacerdotes regibus subdebantur, saith their Salmerō in tract. 63, de potest: Eccle. & secular. Ie∣suite, Their chiefe Priests were subiects and seruants to Kings in the Law: and the chiefe Apostle euen Saint Pe∣ter, from whom they would fetch their Pedegree of Pri∣macy, enioynes all in the Gospell to submit themselues for the Lords sake, whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the 1 Peter 213 superior. So that their freedome from seruice to the Prin∣ces of the Earth, hath no warrant, except from the Prince of the Ayre, to whom Rome dedicates her scepter and ser∣uice. And this loyall seruice of the members vnto the roy∣all and Princely Head, ought to be dutifull, faithfull, and perpetuall: that is the happy seruice, which comes from an hearty obedience; many things may seeme so in appa∣rance, which are not so in eslence: It is the practise and ve∣ry Nulla est pestis ca∣pitalior quam eo∣rum, qui tunc cum maxime fallunt, id agunt, vt boni viri videantur: Cic. lib. , offic. Ephes. 6. 5, 6 prayers of the wicked to cry thus: Hor. 1. Epist. 16. Da mihi fallere, da iustum, sanctum{que} videri, Noctem peccatis, & fraudibus obijce nubem. If they seeme trusty in shew though treasonable in heart, they care not, like bad seruants, not in singlenesse of heart, but with seruice to the eye, as men-pleasers, obey they their regall Masters. This Age is full of such treacherous hearts, as deceiptfull as 2 Sam. 3 27 Ioab to Amasa, who tooke him aside to speake with him peaceably, and smote him vnder the fift rib that he died; or like Iudges 16. 18 Malum sub speci boni celatum, dum non cognoscitur, non cauetur Chrys. super Math. 7 Veritas est tempo∣ris Filia, Dalilah to Sampson, with faire words, and weeping to betray him to the Philistines: No treason but in trust, Decipimur specie recti; The fained voice of Fowlers catcheth the Partridges, & Plouers: The Mother of Error puts on her maske, to bee taken for the Daughter of Time, truth: The Wolfe in sheeps cloathing,
scarce knowne from the sheapheards dogge. 1 Macchab 16. Ptolomie the sonne of Abusus, vnder a faire vizard of loue and kindnes feasting Simeon and his two sonnes, killes them in his ban∣quetting house: Herodes deuo∣tionem promittit, sed gladium acuit: Chry. sup. Mat. 2 Herod when he would play the wolfe, he counterfetted a Foxe: Math. 2. 8 Goe and search diligently for the Babe, and when ye haue found him, bring me word, that I may worship him; his meaning was to worrie him: So Math. 26. 49 Nunquam te fal∣lant animi sub vulpe latentes: impia sub dulci melle venena la∣tent. Foris Cato, intus Nero; totus ambi∣guus. Iudas comes with his Aue Rabbi, Haile Master, betraying him with a kisse: Do'i non sunt doli, nisi astu celas. Plautus. So many a perfidious Traytor will cry, Aue Caesar, God saue the King: but it is with such an affectiō as Antoninus Cara∣calla said of his brother Geta, Sit diuus modo non viuus, Let him be a Saint or a King in Heauen, so he be not a King on Earth. Beware of dissemblers, parasites, and equiuocators; His nomina mille—mille nocendi artes: Such are full of fraud, full of villany; beleeue them as the people of Rome belieued Carbon, swearing neuer to credit him. They are like to Polypus, haue Et Leo pars pri∣ma est, draco me∣dia, ipsa Chymera. various shapes, changing themselues into Angels of light; but Malus vbi se bonum simulat, tunc est pessimus, A bad man when he counterfetteth to be good, is worst; Simulata Aug in Ps. 63 sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, A counter∣set holinesse is a two fold wickednesse. Let vs performe according to our place, faithfull, hearty▪ and trusty seruice to our dread Soueraigne; and though the wicked labour Ʋirtutis comes in∣vidia: Cic. 4: ad Here. to darken with a cloud of slaunder our faire and faithfull seruice, yet at last that eclips of enuy will vanish of it selfe, and our owne innocency and fidelity will animate vs like that Romaine Marius, who being accused by the Senate of Inuidiam ferre aut fortis, aut foe∣lix potest: Seneca. Treason, in a passion teares his garments, and in sight of them all shewes them his wounds receiued in the seruice and defence of his Countrey, saying; Quid opus est verbis, vbi vulnera clamant, What need of words, our wounds de∣clare, our blood was shed for your welfare? Faithfull ser∣uice is laudable before men, and acceptable before God; it may be by the wicked sometimes blamed, but it cannot be shamed: though it be not alwayes rewarded on earth, it shall be sure to find rewards in Heauen, as they Tacit: Hist. lib. 2 once complained, Penes caeteros imperij praemia, penes ipsos seruitij
necessitas, that others found the sweet preferment, and they had horse and heauy burthen for their seruice; yet vertue is a reward to it selfe: bonorum laborum gloriosus fructus, the seruice of the Ecclus. 35. 7: righteous is accepted, and the remem∣brance thereof shall neuer be forgotten: Ipsa quidem virtus sibimet pulc herrima merces. Sillius Italicus. And this seruice due to our King and Country (if neede require) must reach vs{que} ad aras, prodigall of labor, limbe, or life, to defend both; the safetie of both, eyther King or Country is so inseparable, that the seruice done to eyther is alwaies commendable and honourable. VVee haue fa∣mous presidents in this kinde to presse vs to performe the vtmost of our seruice in loue to our Country, in duety to our King: the 3 Decij. Zophirus, Cn: Scipio, uluius Nas∣sus Anchurus fili{us} re∣gis Midae, pro Sa∣lute patriae in pro∣fundissimum chas∣ma sese praecipitem dedit. &c. all offered to sacrifice their liues in loue for their Countrie: Hor 3. car: od. 2. Dulce & decorum est pro patria mori: The Val: Max: l. 5. c. 6 story is most famous of Quintus Curtius a noble Romane, who hearing by the Oracle, that the safety of the city of Rome consisted onely in the sacrifice of one of her best affected children, valiantly and voluntarily leaped in∣to that deuouring gulfe, and so preserued the Citie. Ardua per praeceps gloria vadit iter: Ouid. Hor. ad Flor. Hoc opus, hoc studium, parui properemus & ampli, Si patriae volumus, si nobis viuere chari. A spectacle of loue and loyalty, a sacrifice of high obedi∣ence, that is presented vpon the wings of death; I will not y worthy of imitation: because like vnto selfe sacrifi∣ing of Cleombrotus, they were Martyrs stultae Philosophiae, Martyrs of their fond Philosophy, yet notwithstanding worthy to stirre vp great affection for Subiects to loue as truely their King and country; and the King and Coun∣try to loue such Subiects, that for them aduenture their liues. Naturally euery one loues his Country, Nemo pa∣triam diligit quia magna est, sed quia sua est, saith Sen: de remed. fort: Seneca: No man loues his Country because it is great, but because it is his owne: Ouid: Nescio quâ natale solum dulcedine cunctos Dulce solum patriae est: Virg: ducit, & immemores non sinit esse sui:
The Persians did beare such loue to their Country, that they must sweare by the Sunne rising, neuer to become Iewes, Grecians, Romans, Egyptians, but euer to remain Persians: They counted no fault more foule, then to be a foe to his owne Country. It was an excellent saying of Aulus Fuluius, who finding his sonne in the conspiracy of Catiline, tells him, Ego non te Catilinae genui, sed Patriae, I did beget thee not for Catiline, but for thy Country. They that are Traytors to their King and Country, may fitly be compared to Vipers: The Vipers are conceiued (as Nat. hist: lib. 10. cap. 62. Pliny writes) by biting off the Males head, and borne by eating through their Mothers belly; So they would Decapitare Caput, destroy the King their head, and lacerare matrem, teare the bowels of their mother, their natiue Countrey. Our English Fugitiues are the spawnes of these Vipers, Parsons, Saunders, &c. who because they could not eate through her bowels and belly with their teeth, in reuenge raile at her with their tongues; to whom I cannot giue a fitter answer then that which the Estate of Eng∣lish fugitiues. Spanish Verdugo gaue to Sir William Stanley, railing against this his natiue Coun∣try; saying, Though you haue offended your Countrey, yet your Countrie neuer offended you. These Iesuited fugitiues, who at Rhemes or Rome doe now—Juuen: sat 3. Val: Max: lib: 5. Caluo seruire Neroni, vnnaturally forsake their King, Country, Kindred, and deuote their liues & labours to giue all homage to the chayre of Rome; and though they colour their treasonable plots and proiects of confu∣sion vnder pretence of conuersion, yet bloudy is that faith, that Cain-like will kill their natiue brothers, and Nero-like rip vp their dearest Mother; Conuersio animae praeten∣ditur, subuersio regis, reip. & Ecclesiae intenditur, They pre∣tend religion, but they intend rebellion and desolation. But to leaue these Vipers, of whom I may say as the Soul∣diers at the death of the sonne of Maximus, Non debet seruari vnus Catulus, Not any of their young ones worthy to be kept vp for store; let vs in an example or two, be∣hold the deepe affection of Kings loues vnto their Sub∣iects. The story is common of King Codrus the Athenians
King, who being assaulted and assailed by enemies, recei∣ued this Oracle, That his army should preuaile if he would suffer himselfe to be slaine of his enemies; which newes when it came to the eares of his aduersaries, they made an edict, Nemo tangat Codrum, None might touch Codrus: Codrus then changed his habit: see the fire of loue; he went to his enemies thus disguised: marke the flame, there was he slaine: looke vpon the ashes, the vrne of Codrus, what doe they say, but▪ Hor. Quo nos cun{que} feret melior fortuna, parentes ibimus ô socij, comites{que}— So King Leonides sacrificeth his dearest bloud at Ther∣mopilas, fighting valiantly in defence of his Country and kingdome: Cic. 1 Tusc. Dic hospes Spartae nos te hic vidisse iacentes, dum sanctis patriae legibus obsequimur. In a worde, I neuer read of any King (vnlesse such as Ʋnam populo ceruicem optant quam vno ictu amputare possunt. Nero and Caligula) that did not wish well to his owne Country and kingdome: For, Principis est consulere omni∣bus, prospicere saluti patriae, saith Epist. ad Q. Fratrem lib. 1. Cicero, It is the office of a King to take care and counsell for the welfare of his peo∣ple: Princeps suorum subditorū velut sui ipsius corporis mem∣brorum curam gerit, saith Agapetus, A Prince takes care of all his Subiects, euen as the members of his owne bodie. And so Alfonsus a King had his symboll; (a Type of his true loue) a Pellican with her bill pricking her brest, fee∣ding her young with her bloud, with this inscription, pro lege & pro grege; declaring Emblematically, That Kings with continuall cares wast their liues to prouide for their Alijs micans meip∣sum consumo, alios alens meipsu per∣do: aliud est esse in lege aliud sublege: qui est in lege se∣cundum legem agit qui sub lege secun∣dum legem agitur, ille liber est, iste seru{us}: Aug in Psa. peoples welfares: For good Kings will say with Hadria∣nus Caesar, Sic se gesturum principatum, vt sciant rem populi esse, non suam; They will so gouerne that all men may see they aime more at the publicke good, then any priuate gaine. It is their office to protect their people, prouide for the welfare of the common-wealth, maintaine good Lawes, execute Iustice, defend the Faith, and promote the Church. So we Sleyd. lib. 1 & 2. read that when the Emperor is crowned, the Archbishop of Colen propounds seuerall demands,
An Ecclesiam defensurus? Iustitiam administraturus? Impe∣rium conseruaturus? viduas, orphanos{que} protecturus &c. Whe∣ther hee will defend the Church? Administer Iustice? Pre∣serue the Empire? and protect the widdowes, fatherlesse, and friendlesse? The Xenophon de reb. Lacaed. Solon being de∣manded what was the chiefe safety of a Com∣mon-wealth: an∣swered, if the Ci∣tizens obey the Magistrate, & the Magistrate the Lawes. Publicanimirum res tum sibi cōstat, & aequū imperiū, cum Rex quod iu∣bet, ipse facit. Acti{us} epig. lib. 1. Kings of Sparta at their Coronation did sweare to raigne according to Lycurgus Lawes: and I thinke it is the order of most Christian Kings at their Co∣ronation to sweare to rule according to Iustice, and to maintaine the lawes and liberties of their kingdomes; for farre be it from Kings thoughts to say with Thrasyma∣chus, Principum vtilitate & libidine omne ius definiri, All Law to be defined by their pleasures and profit: for that is to say with the Mother of Antoninus Caracalla, to him quodlibet licere, any thing to be lawfull for him; or with Caracalla himselfe, Imperatores leges dare, non accipere, Emperors giue Lawes, but doe not liue by them. The foundation of well-gouerned Kingdomes hath two sup∣porters (saith▪ Mach: prin. c. 12. Machiauell▪ bonas Leges, bona Arma, good Lawes, and good Armes: And that famous Emperor Praefat. Iustiniā. instit: in initio: Ciuitas subsistere nequit, quae legibus non est firmata; Arist. lib. . politic. Iu∣stinian saith, Imperatoriam Maiestatem non solum armis de∣coratam, verùm legibus oportet esse armatam, Imperiall Ma∣iesty not onely to be adorned by Armes, but also armed by Lawes; and then the Lawes will be best obeyed, when the Law-makers obey themselues. It was a woe our Saui∣our denounced against the Luke 11. 46. Digna vox est Ma∣iestate regnantis, legibus alligatū se principē profiteri. &c. Imperat: The∣od. & Valent, Caes. Interpreters of the Law, be∣cause they did lode men with burdens greeuous to be borne, and they themselues touched not the burdens with one of their fingers: Promulgers and publishers of Lawes ought to be practisers of the same. It was a royal speech of the Emperor Traian, when he deliuered the sword, prae∣fecto praetorij; saying to him, Si bene imperauero, prome; sin contrà aduersus me stringito; If I rule well, draw out that sword for me; if otherwise, against me: and happy is that Kingdome whose supreame head giues good Lawes to o∣thers, and liues by them himselfe, it animateth all to obey. Regis ad exemplū totus componitur orbis: Claudian. Ad te oculos, aures{que} trahis, tua facta notamus, nec vox missa potest Principis ore tegi.
Principis vita est censura ciuium, saith Plin. 2. Panegy. ad Traian. Plinie, The life of King, the life of imitation, his good life as powerfull to draw people to goodnesse, as good Lawes: Claud: —non sic inflectere sensus Longūiter per prae∣cepta, breue per exempla: Jeron: Plebeia ingenia magis exemplis quā ratione capiuntur. Macrob: lib. 7. Sa∣tur. cap. 4. Augustus filled the world with Schollers, Tybe∣rius with Para∣sites, Constantine with Christians, Julian with here∣tickes. Imperio maximus, exemplo maior: Paterculus: lib. 2. In vulgus manant exempla regentum: Cypr. Humanos edicta valent, quam vita regentis: The Rulers godly life, like a good Glosse vpon a Text, makes a perfect commentary vpon the Law to moue vul∣gar obedience. O then let vertue and piety flame in the breasts of Princes, cherish these (O sacred Potentates) at your high Altars, and then your excellent actions will produce exemplar imitations. Persius. Regibus hic mos est centum sibi poscere voces, Centum ora, centum linguas— Many millions of men are your spectators, nay the world is your stage wherein your actions are euen axioms to draw that many-headed beast, the multitude, eyther to vertue or vice. What a glorious and most applauded of all the Saints of Heauen, is your well-acted taske and office, if you render vp your Crownes to him that is the King of Crownes and Scepters, with a commended plandite? then indeed you shall worthily Pers. Sat 1. Os populi meruisse, & Cedro digna locutum linquere— Leaue happie monuments on earth, of your immortall same, and at your farewell from your earthly thrones, leaue a lamen∣ting and bewailing world, but attended vnto heauen with the praiers of your people, with an army of Angels to wel∣come your arriuall, And heerein how are the people of great Britaine bound to render perpetuall praises to Al∣mighty God? who hath blessed them with such a godlie Pietas est verus Imperatoris orna∣tus. Euagr: hist: Praefat: ad Theod: and gracious King, who with his life, lawes, and labours, by his publicke example in the true seruice of God, by the integritie of his life, industry in sacred studies, clemencie in gouernment, delight and diligence in hearing Church∣exercises, making his Court, as it was said of Euseb▪ de vit: Constant. lib. 4. Constan∣tines, Ecclesiae instar, like a Church, their publicke Seruice and Sermons deuoutly performed, and religiously accep∣ted and embraced, labouring Regis ad exemplum totum
componere regnum: by a Kingly patterne of deuotion to ex∣cite all to an holie imitation: So that wee ought to giue God more thanks then Plato did, who yet thanked God for three things: 1. pro ratione: 2. pro natione: 3. pro erudi∣tione: for his reason, nation, and learning: 1. for his rea∣son, being made a man, not a beast: 2. for his nation, a Grecian, not a Barbarian: 3. for his liuing, in the daies of learned Socrates, of whom hee reaped great knowledge. Wee ought also to thanke God for these and other bles∣sings, beeing not meerely men, but Christian men, liuing vnder the reigne of a most Christian King, a Defender of Faelix resp: in qua qui imperat timet deum. Cominaeus: Iustin. the Faith, and cherisher of the Gospell; a louer of Peace: that wee may truely say, as the people did at the death of Pertinax the Emperour, Dum illeregnabat tranquille vi∣uebamus, & neminem metuebamus, While hee reigned, wee liued quiet, and feared no enemies, So now euery man may sit in peace vnder his Vine and Figtree, & beare a part in the song of those heauenly Souldiers, Luke 2. 13. 14. praising God and saying, Glory be to God in the high heauens for our peace on earth. VVe enioy that blessing promised to Salo∣mon, I 1 Chron. 22 9. Tale bonum est bonum pacis, vt in rebus creatis nil gratiosius soleat audiri, nil delecta∣bilius concupisci, & nil vtilius pos∣sideri: Aug. will send peace and quietnesse vpon Israel in his daies, A blessing worthie of thankesgiuing: So that wee may in a Christian peace serue the God of peace, and praise him for our peace, and pray to him for the preseruation of the happy instrument of this our peace: for peace is a nurse of Religion, but bloudie warre the mother of misery, mis∣chiefe, and abhomination; for, Lucan: Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. In time of Warre the God of peace neglected, True faith and Pitty is then reiected. Let all from head to foote, from our Salomon in the Throne, to the poorest member in the kingdom, prostrate their humble soules to the throne of God, (the giuer of all blessings) and in all faithfull obedience, tender him their dutifull seruice, Psalm. 2. 11. seruing the Lord in feare and reioycing in trembling; ascribing all praise and thanks to God, say∣ing, Psalm. 3. 8. Saluation belongeth vnto the Lord, and his blessing
is vpon the people; Gratias August: in Ps. 47. Optima beneficio∣rum custos, perpe∣tua est cōfessio gra∣tiarum: Chrys: Super Math. hom. 25. agere Deo possumus, referre non possumus; giuing God all possible thankes for his bles∣sings, the least whereof is more worth then all our thanks; yet, Ascensus gratiarum descensus gratiae, the ascending of our thankes doe bring descending graces. And with our best and faithfull seruice to our good God, the King of Kings: let our loyall and dutifull seruice be neuer wanting to his vertuous vicegerent, his annointed deputy on earth, our high and dread Soueraigne, Zechar. 2. 8. Qui tangit eum tangit pupillam oculi ipsius, as the Lord speakes of Sion; Hee that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of his eye: beseeching God to be Protector Saluationum Vncti, the defender and Psal 28. 8. Augustus lamen∣ted for Varus death, being as∣ked why; he said, now, now I haue none in my Court to tell me the truth. Sen. lib. 6. de benef. c. 30. deliuerer of his Anointed, to giue him prosperity, peace, and plenty of all things: yea, plenty of it, which Lewes the eleuenth the French King complained hee onely wan∣ted in his Court; and being demanded what it was, hee said ruth, a Diamond faire and fit to adorne a Diadem, commendable to God, acceptable to Kings, profitable to Common wealths; Hee is the Kings and Countries best seruant, that brings in his mouth a message of Trueth. I haue Gregor. Dialog. read how a certaine poore man comming to see Constantine (an Emperor renowned through the world by Fame and Fortune) and that poore man fixing his eies vp∣on him, said thus, Putabam Constantinum aliquid praeclarius & mirabilius fuisse, sed iam video eum nihil aliudesse praeter hominem, I had thought Constantine had beene some rarer and more admirable Creature, but I see he is but a man; to whom Constantine gaue many thanks, (being both plaine and true) saying, Tu solus es, qui in me oculos apertos habu∣isti Thou art onely the man that hast looked vpon mee with open eies; others did flatter him, making him be∣leeue that hee was not, but this man honestly and truelie told him what hee was. Like Nazian. trip. hist c. 32. Macedonius the Eremite, who said to the officers of Theodosius, Dicite Imperatori non es Imperator solummodo sedetiam homo: Tell the Em∣peror he is not onely an Emperour, but also a man: For though in Scripture they be called Gods, it is in sensu mo∣dificato, Mors sceptra  nibus aequat. a qualified sence, Gods by deputation, earthly
Gods, not by nature, but by regiment: they shall dwell in the Lords Tabernacle (and are worthy to be in Kings Courts) Psalm. 15. 2. who walke vprightly, worke righteously, and speake the trueth from their hearts: Qui verit atem occul∣tat, & qui prodit mendacium, vter{que} reus est; ille quia pro∣desse non vult, iste quia nocere desiderat, saith Lib. de Agone Christi. Austen, He that hides the truth, & he that tels a lye, both be guilty: He because he would not profit, this because hee would haue hurt. The Lord and louer of Trueth euermore blesse his Maiesty with trusty Iohn 1. 47. Veritas minime peruia regum au∣vib{us} Alex. Seuer. dictum. Nathaniels, in whom is no guile: Such are the best seruants and secretaries to King and Country, who like one of those three seruants to King Da∣rius, the keepers of his body, come with this sentence, lay∣ing it vnder the Kings pillow, Esdras 3. 12. Trueth ouer commeth all things: But keepe from him (O King of Kings) all flatte∣ring Doegs, crafty conspiring Achitophels, rebellious Shebas, treacherous Zimries, vnfaithfull Zibas, false Ioabs, and Romish Iudasses, who honour him with their lips, but their hearts be far from him. And let all true subiects to his gracious Highnesse, faithfully performe all loyall seruice to this our 2 Kings 23. 2. Iosias, who restores the booke of the Law and holy Scripture; who like 2 Sam. 6. 15. Dauid, fetcheth home the Arke of God and his sacred Gospell; who like 2 Chr. 14. 3. 4. Asa puts downe Idolls, and commands all to seeke the Lord God; who like 2 Kings 10. Iehu, not kills, but Non vitā adimēs sed nidos destruens banishes Baals Priests, the Romish rout of Seminaries and Iesuites, waiters and wor∣shippers of the Papall Moloch (an Paul Fagius pa∣raph. Chald. in Leuit. 18: 21. Idol hauing hands al∣waies to receiue gifts.) Our Soueraigne loathes these lo∣custs, and labours —has terris & templis auertere pestes: To free the Church and Country of these plagues; so that it makes our hearts leape for ioy, and cry aloud, Psalm. 85. 1.  O Lord how fauourable hast thou beene vnto our land in placing religion, learning, vertue, and honour in one seate, Quam bene conueniunt cùm vna sede locantur, Maiestas, & virtus— An admirable spectacle to behold vertue and honour, in the royall Throne: What fires of zeale, loue, and seruice
should it kindle in the hearts of subiects, in thankefulnes to God, to serue the Lord in feare, and come before his presence with a song of thankesgiuing falling downe be∣fore the Lord our Maker, in soule, in body, all within, and all without? He giues all, & must be praysed of all, prayed to of all, for he is all in all. He Psal. 147. 20 hath not dealt so with eue∣ry Nation; and therefore let vs with the Psal 145. 1 Psalmist say and sing, O my God, and King, I will extoll thee, and praise thy name for euer and euer. Let Psal. 149. 2 Israel reioyce in their King: and to conclude with the words of Musculus, Min Psal. 118, 26 Acceptus, foelix, & gratiosus sit iste, quem Dominus nobis regem dedit; Welcome, wished, and most worthy is he, whom God hath set vp to raigne ouer vs, who happily succeeded a Vir∣gin Anuntiation of B. Virg. Mary. Queene. & proclaimed a day before the Festiual of the Queene of Virgins, (a faire Prologue of much ioy) who now with great felicity, and tranquility, hath raigned 15 yeeres in this great and flourishing Kingdome; many more yeeres we continually pray to be multiplied, Addat é no∣stris annos in annos Deus; Make him full of dayes and full of Trophees of honour, and grant him loyall Subiects, faithfull in obedience, and dutifull in all seruice, saying in tongue ioyfully, in heart truly; God saue the King. CHAP. VIII. THE fifth duty of Subiects to be duly and tru∣ly payed and performed to their sacred and dread Soueraignes, is Tribute, which is (as Vipian saith) Neruus reip. The strong sew of the Common-wealth, without which, King, nor Kingdome cannot stand: And therefore our Sa∣uiour first by Christ paid Tri∣bute to Tyberius Caesar. Mat. 17. 27 Si censum filius dei soluit, tu quis tantus es, qui non putas esse soluen∣dum? Ambrosius. president paid Tribute, and also by precept, resoluing the Disciples of the Pharises, demanding, whe∣ther it was lawfull to giue Tribute vnto Caesar, or no? told them peremptorily, Math. 22. 21 That they must giue vnto Caesar that which was Caesars: Reddendum est tributum, honor & obedi∣entia in omnibus, quae non pugnant cum verbo Dei, saith Pisca∣tor,
vpon that place; Tribute Honour, and Obedience, is to be giuen vnto the Magistrate in all things, not repugnant Reddenda esse Cae∣sari, quae sua sunt, illa solum dici, non debita, quae pietati ac religio∣ni nihil officiunt: Chrysán c. 22 Mat. Hom. 71 to the word of God: for this cause (saith Rom. 13. 4. 6 Saint Paul) ye pay Tribute, because the King is the Minister of God for thy wealth, applying themselues for the same thing: Cu∣stodit te Princeps (saith In Lucam: c. 20 Theophylact) ab Hostibus, debes ita∣què ei tributum: The Prince keeps thee safe from enemies, thou doest owe him therefore Tribute; and as he speakes still in that place, Nummum ipsum quem habes ab ipso habes, The money which thou hast, thou hast from him, and ther∣fore, Verbo reddendi, Significat debitum quod inexcusabile subditis impositum est: Theophyl, in 13 Rom. v. 7 Non date, sed reddite, Not giue, but pay; not a gift, but a debt, which all Subiects owe to him. Non damus sed red∣dimus, quiequid ex officio cuiquam damus, saith Beucer; We doe not giue, but pay that which of duty we owe: Tri∣butes, Subsidies, and Taskes, &c: are not gifts, but debts, which of necessity they must and ought to pay. Hoc Scrip∣turae approbant, hoc leges ciuiles communi gentium omnium consensu recipiunt (saith Hip. in Rom. 13 Hiperius): This doe the Scriptures allow of, (writing there of the payment of Tributes) this doe the Ciuill Lawes, with the common consent of all Na∣tious accept, and approue: Ius pendendi vectigalia apud om∣nes gentes fuit semper receptissimum (saith the same In Rom. 13. 6 Hipe∣rius) The Law and right of paying Tribute, among all Na∣tions hath euer beene accustomed: for how could Kings maintaine their States, defend their Countries, reward their faithfull seruants, vndergoe so manifold expences, which belong to a regall reckoning, vnlesse their Subiects with Tributes, Taxes, and Subsidies, helpe to sustaine the common charge? And therefore Calu. in instit. lib. 4. c. 20 Caluin writes well, that Tributes and Taxes are the lawfull reuenewes of Princes; which serue to maintaine their royalty, and the Common-wealths tranquility: Tributa necessaria sunt reip: sine eis, nec quies, nec arma, haberi possunt, (saith Tacitus) Tacit. lib. 4 Hist. Tributes are so necessary for the Common-wealth, that neither peace, nor warre, nor weapons, can be without them: for warre cannot be maintained without men, nor men without mo∣ney, which is Neruus belli, The sinew of warre; Tributis & vectigalibus nulla resp: aut imperium nedum magnum carere
potest, (saith the same Tac. lib. 13: An∣nal. Tacitus) No Countrey, or King∣dome, be it neuer so great, can lacke the payment of Tri∣butes, &c. In regnis bene constitutis certum constitutum est, Tributum (saith Herodotus Herod. lib 3 Hi∣stor.) In wel gouerned Kingdomes, there is certaine Tribute to be paid. Luke 2. 1 Augustus Caesar tax∣ed all the World, that is, all the Regions and Prouinces then subiect to the Romaines, (as the learned interpret it); and this was as Caluin notes, Annuum Tributum, Piscator in locum: Caluin: Harm. in locum. sed non quotannis fiebat descriptio; A yeerly Tribute, though not euery yeere put in wrighting: And the Iewes (though at first) they did aegre ferre mentionem discriptionis, Hardly away with this yeerely taxing, Non tamen reluctatos esse pertinaciter, as Ioseph: antiq. Iu∣daic: lib. 18. c. 1. Suasu pontificis Io∣azari censeri se passos esse. Josephus. Iosephus writes, They did not obstinately resist it, but by the perswasion of their High Priest, they suffered themselues to be taxed. Salomon could not haue beene so rich if his people had not payed him Tribute; but the weight of gold 2 Chro 9. 13. 24 Dauid ouer the Tribute set Ado∣ram. 2 Sam: 20. 24 Salomon ouer the Tribute pla∣ced Adoniram: 1 K 4. 6 they brought to Salomon, in one yeere was sixe hundreth threescore and sixe Talents of Gold. This duty of paying Tribute, Subsidies, and Taxes, &c: by the subiects to the Soueraigne, is by the law of God, and lawes of men, and common customes of most Nations commanded and approued, and that for foure principall causes. First to maintaine that royall estate which God hath giuen to Kings: the glorious patternes of Kings magnifi∣cence, may be fully seene in royall Salomon: Looke but v∣pon There was not the like made in any Kingdome: Imperij finis est populi vtilitas, & tranquillitas his Throne, 2 Chro. 9. 17, and you may iudge of all the rest of his royalty. Secondly, To defend the Common-wealth, both in peace and in warre, which requires a great Treasury. A great Bird had need of a great neast: That High Head which cares for all the politicke body, and night and day studies to preserue their welfare, must participate of their wealth, without which the publike peace and security can∣not be effected: for it is, Status insolidus qui earet solidis. Thirdly To contestate and acknowledge their ho∣mage and subiection to their Soueraigne: for Tributum da∣re, est imperatori subiici, & signum seruitutis, say the Ca∣nonists,
nonists, Extra: de exact: & cens. c. 5, & quaest. 8. can. Tri∣butum., to pay Tribute is to be subiect to the Emperour, and a signe of seruitude, confessing all duty and loyalty to be due, to their annointed Soueraigne, who hath power to command them, their Parte reges, par∣tem patria vendi∣cant. goods, Nehem. 9. 37 lands, & liues, for the ser∣uice of the Kings and Countries preseruation. Looke vpon the Israelites (when King Saul was dead) comming to e∣lect and annoynt Dauid in Hebron, to be King ouer Israel, 1 Chro. 11. 1 Tuitione non frui∣tione. Tributum vocant Turcae populi san∣guinem: Postel. li. 5 de reb. Turci. Behold we are thy bones and thy flesh, meaning (as I take it) that their liues and all, were at his seruice and com∣mandement: for Tribute is not onely of money, but Sudor & sanguis populi, The sweat and blood of the people, if such need require to defend their King and Countrey, is a Tribute due from them, willing and ready to aduenture their liues and limbes, to giue repulse and resistance to forraine or domesticall violence. Fourthly, To testifie their gratefull affections to their gracious Princes, in thankefulnesse for the great benefits by their prudent, prouident, and politicke gouernement, reaped and receiued. So Dauid in lamenting Sauls death, remembers the benefits his subiects receiued by him in his life time, 2 Sam. 1. 14 Ye Daughters of Israel weepe for Saul, which cloathed you in scarlet with pleasures, and hanged orna∣ments of gold vpon your apparell: So Lament. 4. 20 Ieremy of the good King Iosiah, lamenting his death, The breath of our no∣strels, the Annoynted of the Lord, was taken in their nets, of whom we said, Vnder his shadow we shall be preserued among the Heathen. A good King, brings many blessings & benefits vnto his people; and therefore when such as are in authority, be righteous, the people reioyce, saith Prou. 29. 2 Salo∣mon. 4. A King by iudgement maintaines the countrey, By a man of vnderstanding and knowledge, a Realme endu∣reth long, saith the same Pro. 28. 2 Salomon; yea, (as wise Plato well said) Beatas fore resp: cum aut Philosophentur reges; aut reg∣nent Philosophi: When as Kings were Philosophers, or Philosophers Kings, then such Common-wealths should be happy. And indeed all earthly happinesse which is de∣riued to the members, proceeds from the Head, (next vn∣der God, the primary Author of all good things) by whose
direction, discretion, circumspection, care, counsell, and continuall vigilancy, they are preserued in peace, and pros∣per in plenty: for there are sixe externall earthly helpes, ne∣cessary for the temporall prosperity of any Kingdome. 1. A King to rule. 2. A Law to iudge, 3. Pollicy to guide, 4. People to inhabite, 5. Power to defend, 6: Riches to maintaine it, and which is the Alpha and Omega of all, and aboue all, and before all, the Lord and King of all, to pros∣per and preserue all, without whose protection these must come to ruine all. Psa. 127. 1 Except the Lord keepe the City, the keeper watcheth but in vaine; Except the Lord gouerne and guide the shippe of State, it runnes vpon the rocke: Therefore Prince and people ought duly to say with the Psal. 44. 4, 5 Psalmist; Thou art our King, O God, send helpe vnto Ia∣cob, Through thee haue wee thrust backe our enemies, through thee haue wee trodden downe them that rose vp against vs, &c. Rise vp for our succour, and redeeme vs for 26. thy mercies sake. Well, Tributes, Subsidies, Taxes, &c: are a good meanes to help to support the state of Kingdomes; and as they bee the publike Tribute of the Common-wealths, so should they bee imployed about the publike tranquility. Let no Theudas herein deceiue you, or any Iu∣das of Galile (who in the dayes of the Tribute, drew away much people, as Acts 5. 37 Gamaliel speakes) delude you; for he pe∣rished, and all that obeyed him: Si quis putat non esse vecti∣gal soluendum, aut tributum aut honorem exhibendum, in magno errore labitur, saith Aug. in lib. ad Rom. proposit. 72 Austen; If any one thinke Im∣posts, Tribute, and honour, ought not to be paid to them, he falles into a great errour: Iure debemus, & nisi facimus, peccamus in iustitiae regulam, saith B: Aretij Comm. in 13. Rom. v. 7 Moses found Sub∣iects ready in this kinde, for when a volunta∣ry contribution required, they brought so much as they cried, Suf∣ficient, it is e∣nough: Exod. 36. Aretius; We owe them by right, if wee doe not pay them, wee offend against the rule of Iustice: Nay to pay them is so necessary for all, (as the same Aretius there) Nisivelint fortunis, & bonis, adeo{que} ipsa salute spoliari, Vnlesse they would be depriued of their fortunes, wealth, and welfare: Therefore pay it truly, and doe it heartily, as to the Lord, and not vnto men; not grudgingly, as if compelled by necessity, but cheerefully and voluntarily in humble testimony of your hearty fide∣lity,
loue, and loyalty. But herein may arise a question; The Cyrus Subiects in their voluntary gifts at one Sub∣sidy did exceede the long heaped treasure of rich Croesus. Fiscus Dei Caesa∣ris Fisco nihil a∣dimit. Laity ought to pay Tribute to their Soueraigne Kings, but whether the Clergy? And the chiefe pillars of Pope∣ry haue already passed their verdict, that they ought not to pay Tribute; and he that was then foreman of the grand Iury, I meane Boniface the 8, came not forth with an Igno∣ramus, but with a Definitiue Decreuimus Decreeing, that no Clergy man should pay tribute: And since a late Iury of Popish Doctors, that haue beene empannelled vpon that case, haue passed their verdicts, that Clergy men are ex∣empted, not onely from Tributes, but also from all trials, or punishments, to be inflicted by secular Courts. So Bar. in paraenesi: ad Venetos: pag. 47 Ba∣ronius in his Paraenesis to the Venetians writes, Senatum venetum contra sacerdotes vel enormissime delinquentes, nul∣lam habere iurisdictionem, quia scriptum est, Tu quis es qui in∣dic as alienum seruum? &c. The Senate of Ʋenice hath no iu∣risdiction against Priests, neuer so fouly offending, be∣cause it is written, What art thou that iudgest another mans seruant? he stands to his Master, or fals; and the Ve∣netians doing contrary, he compares to be Instar monstri, & portenti Luciferi, Like that monstrous portent of pride, Lucifer. Know ye not that we shall iudge the Angels? So Baronius; So De clerici: c. 28 Bellarmine, sing the same song, that Church∣men that are borne, and inhabite in soueraigne Princes Countries, are notwithstanding not their Subiects, and cannot be iudged by them, although they may iudge them: And againe, that the obedience, which Churchmen giue to Princes, euen in the meanest and meere temporall Ibidem. things, is not by any necessary subiection, but onely out of discretion, and for obseruation of good order and cu∣stome: These two Cardinals, like Sampson, sweate in the Philistians mill, to grinde to powder the power of Princes ouer the Clergy; thereby the more to aduance the, vsurped might of the Papall Miter. What should I record the pal∣try verdicts of others, who liue vpon Bellarmines & Baro∣nius scraps and fragments, as the Poets did vpon Homers Bason? and will wright and fight, yea —Iurare in verba Magistri,
Sweare to defend the foulest errors of their false Ora∣cles:— Quos penes arbitrium est, & ius, & norma loquendi. If Bellarmine and Baronius, the one in controuersies, the other in Histories (men indeed deep, and famous in know∣ledge, if it were sanctified) if they haue once beate their braines about any point, then the Ignatian brood, (a soci∣ety like to Liuie. Hannibals Army, gathered Ex colluuie omni∣um gentium, Of the drosse, and dregs of euery Nation, will tooth and nayle defend it; as if Chrysippus had bred them, who vsed to boast, Diog. Laert: in Chrysipp. That if once he had the opinion, he ne∣uer wanted arguments to defend it. Reade but Mariana de rege & regis instit. lib. 1 c. 10: pag. 88: or Francis. Bozius Princeps nominem ex sacrato ordine, supplicio quamuis merito, afficiat &c. Maria: ibidem. de temp. Eccl: Monar. lib. 2, c. 1, pag. 264, & 265: or to be briefe, Catechis: Iesuit, lib. 2, c. 26, pag. 235: you shall find how they concurre and conspire like Simeon and Leui, to draw the Clergy out of the yoke of obedience from secu∣lar Powers, to inthrall them to a base bondage to the Pope; & indeed it was a pollicy vsed long ago among the Popes, the better to raise the pontificall Hierarchy by de∣grees, to decree Clericall Immunities from secular Autho∣rities, as we Nullus Iudicum: 2 De foro: compet. reade in diuers places; Nullus iudicum saecu∣larium Presbyterum, Diaconum, aut Clericum vllum sine per∣missu pontificis condemnare praesumat, &c. Let no Iudge Se∣cular, presume to condemne Priest, Deacon, or Clerke, without leaue of the Bishop; if he doe, let him be seque∣stred from the Church: Donec reatum emendet; Till he hath mended his fault. C. si diligenti, 12: Eod. tit. And againe, Episcopi, Diaconi, & quili∣bet Clerici, siue in criminali siue in ciuili negotio, seculare iudi∣cium non possunt subire: Bishops, Deacons, or any Clerkes, may not vndergoe iudgement; either in any criminall, or ciuill businesse, or proceeding: And so c. 1, &c. Clericos 3. de immunit: Ec∣cl: in 6. againe, Ecclesiasti∣cis mandatur sub depositionis poena, vt laicis imperatoribus, regibus, principibus, comitibus, &c. Talias, collectas, nec sub adiutorij; mutui, aut subsidij, vel doni nomine, licet promissas soluant: It is commanded Ecclesiasticall men, vnder paine of deposition, or depriuation, that they shall not pay to Lay Emperors, Kings, Princes, or Rulers, Taxes, or Tenths,
vnder the name of helpes, lendings, subsidies, or gratuities, although promised. What a cautelous decree is this, as if it were like sacriledge to pay tribute to Kings, as Christ did; or to giue them any thing by way of gratuities, which all may doe without controule? Eugenius I, was one of the Ʋolater: Chro. first that did Potestatem gladij ciuilis rapere, Snatch into his hands the power of the ciuill Sword, for he decreed, that Episcopi haberent carcerem ad plectenda delicta clericorum; Bishoppes should haue a prison to punish the faults of Clerkes And so Hadrian the first, Ne clerici extra suum fo∣rum in iudicium traherentur; That Clerkes should not be Chron. Chron. drawne out of their owne Courts. And so Platina. Syluester, Lai∣cis clericum in ius vocare interdixit, He interdicted Laycks to call Clerkes into their Courts: So Fabian decreed, Sa∣cerdotes causam dicere & mulctari in sacro, non prophano fo∣ro debere, That Priests ought to pleade their cause, and to Sabellicus. be punished in the sacred, not prophane Courts. So Iulius the first, decreed, Ne sacerdos alibi, quam apudiudicem Ec∣clesiasticum dicat; That no Priest should pleade his cause, but before an Ecclesiasticall Iudge. And so many other Popes, Anacletus, Alexander the first, and second; Eusebius, Platine. Gregory 7, called Heldebrand, and since him, all haue right∣ly Heldebrandized, arrogating the spirituall and tempo∣rall Sword, as Boniface did, who when Krantz. Sano: pag. 225. Albert the first, sent to him to confirme his election, hee refused, saying; that he was both Emperor and Pope: and so in that pre∣sent Iubile, did shew himselfe, the first day in his Pontificall Platin. in Boni∣fac. 8. robes, and the next day in the habite of an Emperour, say∣ing; Behold, here are two swords: and euer since they haue vsed all their skill, plots, and pollicies, to claime a supre∣macy ouer Emperors, Kings, and Princes, not onely in spi∣rituall, but also in temporall matters: Reade but Page 52. Vid. Sand: de vi∣sib: Monar. li. 2 c. 4. Bozius Booke De temporali Monarch: who there labours to de∣fend, that the supreme temporall iurisdiction belongs to the Pope; so that hee is the vniuersall Monarch of all the World: and that the Emperour holds his Empire of the Church of Rome, and may be called the Popes Vicar, or Officiall, as Tract. de consil: in sin. vlt c. pag. 778. Iacobatius Writes: Agreeable to the doctrine
and propositions of Bellarmine, Bel: de pont: lib. 1. c. 7 that Kings are subiects to Popes; Lib. 3. c. 16: and haue degraded Emperors, and thereupon they challenge both swords, and striue to free themselues, and Reuel. 12. 4. Dragon-like with their taile would draw the third part of the starres from all obedience and allegiance, from the Kings of the earth, denying all suites and seruice, tributes, trials, or secular punishments to be inflicted vp∣on them, exempting all their Cleargy from temporall sub∣iection: Contrary to the Precepts and practise of the Priests and Prophets of the Law, and Christ and his Apo∣stles in the Gospell: yea contrary to the practise of the pu∣rer times, euen in the Church of Rome, when as their Bi∣shops acknowleged their seruice and fealty to Caesars, and paied them tribute. Episcopi dederunt, tributa potestatiregiae non resistentes, &c. saith Euseb: hist. ec∣clesiast. tripart. lib. 7. c. 9. Eusebius, The Bishops paid their Tributes, not resisting regall power: yea let their Vrban. pa. 23. Quaest: 8. can. Tri∣butum. Pope Vrban speake, tribute was found in the mouth of a fish, Peter fishing, Ec∣clesia tributum reddidit, then the Church paid Tribute: yea Extra de exact: & Cens. c. 2. Tributarium nummum debetis dare, quo vos indicatis obedi∣entiam vestram, You ought to pay tribute mony, by which you ought to declare your obedience. But peraduenture they will alledge King 1 Esdras 8. 23. Artaxerxes commission giuen to Esdras, in which it pleased the King to command, that no Tribute or taxe of the Priests, Leuites, holy Singers, Por∣ters, Ministers of the Temple, or workemen of the Tem∣ple should be taken, or any had power to taxe them in any thing; the answere is easie. First, this immunity procee∣ded, ex mera gratia & beneplacito, from the meere fauour and pleasure of the King, the better to incourage them in their worke at Ierusalem. Secondly, they possessed no lands, but liued by oblations and sacrifices; being herein like the Druides among the Frenchmen (who payed no Tribute) as Caesar writes; the reason was, because they had nothing, and where nothing is, the King loses his right. Thirdly, a particular fauour or example makes not a gene∣rall law: Indeed Cod. tit. de Cle∣ricis: & in alys tit: legis. Iustinian the Emperor hath granted to the Cleargy speciall priuiledges, and freed them from mi∣litary
or martiall imployments, personall officers, and from many exactions; but all this proceeds ex beneplacito, out of an Emperiall fauour, and royall grace, which all vertuous Kings beare vnto Gods Ministers, non ex praecepto, or praxi; for practise Math, 17. 27. Christ himselfe payed Tribute for himselfe and Peter; and by Math, 22. 21. precept, Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars: telling his Disciples, Math, 20. 25. The Lords of the Gentils had dominion ouer them: And S. Rom, 13: 6. 7. Paul commands euery soule to be subiect to the higher Powers, to pay Tribute, and to giue Tribute to whom they owe Tribute. To them therefore that challenge immunity from the performance of these publicke debts of tributarie duties to their Liege Lords and Kings, I may say to them as Dioclesian to the Philosopher; Thy profession differs from thy petition, thy profession teaches thee to giue Caesar his due, and not to rob him of his right. Bishop Latimer calls such theeues that rob the King of his due debt, Subsidies, Tributes, or Taxes. Rather imitate that Ambros. contra Auxen: 11. quaest: 1, Can: si tributum. Ambrose the famous Bishop of Millan, who teacheth thee a better lesson: Si tributum petit Imperator, non negamus, agri Ecclesiae soluant tributum; si agros desiderat Imperator, potestatem habet vendicando∣rum, tollat eos si libitum est; Imperatori non dono, sed non nego; If the Emperor demand Tribute, we doe not denie it, your fields of our Church shall pay tribute; If the Emperor de∣mand the fields, he hath power to challenge them, let him take them, I neither giue them nor denie them in no case, arguing obedience in ordinary, or extraordinary exa∣ctions: agreeing fully with Luther, Luth: in Math: 22, 21. If thy substance, bo∣die, or life should be taken from thee by the Magistrate, thou maist say thus, I doe willingly yeeld them vnto you, and acknowledge you for ruler ouer me, I will obey you, but whether you vse your power and authority well or ill, see you to that: For Kings must one day giue account of all their workes, to the King of Kings; and if they haue a∣bused their power by Tyrannie, crueltie, or any bad go∣uernment, an hard iudgement Wisd. 6. 5. 8. shall such haue that beare such rule, for then abides the sorer triall, as the Sonne of wisedome speakes; The power is from God, the abuse of
it from themselues, and they will finde it, when God and it cals them to reckon. The chaine of gould is not made the worse because an harlot weares it about her necke: it is Luth: in Math. 22. 21. Luthers comparison in this case; so still Kings must be obeyed, for conscience sake, if not commanding contrary to Gods commandements. Let vs in these follow the steppes of faithfull Fabricius, of whose fidelity Pyrrhus boldly speakes, Difficilius Fabricius a legalitate quam sol a suo cursu vertipossit; Let the Sunne first turne from her course, then we from the course of loyall obedience, and allegiance: alwaies remembring that Christian saying of the Martyr Ignat. epist. 2. ad Magnesianos. Ignatius, No man euer liued vnpunished, which lifted vp himselfe against his betters, superiours, his Princes; disobedience brings infamie, disgrace, death, yea hatred after death, that the sorrowfull Sonne may say of his treacherous sire, Gen. 34. 30. Ye haue troubled me, and made me stinke among the inhabitants of the land, as Iacob said of Simeon and Leui. Let vs alwaies from the bottome of 1 Prayer. our hearts, pray for the Kings safety, corporally; for his saluation spiritually, and preseruation politically. Let vs 2 Obedience. obey him because hee is the Lords annointed, appointed by God to be his vicegerent, representing the person on earth, of the King of Kings in heauen: Let vs honor him 3 Honor. not with lips onely, but with hearts truelie, because he is the Father of our Countrie, the constant Defender of the Faith, and so worthy of double honour: Let vs be ready 4 Seruice. to performe at his command our best seruice, being his na∣tiue and naturall Subiects, born and bound by Allegiance to all Christian dueties of subiection: Let vs be willing to pay Tribute, a publike purse must 5 Tribute. helpe the publicke peace, Multorum manibus grande leuatur onus. Yet let vs pay him his duty: Tribute to him, for we owe him Tribute; Custome to him, for we owe him Custome; Feare, Honor, Obedience Seruice and all other loyall ser∣uices and performances of duties belonging to good sub∣iects in their seuerall degrees and places; humbly to ten∣der them, and render them vnto our gracious and high
Soueragine Lord the King, whose Sword, Crowne, Scep∣ter, Throne and Person iustly requires all these duties: the Sword exacts obedience, Crowne commands honor, Scep∣ter seruice, Throne tribute, and Person prayer; alwaies powring forth to God this prayer and petition, God saue the King: Corporally. Spiritually. Politically. CHAP. IX. First Corporally. AND if euer Praiers needfull in this kinde, now is the time; Nolite tangere, abhorred Non solum iure, sed cū laude & gloria perimi possunt, &c Marian. de Instit: reg pag. 61. Quid interest fer∣ro, an veneno peri∣mas? Veneno∣quod fit, minori periculo, & maiori spe impunitatis. Marian: p. 65. 67. of Heathens, is now applauded and defen∣ded of false Christians. Religion and su∣perstition now comes forth with her knife, ready to cut Kings throats, it beeing the generall rule of them, Occide haereticum, Kill an hereticke, make away with him, giue him an Italian posset, poyson him though it be in the Sacrament, Stella fasicul. tempor: Naucler. Genebrand. vid: Westō lib. 3. de Tri: hom: offic. as Henry the seuenth, Emperour, poysoned in Sacramentall bread; Ʋictor the third, Pope, in the Sacramentall cup; and yet they say that Christs bloud is really in the wine, how then comes that poyson of death mixed with that sacred substance of life? The Patrons and Proctors to plead for King-killers, I meane the Iesuites with their adherents, make this for a conclusion; That any priuate man may be an executioner of a King excommunicated and deposed by the Pope: and Anno 1089. n. 12 Caesar Baronius alledges & commends out of Iuo a breue of Pope Ʋrban the second, wherein it is pronounced, that they are no homicides who kill such as are excommuni∣cate; for wee doe not iudge them to bee murtherers, who burning with the zeale of their Catholike mother, against such as are excommunicate, happen to haue killed any of them. And so Defens. fid: Cath: adu: Angl: sect. er∣ro: lib. 6. c. 4. n. 18. Suarez the Iesuite in his last booke against
our King writes, After sentence condemnatory is giuen of the King, &c. then hee that hath pronounced the sentence, or he to whom it is committed, may depriue the King of his kingdome, euen by killing him if hee cannot doe it o∣therwise; and the very Cannibals are not more thirsty of bloud then these false Catholickes, commending & com∣manding murther, the murther of Gods Anointed Kings, (which any heart, not stupified with Atheisme, or repro∣bate sence, would tremble at it) and appropriate the do∣ing of that deed onely to Papists; for so Suarez vbi supr: Suarez saith, If his lawfull successor be a Catholike, and so that hee be a Catholike that succeedes in the right, challenging the right of committing so execrable villany, to appertaine to none but onely to Romish Catholikes; disdaining that any should haue an hand in so horrible and hellish mischiefes against the King, but onely a friend and follower of the Popes religion; true-borne children of their bloudy Mo∣ther the whore of Babilon, the mother of murder, Reu. 17. 6. drun∣ken with the bloud of Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Christ Iesus. If the Pope cries against any King, with the Luke 19. 14. Citizens in that parable, Nolumus hunc regnare, Wee will not haue this man to reigne; presently pollicie, villany, mischiefe, and murder, fraud and deceit, Armata impietas: arte pellere, vt marte tollere. all shall conspire to accomplish the Popes desire: If poy∣son and policie faile, power shall reuaile: like to him when intreaty could not moue, laid his hand on his sword Conn: Julian ex hist. hisp. Diffidens clauo Pe∣tri, arripit clauā Herculis. saying, At hic faciet, but this shall doe it; if Mercurie be too weake, Mars shall second him, then leaue Apolloes harpe, and take Hercules club; both pens and pikes, heads, hearts, and hands are too nimble to hurt Kings: Sanguiuolenta est mens, Sanguinolenta manus: A bloudy heart must haue a bloudy hand. How many Princes of Christendome hath that Sea of Rome swallowed and deuoured? A Sea indeede, nay a red Sea of bloud, or Mare mortuum, wherein that Iob 41. 22. Leuia∣than makes his Sea, (as the Lord tells Iob) like a potte of oyntment: Sed mors in illa ella, Death is in the pot. Out of this Sea creepe those Crocodiles, I meane Iesuites, Semi∣naries,
and men vsually troubled with the Kings euill, Treason: These Romish rats creepe into regall Pallaces, at last take and taske their owne bane, like the spirits of De∣uils (of whom S. Iohn) Reu. 16. 14. worke myracles to goe vnto the Kings of the earth, and those whom they cannot draw by their collusion, they would deuoure by effusion. I may Hoc discunt nostri ante Alpha & Beta, Papistae. say of them as Polymnestor speakes in the Tragedie of He∣cuba, Hastifera, armata, equestris, Marti obnoxiagens, They are well weaponed people, dagges and daggers, charmes, poysons, powder, all tragicall and traiterous engines and instruments they haue to touch Gods Anointed, the Kings of the earth corporally. In olde time scarce any treason without a Priest, in our time scarce any without a Iesuite: As Iudas was the antesignanus of traytors (chiefe Captain of the cursed crue) so since him the false stiled Iesuits, but the true Iudaites, are the cheefe Shibas, to blow aloud the trumpet of rebellion. And there was a wicked man na∣med Sheba, the sonne of Bicri, a man of Iemini and hee blew the Trumpet and said, We haue no part in Dauid, nor inheritance in the sonne of Ishai. Euery man to his tents O Israel, 2 Sam. 20. 1. And there are many of Israel that follow these Shebas, but 2 Sam. 20. 2. the men of Iudah claue fast vnto their King, from Iordan euen to Ierusalem. All good sub∣iects will cleaue with the men of Iudah faithfully to their King, and will goe with Ioab to pursue these Shebas, 13. 22. vntill their heads be cut off and throwne to them ouer the wall. These Shebas make Kings the markes of their mur∣ther; saying with treacherous 2 Sam. 17. 2. Achitophel, I will smite the King onely: or with the King of Aram, 1 Kings 22. 31. Fight ney∣ther against small or great, saue onely against the King of Israel. Feriunt summos fulmina montes. The highest moun∣taines most exposed to Thunders: And to perpetrate such crying and capitall murders, they will hazard the pe∣rill of their liues, and losse of their soules: and (but Psal. 91. 11. that the Lord hath giuen his Angels a charge ouer his Anoin∣ted to keepe them in all his waies) the attempts of such de∣sperate miscreants were deadly dangerous: for as Seneca, Ʋitae tuae dominus est, quisquis suam contempsit, He is Master
of thy life, who contemnes his owne. Cato when hee had got a sword, (though therewith to kill himselfe) cried out, Now am I my owne man. So these desperate villaines who runne with desire to their owne deaths, are their owne men to act murder: but God doth bring to nought their desires and deuices, and raiseth vp for his seruants in extraordinary dangers, extraordinary deliuerances. The Herodotas. imminent danger of King Croesus, yet a Heathen King, o∣pened the mouth of his dumbe sonne to tell it. Plutarch. Bessus his parricide discouered by the chattering of Swallowes; ve∣rifying Salomons Eccl. 10. 20. wordes, The fowles of the ayre carrie that voice; God can cause euery fowle of heauen, and euery creature on earth to finde a tongue to tell treason, to deli∣uer his Anointed. Our gracious King is a speaking mappe of many wonderfull deliuerances in extraordinary dan∣gers; still we cry and craue with Dauid, Psal. 20. 9. Domine saluum fae Regem, Lord saue the King, cloath Psal. 132. 18. Psal. 2. 9. all his enemies with shame, and breake them in peeces like a Potters ves∣sell: Let thy hands O Lord, finde out all that hate him; make them like a fiery ouen in the time of thine anger, and Psalm 21. 9. destroy them in thy wrath: Deliuer his soule from the Psalm 22. 20. 21. sword, and saue him from the Lions mouthes: confound all Shebas that would stirre vp Israel against Dauid, and all Adoniahs that gape to take the kingdome from our Salomon; all like them, let them perish like them. Then will all loyall subiects reioyce when they see the venge∣ance, they shall wash their feet in the bloud of the wicked. Let our feruent prayers be daily powred forth vnto God, to defend him from all Traytors, to reueale their plots and reuenge their purposes, that they —qui volunt occidere regem, posse nolunt: That they who would kill a King, may neuer haue power to performe it: that no danger may assault him, no trea∣chery may endanger him, giue thine Angels charge O Lord to sentinell ouer him: make his chamber like the tower of Cant. 4. 4. Dauid, built for defence; a thousand shields hang therein, and all the targets of the strong men; and his bed Cant. 3. 7, 8. like Salomons, threescore strong men round about it
of the valiant men of Israel, they all handle the sword, and are expert in warre; euery one hath his sword vpon his thigh, for the feare by night, that so no enemy may op∣presse him, nor the wicked approach to hurt him; to de∣stroy his foes before his face, and plague them that hate Psal. 89. 22. 23. him; his seed long to endure, and his daies as the daies of heauen. So shall the Lord be gracious to his Seruant, and mercifull to vs his people who continually pray, God saue the King, Corporally. CHAP. X. 2. Spiritually. GOD Saue the King Spiritually, God euer keep him constant and couragious to maintaine the true profession of the Gospell, and to la∣bour to purge Gods Church of all supersti∣tion, and to plant in it Gods true religion. Our Kings owne saying, viz. This is the first duety of Kingly seruice vnto God, to cleanse his Church of all idolatry and superstition. It is the chiefe duty of King to settle first Gods seruice and Church affaires before their own. The good Kings Ezechias and Iosias, were carefull in this behalfe: Ezechiah when hee came to the Crowne of Iudah, 2 Kings 18. 4. he tooke away the high places, brake the Ima∣ges, and cut downe the groues, and brake in peeces the brazen serpent, &c. that is, rooted and raced out all Ido∣latry. So 2 Kings 23. Iosiah puts downe all Idols, and Idolatrous Priests, who defiled the Temple. So 1 Kin. 15. 12. 13. Asa tooke the wic∣ked Sodomites out of the land, and deposed Maacha his Mother, because shee had made an Idoll in a groue. So 1 Kings 6. 2. Salomon installed in his kingdome, built a Temple for seruice and worship of the Lord. It is the office of a King specially to take care to prouide, that God may be religi∣ouslie worshipped, that his 1 Sam, 12. 24. people may feare the Lord, & serue him in the trueth: for the happinesse of King and Kingdome consists in the trueth of their religion; For that nation and kingdome which will not serue the Lord shall perish and be vtterly destroyed, saith the Prophet Esay 60. 12. Esay. Est boni Principis religionem ante omnia constituere;
saith Liut: decad. 1. l. 1. Liuie, It is the part of a good King, first to establish true religion; for that is the very fountaine and foundati∣on of all felicity. Plutarch. de ciu: administr. Beneficentia quae fit in cultum Dei maxi∣ma gratia. That loue and care which is declared towards the true worship of God, is most commendable: for true religion is Cardo or Axis, the very Pillar of all prosperity, the soule of Tranquility, the totall summe of true felicity: Propter Ecclesiam in mundo, durat mundus, saith Luther, Christs Church on earth is the cause of the continuance of this earthly world: without the light of the Gospel, Kings & people liue in thraldome, in the Egypt of wofull blind∣nesse: it is but painted happinesse, a vaine flourish, nay a dangerous ship of state, where God sits not at the sterne. As all kingdomes stand luteis pedibus, vpon clay feet: so that Kingdome cannot stand at all, which wants the foun∣dation, true religion. It is the speech of an Plato lib. 4. de legibus. Heathen, but may be the lesson of a Christian, Religio vera est firmamen∣tum reip. &c. True religion the foundation of a Common wealth, and the chiefe care ought to be, to plant the same. So 1 Chr. 15. Dauid reioyces in nothing so much as in the Arke of God, desirous rather to be a dore-keeper in Gods house, then to rule in the tents of the vngodly. Like to that good Emperor, who gloried more to be membrum Ecclesiae, then caput Imperij, a member of Gods Church, then an head of a great Empire. Salomon 2 Ch. 2. 1. begins well, first in building an house for God, knowing nothing can prosper without God: Except the Psalm. 127. 1. Psalme 2. 4. 10 Lord keep the City, the watchman watch∣eth but in vaine. In vaine doe the Kings of the earth stand vp, if they assemble against the Lord, for then hee laughes them to scorne, and shall haue them in derision. Be wise now therefore 11 O ye Kings, serue the Lord in feare, be wise in Diuine mat∣ters, serue the Lord in feare; for his feare is the beginning of wisedome, to direct you to rule your selues and people in the seruice and worship of his holy name. We read it recorded of Gregor: Naziāz: orat. funebr; in laudem Athanasij. Constantinus the Emperor, that when he died, he did much lament for three things which had happened in his reigne. First, the murther of Gallus his kinsman: Secondly, the liberty of Iulian the Apostate:
Thirdly, the change and alteration of religion. And surely there cannot be a greater cause of lamentation, then an in∣nouation or alteration of religion: yea then a tolleration of a contrary religion. It had beene a hard matter to haue had obtained a tolleration of such a thing as a Masse at Moses hands with a masse of money. A godly Prince may not suffer any religion but the true religion in his Domi∣nions, and this we may proue by diuers reasons. First the exercise of a false religion is directly against the honour and glory of God. Ergo. Secondly, consent in true religi∣on is vinculum Ecclesiae, the chayne and bond of Gods Church; for Eph. 45. there is but one faith: therefore a difference and dissention in religion, is a dissolution in Gods Church; but no Prince ought to haue his hand in dissoluing Gods Church, for Kings are Esay. 49. Oportet Principem esse ante omnia Deicolam. nursing Fathers of the Church. Thirdly, it is the Princes duty to prouide for the safety of the bodies, much more for the safety of the soules of his Subiects. Now true religion is the foode, but false the bane of soules; and you know, Qui non seruat periturum, cum potest, occidit, He that doth not helpe one ready to pe∣rish, being able to helpe, kills him. Fourthly, the Reuel. 2. 14. 15. An∣gell of the Church of Pergamus is reprooued for hauing such in Pergamus as maintained the doctrine of Balaam, and the doctrine of the Nicholaitans; and the Church of Reuel. 2. 20. Thiatyra reproued for suffering Iezabel to teach and de∣ceiue. Fiftly, the Lords Iudg. 6. 25. 26. Altar and Baals Altar must not stand together: Quae concordia Dei & Belial? No agreement twixt God and Belial. Indeed the Papists haue beene very earnest to supplicate for a Tolleration for their corrupt religion, and yet themselues neuer allow it. The Pope ne∣uer afforded such fauour to Protestants, witnesse their In∣quisition: Nay De laicis, lib. 3. c. 19. &c. 21. Bellarmine doth confesse, that the Papists would not suffer any among them, Qui ostendunt vllo signo etiam externo se fauere Lutheranis, Who doe declare by any signe externall that they fauour the Lutherans; but they doe mittere illos mature in locum suum, send such quickly to their last home. Read but Lencaeus the Louayne profes∣sor c. 21. §. 2. in his booke Devnica religione, or Pamelius in his book
De diuersis religionibus non admittendis, Who both with might and maine dispute against Tollerations. It was a great commendation in the Emperour Constantino, who would not suffer Idolatry in any part of his Dominions, as Euseb. lib. 4. de vit: Const. Eusebius writes of him. And it was commendable in Amphilochius Trip: hist: l. 5. c 25 Vid. Theod: lib: 5. c. 16. a Bishop, who reproued Theodosius the Emperor, that he so long winked at Arrius, and suffered him to spread his pestilent heresie ouer the body of the Church; and it was commended in the Emperor, who was not angry with the words of iust reproofe, but forthwith banished Arrius, & gaue him some part of his iust deserts. Sozom. lib. 7. c: 12. But heerein we neede not seeke out forraine histories, wee haue examples at home, who neuer would yeeld to tolle∣rate corrupt religion. Edward the sixth, a Prince most famous and vertuous, was sollicited by Carolus the Em∣perour, Mr. Foxe in Acts & Monuments. and his owne Counsellors, to permit the Lady Mary to haue Masse in her owne house; his resolution ne∣gatiue, saying, he would spend his life, and all that he had rather then to agree and grant to that hee knew certainely to be against the truth. The late Queene Elizabeth (of blessed memory) could Dr. Abbot in his answer to the reason vi. of Dr. Hill in the latter end. neuer be perswaded to tollerate Popish Religion, who af∣ter innumerable dangers and manifold persecutions, with vnspeakeable courage, notwithstanding many difficulties at home, of Princes abroad, and of the Diuell euerwhere, professed to maintaine the truth of the Gospell, and to de∣face Idolatry and superstition, which with singular con∣stancy shee continued all the dayes of her life. And now this our great & gracious Soueraigne followes the steps of those religious Princes, not all the World can change his constant resolution in Christian Religion, his eares and hearts abhorre their charmes, who are Petitioners in this kind; for the granting of such a request, might much dis∣quiet the Christian Church, State, and Gospell. God euer keepe and blesse the King, in this his holy and spirituall perseuerance in the truth of the Gospell; make his heart like Mount Sion, neuer to be remoued: A King so constant in profession of the Gospell, and so learned and profound
in all spirituall knowledge, that he is able to confute, and conuince with sound arguments the enemies, of the Gos∣pell: and thereupon it was (as I take it) that Suarez the Ie∣suit said; That Learning did disparage the royall dignity, because the Champions of Rome see that they are not a∣ble to incounter with his Highnes matchlesse knowledge. And surely if learning grace any man, it must be more gra∣cious O faelicia antiquo∣rum tempora, in quibus ipsi impe∣ratores mundum regentes, seipsos philosophiae dede∣runt, vt de Alex∣andro, de Julio Caesare, de Ptolo∣maeo rege &c: Hug. in dicasc lib. 2. in a Monarch, a Man of Men. What made Salomon so famous and so renowned, but specially his wisdome and knowledge? Iulius Caesar, Constantine, and Charles the Great, Iustinian, Leo, Palaeologus, Cantacuzaenus, the Al∣phonsi, and many more? Naucler. Posseuin. concil. Mediol. 1. sub. Bor∣rhom: Sigismund the Emperor, commen∣ded for playing the Deacon at the Councell of Constance. Henry the eight writing for the seauen Sacraments, whose Booke subscribed with his owne hands, the Popish Priests glory to haue it in their Vatican. The Cardinall of Millan thinkes it the highest commendation he could giue the late King of Spaine, In eius regia dignitate, vt verbo complec∣tar, sacerdotalem animum licet aspicere: In his regall dignity, to comprize all in a word, wee may see his sacerdotall heart: Iuuenal. Haec opera, at{que} hae sunt generosi Principis artes. And in the sacred studies of diuine Learning, our dread Soueraigne may carry the Palme, and weare the royall Crowne, who hath deliuered to the World better Princi∣ples of Theologicall knowledge out of his Chaire of State, then the Mitered Pope did euer é Cathedra; for a King to descend to the Preacher, is a worke of piety, as Eccles. 1. 12. Salomon did, I the Preacher haue beene King in Ierusa∣lem; but for the Priest to climbe into the Kings throne, is to play the Popes part, the part of Antichrist. Our royall Soueraigne hath made it his last delight, to delight in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth hee meditate Psa. 1. 2. day and night: In which spiritual labour, hee hath so pro∣fited himselfe and others, that hee hath taken Princely paines to publish the truth of Christ; and to proclaime to the Potentates of the world the errors of Antichrist: So that all people haue cause to pray, God saue the King spiri∣tually.
That a Pro. 16. 10 diuine sentence may be in the lips of the King, and his mouth shall not transgresse in iudgement, who like the good Emperour Constantine, labours to de∣cide matters of Religion, by the true rule of Gods word: for so Theod: Hist lib 1 c. 7. Constantine commanded the Bishops to order all points by the Booke of God, which Booke he placed for the same purpose in the middest of them: And euen so speaks our dread Soueraign, In his Apology for the Oath of Alleagiance, pa. 36, line 13. whatsoeuer I find agree with the Scriptures, I will gladly imbrace; what is otherwise, I wil with their reuerēce reiect; godly & golden words. The Lord euermore blesse his body and soule spiritually, and enlarge the great Talent of his Princely wisdome, giuing him as great a measure of knowledge, as was giuen to Sa∣lomon 2 Chr. 1. 12; yea, such riches, treasures, and honours, as none had before him, or after him; and as his Maiesty hath ta∣ken manifold paines to reduce the Popish Sectaries, out of their spirituall blindnesse, that they who will not bee wakened out of their slumbers of ignorance, by the voice of so royall and religious a sheapheard, may be compelled by the Sword of Magistracy to depart out of Babylon, or out of his Dominion: But herein it becomes not me to giue counsell; rather fall to prayer, that the Lord, whose cause it is, would take the cause into his owne hand, and stirre vp the hearts and hands of all Christian Kings, to compell all people, who will not be moued by the word of Gods Ministery to come out of Babylon, might be for∣ced by the sword of Magistracy Reu. 18. 4 to depart from her, least they receiue of her plagues. Qui phreneticum ligat, & le∣thargicum excitat, ambobus molestus, ambos amat, saith Aug. Epist. 48 Au∣sten: He that bindeth a franticke man, and awakes him that hath the lethargy, loueth both, though he be greeuous to both: And as the same Father Aug contra 2. Gaudentij Epist: lib. 2, c. 17 Ad caenam tanti patris familias si sponte non vultis intrare, compelli∣mus: Aug contra 2: Gaudentij Epist. lib. 2, c. 28 in another place, Quod au∣tem vobis videtur, inuitos ad veritatem non esse cogendos, &c. Whereas you thinke, that men are not to bee compelled to the truth against their wils, ye erre, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, which maketh those willing, though they be compelled against their wils: Goe into the high wayes, and compell them to come in, saith Luke 1. 4 23
our Sauiour Christ: whereupon Saint Epist: 204. Austen saith; Qui compellitur, quô non vult, cogitur, sed cum intrauerit, iam vo∣lons pascitur, He that is compelled, is compelled against his will to enter; but when he is entred, he is fed willingly. The Lord for his mercy sake by the power of his word, draw all Christs flocke to vnity in Religion, and giue to all Kings faithfull hearts, to fauour and follow the same; and specially, O Lord, blesse from Heauen, thy deare ser∣uant, our dread Soueraigne: giue him all graces and gifts sutable for his Princely calling, knit his heart vnto thee, that he may euer feare thy name; and let all them that loue the Gospell of Iesus Christ, night and day pray; God saue the King, Spiritually. CHAP. XI. Thirdly, God saue the King Politically. AND to induce all loyall subiects to this acceptable and dutifull seruice, many cau∣ses concurre both diuine and ciuill, (wher∣soeuer we turne our thoughts) which may englad our hearts, and moue them to burne in affectionate flames, in the oblati∣on of this deuotion. For vnder him we leade a peaceable and a quiet life, free from forraine feares, or domesticall troubles; that we may say by his gracious gouernement, in our Lard; Mercy and Truth haue met together, Righte∣ousnesse and Peace haue kissed each other: And againe with the Psal. 43. 6, 7 Caesariae domus to∣tum relege & re∣uolue progressum, & inuenies quod breui perijt memo∣a corum, quoniam a se scientiam Do∣mini repulerunt, & ipsi repulsi sunt. Chryso. Psalmist, The Scepter of thy Kingdome is a Scepter of righteousnesse; thou louest righteousnesse, and hatest iniquitie; wherefore God, euen thy God hath an∣nointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse aboue thy fel∣lowes. We haue and heare peaceably and plentifully the welcome tidings of the Gospell, (the voyce of the Turtle
is heard in our Land) enioying a setled peace among our selues, and with other Nations, hauing trafficke and com∣merce with them; a soueraigne benefit to inrich these Realms. The admirable peace, plenty, and prosperity, by a Christian, and politicall gouernement his Highnesse Peo∣ple doe enioy, hath made other Nations enuie our felicity: The French haue sworn, that this Land (in respect of peace and plenty long continued) was the Land of Promise, and their Kings hitherto haue had Moses punishment, to stand vpon their Towers, (as Deut. 34. 1 he vpon Mount Nebo) to see the clifts of this Canaan, but not permitted to enter; that we see that verified, which Salomon long agoe deliuered, Pro. 29. 4 A King by iudgement, maintaines the Country: or with wis∣dome Wis. 6. 24 her selfe; A wise King is the stay of the People: or to speake of our Soueraigne in the words of the Prince∣ly Psa. 79. 70. 72 Prophet, The Lord chose Dauid his seruant, &c: to feed his People in Iacob, and his inheritance in Israel; so hee fed them according to the simplicity of his heart, and guided them by the discretion of his hands. So that wee find the saying of In 2 part, c. 49, In fine: de victo: Carolo. Cominaeus true, Foelix resp: in qua qui imperat, timet Deum; That is an happy Common-wealth, in the which the King feares God; or with Eccles. 10. 17 Salomon: Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the sonne of Nobles, and much more of noble vertues. How happy was the Throne of Gouernement, how successefully Religion pro∣pagated, when vertue honouring Constantine was inthro∣ned. The like in other Christian Emperours: then Iustice was exalted, vertue rewarded, piety inlarged, vice punish∣ed, superstition discouraged. Of all temporall blessings, none more incomparable, then to be blest with a good and godly King. Woe to thee O Land, when thy King is a Child, saith Eccles. 18. 16 Salomon, vnable and vnapt for that high fun∣ction, the Art of Arts, and Office of God; farre more intri∣cate and difficult then any other kind of ministration on Earth: But thankes be giuen vnto God, who hath giuen vnto vs a pious, prudent, and peaceable King, experienced Rex reip: gerendae gnarus artifex. in the regall Art, yea, learned in all good Arts, indowed with iudgement, prowesse, wisdome, bounty, iustice, tem∣perance,
clemency, and compassion, who may truly say with the Orator; Natura me clementem fecit, resp: seuerum Remissius imperan∣ti melius paretur: Seneca. Benigni Principis est, ad clementiae commodum transi∣lire terminos aequi∣tatum, cum sola est miserecordia, cui omnes virtutes, honorabiliter ce∣dere non recusent: Cass. postulat, sed nec natura, nec resp. crudelem efficiet, Nature frames him merciful, the Common-wealth requires seuere, yet neither nature or Common-wealth can make him cru∣ell, that I may apply that to his praise which the Poet ap∣propriated to Caesar. Ouid: de pont. Eleg. 3. Est piger ad poenas, Princeps ad praemia velox, Qui{que} dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox: A Prince to punish slow, yet swift to giue; And when he must be cruell, much doth grieue. Yet he keepes a golden meane in the mixture of Mercy and Iustice, that his Tribunall is not like to Cassius Tribu∣nall, Reorum Scopulus; Neither a Rocke, or refuge to the Meliores quos di∣rigit amor, plures quos corripit ti∣mor; Claudian. guilty Malefactors, but spares some in mercy, and for ex∣ample cuts off others in Iustice—Truncatur & artus, vt liceat reliquis securé viuere membris. And which is great praise in a Prince, and powerfull to doe much good in the politicke body, is the edification of his Maiesties exam∣plar life, acknowledged by his owne enemies the In a supplicati∣on for a tollera∣tion in the be∣ginning. Papists, and forcible to moue his subiects to imitation; for the peo∣ple, like Labans sheepe, conceiue by the eye, and are obser∣uant of Princes vertues or vices, and as In consul. 4, Ho∣no: Panegy. Claudian to the Emperour Honorius; Vt te totius medio telluris in orbe Viuere cognoscas, cunctis tua gentibus esse fact a palam:— They act their Princely part vpon the open Theater of the world; and oftentimes taxed by the secret censures of malapert and malignant spirits, when they are free from any faulty reprehension; as Cymon Plutar. in prae∣cept. reip: gerend. Tanto conspectius in se crimen habet, quanto maior qui peccat, habetur: Iu∣uenal Satyr 8. Vt in corporibus, sic in imperio gra∣uissimus est mor∣bus, qui à capite diffunditur. Sene∣ca. at Athens taxed that he dranke wine; Romans find fault with Scipio for his sleepe, with Pompey for scratching of his head: And in∣deed deminitiue faults in Princes are counted superlatiue, because of the publike example; for sinne is made worse three wayes: 1. Ratione loci, 2. Ratione Temporis: 3. Ratione personae: In respect of place, time, and person, which com∣mits it. In sayling (saith Agapetus) the error of an old ordi∣nary
shipman causeth little detriment, but the error of the Steers-man or Pylot hazards the whole voyage: So the e∣uill examples of great persons draw multitudes, and their errours cause terrours, and troubles to the Common-wealth: Quic quid delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui. Yet euer was there such a flattery of the Regall Scepter, that sometimes vices passed for vertues, and few there be that dare with that bold Aug. de ciuit: Dei, cap. 4, lib. 4 Pirate, tell Alexander, because I doe it in a Fly-boate, I am called a Pirate; thou doest the like in a great Nauy, and called an Emperour. But herein, (let our enemies be iudges) that our Soueraigne may tru∣ly say with Leonidas; Nisi te fuissem melior, non essem Rex, As farre aboue all in vertue, as he is aboue them in place: for Pueri, Rex eris, a∣iunt si recte facias, &c. Hora & Guicciard: lib. 16 though Popes vsually are praised for their goodnes, when they surpasse not the wickednesse of other men, as the Hi∣storian tels vs; yet our gracious King may in the integrity of his vpright life, boldly and truly say with good and iust Samuel, 1 Sam. 12. 3 Behold here I am, beare record of me before the Lord, and before his Annointed, whose Oxe haue I taken? or whose Asse haue I taken? or whom haue I done wrong to? or whom haue I hurt? &c. And all the People of Britan∣ny must answere with the people of Israel there; Thou hast 4 done vs no wrong, nor hurt vs, nor taken ought of any mans hand; the Lord is witnesse. His Highnesse speciall Summum in regi∣bios bonum est iu∣stitiam colere, ac sua vnicui{que} iura seruare. Gregor. care and gracious desire is, to haue Gods Religion sincere∣ly imbraced, Iustice executed, Vertue promoted, Vice pu∣nished, Gods Lawes, and the good Lawes of the Land ge∣nerally maintained, and obserued: so that the Church finds him a true Defender of the Faith, the Common-wealth a Talis Rex, qualis esse deberet. Father, the proud a powerfull Prince, the meeke and hum∣ble, a mercifull Gouernour: All find him a most religious and vertuous King, carefull of the good of Church and Common-wealth, that all the politicke members of this Princely Head, may 1 Tim 2. 2 leade a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and honesty. These Princely properties and sa∣cred graces, will procure his Maiesty an eternall Crowne of glory in Heauen, as God hath promoted him to a soue∣raignety
and supremacy here on Earth; and may truely moue all sound members of this politicke body, whereof his sacred Highnesse is supreame Head, to pray with the Psa. 72. 1 2 7 Psalmist; Giue thy Iudgements to the King, O Lord, and thy righteousnesse vnto the Kings sonne; then shall he iudge the people with righteousnesse, and thy poore with equity: In his dayes shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace shall be so long as the Moone endu∣reth; yea, to pray like the Isralites Baruck. 1. 11. for the life of our King, and the life of his royall Queene, his Princely Sonne, the County Palatine of Rhene, with the Princesse Elizabeth, and their Progeny, that all their dayes may be vpon the Earth as the dayes of Heauen, and that God would giue 12 vs strength, and lighten our eyes, that we may liue vnder their shadow, and may long doe them seruice, and find fa∣uor in their sight: That God would confound all their ene∣mies, and put them to a perpetuall shame: That the Lord of Hosts may be euer with them, and the God of Iacob may be their Refuge, to protect and direct them, to Psa. 64. 2 hide them from the conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of the workers of iniquity; that God may euer blesse them, and preserue their going out and comming in, from henceforth and for euermore. So we thy people, and sheep Psa. 79. 13 of thy Pasture (the louing and loyall subiects and seruants of the Lords Annointed,) will praise thee for euer, and pray vnto thee from generation to generation; God saue our King Corporally, Spiritually, Politically. Peroratio. I will draw these lines to the maine Center of all, ma∣king our conclusion short and gratulatory: First to your Grace (sacred Soueraigne) the mighty Monarch of these 1 To the Kings Maiesty. flourishing Kingdomes; shall I that am Gen. 18. 27 32. but dust and ashes prefume to speake vnto my Lord and King? Let not my Lord be angry though I speake once: and how happy shall this poore Embrio be, if euer it be graced with the milde aspect of your Princely eyes, and once but touched Si libet exiguis re∣bus adesse Ioui? with your Regall hands, which holds the Iacob. staffe, to
measure the height of all learning. Giue patient leaue and licence to your vnworthy and vnable vassall, prostrated in all submissiue obedience at your Highnesse feete, to cele∣brate and congratulate the happy day of your Maiesties entrance into this kingdome: A 2 Kings 7. 9. day of good tidings, and who can hold his peace? A day which was the begin∣ning to multiply and aduance our chiefest ioyes on earth, making vs sing with the Psal. 118. 24. Psalmist, This is the day which the Lord hath made, let vs be glad and reioyce in it. O Lord I pray thee saue now, Lord preserue him whom thou hast giuen: 25. giue him (O King of Kings) good successe, peace & pros∣perity, multiply these good daies, grant him many of these happy yeares, Annos vt annis addat è nostris Deus. Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea thought himselfe much honoured, that he was appointed to preach at the inaugu∣ration of Constantinus the Emperour: so I take it as my great ioy, that I (the most weake of all our tribe) am one of the first in this kinde to write the aniuersary of Englands happinesse by your Maiesties entrance, to put them in a perpetuall remembrance, to reioyce with thankefulnesse. And if I should remember in your presence the innumera∣ble benefits and blessings your subiects of great Brittaine enioy by your Princely comming to this Crowne, I might be iudged a flatterer (a creature most odious in your Gra∣ces eyes,) modesty compels me to be silent. I will onely say that which I haue read the Painter Zeuxes did, who being to make the portraiture of Iuno, chose out certaine amia∣ble Virgins, & put the seuerall beauty of them all into that picture: so indeed the wise Creator of all, hath made you such a King, the liuing picture of all earthly perfections; and as it was an old saying, That in one Austen there was many Doctors, in one Iulius Caesar many Captaines; so in one and our King Iames, many Kings, the very perfection of most Kings. But I will turne our praises into prayers; remembring Antaloides saying to a certaine Orator making a long ora∣tion of Hercules praises, cut him off thus, Quis eum vn∣quam
sanus vituperauerit? VVho euer in his right wits dis∣commended him? So, who dare, nay who can, (except the seed of the serpent) dispraise your Highnesse, whose vertues finde fauour with God and men? euery tongue pronounces your name with ioy, and euery heart affects your Maiesty with content and comfort. As God hath gi∣uen you power in hand, so haue you pittie in heart, Cle∣mentia Regis est quasi imber serotinus, saith Prou. 15. 16. Regis Clementia virtus, claudian. Salomon, The pitty or fauour of a King is like the latter raine; and your princely delight is not in sono catenarum, in the noyse of chaines, but like the good Emperor, Theodosius: malū est delectari in so∣no catenarum: Seneca. rather desirous to call the dead to lise, then put the liuing to death. So that I may say to your Grace as Mecaenas saide of Octauius Cae∣sar, Omnes te tanquam parentem & seruatorem suum intuen∣tur, te moderatum, vita inculpata, & pacificum amant, &c. All people fixe their dutifull eyes vpon you, as vpon the publike Father of the Common-wealth, loyally louing you, being milde and mercifull, holy in life, and peacea∣ble in gouernment. So that though at last, there must be a translation to an Pallida mors aequo pede pulsat paupe∣rum tabernas re∣gum{que} turres. incorruptible Crowne in Heauen, yet all your Subiects pray the time of that transmigration may bee long de∣deferred. Horac: Serus in coelum redeas, diu{que}, Laetus intersis populo Britanno. I need not heere play the part of King Philips Page to cry at your Princely chamber dore, Memento te esse morta∣lem, Mors sceptra ligo∣nibus aequat, nilme potentum sceptra minacium possunt verendo flectere: Crinitus. Remember you are mortall: or with the Artificers of the Emperors tombes, at the day of the Emperors Coro∣nation, offer a lap full of stones, with these verses: Elige ab his Saxis, ex quo (Augustissime Caesar) ipse tibi tumulum, me fabricare velis. Of these same stones (most mighty Caesar) take, Of which I may thy tombe begin to make. Your Highnes needs not these aduertisements, the me∣morie whereof presage our lamentations; though it shall bring you in present possession of perpetual glorification, who liue, and labour to passe off this worlds Kingly Thea∣ter
with that approbation, Luke 19. 17. bene, fidelis serue, Well done, faithfull seruant, enter into thy Masters ioy. Our hearty and humble prayers shall euer be powred foorth to the King of Kings, from the bottome of our soules, that your Highnesse may still reigne many happie yeares on earth, in prosperous health, Kingly honour, and all happinesse, and may oft renew and reuiue our hearts with these annuall ioyes; and when the last period comes, that God may make you as glorious a Saint in Heauen, as you are a great, gracious, high, and happy King on earth: and leaue behinde you the succession of your loynes, to sit vpon the Throne to the worlds end; and all your faithfull seruants and subiects will ioyne with mee in this prayer, and say Amen, Amen. Next to your Honors (most graue and wise Senators.) 2. To the most honorable Lords of the priuie Counsell. Plutark. in epist. ad Traianum. the politicke Statists of the land, who represent Romanos rerum dominos gentem{que} Togatam; The most honourable Counsell to the royall head, whom for fidelity I may compare to the heart of England: to you by right of office, place, and charge, this faithfull seruice principally appertaines to procure and pray for the Kings safety, who is (as it was said of Iudith 15. 9. Iudith) the exaltation of Ierusalem, the great glory of Israel, the great reioycing of our Nation: That hee may enioy many Alcion daies, and reigne many golden yeares in safety and securitie: Virg: Aurea securi quis nescit saecula regis? It is your noble taske carefully to consult in the preuenti∣on of publicke mischiefes: and though wee may now say with Agamemnon, Seneca in Aga∣mem. Act. 4. Malum dum non videtur, non ti∣metur: Ʋictor timere quid potest? What need the Conqueror feare? yet Cassandra will tell vs, Quod non timet, feare that you doe not feare: feare procures precau∣tion, precaution preuention; feare the plots and proiects of the Numb▪ 13. 34. sonnes of Anak, the Popes Giants, traiterous Iesuites, of whom I may say as Ammianus Histor. lib. 14. Marcellinus writes of the Saracens: Nec amici nobis vnquam, nec hostes optandi: si amici, perfidi, si hostes, foedifragi; VVee need not to wish them to be our friends, or foes: if friends, they will proue treacherous, if foes, perfidious. Circumspect pre∣caution
is the life of pollicy: for stultum est, cum sit is fauces tenet, puteū fodere; for that is like the Phrygians, sero sapere, to be wise too late. But why doe I like an vnexpert Phor∣mio, dispute of warres in Hannibals presence? you are the Nestors of this kingdome, wise as Math. 10. 16. Serpents, but inno∣cent as Doues; be careful to take the Cant. 2. 15. Foxes which would destroy our Vine. Faber cadit cum ferias fullonem, neyther state nor statute free, till the Realme be freed of them; be∣ing like Nouatus, whom S. Cypr: epist: 8. l. 2. Cyprian describes in these co∣lours, Saepe blandus, vt fallat, aliquādo saevus, vt terreat; sem∣per curiosus, vt prodat, nunquam fidelis vt diligat, Alwaies flattering, to deceiue; sometimes cruell to terrifie; alwaies curious and cunning to betray, neuer faithfull to loue. But your Honours know best how to preuent the mis∣chiefes of such miscreants who desire the ruine of King and Country, for you can best tell how to doe it: Propert: lib. 2. Nauita de ventis, de tauris narret arator, enumeret miles vulnera, pastor oues. I will not meddle with your high affaires; rather fol∣low mine owne duety, fall to prayers for you, that God may euer be present and president at your Counsels, gi∣uing you the spirit of counsell, and of courage, wisely to foresee, and happily to preuent all misfortunes and mise∣ries intended against our King and Country, and that our 1 King. 4. 25. Iudah and Israel may dwell without feare, euery man vn∣der his vine and figtree, from Dan euen to Beersheba al the daies of our Salomon: That God would still multiply these happy yeares, and grant that our high and princely Cedar, with all the faire & goodly branches may long flourish in this land; and that all his subiects high and low, may safe∣lie shelter vnder the shadow of his gracious gouernment; blessing your Honors, the very supporters of the state, the pillars of the land, with grace and wisedome from aboue: to prosper your Counsels, and euer direct you to con∣sult for the glory of God, the good of the King, the com∣fort and welfare of Church and Common-weale. To you also the bright stars of Court, blest with the dai∣lie 3 To the Court. beames and influences of the Regall Sunne, who like
orient Pearles, serue to adorue the golden Diadem; to you I may fitly tender these present meditations, who no doubt dailie doe meditate vpon this Theame, to say and pray, God saue the King. You faire flowers of honor, who flourish in the courtly Canaan, a place which flowes with plenty and pleasure, the Mund{us} iste bland{us} periculosior est, quam molestus, & magis cauendus, cū se illicit diligi quā cum admonet, co∣git{que} cōtemni: saith Austin, pointing at the Court. epist. 144. very garden of delight, (where the Bee gathers hony, and the spider poyson) where you may reape all earthly plea∣sures, which are like Ionas Gourd, content a while, but not continue; your eies behold the subiect of our prayers, the ornament of our land. Nay I may say with the Poet, Hor. lib. 4. od. 14. & od. 2. O quâ Sol habitabiles Illustrat oras, maxime Principum, Quo nil maius, meliusue terris Fata denavere, boni{que} diui Nec dabunt, quamuis redeant in aurum Tempora priscum: Vpon no shoares the Sunne doth shine, Blest with a King more diuine. The fire of your feruent prayers for the welfare of the King should perpetually flame at the high Altar of deepe deuotion, being graced with all kingly fauours, and ad∣uanced with honour and rewards; if you should proue dis∣loyall or vndutifull to the King, hee might rightly vse the Prouerbe, Mercedes locat in pertusum sacculum, Put his re∣wards in a broken bagge, and might iustly frowne on you (and his Prou. 19. 12. wrath like the roaring of a Lion) and euen strike you dead with a Quos ego? If you desire the Kings fauour, which is the way to honor, be faithfull and loyall: This raised Mordecai Ester. 6. 8. 11. Ester. 10. 2. 3. to ride on the Kings horse in royall ap∣parell, a Crowne of gold on his head, &c. and to be eter∣nized with the eternall Crowne of truth. It raised Gen. 41. 43. Ioseph to ride in the second Chariot of Egypt: Dan. 5. 29. Daniel to be clothed in purple, and a chaine of gold about his necke. Look vpon 1 Kings 2. 7. King Dauids gratuitie for Barzillays loyalty, who commanded Salomon on his death bed to let the sons of Barzillai to eate at his table: This is the onely way to
winne the Kings fauour, which if you lose, you are but falling starres, your Fame obscured, your Names contem∣ned. Macro salutes Vide hist. Dion. lib. 58. & Xiphilin. in vita Tiberij. Seianus no longer then he is in Tibe∣rius fauour: Actum est, ilicet, peristi. But your faithfull seruice to your Soueraigne will be commendable to God and men, seruing in soule the King of heauen, and seruing Caelopraefertur Adonis. loyally the King on earth, not to prefer earth before hea∣uen, to say with some, Mart. lib. 9. Seeke others for to feast with Iupiter aboue, I heere on earth my Iupiter will loue. But Math 6. 33. first seeke the kingdome of God, and his righteous∣nesse and this wil teach you to serue your King with faith∣fulnesse, and to pray for his preseruation in all humble and harty diligence and obedience, saying, God saue the King. Also to your Honors (right noble Peeres) this taske be∣longeth, 4. To the Nobility of the Land. alwaies to pray, God saue the King: being noble by birth or place, this will ennoble your persons more, if you say faithfully as Iudith did to Bagoas concerning Holofer∣nes feignedly, Iudith 12. 14. Who am I that I should gaine say my Lord? surely whatsoeuer pleaseth him I will doe speedily, and it shall be my ioy vnto the day of my death; then your names and fames shall euer stand registred in the Chronicle of honor, free from the blacke Characters of disloyall infa∣mie. And though Fortunes image be made of glasse, brittle and mutable, yet your honourable Fama post fata superstes. memoriall shall neuer perish; Death, which is the true Herald of Armes, blazo∣ning mans pedegree to be but genus lutulentum, a picture of dust, be he a Prince in his pallace, or a begger vnder a bush, yet Iob. 17. 14. corruption is their Father, and the wormes their mother and sister. Their good workes Apoc. 14. 13. following them, but their Psalm 49. 17. pompe left behinde them; onely their sanctitie to God, and seruice to their King and Countrie shal make them glorious in heauen, and famous on earth: Posteritie will hold them worthy of honor, and desire to reserue a Catalogue of their names, and will say, These were the Noble men that loued their God, their King, and Coun∣trie, Prou. 31. 29. Many haue done vertuously, but these surmounted them all.
Archidamus told King Philip after his victory at Che∣ron, Rhodig. lib. 8. cap. 26. that if he should measure his shadow, he should not find it an haires breadth bigger, or longer then before; so let no vaine-glory fill you with empty wind, it cannot make your shadowes bigger or longer: glory more in your owne vertuous actions, then in your renowned Ancestors, Virtute decet, non Sanguine niti. Claud. for though some doe boast to be, A loue tertius Aiax, yet, —Quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voca: Ouid. It is the honour of a noble man, when he doth excell in Ego meis maiori∣bus virtute prae∣luxi. Cicero. vertue his forepassed Ancestors, when he is religious, to feare God, and to honour the King; saying of his Soue∣raigne, as Gen. 27. 29. Isaac said to Iacob; Cursed be he that curseth thee, and blessed be hee that blesseth thee; and wishing with the Gal. 5. 12. Apostle, would to God they were cut off which doe disquiet him: alwayes loyall to his Soueraigne, and lo∣uing to his Countrey, willing to aduenture in their seruice his limbes, or life, euer wishing and praying; God saue the King, and Countrey. Likewise to your Fatherhoods (most right and reue∣rend 5 To the Clergy. Fathers) the Heads and louing Brethren of the Tribe of Leui,) whose place and office bind you in all duty to be loyall to the royall Tribe of Iudah; to you I may without offence proffer this poore present, who spend your spirits at Gods Altar, to offer a morning and an euening incense of seruent prayers, for the preseruation of Gods Annoin∣ted, exhorting with 1 Tim. 2. 1. 2. Paul, that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giuing of thankes, be made for Kings, and for all that be in authority. And indeed, before all, and aboue all, we of the Church, (the vitall spirits of the politicke body) haue manifold motiues to pray for our Soueraigne, who vnto vs, against Ad eius vexillum Ecclesia conuolat. the tempest of these times, is a refuge, an hiding place from the wind, and as the shadow of a great rocke, as it was said of King Esay 32. 2. Ezechiah; His Maiesty is a Defender of the Church, as he is a Defender of the Faith; and against the 2 Tim. 4. 14. Atheists and Alexanders of these dayes, that would doe vs much wrong, he stands to pleade our cause, to grace
our calling, that we may say with the Poet; unen. Sat. 6. Et spes, & ratio, studiorum in Caesare tantum, Solus enim tristes hac tēpestate camaen as—respexit: Though the Church be made blacke, blacke by custo∣mary contempt, and continuall oppression and persecu∣tion, Cant. 1. 4. yet the King kisseth her with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. . 1. 3 and his loue is better then wine; we will reioyce, and be glad in thee, we will remember thy loue more then wine, the righteous doe loue thee. And herein (if we may boast in any thing,) we may boast in this, That our Church was neuer the Author of Treason: (The Mother of Soules should not be the murderer of Kings) members inclined to rebellion, were neuer well possessed of Religion; As we haue hitherto beene faithfull, obedient, and loyall, so still euer be: from the Church Sit procul omne nefas. Let the mother of blood and treason, still dwell vnder the roofe of Romish Babylon, the Reu. 17. 5. 6. Oh ignominia, si es∣set domus Domi∣ni! mother of whoredomes and of these abhominations, drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Iesus Christ; which cloake these murders and massacres, vnder the mantle of Religion; like the Rulers of Ephesus, distressed with a ter∣rible battery in that Seige her Gouernours tied with ropes Poliaen. the wals and gates to Dianas Temple, that so being conse∣crated to the Goddesse, that enemy should assault them at his perill: Euen so the Popish pollicy is, to tie euery thing to the Temple, Conspiracies, Murders, Treasons, all tied In nomine domini incipit omne ma∣lum. to the Church, cloaked vnder a colour of Religion, that I may say with their owne Leo. Epist. 8. 9. Leo, Ecclesiae nomine armantur, & contra ecclesiam dimieant, They arme themselues with the name of the Church, to fight against the Church, and to destroy the pillars of the Church: Hi Christum simulant, sed Sathanalia vivunt. Well, let our preaching and praying tend to this end, Aut pareas, Aut pereas. to giue Caesar obedience, to feare God, and to honour the King; knowing that all must submit to the Higher Pow∣ers, for Rom. 13. 5. conscience sake, and for the 1 Pet. 2. 13. Lords sake: and they that will not doe it, they are none of Gods Clergy, none of the Heritage of the Lord: They haue neither conscience
nor calling; like to certaine Bishops in Ambros. lib. de pastore. Ambrose dayes, of whom he writes, Quod dedit cum episcopus ordinaretur, au∣rum fuit, quod perdidit, anima fuit, cum alium ordinaret, pecu∣nia fuit, quod dedit, lepra fuit: That which he gaue when he was made a Bishop, was gold; what he lost, was his soule; when he made another, it was for money; what he gaue, was a leprosie. But these Bishops liue beyond the Alpes, I hope there is none in Albion. It is our comfort and our Crowne, that our calling and conscience is such, which burnes in zeale and duty to God, and loyall obedience to our graciour Soueraigne; Morning and euening, at noone and at night, at bed and boord, praying; God saue the Church, God saue the King: To you the wise and worthy Iudges of the Land, who 6 To the graue & reuerend Iudges. are the eyes and eares of this politicke Body, who well know Scita patrum, leges, & iura, fidem{que}, deos{que}: To you I may dedicate and appropriate these our la∣bours, whose places and paines serue to this purpose, to serue the King and Countrey, and to helpe to preserue the welfare of the King and Kingdome: Your publike paines and priuate prayers speake to the World these words; God saue the King. You are sworne to this seruice, and sweat in it; neuer more Malefactors in this kind, and as Paul tels 2 Tim. 3. 1. 4. Timothy, In the last dayes shall come perillous times, for men shall be Traytors, heady, high-minded, &c. You know the Nilus, where these Crocodils are bred and fed; vse all good diligence to catch them, spread your nets, not Vulpina retia, Foxes nets; but Regni retia, The Lawes of the Land: if you can take them, you shall doe God, and the King good seruices. Spare none of this kind, who dare Nulla maior causa mali, quam licentia mali. lift vp their hand against the Lords Annointed, for they are worthy to die; Bonis nocet, qui malis parcit, He hurts the good, which spares the bad; yea, in all your loyall and le∣gall seruice, let neither feare, or fauour, flattery, or bribe∣ry, blind your eyes, or deafe your eares, remembring that you exercise not the 2 Chro. 19. 6. iudgement of man, but of God; and thinke vpon this verse in your Iudgement seate,
Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conseruat, honorat; Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, iura, bonos. Farre bee that leprosie from the Iudges of our Land, which so corrupted them in Cic. in Verr. 1. Act. Non terminantur negotia, donec eua∣cuata sunt marsu∣pia. Innoc. de vita hu∣ma: conditi. Ciceros dayes, that he could say; His iudicijs quae nunc sunt, pecuniosum hominem non posse damnari: In these iudgements which are now, a monied man cannot be condemned. But bribery foules not your hands, who to corrupting Simons say with Acts 8. 20. Si Niceas non sit reus, dimitte homi∣nem, si reus, mihi dimitte. Cambyses Sysamnem iniqū Iudicem excoriari fecit, in terrorem aliorum. Gratior Deo est ni∣mia miserecordiae, quam nimia seue∣ritas. Dum parcebatur lupo, mactabatur grex Christi. Symon Peter, Thy money perish with thee. Neither let any of Agesi∣laus letters moue you, who writ to a Iudge for his fauou∣rite in this stile, Si causa bona, pro iustitia, sin mala, pro ami∣citia absolue; If his cause be good, dismisse him for Iustice sake; if bad, for friendship sake. Let Iustice be vnpartially executed, yet tempered with lawfull pitty; thinke vpon that Christian caueat, Duo sunt nomina, peccator, & homo, quod peccator, corripe, quod homo, miserere: These are two names, an offender, & a man; as an offender, punish him, as a man pitty him; be not too seuere with Draco, Ne superet medicina modum, Least the medicine exceed the malady: nor too remisse with lenity; for that is a kind of cruelty, Tam omnibus ignoscere crudelitas, quam nulli, saith Sen. de clem. lib. 1. c. 2. Quosdam necare clementia, & quos∣dam seruare, cru∣delitas est. Seneca, To pardon all is cruelty, as well as to pardon none. But, Sus mineruam, You know best to keepe the meane, and—Medium tenuere beati: So shall you performe lauda∣ble seruice to God, King, and Countrey, if you execute Iu∣stice, punish disobedience, which is the falling sicknesse of a corrupt Common-wealth; Command all to giue * Caesar his due, represse all his enemies by force of lawes, and cut them off with the Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trabatur. Ouid. sword of Iustice, that their exemplary punishments may terrifie all others from such attempts, and bee like monitors and remembrancers to all people, crying; Discite iustitiam moniti, & non temnere diuos: Virg. Paena ad vnum, est terror ad omnes: malefici non pere∣unt, vt pereant, Sed vt pereundo, alios deterreant. Seneca. Let others harmes admonish thee, and learn not to despise these supreame powers, for which offence, so many Tray∣tors dies. Seauenthly, to the Common-wealth. Last of all to you, the inferior, yet sound members of
the supreame Head, the natiue and nationall children of our common Mother, whom I may fitly compare to the hands and legges of this politicke body, to fight and stand strongly for the defence and welfare of our King and Kingdome: To you I hope this little Booke will be wel∣come, and therefore say to you, as the Reu. 10. 9. Angell said to Iohn; Take this little Booke and eate it; and if you be good Subiects, it will be sweet in your mouthes, and not bitter in your bellies: for you cannot be true Christians, vnlesse you be true Caesarians, there is no true Religion in that heart, which entertaines a motion to rebellion; it is a rot∣ten member that will not be obedient to the regall Maie∣stie. And consider with your selues the happy bles∣sings you enioy by the mercifull prouidence of God, in giuing to this Realme so godly and gracious a Soueraigne to reigne ouer you; and it will make you cry forth with the Psa. 3. 8. Psalmist, Saluation belongeth vnto the Lord, and his blessing is vpon the people: O Lord, how fauourable hast thou beene vnto our Land, in placing ouer vs so religious and renowned a King, so absolute and compleate a Prince in wisdome, learning, and religion! and it will stirre vp all thankefull hearts to say with the Psa. 67. 3. Psalmist; Let the people praise thee O God, yea, let all the people praise thee: Psal. 47. 6. 4 Sing prayses to God, sing prayses, sing prayses vnto our King; for hee hath chosen our inheritance for vs, euen the glory of Iacob, whom he loued. If we be not truly thankefull for so great benefits, it may be truly verified of vs, which was said of Numb. 13. Canaan, Bona terra, sed gens mala, A good Land, but in it there be bad people. O vnthankefull and vngratefull Britaines, if euer you forget so great blessings, Vae vobis propter ingratitudinem, Woe be vnto you for your Ʋae aetati nostrae propter ingratitu∣dinem, &c. Ber. ingratitude: Ingrata patria, Vngratefull Countrey, it is an infamous name, odious to nature and Nations. Gratiarum actio, est ad plus dandum inuitatio, Giuing of God thankes for fauours receiued, is a kind of supplication and inuitati∣on to obtaine more. The Anatomists tell vs that euery crea∣ture hath foure muscles about the eyes, but a man fiue; foure serue to turne about the eyes, the fifth serues to lift
vp the eye, and looke vpward to Heauen. Man should not with other brutish creatures looke altogether vpon the Prona{que} cū spectant animalia caetera terram, Os homini sublime dedit, coe∣lum{que} videre. Ouid. earth, but lift vp his eyes, hands, and heart, to Heauen, to giue God due and true thankes for his daily and fatherly fauours and mercies bestowed vpon him The Esay 1. 3. Danti rependi quicquam gratius ab accipiente non potest, quam si gra∣tum habuerit, quod gratis accipit: nam spiritui gratiae con∣tumeliam facit, qui beneficium dantis grata mente non suscipit. Ber. Oxe knowes his Owner, and the Asse his Masters Crib; yea, the Riuers are tributary to the Sea, from whence (some say) they first come, and againe returne: All Creatures seeme in their kind to be gratefull debtors to their curteous Bene∣factors, except the Swine, whose mast makes him forget the tree from whence the Acornes fall; or the Moon which being at the full, (by interposition of the earth) darkens the Sunne, from whence yet shee borrowes all her light. It was Israels sinne, vnthankefulnesse, I pray God it be not Englands sicknesse, Nihil est quod in∣dignationem Altis∣simi prouocet, sicut ingratitudo; est malorum prouoca∣tio, & meritorum exterminatio. Pe∣tr. Raw. vngratefulnesse to God: Woe vn∣to vs, if we scant God of our fruits, who hath not scanted vs of his fauours. Psa. 29. 2. Bring presents to the King of glory, giue vnto the Lord glory due vnto his Name, worship the Lord in his glorious sanctuary. Psa. 115. 1. 14 18. Not vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy Name giue the glory, for thy louing mer∣cy, and for thy truths sake. Be euer thankefull to God, and then he will euer be mindfull of you, to blesse you; the Lord will increase his graces towards you, euen toward you, and your children; therefore praise the Lord from henceforth and for euermore: for he hath not dealt so with euery Nation; and if our deseruing were put into the lot∣tery of other people, wee should bee rewarded with a blanke. Gods loue and gracious fauour to vs, is Ber. Epist. 11. ignis accen∣dens, fire to set vs on fire: Let our thankefulnesse to God be, ignis accensus, a fire flaming to God in all zeale, loue, duety, thankes, seruice, and deuotion. God hath set Eng∣land as it were vpon an hill, a spectacle to all Nations, Insuperabiles, nisi separabiles. strengthened by sea and land, ad miraculum vs{que}, to the ad∣miration of all people, blessed it with an extraordinarie peace & prosperity of long continuance; we are the worlds enuie, let vs not become their declamation. Nothing but our Gratiarum cessat decursus vbi re∣cursus non fuerit, &c. Ber. serm. 35. vnthankefulnesse to God, our licentiousnesse in life,
our disobedience to his Word, our securitie in sin, our con∣tempt of good meanes and mercies offered, can worke our ouerthrow: and these (if we doe not drowne them quick∣ly in the riuers of repentance) so one may breed and bring our wofull downefall. The Lord hath blessed this land with great and gracious blessings: in it the golden bels of Aaron are powerfully rung, the word by faithfull teach∣ers mouingly deliuered. Oh let our perpetuall Gratiarum actio est pro gratia sus∣cepti muneris, mu∣nerantis laudati. Tullius. prayers, praises, and thanks ascend to heauen, because Gods gra∣ces and mercies plentifully descend to earth. Et si desint gratiae, quia nos ingrati, If any grace be wanting, it is because we want grace to be thankefull for this our happy gouern∣ment, hauing a prosperous peace, and that which is the procurer of peace with God and men, that blessed passage Religio remp. paca∣tam, & regiae po∣tentiae morigeram reddit: Mach. princ. c. 5. of the Gospell. Si totum me debeo, pro me facto, quid debeo, pro me refecto? saith a Father, If wee owe God our selues, for our creation, what doe we owe vnto him for our rege∣neration, preseruation, and saluation? We therefore that haue tasted of the great cup of Gods mercy, let vs with Dauid take the cup of saluation, & giue thanks, and praise the name of the Lord; let vs praise God for these aboundant mercies, and euer pray vnto him to preserue the happy instrument of manifold benefits and blessings to vs, our most dread and deare Soueraigne: duty bindeth vs to this taske, our owne welfare mooues vs to this duety; for his prosperity is our tranquillity, his safety is our felicity, the blessing redounds to vs; and if he should miscarry, (which God forbid) we should be partakers of his misfortunes. Therefore be alwaies obedient and dili∣gent to serue our royall Head, (golden in all vertues and Propugnaculum quovis alio firmi{us} est, multitudinis odio carere. Mach. prin. c. 20. princely perfections) in all loyall and Christian dueties, lo∣uing his Highnesse in our hearts, which is the best earthly defence for a King, Inexpugnabile munimentum est amor ci∣uium, saith Seneca, The loue of the people is an inuincible munition: and as that great Rabbi of pollicie Mach. prin. c. 19. Machiauel hath set it downe for a sure rule, Contra regem, quem omnes magnifaciunt, difficilis coniuratio, oppugnatio & irruptio, Against that King whom all highly esteem and reuerence,
conspiracy or treachery is very difficult, or if attempted, seldome succeedes. Let vs bee in pace Lepores, but in praelio Leones, in peace like Hares, timerous to offend his Grace in any way of disobedience; but like Lions fight for him against all his enemies with an vnwearied courage, vndanted magnanimity, ioyning with our fighting hands our feruent prayers to God, like faithfull Israelites, against all rebelling Amalekites: Oratio coelos penetrat, & hostes in terravincit, saith Origen, Prayers pierce heauen, and o∣uercome enemies on earth, plus precando quam praeliando, more by praying then by fighting. 1 Sam. 17. 45. Dauids encountring with Goliah in the name of the Lord, was more powerfull then his fling, and fiue stones. Let vs make it one part of our daily praiers to God to keepe Psalm 17. 8. our King as the apple of his eye, and hide him vnder the shadow of his wings, to saue him from all enemies bodily or ghostly; Psalm 59. 13. to con∣sume them in his wrath, consume them that they bee no more, & let them know that God ruleth in Iacob euen vn∣to the ends of the world: beseeching God of his great mer∣cie euer to prosper this most peaceable and puissant Mo∣narchie of great Brittaine: Psal. 132. 9. 10. Arise vnto it, as vnto thy re∣sting place: Turne not away thy face from thine Anointed, who hath now happily to our immeasurable ioy, worne the imperiall Diadem of great Brittaine these 15. * yeares. 15 yeares currāt. Vota nostra, Vita longa. Many more happie and prosperous yeares wee pray to be continued, prolong his daies, O Lord, as the daies of hea∣uen, and grant that his Highnesse and his Princely poste∣rity may in these kingdomes reigne so long as the world endureth: Enlarge and enrich his royall heart with all Re∣gall gifts, and Diuine graces, sutable for his high calling: Saue and defend him from the tyranny or treachery of all forraine and Antichristian power, and from the plots and proiects of domestical aduersaries; Let them Psal. 109. 29. couer them∣selues with their confusion, as with a cloake. Blesse his most gracious spouse and bedfellow, Queene Anne, let Amen. thy Angels O Lord encampe about her to guide & guard her in a safe protection: and euer continue thy most hea∣uenly hand of benediction vpon the high & mighty Prince Amen.
Charles, the famous Prince of Wales, the second ioy of great Britaine: Lord looke vpon him from heauen, Psalm 72. 1. Giue thy iudgements vnto the King, and thy righteousnesse vn∣to the Kings Sonne. Teach him O Lord in his tender yeares like a good Iosias to learne, and loue thy true religion, the way to winne the eternall Crowne of life. Be gracious O Amen. Lord to the County Palatine of Rhene, Fredericke, Prince Elector, and to his most vertuous and gracious wife, Prin∣cesse Elizabeth, with their Princely progenie. O Lord preserue them with thy mightie and out-stretched arme, giue them a most happy peace and prosperity in a Princely Amen. honor & felicity all the daies of their liues. O Lord Iob 5. 12. scat∣ter the deuices of the crafty that their hands may not ac∣complish any wicked thing they do enterprise. Confound all them that haue ill will at Sion, that repine at the peace of the Church, the welfare of great Britaine, the prosperity of his Maiesty & his royall progenie; that howsoeuer they haue shift of faces, and maske vnknowne, yet let vs pray that that Dan. 2. 34. stone which is cut without hands may breake the Images of such Traitors in peeces, giuing him victory ouer all his enemies: Psalm. 132. 18. Cloath them all with shame, but vpon him let his Crowne flourish, and grant him an happy multiplication of many prosperous yeares, to renew with many returnes, these our cordiall and annuall Ioyes, long to sit vpon his Throne, and make his foes his footstoole. And let high and low, rich and poore, young and old, yea let Heauen and earth, with the Monarchie of greate Britaine, and all good Christians, professors of the Gos∣pell, be deuoted Suppliants to the King of Kings, with ioyfull tongues, and zealous hearts, to pray and say, God saue our King, God saue King IAMES. Ʋiuat valeat, vincat. God saue the King: Corporally. Amen. Spiritually. Amen. Politically. Amen. Τέλος. Gloria Tri-vni Deo in secula.
Caesaris Hostes: OR, THE TRAGEDY OF TRAITORS: For the fift day of August: The day of the bloudy GOWRIES Treason, and of our Kings blessed preseruation. I will sing a new song vnto thee, O God, and sing vnto thee vpon a Viole, and an Instrument of ten strings: for it is hee that gi∣ueth deliuerance vnto Kings, and rescueth Dauid his seruant from the hurtfull sword. PSALM. 144. 9. 10. Dum iniusti saeuiunt, iusti saluantur, & vtilitati bonorum militat potest as prauorum. Gregor in Moral. By SAMVEL GAREY, Prea∣cher of Gods Word. LONDON, Printed by IOHN BEALE, for HENRY FETHERSTONE, and IOHN PARKER. 1618.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, Sir FRANCIS BACON Knight, Lord Chancellor of England. (Right Honourable Lord:) IT was the saying of St Hierome to Celantia, Summa Epist. 37. apud Deum nobilitas est, clarum esse virtutibus. Yea the wise Moralist, vnchristened Seneca could say, Nobilitas animi, generositas est sensus, no∣bilitas hominis est generosus animus: The which true Nobility of the minde is your inherent, and hereditary honor, famoused for Piety, Iustice, Learning, and Liberality, so that the world sees you write not your desires in the dust. We blesse God, and wonder to behold in you so admirable a patterne of true Nobility, & moues vs to say with K. Lemuel, Pro. 3. 29. Many haue done vertuously, but you surmount them all, in your great perfection of Arts, and happy progresse in Grace, the world can number but few such. Vere∣or ne violem frontem tuā, sedem honoris, testem verecundiae: I know the sound of the trumpet of your praises is no musick to your eares, neyther doe I loue such straines: the land in generall ecchoes your renowned applause, and God who hath so blessed you, and by the Kings Maiesty promoted you to so honourable a Place, continue you an happy instrument of much good to Church and Common-wealth, and prosper your noble proceedings according to the promise of your admired entrance. And now (most honorable Lord) I hum∣blie craue your pardon, in presuming to present so simple a Present, vnto the view of so approued a iudgement, who haue Mercurium in lingua, & Mineruā pectore: yet although not the manner (being meane and homely) yet the matter handled may iustly merit your noble acceptance, being a description of the hainous sin of Treason, the fall and Tragedy of Traitors (plagues which the Arch-traitor to mankinde hath added to the world;) and also a seasonable subiect for the Time, August the fift, against which day it was, and is pre∣pared as an annuall obiect. And I know there is none within the
compasse of Great Brittaine poures forth more hearty prayers to God with a more feruent and faithfull soule, then your Honor doth, for the preseruation of our most deare and dread Soueraigne, and for the detection and destruction of all pestilent and truculent Trai∣tors. Wherefore in a hopefull affiance of your honorable acceptance, I humbly offer this little labor, (a Testimony of my great obser∣uance) with my selfe perpetually to your seruice, not after a cere∣moniall submission, but from a serious agnizing and feeling of mine owne imbecillity, euery way so obscure and weake, that ingenuouslie I confesse, —Et scripfisse pudet, quia plurima cerno, me quoque qui feci iudice, digna lini. And of all others I know your Honors censure and iudgement is most substantiall, yet my weakenesse thus farre encourages me, that your Honor will like my willing mind, commend the matter, though not the manner; and I hope will fauourablie accept this Mite, and put it into your richer Treasurie, and countenance it with your worthy protection, which will be like Aiax buckler to shield it safe against detraction. Ringanter, rumpantur, liueant, improbent maledici; si Honori tuo arriserit, instar mille, Platonis calcu∣lus: I would not bee a monster to please all but some, and say with the Poet Lucilius, Me paucis malle à sapientibus esse probatū. So giuing my farewell to this feeble Infant, saying as Iakob did when he parted with his beloued Beniamin, * Goe, and the Lord Gen. 43. 13 shew thee fauour in his sight: and sovpon the bended knees of my prostrated heart to God, I shall euer incessantly pray to the Lord Keeper of Heauen and Earth, to make your paths euery way prospe∣rous, blessing your Honour with happy preseruation, and a longioy∣full life on earth, and grant you an eternall Patent (sealed by the euerlasting Decree of the sacred Trinitie) of immortall possession of a glorified life in Heauen. Your good Honors euer to be commanded in all duety and seruice, SAMVEL GAREY.
Caesaris Hostes, OR The Tragedie of TRAYTORS. Now these are examples to vs. 1 Cor. 10. 6. If thou hast any enemy, or Traytor, send him hither, and thou shalt receiue him well scourged. 2 Macch. 3. 38. CHAP. I. THE memory of Gods great and glorious workes, either of iudgement vpon his ene∣mies, or mercy towards the Church, ought to be preser∣ued with a thankefull re∣membrance. So the Ester 9. Iewes being preserued by the meanes of Queene Ester, 17 and godly Mordecai, from the intended plot by Ha∣man, 22 kept the foureteenth day of the moneth Adar, yeere∣ly with feasting and ioy. So when God had deliuered his
people of Israel from the tyranny of Tryphon, by the meanes of Simon their Captaine, he 1 Macch. 13. 52 ordayned that the same day of their deliuerance, should be kept euery yeere with gladnesse. So when the Nehem. 8. 9. 18. people of Israel were deli∣uered from the captiuity of Babylon, and restored to Gods true Religion, they kept a Feast seauen dayes together to the Lord with reioycing and thanksgiuing. The Feasts Deut. 16. 1. of the Passeouer, Pentecost, Tabernacles, were commanded by Moses to be kept holy, in remem∣brance of great benefits receiued at Gods hands. Hence it was, that in times past, the Patriarks, Prophets, and people of God, would not forget any memorable act of Gods prouidence, without setting some remarkeable Memonto vpon it, that so it might remaine fresh to succee∣ding generations; that Psa. 78. 6. the children vnborne might tell it to their children. That 2 Chr. 20. 26. valley wherein Iehoshaphats aduersaries were ouerthrowne, was called Beracah, a valley of blessing, that so the Name might present to their minds to praise God for their maruellous victory. Gen. 28. 19. Iacob did call the place where God appeared to him, Bethel, The House of God, which before was called Luz: and 1 Chr. 13. 11. Dauid the place where Vzza was smitten, Perez. vzza, i. the diuision of Ʋzzah; and Gen. 22. 14. Abraham the place where Isaac was deliuered from the bloody knife, Iehouah-ijreh, i. The Lord seeth, or pro∣uideth; and the Iewes Ester 9. 26. called those holy-dayes which they solemnized for their deliuerance from Hamans de∣uice against them, Purim, by the name of Pur, i. Lot, or lots, in casting lots for their destruction. 1 Sam. 7. 12. So Samuel pit∣ched a stone (the Philistines being ouercome) and called it Eben-ezer, Lapis adiutorij; Hitherto hath the Lord hol∣pen vs. These and many other examples (whereof the Scrip∣ture is plentifull) are sufficient to stirre vp Gods people to remember with humble thankefulnesse the great workes of Gods most mercifull deliuerance And herein as becom∣meth faithfull seruants to God, and loyall Subiects to his Annointed, let the People of Great Britanny holily cele∣brate
with deuout prayers, and prayses to Almighty God, that solemne Anniuersary day, The fift of August, the day of our gracious and religious Kings preseruation from that bloody intended destruction of the wicked and wret∣ched Traytors, Gouries of Scotland. In which deliuerance, Gods might and mercy did so wonderfully appeare, that we may cry with Exod. 14. 13. Moses, Stand still, and behold the salua∣tion of the Lord, which he shewed this day: Saying with the Psa. 14. 10. Psalmist; It is hee which giueth deliuerance vnto Kings, and rescueth Dauid from the hurtfull Sword; and moues our High Soueraigne to say with that Kingly Pro∣phet, Psa. 94. 1▪ If the Lord had not holpen me, my soule had beene put to silence: and therefore his Maiesty in a thankefull ac∣knowledgement of Gods mercy doth religiously obserue in hearing prayers, and preaching of Gods word, euery Tuesday in the yeere (it was Dies Martis, almost Mortis.) Two most admirable deliueries vpon that day from two abhorred Treasons, in both which I may cry with Ier.  Iere∣rie; It was the Lords mercies that we were not consumed: and may say with Aug. de c. 6. Augustine, Hee that seeth not Gods mercy in this, is blind; he that seeth it, and prayses it not, is thankelesse; he that hindreth him that praises it, is mad. And therefore to adde a little fewell to the fire of our ge∣nerall deuotion to God, for this his mercifull and maruel∣lous preseruation of our dread Soueraigne, worthy to be written with eternall Characters in the hearts of all good People, perpetually to praise God for the same; I haue en∣terprized to write this little Treatise, hoping that others, who haue greater Talents, will labour to eternize the me∣mory of this renowned worke of God to all posterities. In handling of which Subiect, I shall not write the History of it, it is already Gouries conspi∣racy: yet the chiefe substance is related in the end of this sub∣iect. published to the World: I shal only dis∣course of Traytors in generall, with some application in particular, declaring the wofull & Tragicall ends of Tray∣tors, with such occurrences, Vt quorum exitus per horres∣cunt, eorum facta non imitentur, That as their wofull deaths, so their wicked deeds all men should abhorre: and as St Ambros. de Na∣both Je. Ambrose closes vp the Story of Achabs and Iezabels fear∣full
end thus; Fugies huiusmodi exitum, si fugies huiusmodi flagitium, Escape their sinne, and thou shalt escape their end. So hate Treason, and neuer feare a Traytors end, whose wayes is the gallowes, death, or hell. In the descrip∣tion of the punishment of Traytors, and their ends, their infamy in the World, the greatnesse of their sinne, being hatefull to God and Man, dangerous to Kingdomes, dreadfull to Kings, and damnable to themselues, (the diuel and his adherents▪ the onely Agents in such enterprizes) if the Tragedy of them past may worke so well vpon the hearts of all, present, or future, as to detest Treason both in action and affection, because it brings wounds to their consciences, ruine to their Families plagues to their Coun∣tries, and punishments to their carkases; how happily shall this little labour be bestowed, if hereafter in great Bri∣tanny no Traytor may be found to his King or Countrey? Then shall the Lord Psa. 90. 17. blesse the workes of our hands, O Lord blesse thou our handy worke. CHAP. II. AS the highest mountaines are most subiect Feriunt summos fulmina mentes. Sola miseria caret inuidia: to thunder and tempests, so the greatest Potentates exposed to dangers. Enuie and Treason, neuer aime at misery, but flies an higher pitch, and like vnto the Pro. 30. 28. Spider, liues in Kings Palaces, and lookes with blood-fallen eyes vpon the royall hands of him that holds the Scepter to bring him downe to his Sepulcher. This hath befallen to many Kings, both good and bad, Christian and Heathen in all ages. Not to recite a long ca∣talogue of this cursed crew of Trayterous miscreants, whose memorial is perished with them, who haue attemp∣ted Treason against the Lords Annointed: Dauid a man after Gods owne heart, yet loc 2 Sam. 20. 1. Sheba, the sonne of Bichri blowes his Trumpet, saying; We haue no part in Dauid,
neither haue we any inheritance in the sonne of Ishai; nay, not onely strangers, but his owne sonne 2 Sam. 15. Absolom proues a Traytor, and seekes his Kingdome. So, many others of the Kings of Israel, found Traytors to indanger them; yea, our Sauiour himselfe had a Iudas to betray him: King As∣suerus King Benhadad his Hazael to strange him. 2 K. 8. 15. King Antiochus his Tryphon to kill him. 1 Mach. 13. 21. had his Bigthan, and Teresh, Traytors: Ester 2. Eze∣chas had his Shebna: Esay 22. 15. Looke vpon the reignes of Heathen Kings, and you shall find Histories full fraught with many examples. Sueton. c. 19. Augustus a famous Emperour, ten times assaulted by treacherous villains. Iulius Caesar found a Brutus and Cassius to kill him. Ʋespasian made totus ex clementia, All of mercy, as the Historian tels vs, yet for all that, Sueton. c. 25. Machinationes nefariorum assiduas expertus est, Hee found daily Treacheries attempted against him; and his Princely sonne Titus, graced in those dayes with Amor, & deliciae generis humani, the loue and delight of all mankind, yet had Sueton. c. 16 a Trayterous Cecinna to assault him. Antoninus had Traytors to trouble him, Cassius, Titianus, and Priscia∣nus: Berengarius the Emperour found Flambertus a Tray∣tor, whom yet he highly aduanced, and vsed in the secre∣cies of State, and familiarity; Sed eô magis aestuaret innocen∣tē tollere regem, So much the more he was set on fire to de∣stroy the innocent King, saith Cuspinian in ∣reng. Cuspinian. What should I rehearse the troope of Traytors, which in former Ages haue lift vp their hands and hearts against their royall Ma∣sters? This last Age, prophesied by 2 Tim. 3. 1 4 Saint Paul, to be peril∣lous times, wherein men shall be Traytors, hath fulfilled that prediction. These last dayes haue swarmed with such desperate and diuellish wretches, who by all meanes of mischiefe haue laboured in these attempts, not to play the part of a Notary or Recorder in forraign Nations, in pub∣lishing the names of Traytors, who haue infested their Kings or Countries; wee haue had too many in our natiue Countrey (whose names are registred in the Popes Kalen∣der of Martyrs, or the Hangmans Booke) who haue assaul∣ted in late times, our late dread Soueraigne Queene Eli∣zabeth, of blessed memory; and our most gracious and ver∣tuous King: two as famous Princes as euer here reigned,
and both admired of all the Monarkes vnder the Sunne. How many Traytors swarmed in Queen Elizabeths daies, how frequent were conspiracies of vngodly persons, Par∣ries, Lopusses, Babingtons, Campians, &c? and the roaring Pius Q. An. Do. 1570. In qua declarauit reginam hereti∣cam, & regni iure prtuatam, & sub∣ditos omni domi∣nij fidelitatis, & obsequij debito perpetuò absolutos, &c. Buls came from Rome with thunderbolts of excommuni∣cation, depriuation; and all this was but Sonitus spinarum ardentium sub lla, Like the noise of thornes burning vn∣der the Pot, as Salomon, Eccle. 7. 8. And therefore these ful∣minations were againe confirmed by Pius Quintus his suc∣cessour, Gregory the 13. Yet all these plots instar vaporis euanuerunt, vanished away like smoake proceeding out of that smoaky Kingdome of Antichrist: and her Crowne, and person by the fauour of the Almighty, vnder whose shadow shee was protected, safely defended, and reigned forty and foure yeeres, foure moneths, and eight dayes, a Virgin Queene, and died in peace, in a full and glorious age; so beloued, so honoured, and so esteemed of her sub∣iects at home, and Princes abroad, as neuer any Queene more: so that it was verified of her truly, which the Psa. 2. 1. 2. 4. Psal∣mist of Christ typically; Why did the Heathen rage toge∣ther, and the People imagine a vaine thing? The Kings of the Earth stand vp, and the Princes assembled together a∣gainst the Lord, and against his Annointed: but he that dwelled in the Heauens did laugh them to scorne, the Lord had them in derision: for there Pro. 21. 30. is no wisdome, nei∣ther vnderstanding, nor counsell against the Lord. And this our deare and dread Soueraigne, (whom the Lord of mercy still preserue) hath beene subiect to sundry dangers by wicked Traitors, as his Maiesty doth His speech the Parliament after the Gun-powder treason. Pag. 2. wit∣nesse it himselfe, not onely since his birth, but before his birth, euen in his Mothers belly; but especially to two most horrible Treasons, this in Scotland attempted by the bloudy Gowries, the fift of August, and the other in Eng∣land, the fift of Nouember, the Gun-powder Treason, from both which barbarous and monstrous proiects, (the latter no age can parallel the like) the great King of all Kings in his great mercy graciously protected him; that both King & subiects may say with Zachary, Luk. 1. 74. 75 Being deliuered out of
the hands of our enemies, we may serue him without feare, in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the daies of our liues. So that our King may vse the Psalm. 27. 2. Psalmists words; When the wicked, euen mine enemies and my foes came vpon me to eat my flesh, they stumbled and fell. The Lord did 28. 4. reward them according to their deeds, and according to the wickednesse of their inuentions. Therefore giue Psalme 29. 1. vnto the Lord O ye sonnes of the mighty, giue vnto the Lord all the glory for your deliuerance. CHAP. III. TREASON hath beene alwaies accounted an heynous sinne, and by F: Tit. ad legem Iulian. Ma. l. 1. Iustinian ranked next to Sacriledge, Crimen laesae Maiestatis proximū Sacrilegio, &c. Treason is next to Sacriledge, the one a robbery of God, this is  a fighting with God: so odious that the sole intention, without action or execution, is death: for Voluntas reputatur pro facto in Et patitur paenas peccandi sola vo∣luntas: Hor. causa proditionis, The will is accounted for the deede in Treason. Principis in rehus & voluisse sat est. And therefore there was a statute made in the reigne of Edward the third, That whosoeuer shal imagine the Kings death, are guilty of rebellion, and high treason. This sta∣tute toucheth all Iesuites, who are perduellionum signiferi, the ring-leaders of Rebels to animate them to rebellion, vnder a colour of religion. If the meere intention of Treason be so capitall, what then is the Action? Clamitat im coelum vox sanguinis: The Gen. 4. 10. voyce of blood cryes to heauen for reuenge. VVhat doth the voyce of royall bloud spilt by the hands of exe∣crable Parricides, destroying Gods owne image, the Lords Annointed? May I not call such, as Polycarpe called Mar∣cion, Iraeneus lib. 3. c. 3 Daemonis filiolos, the Deuils children? and say as our Sauiour did to the Iewes, Ye Iohn 8. 44. are of your Father the De∣uill,
he hath beene a murtherer from the beginning. Nay, the very Heathens (void of Gods word) did great∣ly abhorre Traitors, and seuerely punish them. Traitors among the Greekes were brought to Delphos, and they did offer them a quicke sacrifice to Apollo. The Persians did bury such quicke: and the Romanes brought such to the publicke Theaters, where they were hewed in peeces per gladiatores, by the sword-players. Cn: Pompeius the Great, made a Law (as De Roma. legib'. Pomponius re∣lates it) to punish Parricides, destroyers of Fathers or Mo∣thers in this kinde, To put them into a great vessell or tun, or such like instrument, inclosing with them in it a Dogge, a Viper, a Cocke, and an Ape, and to cast them into the Sea. VVhat then shall be done to the publicke Parricides, destroyers of Kings and Countries? Our Lawes of Stanford pleas of the Crowne. lib. 3. c. 19. Eng∣land hath prouided for them a fit punishment, which is this: A Traytor conuicted, hath his punishment to be drawne from his prison to the place of execution, as being vnwor∣thy any more to tread vpon the Mother earth, and that backward, his head downe-ward, as hauing beene retro∣grade to the naturall course of obedience, after hanged vp by the necke twixt heauen and earth, as deemed vnworthy of both: his priuy parts cut off, as vnfit to leaue any ge∣neration behinde him: his bowels and entrailes burned, which in wardly conceiued and concealed Treason: his head cut off which imagined such mischiefe: and last of all, his body quartered, as a prey for the birds of the aire: and In cruce pascere corues. as it was said of a traiterous Iesuite: Sic bene pascit aues, qui malè pauit oues: In life he had no care the sheepe to feede, And now his carkasse serues the fowles in neede. The Apostle Rom. 13. 2. Paul saith, That they that resist shall re∣ceiue to themselues iudgement. The greeuousnesse of iudgement should be proportionable to the heynousnesse of the crime; for if the law Exod. 21. 23. 24. requireth an eye for an eye a tooth for a tooth, life for life; what death sufficient for a 2 Sam. 18. 3. Traytor that kills a King, a murderer of many, who is worth ten thousand of vs, so that hee cannot be sufficient∣ly
punished of man, but God also will punish him who is a reuenger of such sins. Neuer did I reade of any Traytor Sequitur hos à ter∣go vltor Deus, vel homo: that did euer escape both the hand of man, & hand of God. Looke vpon Absalom a double Traytor, to his Father, and his King, his end sutable: First, his chiefe Counseller and plotter 2 Sam. 17. 23. Achitophel hanged himselfe: 2 Sam. 18. 7. twenty thou∣sand of his adherents were slaine in battell: Last of all, Absalom 2 Sam. 18. 9. by the hand of Heauen was hanged vp by the hayre of his head, in stead of an halter, vpon an Oake tree in stead of a gallowes or gybbet. Sheba 2 Sam. 20. 22. that traiterous Rebell lost his head for his trea∣son against Dauid. King 2. Chron. 33: 24. 25. Ammon, the sonne of King Manasses, an euill King, was slaine by his seruants, who conspired against him, & slew him in his owne house: but this bloudy fact of King-killing was so odious to the people of the land, that they slew them al that had conspired against King Ammon. Treacherous 1 King. 16. 18. Zimri slue his King, but the people hea∣ring of it, made Omri King, to take Zimri; who fired the Kings house, and died in the fire. Bigthan Ester. 2. 21. 22. So that Amale∣kite that hasted Sauls death, yet wishing and wil∣ling it, was put to death by Da∣uid. 2 Sam. 1. 15. and Teresh, who sought to lay hand on King Assuerus, were both hanged on a tree. The Scripture is plentifull in such examples. In profane histories there is a cloude of witnesses to verifie the pu∣nishments of Traytors. Brutus and Cassius, who killed Caesar, neuer enioyed good, till bloud was requited with bloud. VVe reade of Trip. histo. lib. 9. c. 45. Eugenius that rebelled against the Em∣peror Theodosius, whose rebellious army the Lord dismaid, so that Eugenius was forced to fall downe at the feete of Theodosius, and had his rebellious head cut off from his shoulders. So of Trip. hist. lib. 7. c. 15. Procopius, who rebelled against the Emperour Ʋalens, who being taken, had for reward his two legges tyed to two young trees growing neare together, bowed downe by strength; which being suddenly let rise, rent the body of Procopius, who would haue rent the body of the kingdome.
So of Lib. eccl. 10. c. 15. Magnensius, who rebelled against Constans the Emperor, who neuer enioyed good day after, till hee was destroyed by Constantius the Emperors brother. Annibal Mach. prin. c. 19▪ Bentiuolus, chiefe Ruler of the Bononians, was killed by Cannensis, who conspired against him; but presently the multitude were stirred vp with the sight of that bloudy fact, and destroyed with death all that stocke and family. The same Mach. prin. c. 8. Author tells vs of the bloudy and treache∣rous murder of that butcherly Monster Oliuerot, who sen∣ding letters to Iohn Foglianus, that he might be honoura∣bly receiued at Firmanis, and beeing nobly entertained, treacherously pretends a great Feast, inuiting Foglianns, and the chiefe men of the City; after the banquet, by his Souldiers appointed in secret places, kils them all that were present: a most barbarous and diuellish stratagem: but afterwards he payd the price of bloud, for Fracta gula in∣terijt vbi supra. his throat was cut and so hee died: Miserè pereunt, qui malè perdunt, Bloud calls for bloud. Caines Conscience so prickt for murder, that he thought Gen. 4▪ 14. Clytus Ghoast terrifies great Alexander: and Agrippinas Nero. euery man that met him would haue killed him: if they escape (which yet is rare) the hand of man, neuer the hand of Diuine Iustice. Herod no parricide, or Regicida, but Puericida, a mur∣derer of children Math. 2. 16. from two yeeres olde and vnder, by his greatnesse scapes mortall reuenge, but not Diuine Iustice on earth; for hee died most miserably, and I will set it downe in Theoph. enar. iu 2 Math. Theophylacts words, Amara morte perijt Herod, febri, dysenteria, & scabie, & podagra, & putredine veren∣dorum, generatione vermium, spirandi difficultate, & tremore, & contractione membrorum malam absoluit animam. Alike was the end of that bloudy Tyrant Antiochus, whom 2 Macch. 9. 5. the Lord punished with the paine of the bowels that was re∣medilesse, and sore torments in the inner parts, and all his members bruised with a great fall; so that wormes came out of the body of this wicked man in aboundance, and 7. 9. his flesh fell off for paine, and all his army grieued at the smell, so that no man could beare him because of his stink, 10 12 28 no not his owne selfe: Thus that murderer suffered most
grieuously, and as he had intreated other men, so he died a miserable death: for with what Math. 7. 2, measure men mete, it shall be measured to them againe. This is so cleare a Truth, that murder neuer goes vnpu∣nished on earth, by God or Man, as that diuine & humane histories, & common experience affords pregnant proofes and examples: then how much more will the Lord re∣uenge the murder of his owne Vicegerents, whom hee hath giuen a generall precept, not 1 Chr. 16. 21. to touch them, no Eccl. 10. 2, not to curse them in thought, much lesse to hurt them in deed, as Traytors doe, or desire? Hor: epod. 7. Quô, quô scelestiruitis, aut cur dexteris Aptantur enses conditi? What meane you (ô ye monsters of men,) are you 2 Sam. 1. 14. not afraid to put forth your hands to destroy the Anointed of the Lord? Can you lay your hands vpon them and be guilt∣lesse? Remember Ignat. epist. 2, ad Magnesianos. Ignatius godly counsell, No man euer remained vnpunished which lifted vp himselfe against his Prince. Though they want power to accomplish their bloudy actions, yet are they odious Traytors in the eyes of God and man. Looke vpon the tragedy of those Traytors whom Hel∣debrand the Pope stirred vp against T'is Emperor vexed by; Popes Hldbrand, Vr∣ & Tbalis. Henry the fourth the Emperor. First he stirred vp Rodulphus, then Hermannus, and afterward Ecbertus, all seruants and subiects to their Lord and Master the Emperor. And when these failed, his successour Pope Ʋrbane Ipsias Vni auyhoritate regnis aduersus patrem i Lombar ∣pit: Sigon. reg. . p. 384. raised vp Conradus, and Hen∣ricus, the Sonnes against the Father; all laboured to their power in this proiect of rebellion, marke the issue and end. First their Author & ghostly Father in this Treason the Romane Achitophel, Gregory the seuenth, alias Heldebrand, not like Achitophel hanged himselfe, but for his bloudy & bestiall life was forsaken of his people, eiected out of his Sigeber. Anno 1084. Popedome, and died in sorrow, misery, and infamy. Secōdly, Rodulph had his right hand cut off in a skirmish, & fetching deepe sighes, ready to giue vp the ghost, said to certaine Bishops, Behold this is the right hand wherewith Ʋspergen. in Anno 1080.
I swore fealty to Henry, and lo now I leaue his kingdome and my life. Thirdly, Hermannus had his treacherous head by a great stone cast downe by a woman, deadly broken, so that his braines dasht in peeces, running about his eares: which did affright his army, and scattered them with feare. Fourthly, Ecbertus did flie out of his Throne into a sinkehole, and hoping to saue his life, lost it. Fiftly, Conradus the elder sonne, rightly dis-inherited, did end his daies miserably. Sigon. pag. 387. Sixtly, Henry the younger sonne by periurie and cruell treachery against his Father, gate the Crowne, but with Nauer. pag. 801. Vit. Hen. pag. 49. little comfort. And since many of the Popes of Rome haue Heldebran∣dized, raising vp Subiects to rebell against their Soue∣raignes; whose successe hath bin sutable to their attempts. The Chronicles of euery Nation haue too many exam∣ples Tormenta malorū snt exempla mul∣torum. of Dukes, Earles, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and others of inferiour sort, prouing Traytors to their annoin∣ted Gouernours, whose treacherous acts haue found tra∣gicall ends. Traytors are odious euen to their Abettors and Mai∣sters, Proditores etiam 1, quos anteponūt muisi sunt. who first moued them to that villany: and, as it was said of Antoninus, Odit Tyrannum, non tyrannidem, They may like the treason, but they loath the Traytor. Alex∣ander the Great (as Iustin saith) at his Fathers obsequies, commanded publike iustice to be done vpon those, whom he had before secretly imployed to kill him. And Nero the monster of men, as Tacit. 1. Annal. Tacitus saith, disauo∣wed his Commissiō giuen to asouldier to kil Agrippa. Such agents are abhorred of their Adiutors, and if possibly they can, they will be their executioners, for feare they should disclose their conspiracy: for both are Nihil interest, an faueas sceleri, an illud facias? Sene. Nulla est excusatio ccati, si amici ausa :  in Lo. Traytors, & both worthy of death. Some desperate wretches, who for loue of the trencher, or for hope of reward, or for some other respects, will be wagered and hired to enterprise hellish and horrible designes; who being debosht vassals, bank∣rout of grace and goodnes, to purchase loue or liuing (as
they hope) of them of whom they haue dependance, whose hearts are died in a deepe tincture of disobedience, will hazard life, lands, yea hell it selfe, to atchieue the pro∣iects of their animating superiours. So said Restalrig, that Exam: of George Sprot: pag. . is, a perfect Traytor or Gowrie, for they two in this con∣spiracy had but one heart; My Lord, I am resolued (saith he) to perill life, lands, honor, goods, yea and the hazard of hell shall not fray mee, though the scaffold were alrea∣die Si timor Dei non tenet, teneat timor Iudicis, mtus ge∣bennae, laque mor∣tis, dolores infer∣ni, &c. Hugo. lib. 3. de Anima. set vp. A miserable resolution with a miserable con∣fusion. But hee had his demerits though not in so high a kinde as hee deserued: and bloudy Gowrie strooken stone dead in the place where he intended, and striued to act his Treason: Lipsies de Const. lib. 2. c. 13. Cognatum, imo innatum omni sceleri sceleris sup∣plicium: The fruits of Treason, shame and death: That it may be said of wicked Gowries and their adherents, in the words of the Psal. 9. 6. 15. Psalmist; O enemy, destructions are come to a perpetuall end, their memoriall is perished with them. The hea∣then are sunke downe in the pit that they made, in the net that they hid is their foote taken. CHAP. IIII. BVt not to insist thus in generall in the declarati∣on of Traytors punishments, I will specifie some part in particular; which though they be commonly knowne, yet may be propounded to good purpose, as precautiōs to posterity, to feare to follow their bad examples, lest they find their woful punishments. The punishment of disobedience and treason is of two kindes. 1 Punishments by God. 2 Punishments by man. Punishments by God are threefold; externall, internall, eternall. I will not take vpon me to be a Iudge in the hea∣uenly Assises, I will be as a Clarke to reade their punish∣ments registred in Gods booke: First externall, and they are of two sorts; eyther ordinary, or extraordinary. Or∣dinary as Ieremy denounces them. The Ier. 27. 8. Nation and king∣dome which will not serue Nebuchadnezzar King of Ba∣bell,
and will not put their neckes vnder the yoake of the King of Babell, the same Nation will I visite (saith the Lord) with the sword, with famine, with pestilence, vntill I haue wholly giuen them into his hands. Extraordinary, as Numb. 12. 10. Miriam for her murmuring against Moses was made leprous: the murmuring Numb. 11. 1. Israelites pu∣nished with fire. Numb. 16. 32. Core, Dathan, and Abiram were swal∣lowed vp of the earth, Absalom 2 Sam. 18. 9. with his owne mule drawen vnder an Oake, where hee was hanged vp by the hayre of his head. 2 Internall, and that specially tormented with the Nulla grauior Paena conscientiae Paenâ. Isidor. lib. 2. soliloquior. worme of a guilty Conscience: for it is a fearefull thing when malice is condemned by her owne testimony, and a Conscience that is touched doth euer forecast cruell things, saith Wisd. 17. 10. Nullū consciū pec∣catorum tuorū ma∣gis timueris, quam temet ipsum; alium enim potes effuge∣re, te nunquam: Seneca. lib. de mo∣ribus. Wisedome her selfe: this inbred monitor, and notary of the soule, signes euery bill of Inditement, with Teste meipso; which is in stead of a thousand witnesses. A guilty Conscience who can beare? It makes the wicked cry with Tiberius, Dij me perdunt: God and their owne conscience begin to confound them, remembring with Iu∣das, how they haue sinned in betraying the innocent bloud. —Quos diri conscia facti, Nunquam securus est reus animus, mens enim mala conscientiae pro∣prijs agitatur sti∣mulis: Isidor. Iuuenal. Sat. 13. Mens habet attonitos, & surdoverbere caedit, Occultam quatienti animo tortore flagellum: The conscience of foule acts their soules affright, And scourge with restlesse torments day & night. Eternall: But those I leaue to the Iudge of all, who holds in his hands the Keyes of Heauen, and Hell; for no Tantae pietatis est dominus Iesus, vt ipsi Iudae donaret veniam, si Christi expectasset miseri∣cordiam. Ambros. sinne, neuer so dangerous▪ and damnable in it selfe, (ex∣cept the sinne against the Holy Ghost) but vpon true con∣trition grounded in a true Faith, may receiue remission. 2. Punishment of Traytors by the Lawes of Men; and that foure wayes: 1. By bodily death: 2. By want of burial: 3. In blood and posterity: 4. In losse of liuing. 1. By a violent death; the manner of it I described in In body. the Chapter before, how wofull to runne such a wicked
race, as that body and soule must be diuorced before their In Body. Reade Aeneas Sylaus hist. de Eu∣ropa, cap. 4. 6. of the murther of Iames the first of Scot∣land, and the pu∣nishmēt of those Traytors, where∣of he was an eye witnesse. time: life ended, before the line of life naturally finished: and that by a shamefull death, hanged vpon a Tree, or the head cut off, which conspired against the supreame Head: all men reioycing at their deaths, and point at them with their fingers;—Ille crucem sceleris pretium tulit: All Men saying that truly, which they did of Christ most false∣ly; Mat. 26. 66. Except the Prin∣ces mercy for∣beare this pu∣nishment. He is worthy to die. 2. In buriall; yea, rather in defect of buriall, their bo∣dies dismembered, and their quartered parts fixed vpon gates and walles of Cities, spectacles exposed to all be∣holders, and reserued for remembrance to all Subiects, to learne by their mangled and vnburied limbes, to leade more dutifull and obedient liues. It was a great punish∣ment to Ieholakim, that he should be buried as an Asse is * Ier. 22. 19. buried, none to mourne for his death; saying, Ah Lord, or ah his glory, but to be drawne, and cast forth without the gates of Ierusalem: But a Traytors buriall is worse then the buriall of an Asse; for the dogges, or beasts of the field soone deuoure them, & so are forgotten: but these liue in shame in the relickes of their dead carkasses, as monu∣ments or mappes of their misery, and mischiefe. These want the sweet perfumes and balmes, the honour of Fune∣rals, the Sepulchrum qua∣si seorsum pulcbrū. faire Tombes of their Ancestors, they lie inglori∣ous; and on their graues (if they haue any) it may be engra∣ued as it was written vpon Pope Alexanders Tombe, Iacet hic & scelus, & vitium: Whereas others, if they haue beene loyall, they goe to their graues in peace, resting in their naturall lodging to the last day; and if they haue beene of honourable Race and Rancke, they vsually are graced with some sumptuous Monument, to witnesse to the World their singular vertues to their succeeding genera∣tions. Aen. 6. Nampius Aeneas ingentimole sepulchrum Imposuit, sua{que} arma viri, remum{que}, tubam{que}, Monte sub aerio, qui nunc Mysenus abillo Dicitur, aeternum{que} tenet per saecula nomen. Whereas Traytors are vsed, as I haue read how the
Souldiers vsed Zisca, the Commander of the Hussites, who being dead, they did flea him, and tooke his skinne, gi∣uing his body to the wilde beasts; and of his skinne did make a military drumme, that his enemies who feared his sight aliue, might feare the sound of his skin being dead: so these infamously are dismembred, their heads set vpon poles, or high places, to terrifie all men from trayterous attempts. 3. In Blood and posterity: Their names and honour at∣tained, as Pro. 10. 7. Salomon; The name of the wicked shall rot. The names of Traytors and Rebells giue an ill sent and sauour in the Land, stayning and dishonouring all their Progeny; leauing behind them an vnhappy and disgrace∣full memory: so that the liuing issue of so leud a Progeni∣tor may say, as Iacob said of Simeon and Leui; Gen. 34. 30. Ye haue troubled me, and made me stinke among the Inhabitants of the Land. What more odious names to all true Britains then the mention or memory of Kett, Cade, Straw, Lopus, Parrye, Gowry, Fawx, with those Agents in the Powder-plot; their names branded with contempt? The portion of the wicked (saith Iob 24. 18. Iob) shall be cursed in the Earth, and they themselues are gone, and brought low, they are de∣stroyed and cut off as the top of an eare of corne: for de∣ceitfull 24 and bloody men doe not liue out halfe their dayes; they hasten death vpon themselues, and shame to their po∣sterities. And as their names be disgraced, so their posterity depriued of the honour and pedigree, where before their fall they were interessed and lineally inuested: for although Traytors in England, are not vsed as they were in Persia, that euery one of the Family should be put to death; or as in Macedonia, fiue of the Traytors nearest Kins-folke suf∣fer with him; yet are they punished here in name and po∣sterity, depriued of their lands, liuings, goods, offices, blood, and honour; which is the fourth greefe that might (if it were possible) euen vexe a Traytor in his graue, to behold himselfe to be naked and destitute of all the goods of nature, Fame and Fortune, and by his fall to haue deplu∣med all his Progeny, not onely of Pedigree, but of Pa∣trimony,
left them to the mercy of the Prince, and the mi∣fery of Time? What Parent, though like Romulus nursed vp with a Shee-wole, or as stony-hearted as a Myrmi∣don—Aut duri miles vlyssi? Yet must be moued with im∣measurable mourning, (though sencelesse of his owne sor∣rowes, which are great and grieuous, as losse of liberty, li∣uing, life, goods, and good name) and when paine on earth is past, yet still to be punished in his Issue and Posterity: Maiorum culpas luere nepotes, His children bred of his owne loynes, by his leud life disinherited of their liueli∣hood; and can challenge no more for their owne:—Nisi pontus & aer, VVho cannot but be moued with the loue of his owne Natis sepulchrum ipse est parens. 1 Seneca. children, and especially when they are ruinated hy his owne fact and folly. Quis si non genitus duris è cautibus horrens Caucasus? vt stirpis modice moueatur amore: VVho, if not bred vpon a stony Rocke? But fancy moues to loue his filiall stocke. To behold his wife and children (Pignora chara amoris) exposed to all stormes of time and contempt, depriued of all riches and respects; who though he be regardlesse of his owne fall, yet in this case must needs Luke 23. 28: weep for himselfe, and for his children: or if he haue neither of these to weepe for, yet may he iustly weepe for hauing an hand, or heart in so foule a sinne as Treason is; for which hee must suffer an ignominious death, and haue his capitall offence re∣corded, Ad perpetuam eius infamiam, To his eternall infamy: or if he regard not Fame, or Name, yet ought he to regard Duo necessaria ti∣bi, fama & consci∣entia. his Conscience, which must needs accuse him for such a sinne; and beholding the eternall Iam. 5. 9. Iudge stand before the doore, able to cast body and soule into hell fire, and there Greg. lib. 4. Dia∣log. Vnusquis{que} quantum exigit culpa, tantum illic sentiet poenam: according to the greatnes of his sinne shall there find the grieuousnesse of his punishment. And therefore to con∣clude this with Saint Cyprian, Si quam turpem cogitationem
in mentem tuam venire animadrtis, suscipe staim iudicij ex∣tremi salutarem commemorationem, If thou once perceiuest any filthy thoughts to enter into thy mind, straight to call to mind the day of doome, and last iudgement. So let all men daily thinke of the manifold iudgements and punish∣ments which Rebels and Traytors on earth haue suffered, and receiued, and without deepe repentance, and diuine mercy must needs suffer at their final doome, when Christ shall say; Luke 13. 27, Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. CHAP. 5. THus hauing in part set downe the fall, and punishment of Traytors; next let vs ob∣serue the corrupt causes which produce these cursed effects: for though in Treason the Diuell is alwayes primus motor, being an Arch-Traytor to God and Man, and reignes in the Children of disobedience, and Iohn 13. 2. puts into the heart of Iudas to betray Christ; yet are there also pro∣creant causes in themselues to allure and procure the wic∣ked to such wretched and wofull motions. And the Mo∣ther of these mischiefs vsually is Ambition, whose Daugh∣ter 1 Cause of Trea∣son is Ambition. is superbia, Pride; which Saint Austen cals Cathedram pestilentiae, The Chaire of Pestilence. Ambition is a dange∣rous malady, and as Saint Ambros super Luc. lib 3. Ambrose speakes of it, Quos nul∣lapotuit mouere luxuria, nulla auaritia subruere, facit ambi∣tio criminosos, habet enim for ensem gratiam, & domesticum periculum; & vt dominetur, alijs prius seruit, dum vult esse sublimior, fit remissior; Though Luxury, or couetousnesse could not moue them, yet Ambition makes them sinfull, hunting for popular applause, and hauing domesticall danger; and that they might rule, they will first serue, and to be high, they will seeme humble. Saint Bernard paints Ber. in ser. qua∣drages. out Ambition in perfect colours, Ambitio secretum virus, pestis occulta, doli artifex, mater hypocrisis, liuoris parens, vi∣tiorum origo, tinea sanctitatis, excaecatrix cordium, exreme∣dijs
morbos creans, ex medicina languorem generans, Ambi∣tion is a secret poyson, an inward plague, the contriuer of deceit, the mother of hypocrisie the parent of enuie, the originall of vice; the moth of sanctity, the blinder of Quid ambitio est, vide; cum scieris, fuge. hearts, creating sicknesses of salues, and of medicines ma∣ladies. The World is now much infected with this plague, and we may see, and say with Bernard; Ber. de consider, ad Eugen. lib 5. Limina Apostolorum amplius ambitio quàm deuotio terit, & vocibus eius tota die resultat palatiū, Ambition rather then Deuotion possesseth many in euery State, gaping for promotion; Honores am∣biunt, qui onera non sentiunt, Though their desarts small, their desires great, and are neuer content with their pre∣sent estate: so that we may say with Pro. 30 15. 16▪ Salomon; There be three things that will not be satisfied, yea, foure that say not, It is enough: The graue, the barren wombe, the earth, and fire; and among many more, I will adde two more, an ambitious man, and a couetous Lawyer, the one with honour, the other with mony, will neuer say; It is enough. Ambition liues in euery Climate, and loued of euery Tribe: In the state politicall, the poore man would be a yeoman; the yeoman after the death of his wife, or dearth of corne, would be a gentleman, and will giue armes, if the Herald will accept of Angels: the Squire would bee a Knight; the Knight a Baron, the Baron an Earle, the Earle D. Boys. a Duke, the Duke a King the King Caesar, and is the worlds Emperour still ambitious? The Poet tels vs, Iuuenal: Ʋnus Pellaeo iuueni non sufficit orbis, Aestuat infaelix angusto limine mundi: One world is not enough for Alexander, and there∣fore he weepes, and is discontent; as if he wanted sufficient Valerius Max. lib. 8. c. 15. elbow roome. In the State Ecclesiasticall, Ambition finds fauourites; Maiora eupimus, quo maiora ∣rint . Seneca. de Benefi. The Mendicant Frier, would be the Master Prior: The Pri∣or the Abbot the Abbot a Bishop, the Bishop an Archbi∣shop, the Metropolitane a Cardinall, the Cardinall Pope, the Pope God; nay, that is too little, aboue all that is cal∣led God: 2 Thess, 2. 4. Bern. de consid, lib. 3. Ambitio ambientium crux, quomodo
omnes torques? & omnibus places, saith Bernard; O Ambiti∣on, how painefull is thy pleasure, which hath beene the o∣uerthrow of the Angels in Heauen, and our Parents in Pa∣radice, and many men on Earth? Potestatis ambitio Angelum faelicitate angelica priuauit, &c: & Euam promissi honoris am∣bitio illecebrosa decepit, An ambition of power, depriued Bern. the Angell of Angelicall happinesse, and the inticing am∣bition of the promised honour (to be like Gen. 3. 5. God, knowing good and ill) deceiued Eue, and shee Adam: and euer since all the sonnes of Adam haue beene deceiued by her, ho∣ping of a rise, haue found a fall. Excellently Seneca, Ambitio Fortunes Motto, Fauere videor, no∣cere sentior. non patitur quenquam in ca mensura beatorum conquiescere, qua quendam fuit eius votum: nemo agit de Tribunatu grati∣as, sed conqueritur, quod non est ad Praeturam vs{que} perductus: si Consulatus, nec etiam sufficit, sivnus est, vltra: cupiditas non vndevenerit, respicit, sed quô tendit: Ambition will not suf∣fer any man to rest in that measure of state, which once he Relinque ambitio∣nem, timidares est, vana, ventosa, nul∣lum habet termi∣num. Sen. Ep. 88. wished: none wil giue thanks for a Tribuneship, but com∣plaines because not raised to be a Praetor; or if a Consull, yet that suffices not; if alone supreme, yet would rise high∣er: for this insatiable ambition, lookes not from whence they came, but whither they would, still repining at others higher aduancement: Heu melior quanto▪ sors tua sorte mea est? The Poets did very well, and wittily figure the fall, and folly of Ambition, by Phaetons chariot, Icarus wings, Ambition is like a Centaure be∣gottē of a cloude. and Ixions wheele, who as they had a great desire to rise, so they found a grieuous descent and fall: Iuuen. Sat. 10 Haec Crassos, haec Pompeios euertit, & illum Ad sua qui domitos deduxit flagra Quirites: Ambitious Appian. lib. 2. de bello ciuili: Nec regna socium ferre, nec taedae sciunt. Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar, accorded to the ouerthrow of all the rest; and Crassus dying, Pompey could not endure an equall, nor Caesar a Superior: Lucan.—Nec fert Caesar ve priorem, Pompeiusve parem: But their Ambition brought both to a bloody fall. Diod lib. 46. 47. Le∣pidus, Antony, and Octauius, reared vp to kill their enemies a Triumuiratus, till at last they fell out for the chiefe place. Hall. Holling∣sheed, & Stew, in Richard 3. Richard the third an vsurper, and the ambitious Duke
of Buchingham, conspired against King Edwards children and friends, till they fell out in the end to their owne sub∣uersion. All Histories and Chronicles affoord many presidents, how ambitious men hungry of supremacy, haue brought themselues to misery. Yet such a Siren Ambition is, that it tempts many to ha∣zard Caesar wished ra∣ther to be first of a Village, then se∣cond at Rome. their fall, in hope of their rise; liquorous to rule, and had rather be King of a Mole-hill, then Lord of a Moun∣taine. These hungry Aristot. l. 5. de a∣nimal. Vultures, which follow the Army, watching for the prey before it fall, and doe praesagire cae∣dem, Foretell a slaughter, that like Gen. 41. 3. Pharoes seauen leane Kine, they might deuoure the fat: so these ambitious vul∣tures vse all pollicy, stratagems, deuises, mischiefes, and Machauelismes, waiting for 2 Ki. 3. 23. Moab ad praedam, Moab to the spoile; these State-anglers fishing with deadly hookes in such troubled waters, desirous of change of Rulers, that so they might chance to rule, seruing all times, and turnes; Treacherous Timists, vnworthy to be trusted, varying in∣to all formes, and fashions; Regnandi causa, To get superi∣ority. They are like Theod. lib. 2. c. 24. Prope omnium cri∣minum fonte c tria monstrantur esse genera vitio∣rum, gula, iactan∣tia, & Ambitio. Ambros. super ∣cam. lib. 3. Leontius Bishop of Antioch, who be∣ing in heart an Arrian, couered his Religion by dissimula∣tion, and ioyned with the Councell of Nice, in the out∣ward profession of the Truth: His soule was led by the di∣uell, and his body by the world, and so are they, tempted with the Diuell, and temporizing with the world: Iniqui∣tas pulsat animum, ambitio continet manum, colludunt ad in∣uicem mater & filia, iniquitas & ambitio, haec vendicat sibi publicum, illa secretum, saith Innocent. de vi∣lit. condit. hum. Innocentius, Iniquity knocks at the heart, Ambition containes the hand for a time, the Innocentius ∣bi supra. Mother and the Daughter dally together, Iniquity and Ambition; the one would seeme in publike good, the o∣ther in secret is most wicked. The ambitious would seem vertuous, yet is vitious, hu∣militatem simulat, honestatē mentitur; affabilitatem exhibet, benignitatē ostendit, subsequitur & obsequitur, cūctos honorat, vniuersis inclinat, frequentat curias, visitat optimates, assur∣git, & amplexatur, applaudit & adulatur, Counterfeits hu∣mility,
seemes honest, shewes himselfe affable and courte∣ous, crouching and creeping, honouring all, tractable to all, frequenting Courts, visiting great men, rising vp, and reuerencing, applauding and flattering all degrees, labou∣ring to be popular; which yet is an imperfection in a Poli∣tician, according to Math. prin. c. 8 Hocrorbium, locum habet in ciui, &c. Machiauels rule, qui populari intur aura, domum in luto extruit, Hee that relies vpon popular affection raises his house vpon a muddy foundation. So Absalom (that double Traytor) seeking to aspire to his Fathers Throne, how plausible hee is, 2 Sam. 15. 5. putting forth his hand, and taking them, and kissing them, his lippes drop hony-combes, Oh that I were made a Iudge in the land, &c. that I might doe Iustice: stealing 6. away the hearts of the men of Israel, hoping they would adhere to him, when hee had made an head: And as Tacitus, Leaud men, mis∣doubting the present, and expecting change, prepare a∣forehand friends. O ambition, how many Traitors hast thou bred, and shortned the daies of many Emperors and rulers! The Chronicles of euery particular Nation fur∣nished with frequent examples. What caused Henry the Ambitio, & inui∣dia fons cladium. Cypr. ser, de liuore, & zelo. fift the Emperor by force to depriue his Father from his Empire, and to keepe him in prison till he died there, but abhominable ambition? What mooued Mawfroy the Prince of Tarentum to strangle his owne Father Frede∣ricke the Emperour, but trayterous ambition? Am∣bition caused Antoninus sonne to the Emperour Seue∣rus, to stabbe his brother Geta with a dagger: and temp∣ted Solyman King of the Turkes to strangle his owne son Sultan Mustapha. Octauius Caesar by the treason of his wic¦ked wife Liuia, impatient to tarry the inthronizing of her sonne, (as is the nature of Ambition, the nearer the goale, the faster it runnes) tooke away his life at Nola: Tiberius Caesar poysoned by his ambitious Nephew Caius: Clau∣dius poysoned by his ambitious and incestuous wife A∣grippina, that her sonne Nero might raigne: Galba killed by ambtious Otho: Titus brought to his graue, not with∣out a vehement suspition of his bloudy brother and suc∣cessor. Yea most of the Caesars killed by the treachery of
their ambitious Competitors, or procurements: The Ita∣lian figges of ambitious Cardinals, hoping of the Pope∣dome at the next vacancy, haue poysoned many a proud Pope. This traiterous ambition hath robbed many a King of his Crowne and life, and sometimes hath raysed ignoble and obscure men, like Agathocles, who ex figulo factus Rex: or like Am. Marcell. lib. 14. in fine. Adramit tenus, who beeing borne of poore Parents, yet Regali Sceptro honoratus, was honoured with a Regall Scepter, when the right heyre by miserable fate factus faber, was faine to be a Smith, as Dyonisius was faine to be a Schoolemaster. VVhen once proud ambition hath inchanted them with this charme, aut Caesar, aut nllus, either a King or no body; then though their royall Master and Soueraigne should say to them as Pharaoh Gen. 41. 40. to Ioseph, Thou shalt be ouer my house and at thy word shall all my people be armed, onely in the Kings throne will I be aboue thee; yet that will not content them: yea though they should be raised so high, that as Seneca, Nihil foelicitati eorum deest, nisi moderatio eius, Nothing is wanting to their happinesse but modera∣tion, and discretion to vse it; yet still ambition eggs them with Dulce regnare, O what a sweet thing it is to rule, to Ferrum mortem{que} timere, ambitionis amor nescit. be second to none, to command all; and therefore to ob∣taine this affected Soueraignety, vse all desperate and di∣abolicall policies, yea many giuing ouer themselues to Necromancy, and to contract with the Deuill to haue his helpe to come to regall authority, and at last like Lucifer are brought low, Thy Esay 14. 11. Cito ignominia fit superbi gloria: Se∣neca in Prouerb. pompe is brought downe to the graue, the worme is spred vnder thee, and the wormes co∣uer thee: Quem vidit veniens dies superbum, Hunc vidit fugiens Dies iacentem: To day Ester. 3. 2. all knees bow and reuerence Haman, and loe shortly Ester. 7. 10. Calippus would haue stabbed his friend Dion, but the same dagger stabbed him. Haman was hanged on the gallowes that he pre∣pared for Mordecai: —ne{que} enim lex iustior vlla est, Quàm necis artifices arte perire sua:
A iuster Law there cannot be, Then punish blood in like degree. These ambitious climers seldome escape without a fall, and then (as well Ambr. in suo pasto: quanto altior ascensus, tanto grauior casus: The late fall of the great Mar∣quesse d' Ancre in France is a fit example for am∣bitious Courti∣ers. a Father) Non est tanti gaudij excelsa tenere, quanti moeroris est de excelsis corruere, It is not so great a ioye to be exalted, as to be againe deiected, and especially by their owne action and ambition. And therefore (O ye noble and promoted Peeres) be∣ware of this bewitching Circe, a false and vnfortunate Sy∣ren, Ambition, which would euer tempt and temper with you to aspire higher: which infirmity is incident to great∣nes, & as Tully in Offic. Tully, Est in hoc genere hoc molestum, quod in mag∣nanimis & munificis saepius incidit potentiae cupiditas, In this kinde this is most troublesome, that in great men, valiant and liberall, this desire of power & rule is incident: which aspiring fancy hath ouerthrowne many a noble family, when as others content with their lot, be it prope, or procul a Ioue, haue beene procul a fulmine: accepting with thanks their roome and ranke allotted to them, haue finished their race on earth in a comfortable peace with God and men, And surely if men had eyes in the hinder part of their head, as they haue before, to obserue how many in∣feriours Inuidia est odium alienae felicitatis, respectu superiorū, quia eis non aequā∣tur; respectu infe∣riorum ne sibi ae∣quentur, respectu parium, quia sibi aequatur: August. they haue, who would be glad to be blessed with the tithe of their fortunes, they would not be ambitious, or haue enuious eyes to repine to haue a few superiours; but would thankefully say with the Psalmist, My lot is fal∣len vnto me in a good land, I haue a goodly heritage; and would neuer beat their braines, or flatter their soules with ambitious dreames, and charmes of pride, like him who said, Esay 14. 13. 14. Discordiarum cās procurare sapientis est ducis: nulla natio, quamuis sit minima, potest per∣deleri, nisi proprjis simultatibus se∣ipsam consumpse∣rit. Vegetius de re militari. lib. 3. cap. 19. I will exalt my throne aboue beside the starres of God, I will ascend aboue the height of the clouds, I will be like the most High: or crooke in their nayles to keepe them sharpe for a day, hoping by some commotion to come to promotion, or enterprize to vndermine King and State by treachery, hoping by some strange stratagem to intrude into Caesars chaire, and though they should pos∣sesse it but an howre, yet would aduenture all, to sit one howre in a regall throne.
Lucretius: O caecas hominum mentes, ô pectoracaeca. But the shame of such treacherous and vaine glorious spirits haue euer exceeded their glory, and their punish∣ment Gloriam, & hono∣rem bonus & igna∣vus aequam sibi ex optat, bonus vera via nititur, sed ig∣nauus, quia bonae artes desunt, dolis at{que} fallaciis con∣tendit. Salust. greater then their aduancement. In a word; if you affect true honour, enter the gate of humility, and passe the gate of vertue, and that is the right way to honor: aspire by honourable and commendable meanes, and let your merits make you exalted, & be not ambitious with proud Icarus to mount too neere the Sunne, lest your wings bee scorched: for Prou. 16. 18. pride goes before destruction, and an high minde before the fall: therefore, let him that 1 Cor. 10. 12. standeth, take heed lest hee fall. CHAP. VI. I Might in the next place propound Pride (as chiefe mouer of Treason) which as Hugo victorinus lib. 1. de anima. Hugo writes, rides in a Coach drawen with foure horses, Ambition, Vaine-glory, Contempt, and Disobedience; all ready to run the race of Treachery, if the reynes be loose: Or I might mention Enuy, Discontentment of minde vpon some inward cor∣ruption, or outward vexation, or desire of reuenge, misli∣king the punishment or disgrace of their most affected friends, or some other sinister causes which some traitors may harbour in their hearts; and if I had Momus wished window to looke into their breasts, I might the better dis∣couer and discourse of them. But to pretermit these and many others which might be alleadged, I will onely insist vpon one (because I will be the larger in it) the very radi∣call and efficient cause of cursed treachery in these latter dayes, namely the seditious doctrine, or rather Pace bonorū vi∣rorum dictum sit, nouitas ista, ne di∣cam haeresis &c. Auentin. p 470. & Sigeber. chro∣no in An. 1088. p. 129. heresie, of Iesuiticall and moderne popery, teaching that the Pope may depose Kings, absolue subiects from Allegiance; or to vse the words of their owne Carerius potest. Rom. pontif. lib. 2, c. 9. p. 131. Carerius, Papa habet po∣testatem remouendi, reuocandi, corrigendi, & puniendireges, &c: Et hoc tenendum vera fide, tanquam naturalis, moralis, & diuina lex Dei, The Pope hath power to remoue, re∣uoake,
correct, and punish Kings; and this is to be holden with a true beleefe, as the very Naturall, Morall, and Di∣uine Law of God: and therefore the Iesuites haue made it an Art. 55. Article, Doe you beleeue that the Pope can put the Queene from her authority? Ans. I doe beleeue it. From the seed of this serpentine doctrine, the Doctrine of De∣uils it is, That the Pope can excommunicate Kings, depose Ab omni debito obedientiae &c. them from their Thrones, free Concil. Trident. sess. 14. c. 7. Subiects from obedience; and if they doe excidere, fall from them, the next is occi∣dere, to kill them, for deponere a throno, is exponere periculo, to depose them from their throne, is to expose them to deadly perill; capitis diminutio, to depriue them of their kingdome, is as much as capitis obtruncatio, to cut their throats. Si Paparegem deponat, ab illis tantum poterit ex∣pelli, vel interfici quibus ipse id commiserit, saith the Iesuite Ies. Suarez lib. 6, cap. 4. Suarez, If the Pope depose a King, of them onely hee is to be expelled or killed, to whom the Pope shall commit that businesse: and addes after, That if the Pope shall de∣clare a King to be an heretike, and fallen from his king∣dome, without further declaration touching the executi∣on, then the lawfull successor beeing a Catholicke, hath power to doe the feate, or if he refuse it, it appertaineth to the body of the kingdome. The cruell Cannibals may be∣come prentises to these Iesuites, the Masters to teach rules to murther Kings, the ring; leaders of rebellion, and trum∣peters of treason, telling and teaching the people, That Subiects are released from the oath of Allegiance giuen to Princes, if the Pope denounce them excommunicate, and may driue cut hereticall Kings from their kingdomes, as Wolfes, saith Bel. de pont. lib. 5. cap 7. Be a King neuer so vertuous, if he refuse to stcope vnder the Popes primacy, present∣ly hee is an here∣ticke, liable to be deposed, depri∣ued, dethroned, and decapitated. Vide Saunders lib. de Monarch. visib. Bellarmine; or if they be not apparent, but secret hereticks, saith Symancha: yea not them onely, but their sonne, and followers are to be rooted out, as Cres∣well agrees with Symancha, by any meanes whatsoeuer, saith Saunders, eyther by open force, as Iezabel by Iehu, or by craft as Holophernes by Iudith, say Raynoldus and Bourchier; or by knife and dagger, whereby Vide Guliel. Rey∣noldum de iusta abdicat. Hen. 3. Gal. reg. Henry the third & Henry the fourth were murthered for fauouring them, whom they terme hereticks. Yea before any sētence
denounced against them: or by dagges and poyson, as Queene Elizabeth assaulted, as Walpoole and Comensus per∣swaded: or by Gunpowder, as lately appeared, ratified by Iesuites and popish Priests, Garnet, Gerard, Oldcorne, Greenewell, &c. So that I may rightly say, Iesuiticall Pa∣pisme is the Catechisme of Treason, teaching Subiects, that their Emperor or King may be depriued by the Pope, and the right of their kingdome conueyed ouer to others: and if they will not acknowledge it, they must be constrai∣ned by Armes, eyther of their owne Subiects, or other Ca∣tholike Princes, if the Pope will haue it so, yea euen to part with their kingdome and life also, saith Francis Bo∣zius, lib. 2. c. 14. Yea that the Pope is directly Lord of things temporal, the Ruler and Monarke of the world, saith Boz. de temp. eccl. Monar. lib▪ 1. cap. 3. fol. 98. the same Bo∣zius, and so consequently to haue power to depose Kings, and dispose of kingdomes; so that I may truely affirme that which once one of the kings of America said to a Spa∣niard, telling him of the diuision and disposition of Pope Alexander the sixt, concerning the new-found part of the world, the King answered, That the Pope was not the Non vicariii boni Dei, sed diaboli &c Vicar of a good God, but of a Deuill, who would giue that to others which did not belong vnto him: and surely in nothing doth the Pope more liuely shew himselfe to be Sathans Vicar, then in medling with the kingdomes of the world, and the glory of them, and arrogating the De∣uils title, All Math. 4. 9. these will I giue thee if thou wilt fall downe and worship me; yet Christ would not be a Iohn 6. 15. King, or a diui∣der, for his Iohn 18. 36. Kingdome was not of this world: nor Peter would not cast Nero out of his throne by the Thunderbolt of excommunication, or deposition; nor any of the Apo∣stles take from Caesar his Scepter, or Subiects, or King∣dome, or life: yet he that brags he succeedes Simon Peter, Simonem Romae nemo fuisse negat, Owen. Epigr. (Simon, I grant, but not Peter) will by his excommunica∣tion binde Kings that they may not reigne, and Subiects that they may not obey, which is (to vse Ʋrspergensis wordes) a diuellish Art, which hath brought in treachery vnder the cloake of religion, dangerous to Kings, and
damnable to Subiects. But it hath beene the Popes poli∣cie a long time, to make discord among Kings, and rebel∣lion among Subiects: for it is well obserued, that foure things specially haue raised the Pope. 1 The diuision of the Empire. 2 The departure of the Emperor out of Italy. 3 The dissention of Kings. 4 The rebellions and treasons of people. And the speciall motiue of this fourth Mon∣ster, Rebellion, hath beene the diab olicall doctrine of se∣ditious and bloudy Romanists, not Masse, but Mars-Priests, teaching and tempering with the people, that all the dominion of the world, both diuine and humane, was in Christ as man, and so now it is in the Pope the vicar of Christ, as Carer. de potestat. Rom. pontif. p. 111. Carerius writes: That Christ committed to Peter (the key-keeper of eternall life) the right of earthly and heauenly gouernment, and that in his place the Pope is vniuersall Iudge, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, as an Isid. Mose. de ma∣iestat. p. 27. other writes: & by vertue of this pretended claime of Peters successor, and Peters primacy, that they may doe any thing; and as Platina writes in the life of Gregory, that he accustomed to vse these words, Nos, nos, imperia, regna, & principatus, & quicquid mortales habere possunt, auferre posse &c. We are able to take away Empires, Kingdomes, Principalities, or whasoeuer mortall men can haue: for the Pope cries like Plintes frogge, —Mihi terra, lacus{que}: Both earth and Sea belong to his See: nay Purgatory is part of his patrimonie. And all this Pope like Maiesty is deriued from Peter, (yet he loaths his mantle, and puts on Aarons miter) Pe∣ter (saith he) was a Primate of all, I succeede Peter, ther∣fore may excommunicate Kings, and then depose them, free Subiects from obedience vnto them, and by vertue of the words in S. Acts 10. 13. Peters vision, Arise Peter, kill and eat, that is, as In paraen. ad remp. venet. Baronius doth fondly glosse it, Goe Pope, kill and confound the Ʋenetians: or as the same In sentent. sua contravenetos. Cardinall, to prouoke Paul the fifth against the Venetians, saith; Mee thinkes I see sitting in Peters chaire Gregory the seauenth, and Alexander the third, both issuing out of the City of
Senes, whence your Holines takes your beginning: where∣of the one did bring vnder Henry that obstinate Empe∣ror, the other Fredericke &c: You must take in hand the same quarrell. Thus make they their Lord of the seauen hilled City, a bloudy Bishop, a 1 Tim. 3. 3. striker, and a fighter, con∣trary to Pauls Canon, a man of bloud and a warrier; and all this must be cloaked vnder the colour of Peters chaire, (this holy-water sweetens the Harlots cuppe) as if reli∣gion and rebellion sprung out of one blade, as if faith had a knife to kill, and to teach grace to destroy nature. Thus these impostors, not Pastors raise rebels, and preach the murther of Gods Annointed, inuenting opinions' of ex∣communication of Kings deposition, absolution of sub∣iects from obedience; which questions are all like spirits, sooner raised then put downe, beeing patronized by the deuoted Champions of the Popes chaire, Bellarmine, Al∣len, Carerius, Perron, Symancha, Suarez, Philopater, Saun∣ders, Creswell, Reynolds, Parsons, Becanus, &c. laborious vassals to ambitious Popes, whose publishing of these pernicious errors, hath ouerthrowne many popish Fami∣lies, brought a torture to their Consciences, punishment to their karcasses, infamy to their progeny, scandall to their religion, for attempting treason vnder pretence of their Romish profession. But let vs consider (though by way of digression) how and by what meanes this ambiti∣ous Antichrist hath aspired to this arrogant altitude, to set his chaire aboue Kings thrones, and to challenge a power to depriue Kings, and to make, or vnmake temporall Mo∣narkes, a matter which requires a large volume, if we should fully describe their policy in rising, and ruling; but I will but epitomize it, contracting it into a short Com∣pendium, it being by many learned Diuines in their seue∣rall workes more amply discouered.
CHAP. 7. THE exaltation of Popes aboue Emperors Vide Franc. Duar. de Sacr. Benef. lib. 1. c, 10. and Kings, did first especially begin in Pope Boniface the third, who obtained of Phocas, that murdered his Master and Emperour Mauritius, to be created the vniuersall Bishop. So that the Pope is indebted to a King-killer for the glory of his kingdome, and euer since he hath made much of King-killers. Thus he obtained to be Head-Bishop, and together with the Lombards began to rule the City of Rome: after that the Lombards challenging the City of Rome againe, Pope Zachary stirres vp Pipinus, deposing Childericus King of France; and his sonne Carolus magnus, to put down Aistul∣phus King of the Lombards, translated the Empire to France, and diuided the spoyle between them; France to haue that which belonged to the Empire, and the Pope possession of Rome, with such donations as they now call S. Peters patrimony, and ascribe the grant to Constantine the great. After in tract of time, their liberall benefactors being dead, Pipinus, Carolus, and Lodouicus, and the Kings of France affections being somewhat cold to assist the Pope against the Princes of Italy, Oras some say by Leo the 3. and others say, the Empire was not translated to the Germans by the Popes Decree, but by the people of Rome. Pope Gregory the fift practi∣sed with the Germans to reduce the Empire thither, refer∣ring the election to seauen Princes Electors of Germany, reseruing to himselfe the negatiue voyce, the first of which Emperors was Otho. But in processe of time the Germane Emperors began to resist the Popes of Rome, and there∣fore some they accursed, some they deposed, some they destroyed. The chiefe author, actor, and patrone of all pride, presumption, and tyranny, was Pope Gregory the seuenth, alias Hildebrand, who laboured to make all tem∣porall regiment subiect to his spirituall iurisdiction. It were a long story to rehearse the diuellish practises of this proud Pope against Henry the fourth, Emperor, excommu∣nicating
him, deposing him, making him with his wife and childe, barefoot, and barelegged in a frosty winter to Platina. Benno. Nauclerus. wait three daies and three nights at the gates of Canusium to crane his absolution: the said Emperor could neuer be quiet from the tragicall vexations of that Pope, till the Abbas vspergensis. Councell of Brixia deposed that Pope for a Sorcerer, Ne∣cromancer, Concilium Brixi∣ense. 1083. and abhominable life. And afterward Pope Alexander the third doth the like against Fredericke the first called Barbarossa: so that it is obserued, Baptista Egnati. that Henry the fourth and this Fredericke did fight aboue threescore bat∣tels in defence of their right against Popes and enemies of the Empire stirred vp by Popes; yet this Pope at last makes this Emperor submit, and treads vpon his necke in the Church of Venice. And after him Henry the fifth his sonne, with his Empresse Constantia, are content to be crowned by Pope Celestine the third, receiuing the Crown from the Popes feete, and being set vpon the Emperors head, presently with his foot strooke it off againe, decla∣ring he had power to depose him, if hee deserued. So a∣gaine Philippus brother to this Henry, by Popes accursed; and Otho Duke of Saxony placed in his seate, and the same Otho not long after by Popes againe dispossessed. Fredericke the second, the sonne of Fredericus Barbarossa the Emperor, was much persecuted by three Popes, Hono∣rius the third, Gregory the ninth, and Innocent the fourth, and by them accursed and deposed: and by this Innocents the fourth diuellish circumuention, was poysoned retur∣ning into Apulia, whereof when hee seemed to be recoue∣red, he was choaked in his bed with a pillow by Maufred Cuspin. in Freder. 2 his bastard sonne. Conradus sonne to this Fredericke, by the Bishops of Rome, raysing vp the Lantgraue of Thuring against him, driue him to Naples and there died. Conradinus sonne to Conradus Prince of Swevia, and King, of Naples, by the Bishops of Rome, raising vp Charles the French Kings brother against him, was taken with Fredericke Duke of Austria, and by the Popes procure∣ment both beheaded.
I neede not recite the proud practises of Popes against this Realme: The tyranny and iniury of Pope Vide Polydor Virgil histor. or∣nalens. de rebus Anglo. Alexander the third against King Henry the second, and of Pope In∣nocent the third against King Iohn his sonne, giuing away his kingdome to Lodovicus the French King, is common∣ly knowen: Nay what King till Henry the eight but were subiect to the vsurped domination of these Luciferian Popes, insomuch as some (as Math. Pariens. writeth by King Henry the third) were faine to stoope and kisse their Legates knee? Thus we haue a little touched the practises of these Ro∣mish Prelates, in exalting themselues aboue Emperours, and Kings, and seeking by all meanes to aduance their Pa∣pall Hierarchy aboue imperiall and regall dignity, that we may now stile the Pope by another name, Flaccus Illiric. prefat. Cent. 10. Papa-Cae∣sar, or Pompifex, non Pontifex, as Berengarius: for he is honoris hlluo, a greedy gaper for vaine-glory, and to exalt himselfe in the Temple of God aboue all that is called Coster. de praefat. de morib. haeret. God, 2 Thessal. 2. 4. Wee haue touched his practises, next obserue his pollicy in arrogating a pontificall Pri∣macie. CHAP. VIII. DIuers waies haue the Popes of Rome labou∣red to exalt themselues aboue all mortall men, and to deifie themselues, teaching their flattering birds (the Popes parasites) like Psapho to cry, Max. Tyr. Serm. Psapho est magnus Deus, Psa∣pho is a great God. Their Decrees, Decretals, Extraua∣gants, Pontificials, Clementinee, Buls, &c. with their clawbacke Canonists, Monkes, Friers, and late Iesuites extolling to the skies the Papall Monarchy, haue been the Or like Jupiters Priests to Alex∣ander, flatter with à Ioue late. Cages whereout these notes are sung, Papa est Deus, The Pope is a God; herein following the pollicy of Mahomet, who to establish his Alca on, feignes this fable: That three Angels tooke him into a mountaine, the first ript his brest,
and washt his bowels in snow; the second opened his heart and tooke out a blacke graine, which was the Deuils portion: the third closed him vp again and made him per∣fect: then they weighed him in a ballance, and ten men being not able to counter-poise him the Angell bad, Let goe, for no number of men should bee able to weigh a∣gainst Cuius ad effigiem non tantum meiere fas est. Iuuen. sat. 1. him. So they tell the world that no man must re∣proue the Pope, though hee should Bonifac. dist 40. ca. si papa. carry innumerable soules by heapes to hell, yet no man must be so bold or presumptuous to reproue him, or to say to him, Glos. extrauag. de sede vacant. ad Apostolat. Domine cur ita facis? Sir, why doe you so? Strange folly and flattery, yea stupidity; teaching the world, That it standeth vpon Bonifac. 8. ex∣trauag de Maior. & obed. c. vnam. necessity of saluation for euery humane creature to be subiect to the Pope of Rome. And to make men beleeue it the better, they fetch their dignity and do∣mination a farre off, from Distinct. 21. ca. decretis Aaron. Aaron and his sonnes, which (say they) prefigured the Pope and his sonnes, all other Bishops to be vnder him, and that the Church of Rome hath not obtained the primacy, as preferred Pap. Pelagius. distinct. 21. c. quamuis. by any ge∣nerall Councell, but only by the voyce of the Gospell, and the mouth of the Sauiour. This Pap. Lucius. 24. q. 1. cap à recta. Church is the holy and Apostolicke Mother Church of all other Churches of Christ, from whose rules it is not Pap. Calixtus. dist. 12. cap. non de∣cet. meete that any per∣sons should decline, but like as the Sonne of God came to doe the will of his Father, so must you doe the will of your Mother the Church of Rome, the head whereof is the Pope. Whosoeuer vnderstandeth not the prerogatiue of Papa Gelasius, dist. 96. cap. Duo Our Priesthood, let him look vp to the firmament, where hee may see two great lights, the Sunne and the Moone, one ruling ouer the day, the other ouer the night: So in the firmament of the vniuersall Church, God hath set two great dignities, the authority of the Pope, and Emperor, Greg. 9. lib. 1. de∣cret. tit. 33. cap. 6. of the which two this our dignity is so much the weigh∣tier, as that we must giue account to God for the Kings of Ibidem. the earth, and for the Lawes of men. Wherefore know ye Emperors, that ye depend vpon the iudgement of vs, and we must not be reduced to your will; for Innocent. de Ma∣ior. & obedi. c. Solitae. looke what dif∣ference there is betweene the Sunne and the Moone, so
great is the power of the Pope ruling ouer the day, that is, ouer the spiritualty, aboue Emperors and Kings ruling ouer the night, that is, ouer the Laity. Now seeing then the Glossa ibidem. Earth is seauen times bigger then the Moone, and the Sunne eight times greater then the earth, it followes that the Popes dignity many degrees doth surmount the estate of Emperors. And although Constantine: the great wri∣ting to a Pope alleadged the words of Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selues to euery humane creature, as to Kings, Innocent. Gloss. ibidem. &c. Yet in their Decretals they expound the minde of Pe∣ter, to exhort all subiects, and not his successors to be sub∣iect, proouing the Priesthood to be aboue Kings, by the wordes of Ier. 1. 10. Ieremy, Behold, I haue set thee ouer Kings and Nations, &c. Neyther must Kings and Princes thinke it much to sub∣mit Iddem Innocent. 3 de Judicijs cap. Nouit. themselues to my iudgement, for so did Ʋalentinianus the Emperour, and also Carolus: For my power is not of man, but of God, who by his celestiall prouidence hath set me Master and gouernour ouer his vniuersall Church, Ibidem. whereby all criminall causes, as well of Kings as all other, to be subiect to my censure. For my P. Nicolaus dist. 22. c. omnes. Church of Rome is Prince and head of all na∣tions, the Mother of the Faith, the foundation cardinall, whereupon all Churches doe depend, as the doore doth vpon the hinges. The P. Anacletus disti. 22. c. Sacro∣sanctae. first of all other seates, without spot or blemish. Lady mistresse & instructer of all Chur∣ches: a P. Steph. dist. 19. enimvero. glasse and spectacle to all men to be followed in all, whatsoeuer she obserues. Against P. Nicolaus. dist. 22. omnes. which Church of Rome whosoeuer speakes any euill, is forthwith an here∣ticke: yea a very P. Gregor. dist. 81. c. siquis. Pagan, a witch, an Idolater, and Infi∣dell: hauing fulnesse of power onely in her owne hands in ruling, deciding, absoluing, condemning, casting out or receiuing in. To which Pa. Juli{us}. caus. 2. q. 9. Arguta. item. c. ad Romanam. Church of Rome it is lawfull to appeale for remedy from all other Churches; & although it was decreed otherwise in the Councell of Carthage, that no man should appeale ouer the Sea vnder paine of excom∣munication, yet Gratians glosse can helpe that with a li∣mitation, Nisi forte Romanam sedem appellauerint, Vnlesse
they appeale to the Sea of Rome. Of the which Church of Rome the P. Pascalis. dist. 63. c. ego. Pope is Head, the Vicar of St. Peter, yea not the Vicar of St. Peter properly, but the Vicar of Christ, and successor of Peter: Rector of the vniuersall Church, * Pop. Bonifac. proem. Sext. Le∣cretal. ib. sacro∣sancta. and directer of the Lords vniuersall flocke, chiefe Magi∣strate of the whole world, Lex animata in terris, A liuing Law in the earth, hauing all Lawes in the chest of my breast: Yea, Proem. Clem. gloss. Papa stupor. mundi. Nec Deus, nec homo, quasi neuter inter vtrū{que}, Being neyther God, nor man, but the admiration of the world, and a middle thing twixt both. The P. Bonifac. ex∣trav. de Maior. & obed, cap. vnam. Pope hath both swords in his power, both of Temporall and spiritu∣all iurisdiction, able by his owne Sext. decret: de sentent: & re. c. ad Apostolica. Item in gloss. Ibid. power alone without a Councell to depose the Emperor, to transferre his king∣dome, and to giue a new election, as hee did to Fredericke and diuers others; to whom Pop. Gelasi{us} dist. 96. c. duo. Emperors and Kings bee more inferior then lead is to gold: for doe you not see the Idem ibidem. neckes of Kings and Princes bend vnder our knees, yea and think themselues happy and well defenced if they may kisse our hands? What doe wee talke of Kings? The Pope is aboue An∣gels, as his Clarke Anten. in tertia part. Summae Ma∣ioris. Antoninus writes, That hee is greater then Angels in foure things. 1 In iurisdiction. 2 In admi∣nistration of Sacraments. 3 In knowledge. 4 In reward. And so in Bulla Clementis, the Pope commands the Angels of Paradise to absolue the soule of man out of purgatory, and to bring it into the glory of Paradise. Who is able to comprehend the greatnes of my power and seate? For by me onely P. Marcell{us} dist. 17. ca. Synodum. generall Councels take their force and confirmation; and the Dist. 20. Decre∣tales ibidem. interpretation of the said Councels, and of all other causes doubtfull must stand to my determination; yea my Letters and Epistles Decre∣tall are equiualent to Generall Councels: and Symmach. 9. q 4, aliorum. whereas God hath ordained all causes of men, to be iudged by men, he hath only reserued me, that is, the Pope of Rome, without all question of men, vnto his owne iudgement: and whereas P. Innocent. 6. q. 3. ca. nemo. all other Creatures be vnder a Iudge, onely I which am Iudge of all, can be iudged of none; neyther of Emperor, nor the whole Cleargy, nor of Kings, nor yet of
people: For Ibidem. who hath power to iudge vpon his Iudge? so that I differ in power and maiority, and honor reueren∣tiall from all degrees of men. For the better declaration of it, the Ex. 3. part. summ. Maior. B. Antonini Canonists make three kindes of powers in earth. 1. Immediata, which is mine, immediately from God. 2. Deriuata, which belongeth to other inferiour Prelates from mee. 3. P. Innocent. . de Sacra vnctione qui venisset. Ministralis, belonging to Emperors and Princes to minister for me: for the which cause the anoin∣ting of Princes, and my consecration differ, for they are annoynted in the arme, or shoulders, and I in the head. This order of P. Nicolaus. dist. 22. cap. omnes. Priests, Bishops, Archbishops, Patri∣arkes and Cardinals, the Church of Rome hath instituted, following the example of the Angelicall Army in heauen, and the Apostles on earth: For P. Anacletus. dist. 22. c. Sacro∣sancta. among them there was a distinction of power and authority, albeit they were all Apostles, yet it was granted to Peter (they all agreeing to it) that hee should haue superiority ouer them all, and Ibidem. Petrus non à Petra sed  ducitur. therefore had his name giuen him Cephas, that is, say they, head or beginning of the Apostles; whereupon the order Dist. 21. cap. in nouo. of Priesthood first in the new Testament began in Peter, to whom it was said, Thou art Peter, and vpon thee will I build my Church: Math. 16. 18. And I will giue thee the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen, Whatsoeuer thou shalt binde vpon earth, &c. v. 19. Seeing then such power is giuen to Peter, and to the Pope in Peter, as his successor; who is then in all the P Nicolaus in tantum, dist. 22. world, that ought not to be subiect to my Decrees, which haue such power in heauen, in hell, in earth, with the quicke, & also the dead? whereupon Pope Clement in his Bull of lead sent to Ʋienna, granted to all such as died in their peregrination to Rome, that the paine of hell should not touch them: And all such as tooke the In Bulla Viennae in Scrinijs priui∣legiorum. holy Crosse vpon them, should euery one at his request not onely be deliuered, but also deliuer 3. or 4. soules out of Purgatory. And againe, Christ said to Peter: I haue prayed for thee that thy faith shall not faile; hauing Dist. 21. cap. de∣cretis. such a promise and as∣surance, who then will not beleeue my doctrine? So that all they that P Nicolaus. dist. 22. cap. omnes. beleeue not my doctrine, or stand against
the priuiledge of my Church of Rome, I pronounce them heretickes; for Ibidem. he goeth against the Faith, which goeth against her who is the mother of the Faith. And moreo∣uer to shew the strange vertue of the Popes keyes, his Schoole Doctors haue a twofold distinction: Gabriel. Biol. lib. 4 dist. 19. 1. Clauis ordinis, the key of order, hauing authority to binde and loose, but not ouer the persons whom they binde & loose: Petrus de Palude. which authority they take not immediately from Christ, but from the Pope the Vicar of Christ. 2. Key is Clauis Iurisdictionis, the key of Iurisdiction, which the Pope hath from Christ immediately, as being his Vicar, hauing not onely power to binde and loose, but also dominion ouer them on whom this key is exercised. By the iurisdiction of which key all are subiect to the Pope, the Dist. 96. cap. Im∣perator. Emperours ought to subdue their executions to him. Onely the Pope is subiect to no creature, no not to himselfe, Gabr. Diel. lib. 4. dist. 19. except hee list, in foro poenitentiae, to his ghostly father, submitting himselfe as a sinner, but not as a Pope, the papall maiesty euer remaining vnminished. No Dist. 40. cap. si papa. man must iudge or accuse the Pope of any crime, as murder, adultery, simony, &c. but as the Aug. de Ancho Iewes were commanded to obey the High Priest of the Leuiticall Or∣der, so are all Christians bound to obey the Pope, Christs Lieutenant in earth. Concerning whose obedience or disobedience, reade Deutron. 17. 12. where their ordinary Glosse payes it home saying, That he who denieth to the Priest obedientiam, obedience, lyeth vnder the sentence of condemnation, as much as he that denieth to God his om∣nipotentiam, his omnipotence. The greatnesse of the Popes priesthood began in Mel∣chisedech, Antoninus. solemnized in Aaron, continued in his children, perfectionated in Christ, represented in Peter, exalted in the vniuersall iurisdiction, and manifested in Syluester; &c. So that in regard of this priestly preheminence, it may be verified of the Pope which the Psalmist writes, Psalm. 8. 6. 7. &c. Thou hast put all things vnder his feete, all sheepe and oxen, the beasts of the field, the fowles of the aire, and the fish of the Sea, &c.
which place his owne Summae maioris 3. part. disti. 22. Antoninus hath applied to the Pope, and with a clearkely Paraphrase hath expounded, thus, By Oxen are signified the Iewes and heretickes: by the Cattell of the fielde, Pagans: by Sheepe all Christian men, Princes, Prelates, and people: by the Birds, Angels and powers of Heauen: by the Fishes of the Sea, the soules departed in paine or purgatory, as Gregory by his prayer deliuered the soule of Traiane out of hell: By them which passe through the paths of the Sea, are signified such as are in Purgatory, and stand in need of others helpe, and yet be in their iourney, Viatores, & de foro Papa, passengers, and belong to the Court of the Pope, and may be relieued out of the storehouse of the Church by the participation of Indulgence. And though it be truely doubted that pardons haue no power to extend to the departed, yet Romes Doctors can helpe that; for though it was said to Peter, Whatsoeuer thou shalt loosevpon earth, and so being not on earth, they can∣not Antonin{us}. August: de Ancho. be loosed, yet they will dissolue that doubt by a di∣stinction Thomas part. 4. vpon, super terram, vpon the earth, that may be taken two waies, eyther to the looser, and so a Pope being dead cannot loose; or to the loosed, which must be vpon the earth, or about the earth. But what do I talke of the Popes power in such points, the whole Quire of the Popes Cleargy in their books, tra∣ctations, distinctions, glosses, summaries, &c. sing altoge∣ther such notes. The Pope (say they) being the Vicar of Iesus Christ, throughout the whole World, in the stead of the liuing The Romish quire to flatter Antichrist. Baptista de Salis. Bonauentura. Campensis. Coclaeus Durandus in spe∣culo. Driedo de Eccles. Scripturis, & dig∣mat. Lord, hath that dominion on earth which Christ would not haue, (yet had it in habitu, and gaue it to Peter in Actu) that is, the vniuersall iurisdiction, both spirituall, and also temporall, which double iurisdiction is intimated by the two swords in the Gospell; and by the wisemens offering of Incense and Gold to Christ, to signifie that the domini∣on spirituall and temporall belong to Christ, and his Vi∣car. And as Christ saith; All power is giuen to him both in
Heauen and Earth, so it is holden inclusiue, that the vicar of Christ hath power on things cclestiall, terrestriall, and Edw. Pouelus con∣tra Lutherum Ec∣chius in Enchirid. Franciscus Fulgo. Gabriel Biel. Gaspar. Gratianus in de∣cretis. Gerson de Eccl. po▪ testate. Hugo Cardinalis in postilla. Hostiensis. Holkott. Hosius. Io. Andrae. Innocentius. Joan. de Turrecre: de Ecclesia. infernall, which he tooke immediatly of Christ, and all o∣ther take it mediatly by Peter and the Pope. And they that say; The Pope hath onely dominion in spirituall things, may be compared to the Counsellors of the King of A∣ram, 1 Kin. 20. 23. Their Gods are Gods of Mountaines, and therefore they ouercame vs; but let vs fight against them in the plaine or vallies, and doubtlesse we shall ouer∣come them: So Counsellors flatter Kings, saying, Popes and Prelats be Gods of Mountaines, that is, of spirituall things▪ but not of vallies, that is, of temporall things: Therefore let vs fight against them in the vallies, in the power of temporall possessions, and so we shall preuaile ouer them. But what saith God? v. 28. Because the Ara∣mites haue said; that the Lord is the God of mountaines and not God of the vallies, therefore will I deliuer all this great multitude into thine hands, and ye shall know that Lanfrancus contra Wiclef. I am the Lord. Which place (though very impertinent in this point) they vrge with great importunity, to proue the Popes power ouer all mountaines and vallies, that is, say they; ouer spirituall and temporal matters: and so very vnthank∣fully Constantinus Syl∣uestro reddidit in∣iustè detentum: 10. Gerson de potest. Ecc. Concl. 12. part: 3. Magister Sen∣tent. Raymundus in Summa de Casibus. Rabanus super Math. cap. 16. they regard Constantines gift of their patrimony to Syluester, saying; It was not so much a Donation, as a Re∣stitution. Yea (they say) the Pope is superior to Emperors, yea, superior to Lawes, and free from all Constitutions. Who is able of himselfe, and by his interpretation, to preferre equity being not written, before the Law writ∣ten. The Faith, Supremacy, Chaire of Peter; Keyes of Hea∣uen, power to bind and loose; all these be inseparable to Vide Ioan. Driedo de dogmatibus va∣riis. lib. 4. the Church of Rome, being presumed that God prouiding, and Saint Peter assisting the Diocesse of Rome that it shall neuer fall from the Faith: and though the Pope be not al∣wayes good, yet the merites of Saint Peter be sufficient for him, who bequeathed a dowry of merites, with inhe∣ritance
of innocency to his posterity. And if the Pope be an Homicide or an Adulterer, he cannot be accused, but Hugo. in Glossa. dist. 40. c. non nos. rather excused by the murders of Sampson, the thefts of the Hebrewes, the adultery of Dauid; or if any of his Cler∣gy be found imbracing of a woman, it must be presuppo∣sed, Glas. in caus. 11. q. 3. absit. that he doth it to blesse her. To be briefe: All the Earth is the Popes Diocesse, and he the Ordinary of all men, ha∣uing Glos. in c. 11. q. 3. si inimicus. Hostiensis in cap. quanto: de transl. praebe the authority of the King of Kings vpon Subiects: yea, God and his vicar haue but one Consistory, and can almost doe all that God can doe, Clane non errante: Ha∣uing an heauenly arbiterment, able to change the nature of things, Substantialia vnius rei applicando alteri & de ni∣hilo Glos lib. 1. decret. tit 7 cap. 3. potest aliquid facere, Applying the substantiall parts of one thing to another, and of nothing make something. His Doctors according with his decrees, and boasting with Pope Nicolaus, that Constantine the Emperour sitting in the generall Councell of Nice, called the Prelates of the Dist 96. c. satis, & Caus 11. q. 1. cap. Sacerdotibus. Church, all Gods. If Prelates by Constantines voice bee Gods, what is the Pope, the Prince and primate of all pre∣lates, aboue all Gods? So that his vsurped exaltation hath verified Saint Pauls prediction, Boasting himselfe aboue all that is called God; dispensing with Gods precepts, making it no murder to kill them that bee excommuni∣cate; P. Vrban. 2. caus. 23 q. 5. C. excom∣municatorum. dispensing with Matrimony in prohibited degrees, and such like Antichristian power in papall dispensation, which cases and causes may be found in his darling Ho∣stiensis, Et apud Fratrem Astesanum Doct. in Summa Confessio∣nis. de effi. Legit. So that by the immodest and immo∣derate extolling of himselfe, seconded by his Canonicall Parasites of old time, glosing vpon the Popes decrees, and corrupt constitutione, enacted in the ignorance of times, and arrogance of Popes, to magnifie the man of sinne, the pragmaticall and dogmaticall Antichrist, the succession of Popes: making Emperors to hold their bridles and stir∣rups, Lib. 1. Sacraram Ceremoniarum. and Kings going before them, and to surrender their Crownes vnto them, crowning them with their feet, and to kisse their toes, and to kisse their Legates knees, and to waite vpon them at their Pallace gates bare footed; to ex∣communicate Kings, to depriue them of their Soueraign∣ty,
and to absolue their Subiects from Allegiance, with such like Pope-like pollicy, haue beene the stratagems to exalt the papall Chayre aboue the Imperiall Throne; and at first vnder the femblance of humility, haue ascended to this sublimity, temporizing with the world, being darke∣ned with the mist of ignorance, yet affected to a blind de∣uotion, and charmed to this Chayre of superstition, haue made this Serum Seruorum, A Seruant of Seruants, to bee Dominus Dominorum, a Lord of Lords; making Kings his vassayles, and doe him homage, debasing the Lords An∣nointed, * The Pope vn∣dertakes to deale States and King∣domes, as Gods Legacies, and yet God neuer made him his Executor or Ad∣ministrator. deposing them at his pleasure, and disposing of their Kingdomes, freeing their Subiects from all obedi∣ence, and exciting them to violence and villany in rebel∣ling, which hath been the cheefe procurer of the shedding of much royall blood, the massacres of men and mischiefs, and miseries of most Times; which wee shall elsewhere more plainely demonstrate: I will in the next place touch a little, (which yet hath beene handled by elaborate and accurate pensels) this point of Popes deposition of Kings, the very fountaine of Treason, founder of Rebellion, and confounder of Religion, where it is practised or beleeued. I will very briefly wright of it, least I should seeme to make Iliads after Homer. CHAP. IX. THE Romane Church, or rather Court of Rome, wholly degenerated, and arrogating a temporall Monarchy, swelling with a forged puffe of pride and primacy appro∣priated to the Papall Chaire, challenge an exorbitant and vsurped power of deposi∣tion of Kings, and of absolution of Subiects from alleagi∣ance to them; which two-fold power is termed the princi∣pall warders of Saint Peters Keyes, without which the Bulla Pij Quinti. Church could not haue beene well shut, or opened. This power of excommunicating, deposing, and depri∣uing
Kings, and of absoluing Subiects from obedience to them, they principally assume from a pretended primacy belonging to the Pope, ouer all spirituall and temporall men or matters, deriued to them (as they pleade) from a supremacy in Peter, (whose Successorship hath intitled them to such a power and priority) two points oft allead∣ged, yet neuer proued; yet this primacy of Popes (as their Bellarmine saith) is the chiefe point of Catholike Faith, and the foundation of all Religion. For which power the Champions of Rome stoutly stand, and among the rest, the statizing Cardinall, Romes-Rabbi, Bellarmine, the most expert Gamester at the Popes Prime∣ro, in Tract. de potest. Sum. pont. Contra Gul. Barel. pag 97. seuerall workes, yet specially in his fift Booke De Romano Pontifice: The whole summe of it, containing ar∣guments, and examples to proue, that the Pope may by his Imperiall power, (though indirectly, and in order to the Spirituals,) depose Princes from their States and Thrones. And as the same Bellarmine, personating Tortus, saith; Conuenit inter omnes, posse Pontificem maximum iure depo∣nere, It is agreed vpon among all, that the Pope of Rome may by right and law depose Princes: which speech was too generall; for many popish Watson, quodlib. 8. art. 7. 8 Barclay∣us, de authorit. Pa∣pae. c. 2. & Rog. Widdrington. Apol. pro iure Principū. Sl eldonirationes generales, &c. Doctors doubt of it, and denie the papall intrusion into Caesars Chaire; and some that did hold it, haue recanted it, as Tanquerellus comman∣ded so by the Court of Paris, Florentinus Iacobus, and Tho∣mas Blanztus, the two last, holding this for a proposition, Pontificem in omnes habere temporalem potestatem, That the Pope hath a temporall power ouer all, but they came to recantation; nay, Hart (an hearty louer of the Pope) yet his opinion different from Bellarmines, Whosoeuer make the Pope aboue Kings, as a temporall Lord, Nihil habere ra∣tionis, aut probabilitatis, to haue neither shew of reason, or probability, saith he. Yet I confesse, the generall voice of moderne Papists, and among the rest, the Iesuites, who dispositiuè, naturally are inclined to disobedience, and pragmatically, and dog∣matically, declare the same: These are the chiefe Instru∣ments,
but Treason, consummatiue, comes from the Pope, first deposing, then commanding, and warranting disloy∣alty, and conspiracy against them. Sum. de eccl. po∣test. q. 40. art. 1. Augustinus Triumphus saith, The Emperor of Heauen may depose the Emperor of the Earth, in as much as there is no power but of him: but the Pope is inuested with the authority of the Emperor of Heauen, hee may therefore depose the Emperor of the Earth, and as the same saith; Art. 3. The Emperor is subiect to the Pope two wayes, 1. By a filiall subiection in all spirituall things, 2. By a ministeriall subiection in his administration of temporall things: for the Emperor is the Popes Minister, by whom he admini∣sters temporall things: so he. In like sort saith De planct. eccl. lib. 1. c. 13. p. 3. Aluarus Pelagius, that the Pope hath vniuersall Iurisdiction ouer the whole world, not onely in spirituall things, but in temporall things; albeit he exer∣cise the execution of the temporall sword and iurisdicti∣on, by his sonne the Emperor, as by his aduocate, and by other Kings and Princes of the world. The Pope may de∣priue Kings of their kingdomes, and the Emperor of his Empire. So he. De pap. & conc. author. p. 65. Capistranus agrees with him, The Emperor, if hee be incorrigible, for any mortall sinne, may bee deposed and depriued: the sentence of the Pope alone without a Coun∣cell, is sufficient against the Emperour or any other. It is manifest therefore how much the Popes authority is a∣boue the Imperial celsitude, which it translates, examines, confirmes, or infringes, approoues, or reiects: if hee of∣fends, he punishes, deposes, and depriues him. So he, 22. q. 12. art. 2. Thomas of Aquine in this is also very popish. Any man sinning by infidelity, may be adiudged to lose the right of Dominion as also sometimes for other faults: and againe, So soon as any one for apostacy from the Faith, by iudge∣ment is denounced excommunicate, ipso facto, his Sub∣iects. be absolued from his gouernment, and from the oath of Allegiance. And the Cardinall Cited by Allen answere to the booke of Engli. Iust. p. 68. Tolets Glosse vpon his wordes, Note, that albeit Thomas named onely an Apo∣stata, yet the reason is all one in the Princes case that is
excommunicated; for so soone as one is denounced, or declared as excommunicate, all his subiects be discharged of their obedience: which exposition his brother Cardi∣nall Allen applaude in these words, Thus doth this notable Schooleman write, neyther doe we know any Catholicke Diuine in any age say the contrary. De Cath. inst. tit. 23 n. 11. pa. 98 Simone Pacensis ioynes forces with these fellowes, saying, If Kings or other Christian Princes become here∣tickes, forthwith their Subiects and vassals are freed from their gouernement. Tit. 45. nu. 25. p. 209▪ If any Prince bee vnprofitable, or make vniust Lawes against religion, or against good man∣nera, or doe any such thing to the detriment of spirituall things, the Pope obseruing due circumstances may apply a fit remedy, euen by depriuing such a King of his gouern∣ment and iurisdiction, if the cause require it. Tom. 3. pag. 444. Gregory of Valence is harping vpon the like notes: If the crime of heresie, or apostacy from the Faith, be no∣torious that it cannot be couered, then, euen before the sentence of the Iudge, the aforesaid punishment (meaning depriuation from his dominion) is in part incurred, so far that the subiects may lawfully deny obedience to such an hereticall Lord. Where note by the way, that now many of them doe hold, that all hereticall Kings, (and such they account all protestant Rulers) are depriued of their dominion, before their Pope in his deitiue sentence hath so denounced. Indeed their owne Caitane in this was not Catholike, de∣nying Subiects to be absolued before sentence publickely denounced: and therefore Allen contradicts him, saying, ise facte, Kings be depriued so soone as they doe appeare hereticall: followed also by Philopater, saying, it is an opi∣nion of the Faith; agreeable to Apostolicall doctrine, that euery Christian Prince, if hee fall from the Catholike reli∣gion, falls presently from all his power and dignity, by the force of Gods Law and  and that before sentence of the supreame Pastor denounced. And the fiery Foe Gu Reynold, approues the murder De iusta di. Hen. 3. r . of Henry the third the French King, because bee fauoured
Heretickes, before any excommunication published: his Lib. 23. sect. 11. Institut. reason is, Publicke griefes doe not attend for legall formes. Simancha goes further, That a secret hereticke not one∣ly is to be excommunicated, but his sonne also: his reason is, Heresie is a leprosie, and leprous sonnes begotten of le∣prous parents: and therefore seemes to inferre not onely a depriuation, but also a depriuation of all succession: Atque patrem, & prolem inre priuare suo. I need not recite the generall verdict of popish vassals according with these to maintaine the Popes infolency in attempting the depo∣sition of Kings repugnant to his lawes and liking. Who knowes not, that haue reade the workes of these, Saunders Ʋide Fra: Bzi de tempo. eccl. Mo∣nar. visib. Monar. Suarez def. fid. catho. adv. Angl. sect. err. lib. 6. Francisc. Victor. relect. Depotestate ecolesiae: Beca∣nus, Rossaeus, Bellarmine, Allen, Ferron, Parsons, Creswell, Carerius de potest. Ro. pontif. Mosco. de maiest. milt. eccl. with many dozens of prostituted hirelings? who being fed fatte at the Popes high Altar, and gaping for, or gaining the purple Hat, haue studied to extoll the papacy; which they could not doe more pleasingly to the Pope, or pro∣fitably to themselues, then by ascribing to the Pope a power ouer Kings, to depriue them if they breake their good behauiour to him, and to free subiects from allegi∣ance to them being blasted with the fulminations of ex∣communication; making their master Pope, an absolute Lord of the Temporals, turning the Crosier staffe into a Scepter, yea a commaunder of Scepters, making their Church an humane body politicke, to ouer-rule all, yet vnder a painted pretence of Peters primacy to ouerthrow all Princes supremacy. Egregiam verò laudem, & spolia ampla tulistis. Thus this spurious spawne of the olde Serpent, by this serpentine policy erecting the papall primacy of Popes aboue Kings the Diana of Romes religion, haue raised the Pope to this pontificiall domination. But the chiefe pillar whereof they boast, & would build this point of the pow∣er of Popes deposition of Kings, if they be not Catholike
Kings of the Romane size, is the Decree of the Late∣rane Councell, held about three hundred yeares since, con∣sisting, 3. Canon of the 2. Lateran Councell. as they say, of seuenty Patriarkes & Archbishops, and foure hundred and twelue Bishops, and eight hun∣dred other eminent Prelates, who did decree that the Pope had this power ouer Kings. To which wee an∣swere, Thar the Decrees of men ought not to take from Kings that power which God hath giuen them: But the Lateran Councell was a Conuenticle of Mercenary men, and vassals to the Pope, who to please Innocent the third, their Lord and great Master, were willing to gratifie his Holinesse with vnholy Decrees: yet we may doubt of that too, if Platina be credited, who faith, That in that Coun∣cell many things were offred to consultation, yet nothing determined, because the Pope suddenly departed, to pa∣cifie a sedition then raised, and died in his iourny▪ Yet grant it were a lawfull Councell, and this matter so there decreed, what of that? shall a few proud Prelates assem∣bled to flatter the Pope, infringe the Lawes of God, com∣manding obedience and subiection to Kings? shall Gods commands be countermanded by Councels? which so oft haue erred, nay haue confirmed heresies; as the Coun∣cell of Arimium held with the Arrians; yea Ephesus Seleu∣cia, and Remino concluded with them; which made Saint Dialog. aduers. Lucifer. & Vin∣cent. Cyrin. c. 6. Hierome complaine▪ The whole world groaned and won∣dered to see it selfe Arrian. The error of the Councell of Carthage in rebaptizing is well knowne. The Councell of Chalcedon fowlly erred, giuing to Leo then Bishop of Rome, the title of the▪ Gregory the first said, To consent to this wicked name, what is it else but to lose the faith? lib. 4. cp. 39. Vniuersall Bishop, which name he reiected, though others embrace it. In a worde, the late Councell of Trent brought foorth to light a world of er∣rors, that I may say with Ep. ad Procap. pag. 346. Nazianzene, hee neuer saw any Councell haue a good end. Yea as their owne Turrecrem. sum. de eccl. lib. 3. c. 60. Panorm. de elect. & elect. pot. writers say, Councels haue erred, and may erre, which in these latter times must needes be so: when as the Pope is both party and Iudge, which matter of the erring of Councels Significa. hath so oft and so soundly beene by our Dr Willet Synop. Cen. 1. err. 33. Diuines manife∣sted, that I need not insist vpon it.
But how vaine it is to obtrude for vndoubted proofe, the erroneous decrees, and nouell opinions of clawbacke Dr White in his Way to the Church. lib. 2. c. 47. Papalines & parasites to the Pope, to infringe the power of Kings giuen them in Gods word, commanding Rom. 13. 1. euery soule to be subiect to these higher powers, which place of Saint Paul, the Champions of the Popes power to depose Kings, (as their Cardinall of Perron pleades for them) doe expound to be a prouisionall precept, or caution accom∣modated to the times. A strange error of stout Champi∣ons: and as the royal pen of our In defence of Kings, and inde∣pendency of their Crownes. sacred Soueraigne, taxing the Cardinall for robbing the Scripture of authority, by making Gods precepts temporary prouisoes, laies downe an infallible rule, That Apostolicall instructions, which in∣forme maners, are not changeable, but giue a standing and perpetuall rule, permanent for all people, and not fa∣shionable to the quality of Times: But the Romane Church which teach disloyalty and disobedience against Kings, deposing Kings from their thrones, and then au∣thorizing subiects to take Armes against them, had need accommodate Text to time, whose obedience to Princes is temporary, that is, till they haue a fit season and place, (as a vault vnder a Parliament house) and then as Aeneas Syluius said of the Monkes, Non audet stygius Pluto tentare quod audet Effraenis Monachus— Then they are without humanity, vnnaturall, impious, cruell murderers, as Pro Athan. lib. 1. pag. 65. Lucifer Calaritanus to the Arrians, and I may say to Iesuited Priests, beeing bloudy minded and deceitfull men; and therefore many of them doe not liue out halfe their daies, dying bloudy deaths for acting, or affecting bloudy deeds. Let vs in the next place obserue how before these latter times (I meane before Popery was Heldebrandized, and Iesuited) whether this point of Papall power to depose Emperors or Kings, was eyther broached or belieued in the Church.
CHAP. X. IT should seeme not to be belieued, or broa∣ched, by their owne writers; for Lib. 3. cap 35. Otho Fri∣singensis saith, Rego & relego, &c. I haue read ouer and ouer the Acts of Romane Kings and Emperors, and I can finde none before Hen∣ry the fourth Emperor excommunicated by the Bishop of Rome, or deposed, which was first assayed by Gregory the seauenth, called Heldebrand, Anno Dom. 1066. And In Anno 1085. Ʋrspergensis saith, That the Bishops that had ta∣ken armes with the said Gregory against the Emperor, were cast out of their Bishoprickes by the Synode of Mentz, Chron. where the Popes Legates were present. And In Anno 1088. p. 129. Auent. p. 4. 70. Sigebert saith, This nouelty, that I may not say heresie, did not as yet ap∣peare in the world, that Priests should teach the people, that they ought to shew no obedience to wicked Kings; and though they haue taken an oath of Allegiance, yet owe no falty, neyther are to be called periured, if they haue such mindes against Kings. And In spec. hist lib. 1. cap. 84. Ʋincantius Liri∣nensis agrees with him in the same words. Yea many eminent Romane Catholickes did vtterly dislike Gregories deposition of Henry the fourth, and de∣nied the authority of the Apostolike See to depose him, or to absolue his subiects from their oath of obedience: yea the Gregor▪ 7. epist. 21. lib. 8 apud So∣uer. ad Conc. Bishop of Mentz, Gregories friend and fauourer, writ to the said Pope to furnish him with those reasons where∣with hee was moued to depose the Emperor, to prouide him with answers against all gaine sayers. Yea the Bishops of Rome themselues in the purer times acknowledged all obedience to Emperors and Kings, challenging no such prerogatiue to meddle with their Crownes or persons and for 300. yeares, vntill Siluester, they performed passiue obedience to Heathen Emperors, and so before and after Boniface for 500. yeares they per∣formed actiue obedience to Christian Emperors, submit∣ting themselues vnto them in all loyall subiection, and ac∣knowledging
them (as their owne Bishop Meltiades did to Constantine the Great) to be supreame Head not onely in Temporall, but also in Spirituall things, as Eusebius re∣cords it, lib. 1. c. 5. But peraduenture some Papist may reply and say, that I doe not reckon aright, in making Gregory the sea∣uenth, the first Pope that deposed an Emperor, which yet is affirmed by their owne writers: for Leo the third Empe∣ror was excommunicated by Gregory the second, and de∣priued of all his Temporalities hee held in Italy; and the Greeke Emperors were remoued from the Empire by Leo the third, Bishop of Rome, and so of some others. Which obiection is so frequently answered by our Diuines, who haue written about this point of the Popes power in this kinde, that for breuity I will passe it ouer in a worde, That Gregory the second did not depriue Leo the third Emperor of his temporalities, but onely was an agent, or as the head of rebellion in the reuolt of the Italians from the Empe∣ror, not by his vniuersall authority now claimed, but by a popular sedition then raised. And to the second, That the Greeke Empire was translated by Or as some write, by Gregory the fift. Leo the third to the Germanes, is much doubted: for Ʋrsperg. in an∣no 718. Sigebert. in Anno 731. some historians write, it was translated by a Decree of the people of Rome, not by the Popes keyes; yet probably he might haue his head, hand, and heart in it: for as Pope Adrian the sixt said, All mischiefe came from the chiefe Bishop of Rome into the whole Church, and by his Legate Cleregatus promised re∣formation to the Germanes. The Popes of Rome haue a long time laboured to rise to this primacy of pride by degrees: first aboue Bishops, as in Boniface the third: after aboue Kings and Emperors, specially in Gregory the seauenth and his successors: yet those aspiring wings clipt by Councels, Wormes, Papia, Brixis, Mentz; till at last, two of the worst Councels, the Laterane and Tridentine, did lift vp the Pope to the top of the pinnacle, not onely aboue Kings and Councels, but aboue Gods counsels the sacred Scriptures: Tantae molis erat Romanum surgere papam.
But let vs a little look vpon this question (which yet is like a Spirit, sooner raised then put downe,) of the papall power of Kings deposition. A spiritual power in the Pope of primacy I know none, temporall much lesse, but this same pretended Ecclesia Romana est priuatiua, non primitiua. priuatiue power least of al: for it is not in any place to be found, that God hath giuen to the Pope, yea to any man, power to make or vnmake temporall King  for hee that can depose a King, must bee aboue a King; but regall power is the highest power on earth, post Deum secundus est, & solo Deo A King is not bound to giue an account to Popes or people, but God. minor, as Tertullian of Kings, next after God, and inferi∣our to none but God: Super quem non est nisi solus Deus, as Optatus Mileuitanus, aboue whom there is none but God alone. So King Psalm. 51. 4. Dauid, Tibi soli peccaui, against thee onely haue I finned. So that I may say with De potest. regia, & papali. c. 10. Otho deposed John 22. Pope. &c. Iohn of Paris, In the Emperour is inuested a power to depose the Pope, (as formerly many haue beene) if he abuse his power, be∣cause he is his superiour; but not in the Pope, for he is, and ought to be his inferiour: and with this Iohn Maior agree many other, Almaine and Occam, as Quae. 2. de po∣test. eccl. & Laic. c. 12. Almaine alleadges Occams opinion, and makes it his owne conclusion, That the Pope hath no power eyther by excommunication, or by any other meanes to depose a Prince ftom his royall dignity; and further c. 9. 10. 11. affirmes with Occam, saying, The Emperour is not bound to sweare allegiance to the Pope, but the Pope if he hold any temporal possessions, is bound to sweare allegiance to the Emperor, and to pay him tri∣bute. The Scripture recites 19. Kings of Israel, and 14. of Iudah, who brake the coue∣nant made with the Lord, yet none deposed by Priest or Prophet for that cause. But the Champions of the Popes power in this kinde, alleadge some presidents of the Priests in the olde law, who (as they say) by vertue of their Priesthood haue de∣posed and depriued Kings from their seates, which power they labour to deriue and appropriate to the Popes office: I will name but two of them in two examples. 1 Cardinall Defens. Angl. Catho. c. 5. 2 Chron. 26. Allen alleadgeth Azarias the high Priest, who with o other Priests put downe Ozias, smitten with leprosie, by force out of the Temple, and depriued him of his regall authority: Ergo (say they) it is lawfull for the
high Priest, that is, the Pope, to driue hereticall Kings, that is, spirituall Leapers, out of the Temple of Gods▪ Church, and Territories of their kingdome, by excom∣munication, which is a separation; and then by deposition, which is a finall depriuation of them, and deputation of some other Regent, as Azarias committed the kingdome to be then gouerned by Iotham his sonne. Wee answere (as some of our Church haue answered) That Azarias did not depriue Ozias of his regall power, for he held it to his dying day; onely his sonne Iotham as a kinde of Viceroye was surrogated, because the immedi∣ate hand of God had smitten him with leprosie: for his le∣prosie he was punished to liue apart, a priuate life, not to 2 Chro. 26. 20. Visa lepra Sacer∣dotes regem lepro∣sum ad festine egrediendum mo∣nent. Caietan. in 2. Paral. 26. be depriued of his inheritance. Ambition, couetousnesse, yea all sinne is a leprosie (hath not the Pope such a conta∣gion?) why then he may as well be depriued of his Miter, being a grand sinner, and so a great leaper, as any other. Indeed Ozias, or Vzziah greatly sinned in presuming to vsurpe the Priests office, transgressing against the Lord, in going into the Temple to burne incense vpon the Altar of Ʋ. 16. Sacerdotis est tan∣tum arguere, non mouere arma. &c. Chrysost. 18 Leuitic. 13. incense; and Azariah with the other Priests withstood Vzziah the King, telling him, it pertained not to him to burne incense, but to the Priests, the sonnes of Aaron con∣secrated to offer it: and was smitten of the Lord for it with leprosie, and so liued apart according to the Law, yet still was King in esse, though not in execution. 2 Cardinall Bellarmine alleadgeth Iehoiada the High 2 Kings 11. Priest, who commanded Athalia the Queene to bee slaine, and Ioash to succeed; implying an inference, that so it is lawfull for Popes to doe the like. We answer, that Athalia an vsurper and murderer, kil∣ling all the royall seed, excepting only the secretly preser∣ued Ioash the vndoubted heyre of the Crowne, beeing proclaimed and annointed King with a generall consent of all; Iehoiada by the authority of the King, and not as High Priest, but rather tanquam regis patruus, & Protector, as his Kinsman and Protector, the King being in his mino∣rity seauen yeares olde, and Iehoiada being his Allye, ha∣uing
married the Kings An, and so bound by the Law of Nature and Nations to defend the Kings right, and to reuenge the tyranny of a bloudy Queen against the Kings killed progeny: and Iehoiadaes commandement was con∣firmed by the Kings authority, and with the common con∣sent and Counsell of the land, not as being High Priest, but as chiefe of his Tribe, to reuenge the crying bloud of the royall offspring murthered by vsurping Athalia, to depriue her of her vsurped regiment and life: what is this to depose a lawfull King by the authority of the Pope? Kings shall anguste sedere, as Tully said to Caesar, haue qua∣king Scepters, vnquiet seates, and narrow limits, if the Pope haue power to depriue them of their power & state. But to passe ouer other the like examples alleadged by Romanists in this kinde, I will touch those foure things which they obiect, and say, doe dissolue regall right, and make Kings who are culpable of such faults, to forfeit their Crownes. 1. Tyranny. 2. Infidelity. 3. Heresie. 4. Apostacy. The Popish assertions heerein runne in the affirmatiue, that all, or any one is sufficient to depriue a King of his Crown. The opinions of Protestants run in the negatiue, that none of these are sufficient to make a King forfeit his dignity and Diademe. To begin with the first: Tyranny doth not cut off a King from his soueraignty. Who a greater Tyrant then King Saul, who 1 Sam. 24. 12. hunted after Dauids soule to take it: yet who was so 1 Sam. 22. 14. faithfull among all his seruants as Dauid? confessed by Sauls owne mouth, To be more righteous then he, for thou hast rendred mee good, and I haue ren∣dred thee euill: yea this 1 Sam. 24. 18. Saul such a tyrant, that he com∣manded Doeg to 1 Sam. 22. 18. 19. fall vpon the Lords Priests, and Doeg at his commandement flew sounescore and fiue persons, that did weare a linnen Ephod, and did smite Nob the Priests City, with the edge of the sword, both man and woman, childe and suckling, oxe and asse, and sheepe with the sword. Yet Dauid, no priuate, or plebean subiect, but a man by Gods commandement designed for the Kingdome,
cheefe Captaine and Coronel of Sauls Army, and heire ap∣parent to the Crowne; and hauing opportunity to depriue Saul of his life, and importunity of his followers to doe the deed, yet heare his voice, The 1 Sam. 24. 7. Lord keepe me from doing that thing vnto my Master the Lords Annointed, to lay my hand vpon him, for he is the Lords Annointed: and the same Dauid to Abishai Destroy 1 Sam. 26. 9. him not, for who can lay his hand vpon the Lords Annointed, and be guilt∣lesse? O heauenly voice of holy Dauid, how different are Popelings from Dauids resolution! Occasionem victoria Dauid habebat in manibus, incantum & securum aduersari∣um sine labore poterat iugulare, advictoriam opportunitas hor∣tabatur: sed obstabat Diuinorum memoria mandatorum: non mittam manum in vnctum Domini, repressit cum gladio ma∣num, & dum timuit oleum, seruauit inimicum, As most ele∣gantly, and excellently writes Lib. 2. cōtra Par∣menianum. Volebam hostem vincere, sed prius est diuina praecepta seruare, &c. Ibi∣dem Optatus. Their vnction makes them sa∣cred, so that their fatall touch, makes the Sub∣iect sacrilegious. Optatus, Dauid had a pre∣sent occasion of security of victory, and might without a∣ny difficulty, or danger haue killed his vnkind and vncon∣siderate enemy; opportunity might haue pressed him to it, but the remembrance of Gods commandements stay his hand, Touch not my Annointed: This keepes backe the hand and sword, and fearing the regall oyle, fauours a dis∣mall enemy. Now Tyranny may be of two kinds, either of vsurped regiment and dominion, without any ciuill title and inte∣rest hauing no titular foundation, but violent vsurpation; and herein subiection is not necessary, Quoad obedientiam, if Quoad Sustntiam: Herein patience more requisite then obedience. 2 Kind is, when ordinary and lawfull power degenerates into tyranny and cruelty by abuse; and herein Reade Tollett, de occidendo Tyranno lib. 5. c. 6. Mariana. Fra de Veron &c. Papists giue liberty, Tyrannum occidere licet, It is lawfull to kill a Tyrant, contrary to Dauid; God forbid that I should lay mine hand vpon the Lords Annointed; 1 Sam. 26. 11. Meaning Saul, a Tyrant by abuse, but not by vsurpation: but we haue handled this before, and therefore In the former Booke c. 5. of Bri∣tan. Vota. leaue it. 2. Infidelity doth not depriue a King of his regiment: Oh but replies the Papist, All title to Dominion, hath
foundation in the grace of Iustice, Charity, and Piety; so Ʋid. Quaest. Ar∣menic lib. 10. c. 4. that by impiety or infldelity, they make forfeiture of their authority. Answer: It is prouidence, not grace, that dispo∣seth ciuill titles; grace, not prouidence, that makes them comfortable: In a spirituall sense, impious and vnfaithfull men, are vsurpers, I meane by a spirituall right; (for 1 Tim. 4. 8. god∣linesse hath the promises of this life) yet haue they a ciuill and sure title among men, by birthright, succession, electi∣on, or other acquisition, by which titles such rights are de∣uolued to them, that we say with Saint De ciuit dei. lib. 5. c. 11. Austen; Qui dedit Mario, ipse & Caesari, He that gaue dominion to Marius, the same gaue it to Caesar; he that to Augustus, the same to Nero; he that to gentle Ʋespasian, the same to bloody Do∣mitian; he that to Constantine the Christian, the same to the Apostate Iulian: for the Psal. 22. 28. Kingdome is the Lords, and hee ruleth among Nations, the most High hath power ouer the Kingdome of Men, and giueth it to whomsoeuer hee will, and appointeth ouer it the most abiect among men, saith Dan. 4. 14. Daniel; and suffereth for the sinnes of the people, a Kingdome Ecclesiasticus 10. 8. to be translated from one people to another, yea, an hypocrite, or infidell to reigne ouer them; neither must man seeke to displace or dispossesse an Infidell King, but say with 1 Sam. 26. 10. Dauid; Either the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or hee shall descend into battell, and perish: knowing the saying of the sonne of Syrack to be true, Ecclesiasticus 10. 10. 11. Tyranny is of small indurance, and he that is to day a King, to morrow is dead. 3. Heresie is not sufficient to depriue a King of his tem∣porall Inheritance. Popish Diuinity is herein knowne, let De Rom. Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7. Bellarmine be the mouth of all the rest: Christians are not bound, nor may, with the euident danger of Religion, tol∣lerate an vnbeleeuing King: when Kings and Princes be∣come Heretickes are depriued of all right of rule, ei∣ther naturall, oe∣cocal, or ci∣uill. Fr. Ouand. 4. d. 13. p. 347. heretickes, they may be iudged of the Church, and bee deposed from the gouernement, neither is there any wrong done them, if they be deposed. If any Prince of a sheepe become a wolfe, that is to say, of a Christian become an Hereticke, the Pastor of the Church, by excommunication may driue him away, and
withall command the people that they follow him not, and so depriue him of his dominion ouer his Subiects: so Subiects are freed from all o∣bedience, and al∣legiance to them. Turrecr. Sum. de eccl. lib. 2. c. 11. 4. farre goes the Cardinall. Now who are Heretickes? All those Kings which decline from the Papacy, and denie his Supremacy. The Cardinall thinkes as much: Regnante Con∣stantino florebat fides Christiana, &c. While Constantine reigned, the Christian Faith flourished; when Constantius ruled, Arrianisme, when Iulian, Ethnicisme; when Henry the eighth and Edward the sixth, Luthenarisme, when Eliza∣beth, Caluinisme prospered: All Protestant Princes by the verdict of the Pope and his Parasites, be Hereticks, and so consequently to be deposed, if this their heresie (which yet is the Catholicke verity, and sincere and sound profes∣sion of the Gospell) be accompanied with the Popes ex∣communication: and yet it is a great question, and neuer yet proued by the Scripture, that Kings are subiect to this censure of excommunication; it is disputed much both wayes; and let it be yeelded for argument sake, Ex abun∣dante, That Saint Theod. histor. Ec∣cles. lib. 5. c. 18. Ambrose did iustly with Theodosius in that abstention; for I doubt whether it was a complete ex∣communication: for a King is subiect to the presbyteriall Cure, not Court; to be informed in his conscience in the Pulpet, not to be corrected in the Consistory by punish∣ment; to be directed, not iudged, or remoued from the company of his faithfull Subiects, much lesse to be depo∣sed, or depriued of his regiment ouer them; yet let it bee granted for argument sake, that Princes may be subiect to the censure of excommunication, which yet is sparingly to be vsed against Princes, as Contra. Epist. Parmen. lib. 3. c. 2. Austen counselleth: yet though the sentence of excommunication be direfull, ma∣king them for a time as Ethnicks, Sit tibisicut Ethnicus, saith our Math. 18. 17. Sauiour, Let him be vnto thee as an Heathen Man or Publicane: It is tanquam, nonplusquam, as an Hea∣then man, not worse then an Heathen Man. Loyalty and obedience to Ethnicke Kings is to be performed, as the precepts and presidents of Christ, and his Apostles plain∣ly teach all: The spirituall sword onely depriues of spiri∣tuall rights, to depriue him of the Sacrament, not of the
Scepter: shuts out of the Kingdome of Heauen, not med∣dles with the Kingdome of Earth. Excommunication is not an extirpation, it serues not to take away any mans temporall goods of body, or life, or Kingdome on Earth; it hath power ouer sinnes, not ouer possessions, as De Consid. ad Eu∣gen. lib. 2. Bernard to Pope Eugenius: It serues to tame the soule, not to terrifie or destroy the body; it can∣not bind Kings that they should not reigne, or absolue Subiects that they should not obey, or depose Kings from their regall authority, by which pretence of diuellish pol∣licy, in challenging a spirituall power of Kings excommu∣nication, the Pope hath plagued the World with many temporall rebellions. 4. Apostacy takes not away Soueraignty. Iulian an ap∣parent Apostate, and wicked Idolater, as Saint Aug. in Psal. 124. Austen cals him, yet as the same Father speakes of it, Milites Chri∣stiani seruierunt huic Imperatori infideli: & quando dicebat, producite aciem, ira illam gentem, statim obtempera∣bant: The Christian Souldiers serued this Infidel Emperor, and when he called to produce the Army, or to goe against any Nation, they presently obeyed; not because they wan∣ted power to resist: for his whole Army for the most part were Christians, as their voices to Iouinian Iulians Suc∣cessor testifie, Ruff. lib. 2. hist. cap. 1. Omnes vna voce confessi sunt se esse Christi∣anos, They all confessed with one accord, that they were Christians; but their obedience grounded vpon Saint Aust. vb, supra. Austens reference, Subiectes fuisse, propter Dominum ater∣num, Domino temporali, Subiect to their temporall Lord, * Ala. contra exe∣cut. Angl. iust. pa. 167. Bellar. de rom. pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7. for the eternall Lords sake. And though some of the great Diuines of Rome, say; that the Apostles were subiect to Infidell or apostate Princes, and many Martyrs obedient, because they wanted power to resist; and that they might haue lawfully resisted, if they had had strength: when ra∣ther I may say with Tertul. in Apolo∣get. Tertullian, that they had power, but might not lawfully resist. The Apostles were no Tempo∣rizers, to command to pray for Nero, if the time, and not the truth, had not moued them to doe it for conscience sake: Shall Subiects, for Heathen or wicked Kings be 1 Tim. 2. 1. 2. en∣ioyned
to poure forth prayers & supplications, and with∣all be willing (if they haue power) to poure out their So∣ueraignes blood? The Prophet Ieremy exhorted the exiled Iewes to offer vp their prayers for the life of the King of Babylon: hee would not haue willed them to haue prayed for their persecutor, if it had beene a duty contrary to Christian profession, or for lacke of power, to fall to sup∣plication. VVhen King Ester 3. 13. Assuerus had made a decree to kill and destory all the Iewes, both yong and old, children and women in one day, what doe they? rebell, or rise vp in armes to resist with violence? No, no, sorrow, Ester 4. 3. and fast∣ing, weeping, and mourning, sackecloth, and ashes, are their weapons. When Iulian the Apostate, threatned the Christian World; Lachrimae vnicum medicamentum aduer∣sus eum, saith Orat. 1. in Iulia∣num. Nazianzene: Teares the onely medicine a∣gainst his mischeefe, teares were their Speares, Orizons their weapons; They knew that they Rom. 13▪ 2. that resisted power, resisted the ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall re∣ceiue to themselues damnation. These had not beene ca∣techized in the Popes Schoole, teaching Subiects that the Pope hath power to depriue Kings, if they be defec∣tiue in their regiment, or not pliable to his commande∣ment; but were obedient, as the Apostle Rom. 13. 5. exhorts, Propter conscientiam, for conscience sake. Oh but will Master In his censure vpon the Apolo∣gy. Parsons reply, We hold this point, that a Prince is to be obeyed Propter conscientiam, for con∣science sake; but not Contrae conscientiam, Against his con∣science: And he is so stiffe in this assertion, that he saith, If one authority, example, or testimony out of Scripture, Fathers, or Councels, contradict it, we then speake to pur∣pose. VVe answer; Against Conscience rightly instructed, and warranted by the word, It is true: but there is Asinina, lupina, or leprosa conscientia, A foolish, woluish, or leprous conscience, which vicious or erroneous conscience is not rightly called conscience, but error, and peruersenesse, and therein it failes. If a King command things expressely contrary to Gods word, the Acts 3. 19. Apostles rule then is plaine, VVe must obey God rather then men; yet not fall to vio∣lence,
or outward resistance in body, but in spirit; submit∣ting our bodies to suffer with patience what shall bee in∣flicted, like the three Dan. 3. 21. Children to Nabuchadnezar; but in our soules to shew our selues more then Conquerors for our Conscience sake. Thus doe we see, that the foure forenamed crimes, Ty∣ranny, Infidelity, Heresie, Apostacy, (yet great, and gree∣uous sinnes) are not sufficient to depriue a King of his re∣gall Inheritance, or to free his Subiects from their obe∣dience. CHAP. XI. I VVil in the next place briefly consider the goodly Harmony of the holy Doctors of Rome, in the managing and maintaining of this new Doctrine of deposition of Kings by making their Quem penes ar∣bitrium, & ius & norma regendi. Pope an absolute Lord of all Temporalties, and of the Spiri∣tualties; by vertue of which vaste omnipotency of power, as being the Supreme spirituall, and temporall Prince of all, and ouer all, they ascribe vnto his Holinesse this ple∣nitude of power, to haue the iurisdiction of both swords; and so may passe against Kings (if they bee faulty by tyranny, infidelity, heresie or apostacy; or not Roman Ca∣tholickes) Sentences of Excommunication, Breues of In∣terdiction, Depriuation, Buls of Absolution of Subiects from Alleagiance; yea, giue Licence, and Indulgences of pardon to misereants to Such Kings may bee killed when it please the Pope. Baron. Ann. 1089. . 11. murder them: and yet this is not to be counted King-killing, for a King excommuni∣cated, or deposed, is no King in Popery: Let vs see the consent of these Doctors, or rather heare the confusion of their tongues in building of this Babell. Some of the cheefe pillars of Popery defend the direct, ordinary, and inherent authority of the Pope; whereby as Lord of the whole VVorld, in all temporall matters hee may at his pleasure depose Emperors, and Princes: The
cheefe of these is Cardinall Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. An. 57. pa. 423 & 433. Baronius, and to alleadge his reasons I omit, his Bookes are common, and extant in the world. And this opinion, that the Pope is Lord of all the Temporalties, and that the supreame Iurisdiction both in temporall and spirituall matters, belong to Peters Succes∣sors, (which was the brainelesse assertion of old blockish Canonists, and exploded of all sober Papists,) is now re∣newed, and passeth for Catholick Doctrine. Your De temp. Eccl. Monarch. li. 1. 1. 3. fol 98. Francis Bozius defends it, that the Pope is directly Lord of things temporall, and is the Ruler and Monarke of the whole world. So Rodericus Episc. Zamo: al∣leadged by Care∣rius. De potest. Ro. pontif. pag. 131. Sancius, a Bishop of theirs goes fur∣ther; It is to be holden, according to the naturall, morall, and diuine Law, wth the right Faith, that the Lordship of the Roman Bishop is the true, and onely immediate Lord∣ship of all the world, not as concerning spirituall things onely, but also as concerning temporall things; and that the imperiall Lordship of Kings dependeth vpon it, and oweth seruice and attendance thereunto, as a meanes, mi∣nister, and instrument; and that by him it receiueth institu∣tion and ordination, and at the commandement of the pa∣pall Lordship, it may be remoued, reuoked, corrected, and punished: In the gouernement of the world, the secular Lordship is not necessary either of pure, or meere, or expe∣dient necessity; but when the Church cannot. Resoluing this Article therefore, we say; That in all the world there is but one Lordship, and therefore there must be but one Vniuersall and Supreame Prince, and Monarke; who is Christs Vicar, according to that of Daniel, Dan. 7. 14. Which place is proper onely to Christ, the Bi∣shop expounds of the Pope. He gaue him dominion, and honour, and kingdome, and all people, and languages shall serue him: In him therefore is the Foun∣taine and originall of all Lordship, and from him the o∣ther Powers flow: so farre goes this Popish Bishop. And diuers others agree with him; It is iudged that no Christian Monarke hath his Crowne wholly giuen him from Heauen, vnlesse it receiue firmenesse and strength al∣so from Christs Vicar the Pope, so Posseuir. bib. o∣thec. select . 17. Possevine. Christ com∣mitted to Peter the Key-keeper of eternall life, the right of earthly and heauenly gouernement; and that in his place
the Pope is the vniuersall Iudge, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords; saith Isid. Mos. de Maiest. milit. Eccl. pag. 27. another: yea, the holy Writer in the old law made the Priesthood an adiectiue to the King∣dome, but Saint Peter made the Kingdome an adiectiue to the Priesthood, faith the same Isid. Mos. pag. 22. de Maiest. milit. Eccl. writer. Carerius a Doctor of Padua, in his Booke De potestate Romani Pontificis, which he made specially to confute Bel∣larmine, who denied the ordinary and direct power of the Pope in the Temporalties, doth in many places and pages Pag. 9. maintaine, that all dominion as well in spirituall things, as in temporall, is fetcht by Christ, and the same is commit∣ted to Saint Peter and his Successors: that Christ was Lord of all these inferior things, not onely as he was God, but also as he was Man, hauing at that time dominion in the Pag. 111. Earth: and therefore, as the dominion of the world, both diuine, and humane, was then in Christ, as man; so now it is in the Pope the vicar of Christ. That Christ is directly the Lord of the world in tem∣porall things, and therefore the Pope Christs vicar, is the Pag. 112. like; and this power giuen to Peter, is set out, by the sole comming of Peter to Christ vpon the water, for vniuersall Pag. 151. gouernement is signified by the Sea. As God is the Supreme Monarke of the world, pro∣ductiuely, and gubernatiuely, although of himselfe he be Pag. 145. neither of the world, nor temporall: so the Pope, although originally, and from himselfe he haue dominion ouer all things temporall, yet he hath it not by any immediate ex∣ecution, and committeth that to the Emperor by an vni∣uersall iurisdiction. It would weary a man to reade ouer this worke of Ca∣rerius, wherein he sweates and toyles himselfe, striuing with arguments, and laying a curse vpon his aduersaries, that shal gainsay him, or denie the ordinary & direct pow∣er of the Pope in the temporalties: which he writes, as his Vide Saund. visib. Monarch, & de claue Dauid. Melina. tract. 2. de Institut. Becanus, &c. Preface speakes, against the Politicians, and heretickes of the Time; and indeed specially against a greater Clerke then himselfe, Bellarmine, both temporizers to flatter Popes with power in temporalties. To omit all the rest of
this ranke, who inclineto this opinion, That the Pope hath a direct, ordinary, and inherent power in Temporalties: let vs on the other side, behold these Madianites, or Cad∣meyes Brethren, warring and wrangling with an opinio∣nate opposition and contradiction. The principall, and Coriphaeus of all the rest, is the Car∣dinall De rom. pontif. lib. 5. c. 6. Non potest papa, vt papa, ordi∣nariè temporales Principes depone∣re, etiam iusta de causa, tanquam Iu∣dex ordinarius, nec ordinariè iudicare de temporalibus. Bellarmine, who ouerthrowes that ordinary, direct, and inherent gouernement of the Pope in temporalties, as left by Christ, with scripturall arguments very soundly, and sufficiently; yet to gratifie the Pope like a good ser∣uant, he restraines it to limitations, and distinctions: Al∣though (saith he) the Pope be not Lord of all Temporal∣ties directly, neither hath inherent and ordinary authori∣ty as he is Pope, to disthronize temporall Princes, yet he is Lord of the Temporalties indirectly, in order to the Spiri∣tuals (Bellarmines vsuall phrase) and hath an extraordinary and a borrowed authority, as he is cheefe spirituall Prince, to alter Kingdomes, to take them from one, and to giue them to another, if it bee necessary to the saluation of soules, i. in order to the Spiritualties. Wherein obserue how politicke these papall Parasites be, disputing about a power of Popes, in disposing Temporals or Regals, one fort deriuing this power directly, and ordinarily from Christ, and Saint Peter; the other side indirectly, and onely in order to the Spirituals, when as their Pope neuer had any direct, or indirect power in that kind from God, and from Saint Peter. But marke how the sonnes' of this Kingdome be diui∣ded: The Pope hath either ordinary and direct power to depose Kings, as he is Pope; or he hath no authority at all, faith Carerius: But he hath no direct, and ordinary, as he is Pope, by Bellarmines opinion, Ergo, He hath none at all. Thus their diuision hath made a true conclusion, that their Pope hath neither ordinary, or indirect power in disposi∣tion of Temporals: but least Bellarmine should proue an Hereticke in this point, and be vngratefull to his great Master the Pope, of whom he is graced with the purple hat; hee comes with his qualification, and modification,
That the Pope is Lord of the Temporalties indirectly, in order to the Spirituals; which strange distinction hath no foundation: for Peter could Extraordinaria potestas non transit i Successorem. transferre no power but ordi∣nary, and the Pope is no otherwise cheefe spiritual Prince, but as he is Pope; so that if he cannot depose Princes or∣dinarily from their Temporalties as Pope, he cannot de∣pose them extraordinarily, and indirectly as cheefe spiritu∣all Prince: which Carerius enforces, Either (saith he) hee is not the vicar of Christ, or else he deposeth inferior powers as Pope; but he deposeth them not as Pope, saith Bellar∣mine: he is not therefore the vicar of Christ by Carerius conclusion. Thus Bellarmine hath depriued his Pope of the Temporalties, and his opposite Carerius hath not left him Lord of the Spiritualties: The one denies him a depo∣sing Pope, the other inferres vpon it, no Deputy or vicar of Christ; both assertions very true, though they deliuer them by way of altercation. Thus these wrangling spirits haue brought their Popes imaginary power in great ha∣zard to be lost. The one making their Pope Am not I thine Asse, which thou hast ridden vpon since thy first time vnto this day? Numb. 22. 30. Exod. 18. 18. anto oneri ceruix  sufficit vlla. apa sed non vt pa, habet aliquo odo, sed modo in∣directo, potestatem quandam, tempo∣alem, sed non me∣è, nec absolutam, d ad aliquid rela∣, nec perpetu∣, sed casualem,  Eliens. Bishop most excellently  his answere to tus, pag. 27. Sathans Asse, loading him with a boundlesse burthen of power, too heauy for a∣ny to beare, to haue the direct dominion of all the Tem∣poralties in the world absolutely, and ordinarily: Onus Aetna granius, A burthen heauier then the weight of the Mountain Aetna. Iethro said, that Moses his task was too heauy for him; and Iob, Curuantur qui portant orbem, They that support the world, are crooked: yet these Ingrossers of greatnesse, would lay vpon their Popes shoulders the vnsupportable weight of the dominion of the world, to be Lord of all the Temporalties directly, and ordinarily. The other giues him not so much weight of authority, yet giues him too much; To depose Kings if need require, taking a middle course, denying the infinite power of In∣herent and ordinary gouernement; yet reseruing an indi∣rect and borrowed authority belonging to the Pope, yet not as Pope, but as the cheefe spirituall Prince, conditio∣nally, if Kings become tyrannicall, hereticall, or apostati∣call, then the Pope is to coniure them into the circle of
religion, by counsell and admonition; and after if they proue refractary, to confine them out of their dominionby depriuation and deposition: and all this is pretended to be done by power of a spirituall right indirectly to the tem∣poralties, yet to a spirituall end, and in order to the spiri∣tualties. The first to all mens eyes appeare most grosse and egre∣gious parasites, besotted with palpable folly and flattery: but Bellarmine more smooth and cunning, long acquain∣ted with dissimulation, (the very Genius of Romes Court-Cardinals) bedawbes his workes with oyly morter, with holy hony, (if it bee for the saluation of soules, in order De pont. lib. 5. c. 6. to the spirituals, tending to In ordine quidē ad bonum spiritu∣ale &c. spirituall good,) then Si meruere (Pater) tunc dira tonitruamitte, Percutient summos reges, nec fulmina cessent. If they deserue, let Papall thunder cleaue These Regall Cedars, and of Crownes bereaue. These are Boanerges, sonnes of thunder, yet would seeme Barnabasses, sonnes of comfort, tempering and qualifying their fiery thunderbolts of depriuation with a pretence of spirituall good, tending to soules saluation. Vide Ioh. Maior. Doctor. parisi. dist. 24. quaest. idem, Comment. in l. 4. sent. dist. 24. fol. 214. But there is a third sort of Papists on the other side, men of more humble mindes, disliking this statizing Ie∣suitisme, and papall intrusion into Caesars chaire, confes∣sing that the Pope hath no temporall power ouer Kings directly: as Gul. Barclayus de authoritate Papae, against whose opinion herein Bellarmine writes a Treatise, De po∣testate summi pontificis contra Gul. Barclayum: 8. Arti. 7. 8. Watson in his Quodlibeticall Booke, Sheldon in his generall rea∣sons, Roger Widdringtons humble supplication to Paul the fift Pope, which worke a late Condemned in that Decree which was chiefly intended against the Archb of Spalato. The Vniuersity of Paris, and the Sorbone Schoole acknowledge the Popes nullity of power in tempo∣rall authority o∣uer Kings. Decree of Romes Car∣dinalls prohibited, repining to see Popes temporall in∣croachments by Romanists contradicted, good reason therefore to clap their hand vpon his mouth, and to com∣mit him to the dungeon of suppression: Stephen Gardiners booke, Bishop of VVinchester, De vera obedientia, with a preface of Bishop Bonners adioyned to it, De summo &
absoluto Regis imperio, published by M. Bekinsaw, Devera differentia regiae potestatis, & Ecclesiae: Bishop Tonstals Sermon, Bishop Longlands Sermon, Tonstals letter to Car∣dinall Poole, and many others in Latine and English in this kinde of Romane Catholickes, all ouerthrowing this point of moderne Popery. Thus as many Papists openly deny; and I presume ma∣ny Vide Tract. in∣script. le Franc. di∣scours. An. 1000. The nullity of Papall power in the Temporal∣ties and Regali∣ties of Kings will fully appeare in the 6. Volume of the Archb. of Spalatos Book, de rep. ecclesiastica. Marsilius and Oc∣cbam did write a∣gainst this Popes pretneded supre∣macy. of the other doe inwardly beleeue, (being acquainted with their equiuocations, and mentall reseruations) so it may make all men maruell, who are not prepossessed with preiudicate opinions, or preposterous affections, vpon what sufficient, yea probable inducements, and motiues they might build this Pontifician power, eyther of spiri∣tuall, much lesse of temporall authority ouer Kings, ey∣ther directly or indirectly, by way of deposition of Kings, or disposition of their kingdomes. The Basis or pillar of this power, yea pride, they fetch from a primacy (as they say) of Peter, which is diuolued to the See of Rome by right of succession: in both of which points they haue beene lamentably soyled, and it were fol∣ly in me to rub ouer the incureable wounds they haue re∣ceiued in this conflict. I will stand but as a spectator or relator of this skir∣mish: first in Peters primacy. First, wee request them to choose out a place for the foundation of it. And the Car∣dinall De sacram. Chr. leg. l. 3. p. 103. Contarenus answereth, That in his iudgement it was chiefly giuen in the 16. of Mathew, when the keyes were giuen him. But his Brother D. Pontific. lib. 1. c. 12. Bellarmine, & the Rhem. Annotat. Job. 21. 17. Jansen. Concord. c. 14.  Vbi supra. p. 104. Rhemists deny this, and say, The koyes were not then giuen, but onely promi∣sed, and with the keyes the supremacy; the Gift was in the 21. of Iohn, where Christ said, Feede my sheepe. But  Con∣tra replies againe, Let not the subtilty of some more ye that say thus, for they speake more subtilly then truely: thus in the very ore from they begin to stagger, and vary among themselues. But because the place of Math. 16. commonly allead∣ged to prooue Peters supremacy, is their most euident
Locus valde illu∣stris, vbi Christus cam authoritatem verbis amplissimis D. Petro promisit. Greg. Valent. tom. 3. pag 185. place, there we insist, and obiect, that heerein Peter had no more giuen him then the other Apostles, and all made equall with him: for Peter had no more but to be the rocke, and to receiue the keyes; but this is common to the other, ergo, &c. For all the power of the rocke and keyes is included in binding and loosing, retaining and remit∣ting sinnes, as Bell. de rom. pon∣tif. li. 1. c. 12. §. verum haec. Ian∣sen. harm. c. 66. themselues teach: but this power was gi∣uen to all the Apostles, Math. 18. 18. Iohn 20. 21. There∣fore all the power of the Rocke and Keyes common to the other. To reconcile this point and dissolue this knot, they skirmish among themselues: Caiet. Tract. de instit. pontif. c. 5. Sad primum. Greg. de Valent. tom. 3. p 109. Some denying, that the keyes containe more then binding and loosing: Others, that Christ in the 18. of Matthew, gaue not the Apostles the whole power of the keyes, making a threefold sort of keyes, of Primacie, of Order, of Iurisdiction: But Vbi supra. Bellar∣mine condemnes that, saying; It was neuer heard that there were more keyes in the Church then two, of Order, and of Iurisdiction: by which assertion, in giuing the other Apo∣stles the same keyes of Order and Iurisdiction, hee con∣firmes our conclusion. The highest authority that can be assigned, is contained in the keyes say Per claues supre∣mam potestatē gu∣bernandi ecclesiam Christi, &c. Iansen. concor. cap. 66. E∣man. Sa. Annot. Math. 16. 19. Rhem. annot. Mat. 16. 19. If that were true, the Apostles should haue boūd and loosed in Pe∣ters name. they, and the keyes were giuen the other Apostles, Math. 18. Iohn 20. 23. as well as Peter; there∣fore Peter hath no supremacy by the Text, or by their ex∣positions. The common answer of them is, That albeit the Apo∣stles had the same keyes and power that Peter had, yet with a difference, that Peter had it before them, and as their Ordinary, but they after him, as his Legates and sub∣iects: which is vntrue; for in the 20. of Iohn, 21. they all had their power and commission from Christs own mouth, not from Peter: And Mark. 16. 15. Christ said to all, Goe ye and preach the Gospell to euery creature; so that seeing they had all their Commission immediatly from Christs mouth, it doth imply a contradiction to say, they had it vnder and from Peter: herein they implicate themselues in diuers turnings: some Caiet. de autho. pap. & concil. c 3. say, they receiued all their authority from Christ immediately, but this was because it pleased Christ by spe∣ciall
priuiledge to exempt them: wherein marke how they contradict themselues: first saying, they had their autho∣rity from and vnder Peter, and presently, they should haue Oportet mendaces esse memores. had it, but that by speciall grace they were exempted. 2 Sort say, the Apostles had two offices: first, of Apo∣stleship: secondly, of Bishoply dignity: the former they had from Christ; but the latter by & through Peter: Staplet. Prin. doctr. lib. 6. c. 7. p. 215. Dom Iacobat. de concil. lib. 10. art. 7. Victoria, saying. They receiued all the power they had immediately from Christ, in that he made them all Apostles, for to the Apo∣stleship belong three things: first, authority to gouerne the beleeuers: secondly, faculty of teaching: thirdly, pow∣er of miracles: inferring that all the Apostles had the au∣thority of Order & Iurisdiction immediately from Christ. And Sum. mora: p. 403 Dom. Ban. in 22. Tho. p 234. Henriquez saith, There is no likelihood in their o∣pinion, that say the Apostles receiued their Iurisdiction of Peter: Bosius de sign. eccl. lib. 18. c. 1. other determine the doubt thus, That the diffe∣rence of Peters power from the rest was, that hee alone might vse the keyes, but the rest might not without him: and Visib. Monar. lib. 6. c 2. pag 153. Saunders saith, The other Disciples had the same keyes, but after Peter, to teach them that Peter had them by ordinary right as Prince of all, but they by Christs spe∣ciall delegation extraordinarily. Tom. 3. p. 191. Gregory of Valence o∣therwise, that Peter had the keyes from Christ, and ouer all the Church for euer to continue in his successors, which the other Apostles had not. Relect. 2. de po∣test. eccl. nu. 11. pag. 87. Ʋictoria decides this power into foure parts. 1. That Peters power was ordinary, the rest extraordinary. 2. That it was to continue in the Church, the others not. 3. His power was cuer them, theirs neyther ouer him, nor ouer one another. 4. Their power was subordinate to his, so that hee might ouer rule it. De autho. pap. & concil. c. 3. Caitan cuts it into fiue points: 1. In the manner, Pe∣ter receiued the power ordinarily, they of speciall grace. 2. In the office, Peter Christs Vicar, they but delegates. 3. In the obiect, hauing power ouer all, they not ouer one another. 4. In continuance, Peters perpetuall; theirs de∣termined with their life. 5. In the essence, Peters precep∣tiue to command, theirs executiue to doe what hee com∣manded
Bibl sanct. 1. 6. Annot. 269. Senensis deuides it into three parts: 1. of Or∣der. 2. of Apostleship. 3. of Monarchy. What a weake and doubtfull foundation is heere to build vp Peters Primacy, which they make an Article of their Faith, so inuolued with nice distinctions, and per∣plexed with difficulties, and mutuall contradictions? But perchance some Papist may reply and say, the chiefe place to proue Peters primacy, is Iohn 20. 16. where Christ Cum Petro dicitur, ad omnes dicitut, amas me? passe o∣ues meas. Aug. de agon. Christi. c. 30. said thrice to Peter, Feede my Sheepe; why doth hee exa∣mine Peter of his loue more then the rest, but that hee in∣tended him more authority? No such matter: Peter had thrice denied Christ, which none of the other had done; and therefore he had a threefold confirmation, and made a threefold confession for his former abnegation. Oh but some of them haue againe argued, Feeding is ruling with fulnesse of power, but the other Apostles were part of Christs sheepe, therefore he must feede them. Ans Fee∣ding is to edifie by the word and example, so Peter Gal. 2. 11. fedde the Apostles, and the Deus doeuit Pe∣trum per posterio∣rem Paulum. Aug. cp. 28. Apostles fedde Peter, as Paul fedde him at Antioch by reproofe. So all Christs Ministers are commanded to feed the slock of Christ (which is as large as feed my sheepe) but the Pope doth not thus feede the sheepe, but rather Baron. tels Pope Paul that there is a two fold mini∣stery in Peter, Feed my sheepe, and kill and eat. feede vpon the sheepe: Non pascit o∣ues, sed pastus ouibus: in this point, Peter and the Pope are no more alike, then an Englishman is to a blackeamoore: they agree better in fishing then in feeding: Math. 7. 27. Peter with his Angle caught a fish that had mony in the mouth; so the Pope fishes more for money then for men, and cannot a∣bide to be like Peter, or to succeed Peter, when hee Acts 3. 6. saith, Paulus honore par Petro, ne di c am∣plius. Chrysost. in epist. ad Galath,  Prior, non superior. Si Petrus primus, Paulus praecipuus. Euseb. emissen. hom de natiu. Petr. & Pauli. Siluer and gold haue I none: Platos Common wealth, Tullies Orator, Moores Ʋto∣pia, and Peters supremacy are alike. The gouernement of Christs Church is rather Aristocraticall, with many vnder one Christ, then Monarchicall vnder one visible Head: no Primacy of power, or Iurisdiction among the Apostles; if of order? Petrus primus, non primas; for there was a pari∣ty of power among the Apostles: yea as their Ser. 2. in, natiu. Petr. & Pauli. Leo, Ele∣ctio pares, labor similes, finis facit aquales, Their election
makes them alike, the labour alike, the end equall; or Cyprian de vni∣tate Ecclesiae. as Cyprian, Pari consertie praediti, & honotis & potestatis: Like fellow ship, honor, and power. But let vs suppose; (for impossibilities may bee supposed) that Peter had a supremancy ouer the Apostles, or more, that Peter was Pope of Rome, how comes this speciall priuiledge to the Pope? They will answer, by way of succession. To which we re∣ply, that true succession standeth in holding the same true faith; but the Pope departs from Peters doctrine, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selues vnto all manner of ordinance for the Lords sake, whether it be vnto the King as vnto the Superiour &c. Not onely Precept, but President of Peter is disliked in paying tribute for Christ and himselfe: But what if Peter Math. 17. 27. was chiefe of the Apostles, must hee therefore be aboue Kings? and must his imagined successor be aboue Em∣perors? But let vs fee how the Papists proue Papall succession of Peter in this imagined supremacy: Canus doth Locor. Theol. lib. 6. cap. 8. con∣fesse, That it is not written in the Scriptures, that the Pope succedeth Peter in the supremacy: and Controu. 4. q 5. de pontif. finitae An. 1578. Bellarmine ac∣knowledges it in these words, Licet Romanos Episcopos Pe∣tro succedere in sacris lobris non habeatur, &c. Although it be not written in the holy Scripture that the Romane Bi∣shops succeed Peter, yet wee haue it by Tradition from Peter. The Rhemists and many other would yet prooue it by Scripture, when as their chiefe Champion confesses it to Staplet. in 16. of Math. 18. be an vnwritten tradition. But De Diuin. insti∣tut. pontif. c. 13. Caietane proues it another way: The Pope succee∣deth Peter in as much as he is Bishop of Rome, and there Peter made his feate, and died at Rome. To proue this; they alledge a sew humane stories subiect to error, as themselues are: and I thinke it being a matter of so great moment as they make it, that all are damned vnlesse they obey their Pope as Saint Peters successor, and by vertue of this succession beleeue his authority in matters concer∣ning soule and conscience, this life present and the future; it had need to be proued by pregnant places out of Scrip∣ture,
De successione pō∣tificum nihil fere iure diuino cautū inuenitur. Simanc. institit. 45. n. 18. and not by any fallible or doubtfull history. But I would faine be resolued of this point by a schoole Papist, If the Pope succeeded Peter immediately after Pe∣ters death, who it was that succeeded him? whether Linus or Cletus, or Anacletus, or Clemens? it shall be in their choise to name the man. Clemens Romanus an old new Father, whom some say, was the Popes owne childe, writes in his Lib. 7. cap. 47. Apostolicall Constitutions, That Linus was the first Bishop of Rome made by S. Paul, and that Clemens after the death of Linus was the second ordained by Peter; If this relation be true, the Pope sits not in the chaire of Peter, but in the seate of Paul, who appointed the first Pope. Antuerp. Anno. 1578. Franciscus Turrianus in his Apologeticall annotati∣ons vpon the text of Clemens answereth, that Linus was not Bishop of Rome, but Suffragan, or vicar generall, ex∣ecuting it in S. Peters non-residencye: So Ex epist decret. Leo. 2. Marianus So∣tus in the life of Peter saith of Cletus: contradicting the Romane Martyrology, which makes Linus and Cletus both absolute Bishops of Rome; and Baromius in his Annotati∣ons vpon their Martyrdomes and Ecclesiasticall Tom. 1. Annals, reckons thus, Linus the first, Cletus the second, & Clemens the Ibidem. bird Bishop of Rome after S. Peter: the same{us} Baronius thinkes Cletus and Anacletus were all one: but De Rom. Pontif. lib. 2. c. 5. Bellar∣mine doth gainesay him: others hold that Clemens was the fourth Pope after St. Peter: some write hee was first, some second, some third, some the fourth; make the mu∣sicke in this mystery. But De Pontif. Rom. lib. 2▪ cap. 5. §. cae∣terum Petr. mortuo▪ & sequenti. Bellarmine labours to reduce these iarring fractions to a better harmony: Indeed (saith he) Clemens by right was the first Pope, but he suffered out of his humility Linus and Cletus to execute his office so long as they liued: yet Bel. ibidem. §. ne∣{que} multū me mouet. Damasus, and Sophronius, and Sieon Metaphstes affirme, that Linus died before Peter: heere the Cardinall contemnes these writers, which In Catalog. The∣olog. annex. Tom. 24 controu. else∣where hee commends for learned and Catholike Authors. In a worde, let it be granted that Clemens suffered these his competitors to liue, yet if three Popes were aliue at once, who was the true successor of Peter, whether Lord
Cletus, Lord Linus, or Lord Clemens? I would faine be re∣solued of this question by them who so eagerly maintaine the Pope to haue from S. Peter his succession: surely they cannot assoile this demand, who so vary among them∣selues, and so stammer in their owne talke, vncertain who was the first, second, third, or fourth Pope of Rome: that the Lord Esay 19. 2. hath done to them which hee threatned to the Egyptians; I will set the Egyptians against the Egypti∣ans, so euery one shall fight against his brother, and euery one against his neighbour, city against city, and kingdom against kingdome, one against another, and God and the truth against them all. Thus I haue a little diuerted into this point of Peters pretended supremacy, and the imagined succession of Popes after him, whereupon this vsurped power ouer all, the Pope principally challenges. I know this matter hath bin largely handled by the choice Diuines of our Church, and the Papists haue beene put to desperate and wofull shifts: I did not purpose to be large in it, onely but to touch it, because our Lay-Papists haue a great fancy to it, and doe beloeue any thing, because they know little or nothing; and according to Hieren. ad Ne∣pot. Nazianzene, the rude vulgar wonder at that they doe not vnderstand, and thinke their learned Guides prooue this very authentically, when as there is no point more weakely proued, and wherein they themselues are more distracted. And but that their po∣pish tutors presume vpon their simplicity and ignorance, they would be ashamed to argue thus to proue it: as first, Christ said, Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke will I build my Church, Ergo the Church is built vpon Peter and the Pope: or againe, The gates of Hell shall not preuaile a∣gainst the Church, Ergo, Peter and the Pope are the Church, against which the gates of hell shall not preuaile; or, I haue prayed for thee Peter that thy faith faile not; Ergo, the Pope cannot erre: or, Feede my sheepe; Ergo, Peter was the supreame head of the Apostles. What a silly and simple kinde of arguing is this, voide of Diuinity and Logick, which the learned hisse at? which
yet goes for currant arguments among ignorant Papists, who in the Infancy of their knowledge haue no skill and iudgement to discerne these things; yet are so ouercarried, yea, infatuated with a doting fancy to beleeue any thing, which is cloaked with a pretence of Catholike Truth, or Doctrine of the Church of Rome; that with great applause they will accept of these, or the like, vnlearned follies: be∣ing like vnto that Frenchman in Geneua, of whom Epist. ante Mis∣cellan. Zan∣chius speakes, that he protested, If Saint Paul and Caluin should preach at the same houre, that he would leaue Paul and goe to Caluin. So these will euen deny Scripture, to beleeue, and cleaue to their Doctors; and they know how to seduce them well enough, making them firmely be∣leeue, that Peter was the Primate, and Prince of all the A∣postles, and that the Pope succeeds him in all his prero∣gatiues, and sits in Peters Chaire. So that we may say with Nicephorus. lib. 13. cap. 28. Simeones; Who when he saw Arsacius an vnlearned and vnworthy man, placed in Chrysostomes roome, cried out in these words, Prohpudor? quis, cui? Oh shame; who, and whom? So wee may censure the Popes sitting in Peters Chaire, Oh shame, who, and whom? Peter was carefull to teach & preach; but for the Popes, many of them cannot, and all will not, preach the Gospell. Their Bennet that was Pope, when he was not ten yeeres old, and Iohn not aboue sixteene, as their deare Ann. 1033. Nu. 6 Bar. 955. Nu 1. 2. Their Archbi∣shop of Rhemes at fiue yeeres old. Bar. An. 925. Nu. 9 Vide Speculum Romanorum ponti∣ficum: per Stepha∣num Szegedinum. Pag. 91. to 111. Carranz. in Mar∣cellin. Baronius sayes; oh then how wor∣thily was Peters place supplied, how able they were to feed the vniuersall flocke, and to be the Supreame Heads of the Christian World? And many of their Popes haue beene condemned, and conuicted hereticks by themselues, as * Marcellinus for ido∣latry, worshipping Pagan Gods, Athan. Ep. ad so∣lita. Fascicu. Tem. An. 353. Liberius for Arrianisme. Honorius the first, was a Monothelite hereticke con∣demned for it in three generall Councels: Gregory Theod. Niemens. de scism. lib. 3. cap. 44. p. 91. Scriptum de Boni∣facio octauo, intra∣uit vt vulpes, reg∣nauit vt Leo, mor∣tuus est vt canis. Successio in Petri culpa, non Cathe∣dra. the 12, and Bennet the 13, deposed for notorious heretickes, and schismatickes, and many others; oh then how was Peters Chayre adorned, his place supplied, the vniuersall flocke gouerned, the Supremacy managed, the Church edified? Propudor? quis, cui? How is Peters Chayre disparaged by a pretence of such vile Successors: yea, how opposite is the
Pope to Peter, or if you wil, this Sir Peter, or Pope-Peter to Non vnus pilus Pe∣tri est in pontifice. Saint Peter? light and darkenesse are not more dislike. Preaching Peter commanded all, 1 Pet. 2. Feare God, Honor the King, Submit your selues &c. Not onely to the good and 17 18 19 curteous; but to the froward; for this is thanke worthy, if a man for conscience sake toward God endure greefe, suf∣fering wrongfully: But princely Pope-peter vnlooses men at his pleasure from their alleagiance and obedience to Adrianus dixit. Ro. pontifices succede∣de Romulo in par∣ricidijs, non Petro in pascendis oui∣bus. Antonin. tit. 17. 6. 9. good, and gracious Princes (if they will not bow their Scepters to his Miter,) and will depriue them of their Crownes, and if he can, of their liues too, being blasted by excommunication; then proceed to deposition, and to make it take better effect, hee will authorize murder and rebellion: yet all this, vnder a faire vizard of spirituall good, and for the saluation of soules: but Quic quid id est, timeo Danaos, & dona ferentes. Beware of these same Pope-pilles, sugred ouer, yet full of deadly poyson. Peter his precepts and patterne compa∣red Petrus aliter iussit; aliter gessit. with the Popes practise, argue a plaine separation or secession, no succession. Peter commanded and performed obedience to Princes, excommunicated none, deposed none, depriued none, freed no Subiects from alleagiance, or excited them to a∣ny resistance, but suffred (if we may credit their Linus de passione Petri, & Pauli, in biblio. ss. Patr. tom. 2. Register, to proue his being at Rome) as a Martyr: yet these Princes were no Catholickes, yea Heathens. Was it because hee wanted power, (as some haue dreamed?) why, he had the power of Miracles, hee could doe that which neuer any Pope did, or shall doe; Surge, & ambula: Acts 3. 6: Arise, and walke; which had power to heale a creeple from his Mothers wombe. Acts 9. 40. He raised the dead to life, yea, sont the liuing Acts 5. 5. to death, could with his 15. shadow heale the icke: Wanted he power? no, rather he wanted this pride and im∣piety, wherewith the Pope swels and abounds: he knew, that his Kingdome promised by Luc. 22. 29. Christ, was not of this World; here the Kings of the Gentiles should reigne ouer him, and his fellow Disciples: but hereafter in the heauen∣ly Kingdome, they 30. should sit vpon seates, and iudge the twelue Tribes of Israel.
But this Pope-Peter, or prince-like Pope, fearing his Kingdome is not of that world, would faine erect vp his Monarchy in this world, and would sit vpon his seate or chayre, to iudge all the Tribes of the world; and would faine be a Iudge ouer the Tribe of Iudah, to make Kings be subiect to his Ferula, and Rod of correction; and so then surfet them with his cup of corruption: and if they will not submit themselues to his domination, hee will by censure, and sentence of excommunication seeke to dethrone them and depose them, free their subiects from the yoake of o∣bedience and oath of alleagiance to them, and arme and animate them to take vp armes against them; and all this pestilent power he would deriue from Peters Chaire, ma∣king it a Chaire of pestilence, to arrogate such a pernici∣ous supremacy, by which meanes hee hath beene the pri∣mus Hic motor scele∣rum primus, frau∣dum{que} cheragus. motor, the cheefe agent of all the mischeefes, murders, and massacres, treasons, and rebellions, in these latter times. So that I may conclude, that papall excommunica∣tion of Kings, and Doctrine of deposition of them, haue beene the cheefe nurseries of most treasons and rebellions. And this hath moued me to take a little suruey of it, di∣uerting out of the intended Roade of my discourse; for which former prolixity, I will requite my Reader with fol∣lowing breuity. CHAP. XII. I Haue thus farre discoursed in generall, now I will make our conclusion a con∣nexion, with some particular relation of the vnnaturall and bloody conspi∣racy of these Trayterous Gouries, at∣tempted against the Kings Maiesty, August the fift, Anno Dom. 1600: with the manner of his deliuery, and happy preseruation; as also the end and Tragedy of these Traytors, receiuing in part a due doome for their Treason.
His Maiesty lying at Falkland, and going out in the mor∣ning to recreate himselfe with his pleasure of Buck-hun∣ting; before he was on Horsebacke, Alexander Ruthwen, second brother to the late Earle of Gowry, hasted to meet his Highnesse, who after a low curtesie, bowing his head vnder his Maiesties knee, (Beware of such Creepers) draw∣ing his Maiesty apart, (as 2 Sam. 3. 27. Ioab tooke Abner aside in the gate to speake with him peaceably) doth begin a strange discourse to the King: Virg. lib. 2. Aen. Dixerat ille dolis instructus, & arte Pelasga. How he chanced in the euening before, walking alone without the Towne of Saint Iohnstoun, where his brother dwelt, recountred a suspicious fellow, who vpon some conference became amazed, and his tongue faultred; and vncasing him, wrapt vp in a cloake, and finds a great wide pot vnder his arme, full of coyned gold in great peeces: whereupon he brought the fellow backe, and priuately, without the knowledge of any man, bound him in a priuy house, and locked many doores vpon him, and his pot with him; and so hasted by foure of the clocke in the mor∣ning, to aduertise his Maiesty according to his duty, and desirous that the King in his person priuately would bee pleased to behold this spectacle. To this perfidious Sinon the King giues a Princely audience, Ignarus scelerum tantorum, artis{que} Pelasga: Virg. Returning to him at first this answere; That hee would send backe with the said Alexander a seruant of his owne, with a warrant to the Prouost, and Bayliffes of Saint Iohn∣stoun, to receiue the alledged fellow (a man in the Moone) and the money supposed, till his further pleasure was knowne. To be briefe: his Highnesse importuned by the in sinuations of this faire-spoken, yet false Iudas, resolues Freu nulla fides. (the chace being ended, and not dreaming that his Prince∣ly person should haue beene hunted, by such a fawning, yet bloody hound) to goe to Saint Iohnstoun, to see with his Princely eyes the newes which this meale-mouthed Traytor had related to his Graces eares; and so rides thi∣ther
with a very little Trayne, and they followed after, a∣mong which was the Duke of Lennox, and the Earle of Marre. The King comming to Saint Iohnstoun, he was met by the late Earle of Gowry, a Iudas, with an Aue Rex, and some three or fourescore men accompanying him; the Kings Trayne not aboue fifteene persons, and all vnar∣med; yet his Maiesty by the way vpon occurrences of dis∣course, and stupide behauiour of Alexander, requesting the King to stay the Duke and Earle from following him, beganne to suspect some treasonable deuice. Well, the King hauing beene there partaker of a bad dinner, and the said Earle standing pensiue, and with a deiected counte∣nance; Oh quam difficile est, crimen non prodere vultu: And not welcomming his Maiesty, or shewing any har∣ty forme of entertainement; and the Noblemen, and Gen∣tlemen of the Court, being now set at dinner, Alexander rounding in his Maiesties eares, and said; Now is the time to goe: This is your Luk. 22. 53. very houre, and the power of darke∣nesse. The King accompanied onely with the said Alexan∣der, goes vp a Turne-pecke through three or foure cham∣bers, Alexander locked behind him euery doore he passed, (a brother to 2 Tim. 4. 14. Alexander the Coppersmith, which had done Paul much euill) vntill at last, his Maiesty passing through three or foure sundry houses, and all doores loc∣ked behind him by this Cerberus, his Maiesty entred into a little study, where hee saw standing with a very abased countenance, not a bond man, but a free man, with a dag∣ger at his girdle: Now mee thinkes I here that desperate voice, Ʋirg. Heu quae nunc tellus, inquit, quae me aequora possunt Accipere? aut quid iam misero mihi deni{que} restat? Or as 2 Sam. 24. 14. Dauid said to God; I am in a wonderfull straite: fallen into the hands of bloody men, O God, Psa. 70. 1. hast thee to deli∣uer me, make hast to helpe me O Lord: O my Psa. 59. God, deliuer me from mine enemies, defend mee from them that rise vp against 1 2 3 me: deliuer mee from the wicked doers, and saue mee from the bloody men: for loe, they haue laid waite for my soule, &c. Thus
this vile Alexander hauing brought the King into this close Closet of his intended death, Rectè collcat aretia expectant praedam: Now this Traytor changes his countenance, puts his hat on his head, and drawes the dagger from the girdle of the other fellow, holds the point to the Kings breast; Hor∣resco referens. Whither bendest thou thy sword (thou mon∣ster of mankind?) as Clytemuestra said to her wicked sonne Orestes: A Monster, and no Man, to desire to murder a Mo∣narke of Men. Viscera sunt vobis crudelia, pectora ferro Durantur, silices{que} rigent praecordia circum, Qui tantum sceleris potuistis, velle patrare: Nam patrasse, supergreditur genus omne loquendi. Behold this cursed, and Copper-Alexander, facing the King with a brazen impudence, saith; Now it did behoue the King to be in his will, and vses him as he list; swearing bloody oathes, That if the King cried out, or did open a window to looke out, that dagger should presently goe to his heart. Surely some Nero with heeles forward borne, Sire to this slaue so bloody, and forlorne. The Prou. 21. 1. Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, and he will preserue it against the hands of such diuellish Traytors. This bloody villaine opens his blacke mouth, and tels the King; That now he knew his conscience was troubled for murthering his Father: Loe, this Caine talkes of consci∣ence, yet makes no conscience to attempt to kill a most in∣nocent King. His Highnesse wondring at so sudden an alteration, and standing naked, as an innocent Lambe before a raue∣nous wolfe, like the Reuel. 12. 4. woman standing before the red Dra∣gon, beginnes pathetically; and powerfully to dilate to A∣lexander, telling him how horrible a thing it was to med∣dle with his Maiesties innocent blood, a drop whereof could not bee shed without reuenge from Heauen, and Earth: for the Gen. 4. 10. voice of blood cries for vengeance to Hea∣pen, and God had on Earth giuen his Highnesse children,
and good Subiects, which would reuenge it; yea God would raise vp stockes and stones to punish so vile a deed: protesting before God, that his conscience was not trou∣bled for the execution of his Father; he being then a Mi∣nor of age, and then guided by a Faction which ouerruled his Maiesty & the rest of the Country, and what was done to his Father, was done by the common course of Law & Iustice: Appealing to the said Alexanders owne consci∣ence (a sinfull and seared conscience) how well his Grace had at all times since deserued at the hands of all his race, restoring them to their lands and dignities, freely and voluntarily of his regall clemency, bringing vp two or three ofhis sisters, as it were in his owne bosome, by a con∣tinuall attendance vpon his dearest bedfellow in her pri∣uy Chamber: and if all these had beene too little, he would haue giuen him, as it was said to Dauid, such, and such things: but here in them verified, which Sen. Epist. 48. Seneca deliuered, Quidam, quô plus debent, magis oderunt, &c. Certaine men being bound to loue for some benefits, rather the more beginne to hate: Quid autem miserius, (saith the same wise man) cui beneficia dantur, gratias agere iniurijs; What more wretched thing, then hauing receiued benefits, to reward the giuer with iniuries? These are Esops Snakes. His Maiesty promised him on the word of a Prince, that if he would spare his life, (a Soueraigne a suppliant to a subiect an abiect, begges mercy of this miscreant, to spare his life) hee would neuer reucale it to any flesh li∣uing, what was betwixt them at that time, nor neuer suffer him to incurre any harme, or punishment for the same: A speech able to make a Cannibals heart to relent, being vt∣tered with such feeling as accompanies such feares. This his Maiesties perswasiue language some what amazed and calmed this terrible and truculent Traytor, so that hee swore the Kings life should bee safe, if hee would behaue himselfe quietly, without noyse, or crying; and that hee would goe downe, and bring in his brother the Earle to speake with his Maiesty; And so goes downe, and lockes the doore after him, leauing his Maiesty with that man
was there before, whom this Alexander appointed the Kings Keeper till his returne. Then his Maiestie demanded of that man, who was a ser∣uant to the late Earle of Gowrie, & his name Andrew Hen∣derson, whether he was appointed to be the murderer of him, and how far he was vpon the counsell of that conspi∣racy; who with a trembling, and astonished voice, and behauiour, answered with solemne and deepe protestati∣ons, that he was neuer acquainted with that purpose, be∣ing put in there perforce, and the doore locked vpon him: and indeede all the time of Alexanders menacing the King, this Henderson trembled, and requested him for Gods sake, not to doe the King any harme. The King commands him to open the window on his right hand, which hee did: for Alexander had made the King sweare not to cry out, nor open any window. Wherein behold the miraculous prouidence of almighty God, that he who was put in there to vse violence on the King, should be an Instrument for the Kings safety, & vp∣pon Dan. 5. 6. the sight of the King, as Belshazzar did, when he saw the hand writing on the wall, trembling and quaking, ra∣ther like one condemned, then an executioner of such an enterprize. VVhile the King was all this while like Dan. 6. 16. Da∣niel in a Lyons den, and by the 2 Tim. 4. 17. Lord so assisted & streng∣thened, that afterward hee was deliuered like Paul out of the mouth of the Lyon; his Maiesties Trayne rising from dinner, the Earle of Gowry with them, one of the Earle of Gowries seruants comes hastily, saying; His Maiesty is hor∣sed, and away through the Inshe; which the Earle repor∣ting to the Noblemen, and the rest, all rush forth in great haste; and enquiring of the Porter which way his Maiesty went, the Porter affirmed, the King was not yet gone: whereupon this Gowry reuiles the Porter, and turning to the Duke, and Earle of Marre, said; He would presently get certaine word, whether the King was gone, or no? and so ranne through a close, and vp the staires; hauing a pur∣pose to speake with his Brother. Presently the Earle returnes, and runnes to the Noblemen, telling them the
King was gone out at the backe gate, to which place all of them repaired. This inhumane wretch Alexander hauing had a little pawse and parly with his bloudy brother, comes backe a∣gaine to the King; Ingreditur{que} domum, luctus comitatur euntem, Et pauor & terror, trepido{que} insania vultu: Casting his hands abroad in a desperate manner, said, he could not mend it, his Maiesty behoued to die. Tray∣tors haue bloudy hearts and hands, they will not abstaine, Leuit 3. 17. a sanguine, & suffocate, from bloud, and strangled; not one word falls from his foule mouth but dismall: hee had promised before to preserue the King safe, but they who haue made a league with hell, will neuer keepe league or promise with any on earth: neyther great gifts, or good turnes can turne their mindes to mercy; oportet mori, is the foote of the fatall song: the death of Patroclus, saith A∣chilles, the death of my Father, saith Alexander, will not suffer me to thinke of mercy. Therefore this treacherous Philistine comes with a gar∣ter to binde our Soueraigne (as the Iudg. 16. 21. Bis mori est, alteri arbritrio mori. Seneca. Philistines bound Sampson) swearing, hee behoued to be bound. Accursed caitife, to threaten the King, descended from as royal pre∣decessors as any Prince liuing, with an inglorious death: he must not dye by the hand of a woman, which Iudg. 9. 54. Abime∣lech held dishonourable, and therefore willed his Page to runne him through with his sword: he must not die figh∣ting cominus & eminus, hand to hand; but hee would haue him die as a condemned Malefactor, or as a Prou. 7. 22. foole goeth to the stockes, bound hand and foote, though hee ruled with glory, yet goe to his graue with ignominy. It beho∣ueth you to be bound, saith this abhorred wretch; but di∣ed 2 Sam. 3. 33. 34. Abner as a foole dieth? Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet tied in fetters of brasse, but as a man falleth before wicked men, so didst thou fall. His Maiesty hearing this villaine talke of binding, said he was borne a free King, and should die a free King. Be∣holde the worke of the Lord, animating our King Iames
as the Lord did Ioshua 1. 9. Ioshua, Be strong and of good courage, feare not, nor be discouraged, for I the Lord thy God will be with thee, &c. He Leuit. 26. 8. can make fiue to chase an hundred, and an hun∣dred to put ten thousand to flight: little Dauid to kill Goliah; our Salomon void of weapon to ouercome anned Gowrie; and indeed how can he fall in fight, whom heauen & earth assists? God and his Angels beheld this fray, and heard the secret petition of our Soueraignes soule, Psal. 7. 1. 2. Saue mee from him that persecutes me, and deliuer mee; lest hee deuoure my soule like a Lion, and teare it in peeces while there is none to helpe. The Lord did Psal. 20. 1. heare him in the day of his trouble, the name of the God of Iacob did defend him; deliuering his Psal. 22. 20. soule from the sword, his desolate soule from the power of the dogge. This Alexander, degenerating in nature from the signi∣fication of his name, which signifies (as Ierome) auxiliator virilis, an helper of men; he rather to be tearmed with his Masters Title, Reuel. 9. 11. Abaddon, or Apollyon, destroying; and comes to his Maiesty, griping him by the wrist of the hand to haue bound him: his Maiesty relieued himselfe sudden∣ly of his gripes; whereupon as he put his right hand to his sword, his Maiesty with his right hand seazed vpon both hand and sword, and with his left hand clasped him by the throat, like as he with his left hand claspt the King by the throat, with two or three of his fingers in his Maiesties mouth, to haue stayed him from crying out. In this strug∣ling the King perforce drew him to the window which Henderson before opened, and vnder the which passed (O rare & most singular prouidence of God) the Kings traine, and the Earle of Gowrie with them: The King holding out the right side of his head, and right elbowe, cryed, They were murdering him: Ʋirg. Aeucid. lib. 2. —Quaevn vt voit adre Obstupuere animi, gelidus perima Ossa Trem— The Kings voyce instantly heard, and knowe to the Duke of Leno, Earle of Marre, and the other Court∣traine; no winged Pegasus could poast more speedily, to
doe their best seruice for their Soueraignes safety: all of them then like Asahel, 2 Sam 2. 18. as light on foote as wilde Roes; but Gowrie the vnworthy and wretched Earle euer asking what it meant, taking no notice of any voyce heard. The Duke of Lennox, and Earle of Marre runne to goe by the passage his Maiesty went in at: but Gowrie better acquain∣ted with his owne denne, made with his seruants for ano∣ther way vp a quiet turne-pecke, which was euer condem∣ned before, and onely then left open (as it appeared) for that purpose. In the meane time, his Maiesty with striuing and strug∣ling with this base Traytor—impar congressus Achilli; had brought him perforce out of the study, the dore being open, and got Alexanders head vnder his arme, and him∣selfe on his knees, his Maiesty driuing him backe perforce hard to the doore of the same turne-pecke: and as his Ma∣iesty was throwing his sword out of his hand, thinking to haue stricken him therewith, and shot him ouer the staire, the other fellow Henderson, standing behinde the Kings backe, and doing nothing but trembling all the time; that euer-honoured man Sir Iohn Ramsey, now meritoriously graced with more noble titles, finds the turne-pecke dore open, followes it vp to the head, the first that did enter in∣to the chamber to helpe the King. Ʋirg Primus ibi ante omnes, summa decurrit ab arce, As the Poet of Laocoon; it was his happy fortune to haue that glory, and the King his first helpe: they are very happy subiects that are a meanes to preserue Kings from traitors; for therein they stand in stead of Gods Angels. This va∣liant and noble Lord instantly tooke his dagger, & strikes Alexander twice or thrice, his Maiesty stil keeping his hold on this traytor: and immediately this Alexander by the shoulder taken, and shot downe the staire; who no sooner was shot out of the doore, but hee was met by Sir Thomas Erskinne, who ended this vile wretch, and traytor there: a iust punishment for so bloudy a miscreant, who attemp∣ted to kill the Lords Annointed. This Arch traytor may well bee placed in the blacke Calendar of bloudy traitors
in the first ranke, whose name is odious and infamous to the whole world. Thus the King being thus happily preserued from the assault of this butcherly Assasinate, and Sir Hugh Hereis, Sir Thomas Erskins, and one Wilson, being got into the Chamber where the King was; instantly before they could get the doore shut, comes the insolent and bloudy-min∣ded Earle Gowry, hauing a drawen sword in each hand, and a steele bonnet on his head, accompanied with 7. of his seruants, hauing each a drawen sword; the Earle at his sirstentry cryed out with a great oath, They should all dye as Traytors. The King seeing the Earle come in with swords in his hands, sought for Alexanders sword, hauing no sort of weapons of his owne, But the loyall loue, and immortall fidelity of his true Subiects there, rather desi∣rous to hazard their liues in the fortune of that fight, then any more to endanger the King, gat him backe into the lit∣tle study, and the doore shut vpon him, and so put him in safety, re-encountred the Traytor Earle and his seruants, where after many blowes on all hands, it pleased God in his great power and pitty, to giue his Maiesties seruants the victory; Sir Iohn Ransey did strike dead with a thrust through the heart the Traytor Earle, the shame of Nobi∣lity, and scandall to Christianity: who as hee liued wret∣ched, addicted to Necromancers, and after his death had in his pocket found Magicall Characters and words of en∣chantment: so at his last gaspe neuer named God; vix bene moritur, quimale vixit, as De Doctr. Chri∣stiana. Austen: much more in this case, he cannot die well who liued so ill, who did so ill, and died so ill; yet I may not touch his eternall doome, onely say with Cicero, Cicero in Para∣dex. Mors terribilis estis, quorum cum vita omnia extinguuntur, Death is terrible vnto them, with whose life al things be extinguished: for all temporal things lost with him, his heyres by Act of Parliament depriued for euer of his estate, name, same, and fortunes goods with him from his for euer vanished. The rest of the confederates in this fray were dung ouer the staires with many hurts; as also Sir Iohn Ramsey, Sir Thomas Erskin, Sir Hugh Hereis, (a
true Triumviri of right Noble, Valiant, and spirited Knights, famous for euer for this seruice) were sore woun∣ded in this chamber-conflict: yet they grudged not their bloud, had it beene spent to the last droppe in so good a cause, for the defence of the King being in so perillous ex∣tremity. But all the time of this fight, the Duke of Len∣nox, and Earle of Marre, and the rest of the Court were striking with great hammers at the vtter doore, where his Maiesty passed vp to the Chamber, and beeing a double doore could not bee broken open the space of halfe an houre and more; so that though their faithfull hearts and feruent prayers poured out to God for the King, which were effectuall to helpe in this perill, yet their hands could not, as they all desired, be present in this seruice. But ha∣uing at last made a way, and finding his Maiesty (beyond their expectation) deliuered from so imminent a death, and the chiefe conspirators slaine, infinitely reioyced. And his Maiesty immediately kneeling downe on his knees in the middest of them, did most heartily praise the Lord for his deliuery, assuring himselfe that God had preserued him from so despaired a perill, for the perfecting of some greater worke, for the glory of God, and good of his sub∣iects committed to his charge. Thus I haue set downe the chiefe substance of the story of this conspiracy, and the manner of the Kings deliuery, with the two chiefe Traitors death and tragedy. Vnne∣cessary it is for mee to recite the end of Bour and Logane, &c. conspirators dead and deuoured of wormes, whose memoriall is perished with them: onely behold the power and prouidence of God in opening the mouth of Sprott, haling him to the Ministers of Iustice, and causing him to bee his owne accuser eight yeares after, when no mor∣tall creature could detect him (all the confederates dead) except the guilty conscience of his owne breast. And as Lib. de moribus. Seneca grauely, Nullum conscium peceatorum tuorum ma∣gis timueris, quàm temetipsum, altum enim potes effugere, e autem nunquam, nequitia enimipsa est suipoena: Thou maist not feare any who are priuy to thy sinnes, more then thy
owne selfe; for thou may flye from an other, yet neuer from thy selfe, sinne is a punishment to it selfe; and Ecclus. 14. 2. Bles∣sed is the man who is not condemned in his owne consci∣ence; for a Pro. 15. 15. good conscience is a continuall feast; but it is a fearefull thing when Wisd. 17. 10. malice is condemned by her owne testimony, and a conscience that is touched doth euer forecast cruell things. Aug. in Ps. 31. Conscientia mala, bona sperare non potest. What the vltimate end was which Gowrie ay∣med at, it is not knowne certainely; yet sure he looked for more then the life of an innocent King, & proiected more then the bare reuenge of his Fathers death; his trauelling into Italy, into those parts where they would giue sundry folkes Breues, as his follower Rinde confessed; his inti∣mate conference with Iesuites, men dangerous to Kings and States, his plausibility with the people (an harbinger of ambitious thoughts;) These with other practises hee vsed, as being addicted to Magiche, are like the bleating of 1 Sam. 15. 14. sheepe in Samuels eares, and may all say, What meane these things? wee may coniecture something, yet deter∣mine nothing: for this Traytor was a Politician who held this Maxime; Rinde doth re∣late it in his re-ex∣amination. That he was not a wiseman, who hauing intended the execution of an high and dangerous purpose; did communicate the same to any but himselfe. Thus we see how the Lord verifies Dauids words; Psal. 37. 28. Hee forsaketh not his Saints, they shall be preserued for euermore, but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off. Psal. 18. 50. Great deliuer an∣ces giueth he vnto his King, and sheweth mercy vnto his An∣nointed. And if all antiquity should awake, it could not relate a more Diuine deliuery in so dangerous and deadly extremity. And it doth minister immortall and immatch∣able motiues of perpetuall praises, and thankes giuing to God: to sing with 145. 3. 4. Dauid, Great is the Lord, and most wor∣thy to be praised, and his greatnesse is incomprehensible: Ge∣neration shall praise thy workes vnto generation, and declare thy power. The Lord preserueth all them that loue him, but he 20 will destroy the wicked. This day, the fift of August, the commemoration day of this Conspiracy and Deliuery, commanded by regall
authority to be religiously obserued, wherein wee should doe that which the Lord spake to Moses after Israels vic∣tory ouer Amalek, Exod. 17. 14. Write this for a remembrance in the booke, and rehearse it to Ioshua, for I will vtterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from vnder Heauen. And Moses built an Altar, and called the name of it, Iehoua-Nissi, that is, the Lord my Bauner. So the great King of Kings ha∣uing giuen the King of our English Israel an happy victo∣ry ouer Amalk, put out the remembrance of them from Occidit illa dom', sed enim dom' illa perire digna fuit. vnder heauen. All, from the King in his Throne, to the poorest member and Subiect of great Britanny, should write in the tables of thankefull hearts (the best booke of remembrance) this most happy and heauenly deliuerance, and goe to the publike Altar, the house of prayer, and of∣fer vp a seruice and sacrifice of humble and hearty prayers and praises, as sweet Incense vnto the Lord, singing and saying, Iehoua-Nissi, the Lord is my Banner: Exod. 15. 2. The Lord is our strength and praise, and is become our saluation. 6. Thy right hand O Lord, hath bruised the enemie; 2 Sam. 22 50. 51 Therefore will I praise thee, O Lord, among the Nations, and will sing vn∣to thy name: Hee is the Tower of saluation for his King, and sheweth mercy to his Appointed, euen to Dauid, and to his seed for euer. All glory, honour, thankes and praise bee giuen to God alone, The Father, Sonne, and Holy ghost, three seuerally in one. Laus Deo.
Amphitheatrum Scelerum: OR THE TRANSCENDENT OF TREASON: For the fift of Nouember, THE DAY OF A MOST Admirable Deliuerance of our King, Queene, Prince, Royall Progeny, the Spirituall and Temporall Peeres and Pillars of the Church and State, together with the Honourable Assembly of the representatiue Body of the Kingdom in generall, from that most horrible and hellish proiect of the Gun-powder Treason. PSAL. 11. 22. Forloe, the wicked bend their bowe, and make ready their arrowes vp∣on the string, that they may secretly shoote at them which are vp∣right in heart. For the foundations shall be cast downe, and what hath the righteous done? By SAMVEL GAREY, Prea∣cher of Gods Word. LONDON, Printed by IOHN BEALE, for HENRY FETHERSTONE, and IOHN PARKER. 1618.
TO THE ILLVSTRIOVS and Right Honourable Lords, Spi∣rituall and Temporall, the renowned Peeres, Prelates, and Counsellors to the High and famous Court of Parliament; SAMVEL GAREY an vnworthy Minister of IESVS CHRIST, with his most deuoted obseruance, humbly offereth this short Treatise, in a perpetuall remembrance of all dutifull thank∣fulnesse to Almighty God, for your Gra∣ces and Honours happy deliue∣rance from the intended Gun-powder Treason, Nouember the fifth, Anno Do∣mini, 1605. (Most Reuerend, Honorable, and right Noble Lords) MAy it please your Graces and Honors to be∣hold the wofull picture, and lamentable pro∣tect of your earthly Downefall intended, (the contemplation and cogitation whereof can neuer cause you to bury it in obliuion) where∣in the professed enemies to God, King, and Country, endea∣uoured and attempted with one blow and blast to make your Mittimus, and send you all to another world. But Gods most admirable mercy disappointed their most abho∣minable mischiefe, and doth moue your Graces and Honors to say thankfully with the Psalmist, Psal. 44. 7. Thou hast saued vs from our aduersaries, and hast put them to confusion that hate vs: Therefore will we praise God continu∣ally, 8. and will confesse thy name for euer. In which
prodigious practise, and mercilesse Massacre, your Graces and Honors may behold your selues, how you should haue Primae impres∣sionis Flagitium. beene, not rebaptized, but haue beene buried in fire and flames; and by Gods gracious deliuerance haue receiued a kinde of resurrection from a plotted suddaine death: and this popish powder of a future fire-worke, which should haue beene the martyrdome of the kingdome, remooued and dis∣couered, before these dangerous, aiellish, and Purgatory-Vulcans could bring one sparke to enkindle it: still the Regall Sunne and Moone shines with a bright and beauti∣full lustre in the Royall firmament, who by these foule mon∣sters, and fiery Meteors should haue beene finally eclipsed: Charles-wayne is still in our Horizon, and God grant it may be said of our King Iames, as Iacob said of his Iuda, Sceptrum non auferetur à Iuda, Gen. 49. 10. Your Graces and Honors the fixed starres of Church and State, still keepe your station, and retaine your powerfull influences, who by these Miscreants should haue bene sent from the stately Parliament to the starry firmament, and though not then your mortall limbes, yet your immortall soules should haue flowen higher. But loe, * The Lord was 2 Chron. 15. 2. with you, while you were with him, and preserued you in safely as reserued instruments for his further seruice and glory, to the vnspeakeable comfort of his Church, and hap∣py welfare of great Britanny. Which incomparable worke of Gods infinite mercy in this most gracious and generall de∣liuerance, as it can neuer beforgotten, so it cannot be too ofr reuined: which poore oblation (a commemoration of your Graces and Honours preseruation) as it is very seaso∣nable for the time, Nouember the 5. against which day it was and is prepared as a yearely present, and poore Tribute of true thankefulnesse, so I heartily wish it weresatable to merit your most honourable acceptance: Yet
Cum desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas: Your renowned worthinesse will, I hope, accept my wil∣lingnesse, and protect this Treatise (the Transcendent of Treason) vnder the fauourable countenance of your most honourable patronages; so shall it be safe from all backbi∣ting vermine, and vipers of our Church and Country. And as some say, The Sea-Vrchin armes himselfe with some stones against a tempest, so I against all the windy tempests of ill tongued Iesuites, and railing Popelings, who take things with the left hand which are offered with the right, as Ariston once said, will I suppose contemne and con∣demne this worke, wherein their treasonable practises and precepts are in part discouered: yet being armed with your Graces and Honors defence, as with precious stones built vpon the chiefe corner-stone & Rocke, Christ Iesus; though flouds from the Sea of Rome should come, or the windes of wicked Iesuites blow vpon this booke with their infecting breath, and would beate it downe with a storme of words, yet. Math. 7. 25. Non cadet, quia fundatur super petram. I feare to be tedious, and therefore in all dutifull and submissiue reuerence, I cease my hand: yet my heart, till death, shall neuer cease to pray for all your prosperous happinesse and heauenly successe in your holy and high affaires for the Church, King and Country; for which Diuine blessing shall be duely and daily powred forth the poore deuotions of your Graces and Honours most humble seruant, Samuel Garey.
Ad Gloriam Dei, Sionis gaudium, & malorum luctum, MAgnae Britanniae immortales Gratiae Pro salute Britanniae, quinto Nouembris, Ab horrenda proditione Anglo-Papistarum, Qui pul vere bombardico Parliamenti domum Euertere sunt machinati, Hoc Aniuersario commemorantur. In libre diligenter exara illud, & erit in die nouissime in te∣stimonium vs{que} in aeternum. Esa. 30. 8.
Amphitheatrum Scelerum, OR, The Transcendent OF TREASON: For the 5. day of Nouember. Sonne of Man, write thee the name of the day, euen of this same day, for the King of Babel set himselfe against Ierusa∣lem this same day. Ezech. 24. 2. CHAP. I. AS Deut. 4. 32. Moses did speake in ano∣ther kinde to the people of Israel, Enquire now of the dayes that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man Ethnicismus tale facinus ignorat. Quod{que} attentatū, vix aetas postera credet. vpon the earth, and aske from the one end of Heauen vnto the other, if there came to passe such a great thing as this, or whether any such like thing hath beene heard: So I may say, Enquire of the Times past, and search the Records of all Antiquities,
and you cannot finde such a damnable and diuellish pro∣iect (the very modell of all mischiefes, and Miscellan of all massacres) the intended Powder-plot, the Quintessence of all impiety, and confection of all villany: the like ne∣uer An. Dom. 1605. de ficto, much lesse de facto; in which these prodigious and barbarous monsters, not men, but loathsome lumpes of mire and bloud, (in whose proditorious brests the spi∣rits of all expired traytors by a kinde of Pythagoricall transmigration were inclosed) intended to haue destroyed the obiects of Englands earthly glory, the glory of succes∣sion, yea succession it selfe, to extinguish the whole light Grex cū rege, Arae cum focis, lares cū penatibus perijsset. and life of the land, vno actu, tactu, ictu: by one blow and blast of powder, —Tollere Rem, Regem, Regimen, Regionem, Religionem. Furious Phaetons, in one day, yea howre; with a dismall fire-worke to burne all to ashes; of a glorious Monarchy to make an Anarchy; to offer our most gracious King, roy∣all Queene, vertuous Prince, and hopefull Progeny, with right Noble personages of honourable place and birth, the reuerend Cleargy, with all the rest of that wise and flourishing assembly; to offer them all as a quicke and li∣uing sacrifice (not powdered with salt, or salted with fire, as our Mark. 9. 49. Sauiour, but) salted with powder, to make such an Holocaust or burnt offering as should be the general mar∣tyrdome of the Kingdome, to bereaue vs of our 2 King. 2. 11. Eliat, and Horsemen of Israel, and take them away in a whirle-winde and chariot of fire. Quot mortes in vna morte? How many deaths in such a death? to cut off Esay 9. 14. caput & caudam, head and tayle, branch and rush, Prince, Priest and people from our Israel in one day: Quomodo inaudito potuit manus impianisu Tam dirum fabric are nef as? Respublica in vno Funere tollenda est, vno tumulanda sepulchro? With such an hellish deed for to desire To bury King and Kingdome in a fire? How ought the heauenly and happy deliuery from such an horrible and hidcous Tragedy, excite all continually to
thanke, and magnifie our most mercifull God, for such a miraculous preseruation: And though the crying sinnes of the Land had deserued such a Doomesday of fire, yet the Lord in mercy hath deliuered it from that desolation, and secured by his outstretched arme of power and pitty the Royall Head, and loyall members of great Britanny from his and our enemies, who Psa. 83. 3. 4. tooke crafty counsell against thy people, and consulted against thy secret ones. They said; Come, let vs cut them off from being a Nation, and let the name of Israel be no more in remembrance: but they perished at Endor, and were dung for the Earth. Shall 10. Psal. 88. 12. such wondrous workes as these be knowne in the darke, and thy righteousnesse in the Land where all things are forgotten? Can such a deliuerance from such a dismall dan∣ger, so villainous in the Agents, so dolorous for the pati∣ents, so craftily contriued, so eagerly pursued, so neerely effected, the watch of a night, and turning of an hand be∣tweene vs, and so deadly desolations; can such a gracious worke be euer buried in obliuion? Indeed it was The Israelites danced after the drowning of Pha∣roh, yet within three dayes after murmured at the waters of Marah. Exod. 15. 22. 23. Israels error, whose prayers and praises ended, so soone as they had passed the Red Sea: and shall we that haue escaped, not that Red Sea of water, but a Red Sea of fire, shall wee end our prayers and praises to God, because that danger is past? Oh how vnworthy shall we be of future fauours, if so vnthankefull for past blessings? And truly herein the Land is faulty, in forgetting these benefits, in a cold, and Beneficia dei omni∣bus horis conside∣randa sunt &c. Chrysost. in Gen. Hom. c. not continuall acknowledgement of their humble thanke∣fulnesse to God for these, and other vnspeakable benefits. And at the first all peoples hearts did burne within them (like those two Luk. 24. 32. Disciples) when they did but talke of the Powder Treason, admiring and acknowledging the infi∣nite mercies of God, in the preuenting this most abhor∣red massacre and with heart and voice magnified the Lord with Psa. 1 24. 1. 2. 3. 6. Dauids Psalme: If the Lord had not beene on our side, may Israel now say; If the Lord had not beene on our side, when men rose vp against vs, they had then swallow∣ed vs vp quicke, when their wrath was kindled against vs. Praised be the Lord, which hath not giuen vs as a prey vn∣to
their teeths but a few yeeres being past, they beginne to slacken this duty and are cold in praysing God for so bles∣sed Beneficij memoria est breuissima. a deliuerance. Perchance pondering Parsans words, Will you neuer giue ouer (saith he) your clamors and ex∣aggerations. The Powder Treason, the Powder Treason? No, we should neuer giue it ouer, to poure foorth our per∣petuall praises to God, for protecting vs from so prodigi∣ous a plot, and practise. Our Eucharisticall deuotion to God for the preuention of the downefall of the Land, should not be so momentary, and like a morning dew, as if the renued remembrance of so great deliuerance should become wearisomenesse vnto our spirits, or the wonder∣ment of the Lords mighty worke being past, our gratu∣lation to God should be out of dare, vnseasonable, and more then halfe forgotten: No, the deliuery from this fla∣gitious, and most bloody designement, (as it were a resur∣rection of this Kingdome from the dead) claimes not a va∣nishing, but a continuall and constant ioy; which ioyfull thankefulnesse to God if we forbeare or forget, because the time of that danger is past, we shall be like them, who seeing Ioh. 5. 35. Iohn to be a shining and a burning light, reioiced for a season in him; or like the Luc. . Pharise, Thanke God in tongue and countenance onely. And I feare there are many in this publike ioy and thankesgiuing, assume the face, and fashion of reioicers, like Ruf, who came to Ʋitellius af∣ter his victory, carrying (as Histor. lib. 2. Tacitus writes, Latitiam & gratulat ionem vultu ferens, sed animo anxius, &c.) Ioyfulnes in tongue and heauinesse in heart: These if any such, may witnesse against themselues. That Psal. 146. . the Lord hath done great things for vs, wherefore we reioice. The better to awaken our flumbering affections to this perpetuall ser∣uice of thankefull reioicing, and to prouoke vs to imprint an eternall Momento in the Kalender of our hearts fore∣uer, of the maruellous mercy of God in keeping vs from that intended destruction, I haue enterprized to ouze vp and reuiue the languishing spirits of the Land, with the re∣nued remembrance of so ioyfull a worke, and with a fresh Lampes laudis Dei. supply to refresh this fainting and expiring Lampe, which
though it hath beene cherished with the oyle of many hel∣ping hands, yet begins to faile in light, and had need that both Pulpet and Presse should preach and publish a conti∣nuall Hallelu-Iah, for so great and gracious a mercy of de∣liuery. For earthly men are hardly moued to this duty of praysing and thanking God; of ten Luk. 17. 15. Lepers but one re∣turnes to giue thanks. Pharao being plagued, can send for Moses and Aaron, and say; Exod. 9. 28. Pray ye vnto the Lord for me; but being eased, neuer say, Praise the Lord with me: wher∣in (if the latenesse of our gratulation to God) shall find a cold entertainement with the vnthankefull Children of Men; as if this worke were out of date, I say with the Psal∣mist; Psa. 102. 13. This shall be written for the generation to come, and the people which shall be created, shall praise the Lord. In handling of which Subiect, I will discourse princi∣pally of foure generall things: 1. Of the plot and proiect it selfe: 2. Of the Persons: 3. Of the Causes, or motiues: 4. Of the ends. By these foure markes I will guide my selfe in the description of this Chaos of confusion. CHAP. II. 1. Of the Plot. IN the declaration of this direfull, and dete∣stable Quorum Sceleri non inuenit aetas nomen &c. Iuv. Sat. 13. Powder-plot, I may beginne with the words of Aeneas, relating to Queene Dido of the fall of Troy, yet with a little Inuersion: Aenead. lib. 2.Anglorum vt opes, & lamentabile regnum Eruerent Danai— Quanquam animus  horret, luctu{que} refugit, Incipiam— My heart doth shake with trembling feare amazt, How famous England, a rich flourishing Land,
By Papists Powder-plot had beene defac't, And Troynouant, like Troy, in Haec facics Troiae, cum capere∣tur, erat. Ouid. fiery ruines stand, Had not the Lord put forth his sauing hand. As Treason is a worke of darkenesse; so these working Traytors wrought in darkenesse, their plot of hellish pol∣licy and impiety concealed in a place of darkenesse, Sub∣terraneum foramen, A place vnder the Earth, they wrought vnder the ground, beginning their Mine the eleauenth of December 1604, neare to the wall of the Parliament house. —Itum est in viscera terrae. Atque oculis captifodere cubilia talpae: Ouid. These blinded Pyoners to the Prince of hell. Labor in darkenesse, and in darkenesse dwell. Deepe politicians to vndermine a State: what depth in deuising, cunning in contriuing, cost in preparing, sweat in labouring, closenesse in conueying. Ingeniosa crudelitas ad poenas; Men of cruel wits to crucifie their Countrey: but the Lords potent wisdome eluded the profound policies of these monstrous, and mischieuous Earthwormes. In which damnable Malorum Ierna▪ Rem tam secre∣tam esse, vt necesse sit. eam prius pera∣gi, quam discerni, as some say their Garnet did write to the Pope. plot, two points considerable: 1. Their secrecy: 2. Their cruelty in it: Secrecy both in the Act, and Agents: 1. Vnder the Earth, the bosome of all se∣crets: 2. In the Agents, who sweare, and take the Sacra∣ment for secrecy. Strange impiety: to take the Sacrament, the Seale of Grace, to commit not a crying sinne of blood, but a roaring, and thundering sinne of fire, and brimstone: This is Popish practise, vsually to tie themselues for per∣formance of their desperate deeds, by taking the Sacra∣ment, in which they hold Christs body and blood really present; and thereupon make a bargaine to shed reall, yea royall blood. —Nullus smel are receptus Sang fnces. I may say of them, as Iacob of Simeon and Leui; Bre∣thren in euill, the Instruments of cruelty are their habita∣tions:  Gen. 49. 7. 6. into their secret let not my soule come. These Gun-powder-Traytors,
first in their mine consulting with the Prince of Darknesse, (the president of their plot and coun∣sell;) and the combining and conspiring with themselues in the deepest secrecy for the perpetrating this inhumane villany: and hauing from the eleauenth of December, 1604, vnto Candlemasse next, Labor improbus. laboured vnder the ground, and brought their wicked worke through halfe the wall of the Parliament House, vpon a new opportunity leaue their vn∣dermining worke, Daemonum opus, The Diuels worke; and hire the Vault or Cellar, vnder the Parliament house. And as before these Diuels Iourney-men laboured vnder the Earth, so now framing, and machinating sub Senatu, vn∣der the Parliament House, to make a finall dissolution there, which is the famous place of publike reformation: and therefore secretly doe conuey great store of powder thither, about 36 barrels of powder, couered ouer with store of wood and billet; and to vse Psa. 11. 2. 3. Dauids words; Lo, the wicked bend their Bowe, and make ready their Ar∣rowes vpon the string, that they may secretly shoote at them which are vpright in heart: for the foundations shall be cast downe, and what hath the righteous done? And as the same Psa. 64. 5. Prophet, They incourage themselues in a wicked purpose, they commune together to lay snares priuily, and say; Who shall see them? but the Psa. 33. 10. Lord did breake the counsell of the Heathen, and brought to: nought the deui∣ses of such people. Blessed be his holy name for euer. 2 Is the cruelty of the plot, which appears specially in two respects: 1. In the generall extent: 2. In the greeuous de∣uice. The extent large, plotted for the generall destruction of Cruelty in the extent. the King and Kingdome. Cum subit illius dirissima mortis image, Ʋltima quae Regi, regno{que}, bonis{que} fuisset, Horribilis quatit essa tremor:—. A dismall day, in which they did intend Of King, and Kingdome for to make an end. These Powder-papists then dreamed to haue had a Ro∣mane Regiment, that Tuesday at night here; like Hamil∣cars
dreame, the Generall of the Carthaginiani, laying siege to Syracusa, an Image appeared to him in his dreame, and told Hamilear, hee should sup the next night in Syra∣cusa; and so he did, yet not as a Captaine, but Captiue: or like Iulius Caesaers dreame, who the night before he was slaine in the Senate house, dreamed that he sate hard by Iu∣piters seate: So these alreamed of high matters, and imagi∣ned wicked things; but the Lord Psal. 2. 4. 9. did laugh them to scorne, the Lord had them in derision, and caused them to be crushed with a Scepter of Iron, and broke them in pee∣ces like a Potters vessell. I cannot apprehend the hundreth part of the misery of that Iliada malorum. mischiefe, in attempting not onely to make our Kingdome headlesse, but memberlesse; and may cry Quis cladem illius facti, quis funera faudo Explicet? For they intended with one thunderclap of powder to haue cut off our Princely and politicke Head, our Annoin∣ted Heu cadit in quen∣quam tantum Sce∣lus? King, gracious Queene, hopefull Prince, with the bles∣sed branches of the Regall Race; the most reuerend Cler∣gy, Right Honourable Nobility, faithfull Counsellors, graue ludges, the greatest part of our worthy Knights and Gentry, wise Burgesses; the learned Clerkes of the Crowne, Counsell, Signet, Seales, and of euery principall Iudgement seate: the choice Lawyers, with an infinite number of the common people. Nay, this patternelesse proiect had not onely extinguished the best of Christians, but had demolished all the cheefe ornaments, and monu∣ments of the Land, the House of Parliament, the Hall of Iustice, the Tombes of all former Princes, the Crowne, with other markes of royalty, the Records of the King∣dome, the ancient Charters, Presidents, and Euidences of preserued Antiquities. In a word: The Head and Body of the State in generall, with the cheefe ornaments of all our Land, had beene comprehended vnder that fearefull and finall Chaos, and may them vs to borrow the Poets verse, In Chaos , . But the Lord in mercy deliuered all from this barba∣rous
butchery, this Babels confusion, the most Tragicall example of damnable Treachery, praysed bee his Maiesty and mercy for euer. 2. Cruelty is in the deuise, by a pile of fire and fagots, iron∣barrs, 2 Cruelty in the deuise. timber peeces, and huge stones, with thirty sixe barrells of Gunpowder, at one volley to haue blowen them vp; and not onely with powder to burne them, but lest (Salamander like) they should liue in that fire, with wood, stones and Iron to beate them to powder. That I may say with Gen. 49. 7. Iacob, Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruell: A most cursed and cruell forme of practise: for as by three meanes mankind may be put to death, first, by man, the most milde and mercifull way: secondly, by vnreasonable creatures, more vnnatural, yet some resistance may be made, or pity found, and as Dan. 6. Daniel in the lions denne, parcere prostratis scit no∣bilis ira leonis. Thirdly, by insensible, and inanimate things▪ and among all the most cruell, the two elements of water and fire, and of those two, the fire most mercilesse and mi∣ferable. And in this intended corporall death they desire to dispatch all, not sensim, to prepare them by little and little to call to God to keepe them from the second death, Vt iugulent homi∣nes, surgunt de no∣cte latrones. Horat. (worse then a thousand bodily deaths:) But sine sensu, at vnawarns, vnprepared, to send them away, with one blast to blow vp all: they make no distinction of sexe, ex∣emption of person, young, old, great, small, man or wo∣man, Parcit cognatis maculis similis fera Iuuen. Leonum fe∣ritas inter se non dimicat. Serpentū morsus non petit Serpentes, ne maris belluae. ac pisces, ni∣si in diuersa genera saeuiunt. Plin. Hist. 7. Philo apud Centu∣riast. cent. 1. lib. 1. c. 3 Macrob. Saturna. 20. high low, rich or poore. Omnibus est eadem lethivia: They must al passe the fiery trial, be they their frinds or fol∣lowers & welwillers (wherin no doubt but they had some of good place,) yet all of them must be blowen vp toge∣ther. Wherin they shewed themselues worse then the wild beastes; who are kind to their owne kinde, a quality euen naturalized in a brutish breast: but these to satisfie and satiate their bloodie mindes, will exceede the bestiall ferocity, and following the bloody steps of that Butcher Herod, who in the Bethlemiticall murder, to make all sure, did not spare his owne sonne, as some write: which moued Augustus to say; Praestat esse Herodis percum quam prolem,
It was better to be Herods swine thē son; to this practise of Papists may make vs say, It is better to be the Popes beast then Barne, dogge, then Darling. And indeed these kind of people (as this Plot with others is a fit demonstration) Habemus ēsinu▪ Testes: not onely thiust liuing men out of the Church, but also the dead out of the Churchyard. D. Boys. many of them be of very cruell and bloodie dispositions, Powder, Poyson, and Ponyard, the Typicall markes of their profession; nay their malice so inueterate and immor∣tal, that it ceaseth not with death, but the bones, and ashes of their martred enimies, must be disturbed in their graues, as Fox. in Marty∣rolog. Wicliffe, Bucer, and Phags, are famous witnesses. And as it was an old prouerbe, , meaning Cappadocians, Cilicians & Cretians, to which we add Romes Catholicks, Crudeles, er Cruciferos, cruel crucifying Catho∣licks; in their plots of cruelty they wil carry the picture of a crucifix, or an Agnus dei in any foule fact; like the Iacobites, or 2 Macch. 12. 40 Vrsinon saeuiunt in cadauera. Iamnites, who had vnder their coates their golden gods whē they went to battle: Pictura Dei in opere diaboli, The picture of God in the work of the diuel. Yet to dig vp dead mens graues is a point of cruelty, for—molliter essa quieseant. And as Iosias said to his people cōcerning a Prophet buri∣ed in a scpulcher, let 2 Kin. 23. 18. It was Vitellius cruelty, Olere ho∣stem mortuum. Arist. lib. 5. politic. c. 11. & Sueton. in vita. him alone, let none remoue his bones. But if this were all, alas the crueltie were but small, Parua queror: These are poore reuenges of malice to martyr the bones, when they haue murdered the bodies: No no, their cruelty shall not onely descend to the Sepulcher, but ascend to the Scepter: kill a King, poyson a Prince, blow vp a Se∣nate: fire vp a Parliament, Spoile a Nation; Inven. Sat. 1. Aude aliquid breuibus gyaris, et Carcere dignum, Si vis esse aliquis, &c. As Catesby to his companion said, Wilt thou be a Traytor Like Herostratus, who burned Dia∣nas Temple, to be infamously fa∣mous. Tom? venture not thy selfe to small purpose; if thou wilt be a Traytor, there is a plot to a greater aduantage, & such an one as cā neuer be discouered: what a fiery spirit is here not like Luk. 9. 54. Iames or Iohn, to command fire from heauen to consume them, but to fetch fire from hell (or purgatory fire out of the vault) to consume all.
Such a bloody minded man was their Cardinall Farnesus, of whom it is Apud. Sleyd. li. 7. writtē, that he said he would make his horse swim vp to the belly in the blood of Protestants: we know not what Spirits they are of: for as there be three kind of Spirits, Holy. Humane. Hellish. So these possessed with the last, an hellish spirit, in an hellish worke, to destroy our generall Father, and com∣mon Mother, King, and Countrey, with a Mentioned in that letter the means of the dis∣couery. terrible blow; which cruelty may make vs more astonisht, then the witchcrafts of Isis and Osyris amazed Apuleius. —Bella, horrida bella, Et Tamisin multo spumantem sanguine cerno: The warres and woes (if this their worke had stood) Had made the Thames & Temples swim with blood. Oh let this monstrous Monument of superlatiue impi∣ety stand like Gen. 19. 26. Lots wiues pillar of salt, to season all po∣sterity with detestation of such inhumane cruelty. Triste exemplum, sed in posterum salubre, as Liu lib 8. Liuy in another kind: A fearefull In Sionis gaudi∣um, & papistarum luctum. example, worthy to make vs more thankefull to God, more dutifull in our liues, more carefull of Gods Lawes, who out of his infinite loue and mercy preserued vs from this generall and diabolicall massacre. And as I haue read, how the Romanes in detestation of the name of proud Tarquinius, who tyrannized ouer them, banished a good Citizen, onely because he had that name; so let the name of the Powder Treason, worke such detestation in the hearts of all Papists, that they may neuer hereafter thinke of any treasonable plots against King or Country, but banish for euer all such intentions or inuentions out of their hearts, which I pray God giue them grace to doe. And let all from high to low, fall downe vpon the knees of humble and thankfull hearts, and cry with Dauid; Psa. 136. 3. Praise the Lord of Lords, for his mercy endureth for euer: let Is∣rael now Psal. 118. 2. say; that his mercy endureth for euer: who de∣liuered his people, when like Izaacke, almost the knife at Gen. 22. 10.
their throats; and when they had prepared their fire, wood, powder, to offer vp Prince, Peeres, and People, like 2: Isa∣acke as a burnt offering; when they purposed Psal. 7. 5. to perse∣cute their soules, and take them, to tread our liues downe vpon the earth, and to lay our honour in the dust: then 6. did the Lord arise in his wrath, and lift vp himselfe a∣gainst the rage of our enemies: so that they who 15. 16. made a pit, and digged it, fell into it themselues; their mischiefe re∣turned vpon their owne heads, and their cruelty fell vpon their owne pates. The Psal. 9. 16. wicked are snared in the worke of their owne hands, and may moue all to cry aloud; Psal. 66. 5. 7. Come, and behold the workes of the Lord: he ruleth the World with his power, his eyes behold the Nations, the rebelli∣ous shall not exalt themselues. Praise our God ye people, 8. and make the voice of his praise to be heard: 150. 2. 9. Praise him in his mighty Acts, praise him according to his excellent greatnesse: let euery one that hath breath; praise the Lord, for this great and gracious mercy, in the meanes of our maruellous and mercifull deliuery. CHAP. III. The discouery of the Plot: IN the discouery of this Archtrayte∣rous plot, I may truly repeate Liuies words, who in a great case of ioy saith; Maius gaudium suit, quàm quod vni∣uersum homines caperent, It was a grea∣ter ioy then men are able to compre∣hend, by an vnusual discouery to haue a generall deliuery from so dismall In their Let∣ter. Tragedy. For when they had thought and writ, that God and Man had con∣curred to punish the wickednesse of the time, God, and Man consented to reueale the wickednesse of their trea∣son, and makes vs hope well of that Prophecy we do reade in Telesphorus, Lib. de Tribula∣tione. p. 31. Antichristus non poterit subiugare Venetias,
nec Parisios, nec Ciuitatem regalem Anglia, Antichrist shall not be able to sub due Venice, nor Paris, nor the Kingly City of England, London. The principall instrument, and humane meanes of the discouery of this diuellish treache∣ry, was a letter (like 2 Sam. 11. 15. Dauids letter to Ioab, which Ʋriah carried for his owne death) sent some ten dayes before the Parliament should haue begunne, priuily and cunningly conueyed by an vnknowne man to one of the Footemen of that Right Honourable Lord, (worthy of perpetuall honour for his fidelity) the Lord Mount-Eagle, charging him to put that Letter into his Lord and Masters hands; which Letter that thrice-honoured Lord receiuing, won∣dring at the strange contents thereof, and perplexed what construction to make of it, like a most dutifull Subiect and diuine Eagle, concluded not to conceale it; but for all the latenesse and darkenesse of the night, repaires present∣ly to his Maiesties Pallace at White-Hall, and there deli∣uered the same to the late deceased Earle of Salisbury, Sir Robert Cecil, a very vigilant Counsellour, and wise States∣man, then his Maiesties principall Secretary: which said Letter being afterward vpon the Kings returne to White-Hall presented to his Maiesty, (euer Wise as an An∣gell of God. 2 Sam. 14. 20. fortunate in his Princely iudgement in clearing obscurities, and doubtfull mysteries) did vpon the instant interprete, and apprehend by the darke phrases, (yet contrary to Drammaticall con∣struction) that it must be done by blowing vp the House of Parliament by Gunpowder; commanding a search to be made, by which the matter discouered, and Agents were apprehended. Whereas if his Maiesty had not accom∣modated his interpretation to this kind of danger, no worldly prouision, or preuention, could haue put backe this lamentable destruction. So that is here verified, which Prouerb. 16. 10. Salomon deliuered, Diuination in labijs Regis, A diuine sen∣tence shall be in the lippes of the King: The Prou. 25. 1. glory of God is to conceale a thing secret, but the Kings honour is to search it out. In this Gunpowder Treason, our King was Regi , Kingly Prophet, inspired by God in de∣ciphering and declaring the darke meaning of their ambi∣guous,
and mysticall Letters: It was the Lords mercy to put into the Kings mind the darke meaning of this dange∣rous mischiefe: for, Philo. Ibi incipit diuinum auxilium, vbi deficit humanum, When humane helpes are ready to faile, God will come in the very point and article of time, to deliuer his seruants; and will raise vp some meanes either ordinary or extraordinary, to discouer and defeate the deuices of the wicked. As indeed did diuinely appeare in this deliue∣rie; first that a Letter should be writ; secondly a glosse or commentary made vpon it by the King, contrary to com∣mon construction, yet that was the second meanes (vnder Tutelaris Deus. God, whose might and mercy was aboue all) of our pre∣seruation. Telenus prophecied to Cyclops, his eye should be put out, but he was incredulous to beleeue it, contemned this aduertisement: Risit, & o vatum stolidissime, falleris, inquit. So some might haue thought this letter to haue beene Scintilla neglecta magnum excitat incendium. the euaporation of an idle braine; but our Teltroth Cassan∣dra, sacred Soueraigne, presently presaged the truth, know∣ing Traytors to be like Iudg. 15. 4. Sampsons Foxes, to haue fired tayles, and to be firebrands of fury, presupposed it to be a plot of fire: for Traytors are Flagellarci. Flabella sediti∣onis, scourges of Common-wealths, Bellowes of sedition, to inkindle fireworkes of destruction: they are like cruell Surgeons, that alwayes launce and seare, and vse the cut∣ting knife and fire, no gentle Remedium morbo deterius. Remedies: as their heads, like the head of Occuluitque ca∣put, quod adhuc latet: Ouid. Non interest quis occidat si innocen∣tem aliquis occi∣dendum esse desi∣derat. Cassio. sup. psal. 62. Nilus vnsearchable; so their hearts in cru∣elty insatiable, and hands in execution infatigable, as their bloody heads, hearts, and hands appeare in this bloody businesse. These gunpowder Traitors, plotting so abhorred a Particide, though God frustrated their inhumane at∣tempts, and brought the wheele vpon themselues, yet were they most accursed murtherers in the sight of God. Saul a murtherer in mentall affection, in hunting after 1. Sam. 19. 1. Dauids life, though he failed in manuall action and exe∣cution: So Ester 5. 14. Hamax in plotting the death. of innocent Mordecai, was a murderer in heart, and had a murderers reward. Neuer drop of innocent blood-shed, but it cries
for vengeance, therefore Iob 16. 18. Ioh, O earth, couer not thou my blood. A murtherer is the very Image and picture of the Deuill, who was a murtherer from the beginning, as our Sauiour Ioh. 8. 44. saith; and they that practise, or doe purpose to murder men, poyson Princes, destroy Countries, blow vp Cities, fire vp Parliaments, are of their Father the De∣uill, and led by his Spirit. And truly this practise, as it was of extraordinary ascendencie, so it had a rare discoue∣ry, by a letter of their owne, darke, doubtfull, and Sphinxi∣an, deliuered strangely; and when accepted, it might haue beene thought to haue beene an idle gull, or pasquill, and neuer further haue come to light, or being further exami∣ned, they might haue missed the marke in the interpreta∣tion God hath cho∣sen the foolish things of the world to con∣found the wise, &c. 1. Cor. 1 27. of the mischiefe; but God so ordered, that this foolish letter (as it might haue bin iudged) was the meanes to dis∣couer their treachery, and confound their villanie. And further though a Treason suspected, yet nothing detected, till the very night before the day of their intended slaugh∣ter: they had almost brought it to this passe, Psal. 94. 17. Paulomi∣nus in inferno habitasset anima nostra, Our soule had almost dwelt in silence: yea they Psal. 119. 87. had almost consumed vs vpon the earth: we were in articulo mortis, not onely as men ap∣pointed to dye, but at the point to dye; but God who is Psal. 9. 9. adiutor in opportunitatibus, a refuge in due time of trouble, did Psal. 124. 7. breake the snare, and we were deliuered. It pleased God to permit the Deuill to feede these his true seruants with false hopes, let them go on freely with∣out rub, till they had fully wouen their Spiders web, and come to the very point of execution, and deliuery of that deuillish monster whereof they had so long trauailed, and might say with those mourning messengers of King Eze∣chiah sent to Esay, 2. King. 19. 3. the children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth: when we were albican∣tes ad messem, Iohn 4. 35. white for the haruest, and ready to be cut downe, and wanted nothing but thrusting in of Falx, their sickle to cut vs downe: or Fax, the fire to burne vs vp: or Faux, euen Guido Faux, or Faux Erebi, hellish Faux to swallow vs vp: when we might say with 1. Sam. 20. 3. Dauid, there is
but a step betwixt vs, and death: being at the mouth of the pit, then the Zechar. 3. 2. Lord takes vs as brands out of the fire: or as Amos 4. 12. Amos, like firebrands pluckt out of the burning. When our enemies thought they had the prey in their hands, and all had beene sure, when the danger was most deadly, and deliuery desperate, then the Lord did fight a∣gainst them in our cause: Now Esay 33. 10. 11. will I arise, saith the Lord, now will I be exalted now will I lift vp my selfe: Yee shall conceiue chaffe, and bring forth stubble: the fire of your breath shall deuoure you: as you haue Prou 22. 8. sowen iniquity, so shall you reape affliction: ye haue Hosea 8. 7. Qui operantur ini∣quitatem, & semi∣rant dolores, metūt eos. Iob. 4. 8. sowen the winde yee shall reape the whirle-winde. Then did the Lord dash their deuices in peeces, and made their Sun set at noone, as Amos 8. 9. or rather caused their sinne to be discouered at midnight. All the former part of the night their hellish factor Faux was about his worke of darkenesse, in pre∣paring all his Engines and snares of death ready for the morning; and yet before the morning watch, I say, before the morning Psalm. 130. 6. watch, they were disappointed and disco∣uered, and their chiefe Agent▪ By that noble & trusty Knight Sir Thomas Kneuet imployed in that search & seruice. Faux apprehended. Sorrow might endure a night, but ioy comes in the morning.—Redeunt spectacul man. VVhen these Romish Idumeans (enemies to our Israe∣lites) had said like them in their hearts, Who shall bring Obad. 3. vs downe to the ground? then did the watchman of Israel who Psal. 121. 4. Yet they say, the Lord shalnot see, neyther will the God of Jacob re∣gard it. Psal. 94. 7 neyther stumbers no sleeps bring the deuices of the wicked to light, manifesting their mischiefe, detecting their conspiracy, saying to these sinners as to the seas, Iob 38. 11. Thus farre shall ye go and no further: Psal. 68. 1. E Deus, & , When God arose, his enemies were soone scattered, they also that hate him, shall flye before him to make all to say with Esay, Esay 33. 13. Heare ye that are a far off, what I haue done, and ye that are nee know my pow∣er; when the wicked had said in their hearts, Let vs de∣stroy, Psal▪ 83. 8. them alltogether,  Psal. 78. 65. 66. Lord awake as one out of sleepe; and as a Giant refreshed with wine, and smote his enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetuall shame; praised be his blessed name for euer.
And that no heart of man should presume to detract or defalke any part of the glory from Gods entire and plena∣ry praise in the work of this deliuerance; or sing like them, 1 Sam. 18. 7. Saul hath slaine his thousand, and Dauid his ten thou∣sand: Consider the gracious and wonderfull prouidence of God, that the malefactor and Powder-Monster Faux, was taken when hee was new come out of the vault from working his fire-worke, hauing three matches, and all o∣ther instruments ready in his pocket; whereas if this Sinon had beene taken while hee was enclosed in his Equo ne credite Teucri. Virg. Troian Horse, hee confessed hee would not haue failed to haue blowen vp the house, Like Nero, Me mortuo ruat mun∣dus. himselfe, and his takers all toge∣ther: for as the Poet well writes of such Iuvenal. Sat. 6.—Nihil est audacius illis Depraensis, iram, ac animos à crimine sumunt: Such wretches taken, and their deeds once seene, Harden theis hearts, and doe increase their spleene. Yet such was the ouer-ruling power and Vbicun{que} fuerit prouidentia fru∣strantur vniuersa contraria. Aug. prouidence of God herein, without any secondary causes, that the party assigned for the deed should be then without, who if hee had beene within, had done the deed in part, and in stead of touching the parties had ouerturned the place. To moue all, King and Subiects, not to Hab. 1. 16. sacrifice to their owne nets, as if any worldly policy could haue preuented this wret∣ched impiety, but that alone the sacred goodnes and pro∣uidence of our most deare and blessed God might triumph in this deliuerance. Psal. 115. 1. Not vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name giue the glory. Thou Reuel. 4. 11. art worthy, O Lord, to receiue all the glory, honor, and power; and let all the Creatures in Heauen, and Christians on earth fay, Reuel. 5. 13. Praise and honor, and glory, and power be vnto him that sitteth vpon the Throne, and to the Lambe for euer∣more; who hath deliuered vs from this ocean of misery, this odious Massacre. And should mooue all, Head and members, to cry with Ezra 9. 13. 14. Ezra, Seeing that thou our God hast stayed vs from being beneath, and hast giuen vs such a deliuerance, should we return to breake thy commande∣ments, and ioyne in affinity with the people of such abho∣minations?
Seeing the Lord in this extraordinary worke hath declared such liuely markes, and expresse Characters of his diuine maiesty, might and mercy towards vs, shall we not magnifie the Lords mercy with Miriams melody, Exod. 15. 21. Sing ye vnto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider hath he ouerthrown in the Sea: He hath confounded the barbarous immanity, and inhuma∣nity of these bloud-thirsty Traytors euen emancipated to cruelty, by a noble and notable deliuery; and shall we not render vnto him a cordiall and continuall thankesgiuing of our lips, ioyned with a reall thankesgiuing of our liues? or shall we praise him with our mouthes and prouoke him with our sinnes? Lip-labor is lost labour, except with an internall thankefulnesse, there goes an entire obedience. Consider Christs caueat, Iohn 5. 14: Sinne no more, lest a worse thing come vnto thee. Let our newnes of life expresse the great∣nesse of our thankefulnesse. God will not accept the sacri∣fice of mouth-praisers proceeding from vnsanctified li∣uers. Let this our commemoration and recognition of Gods mercies past, prouoke vs to all obedience in the reformation of our liues to come. So shall wee make an holy vse of so happy a deliuery: Singula illius mala erunt nobis singula bona, Their Ignis deuoratio∣nis excitaret ignem deuotionis. banefire of powder, our bone∣fire of praises. And withall to make vs more Finis vnius mali est gradus futuri. vigilant to vn-earth these foxes, who will creepe into holes vnder the ground to worke our ouerthrow: foresight is the wise mans Beacon, Melius est praecauere, quam pauere: Cantic. 2. 15. Take vs the foxes, the little foxes which destroyes the vines; for they are a part of that generation of whom speakes Salo∣mon, Prou. 30. 14. Whose teeth are as swords, & their iawes as kniues, they Prou. 6. 34. will not spare in the day of vengeance, and like the whorish woman Prou 6. 26. will hunt for the pretious life of man. Remember therefore the counsell of the sonne of Syrach, Ecclus. 36. 26. Who will trust a thiefe that is alwaies ready? And let this our true thankefulnesse to God be a dura∣ble seruice, not like Hse. 6. 4. a morning dew, and cloud that goeth away, or a Widdowes ioy, oritur & moritur, gotten, and forgotten in an houre, a suddainefit, or momentay pas∣sion,
or entertained like an annuall guest, as if the force and fruite of our thankefull ioy should be confined to one day, or like a common retainer should haue but a yeerely acceptance: no, I Ezech. 4. 6. haue appointed thee a day for a yeere, euen a day for a yeere, saith God to his Prophet: but this of ours, est Dies pro omnibus annis, a day to thanke God all the yeeres of our life: alwayes to say and sing with De∣borah, Iudg. 15. 2. 20. 31. praise yee the Lord for the auenging of Israel: yea euen the starres in their course fought against Sisera: So let thine enemies perish O Lord. And thou (O Lord) which didst keepe Psal. 64. 2. vs from the conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of the workers of iniquity, by discoue∣ring their villanie, to thee (most mighty, and mercifull God) we offer vp our bodies and soules as a liuing sacri∣fice, desirous to doe thee all prostrate seruice, in body and soule, which thou hast preserued in peace, appointed by the wicked to haue perished in powder; we will neuer for∣get Nulla Dies rerum tantarum obliuia∣ducat. this mercy, or forbeare our humble thankes to thee for our deliuery, but so long as the Sunne and Moone endu∣reth, wee with our posterities, (till time shalbe no more) will cherish the remembrance of it with an immortall thankfulnesse, saying to thee with holy Melchi-sedecke af∣ter Abrahams victory, Gen. 14. 20. Blessed be the most high God, which hath deliuered our enemies into our hands; to which King 1. Tim. 1. 17. euerlasting, immortall, inuisible, vnto God onely wise, be all the honor, and glory for euer, and euer: Amen. CHAP. IIII. A description of the Persons. THe Romish professors, who teach They that with their teeth will teare their brea∣den God, would eate vp Gods people as bread. psal. 14. 4. the people to eate their God, and kill their King, were the chiefe in∣struments in the Powder-treason: all the Actors, and adherents were great Recusants. Lay Recusants, Catesby, Percy, Winter, Tresham, Wright, &c. deuised the plot, and
then the lesuits fell in with them: allowed, and ratified by Garnet, Gerard, Ocorne, Greenewell, &c. Iesuits, and Po∣pish Priests. Garnet imparted the Popes Breues to Cates∣by, a right Catiline, whereby he was stirred vp to deuise some way to worke a generall ouerthrowe. This Cates∣by was the inuentor of this Villanie: Virg:Accipe nunc Danaúm insidias, & crimine ab vno disce omnes. Learne by this Traytors odious fault, and fall, Yee Papists to abhorre Treason in generall: This Si hi Sancti, qui Scythae? Si hi sunt Catholici, qui Cannibales? Canniball, or Roman-catholicke Catesby, hauing bethought him of the powder-plot for the blowing vp of the Parliament house, in generall rearmes breakes the case to Garnet: What if in some case the innocent should be de∣stroyed with the guilty? He answers, they might, so that it were for a good able to recompence the lose of the in∣nocent. And afterward the plot plainly propounded to him, not by way of confession, as his Procters pleade for him, but in conference about it: as he voluntarily confes∣sed before his death, that Greenewell with this Catesby was heard of him, not confessing, but consulting: yet if it had beene by way of confession (for his owne confession prooues the contrary) he should haue reuealed the plot, if not the parties, yea the parties also, if hee would follow the example of his fellow-confessors. Bodin Libro 2. de epub. c. 5. doth relate an example heerein, how a Norman had a purpose to kill King Francis, yet afterward changed his minde, (these farre from such thoughts) and opens this sinne in his con∣fession to a Minorite Frier, of his former, yet forsaken pur∣pose: the Frier doth enioine him penance, and grants ab∣splution: yet declares all to the King, and the Iudges of the Court of Paris cause him to be executed. But these who before had turned them from the true religion, and tutored them in the Schoole of rebellion, were so far from reuealing, as that their heads and hearts were with them to  well of the accomplishing: Gerard gaue the Tray∣tors the Sacrament to kind them to secrecy: Hammond in  house absolued the Traytors, the Treason reuea∣led:
Oldcorne, alias Hall defends the plot being discoue∣red, and willes the Catholickes not to be discouraged. Tesmond plotted with Garnet, and goes vp and downe to raise vp Armes. The publicke writings of our state and Ex Actis public is Henrici Garnetti Londini editis. records heerein, with some of their owne confessions, examinations, and subscriptions, are inuincible witnesses against all the cauels of deprauing Papists, who labour to cleere these their polyprogmaticke Priests, from hauing an hand in so hellish a plot, by desperate, and notorious vn∣truths. But it is manifest by the mouth of Time, & Truth, Vide edictum re∣gium promulga∣tum 15. lanua. Anno. 1606. vbi expressum Iesuitas esse Auctores, & inuentores illius proditoriae Ma∣chinationis. that these Priests were priuie to the Powder plot, against all Popish calumniations suggested to the contrary: and these Lay Recusants hauing first suckt the pestilent poy∣son of this vnheard Treachery out of the ill humors of Po∣pish doctrine, infused into them by the treasonable Tribe of Iesuits, who teach Treason, and cause Traytors to be canonized in Romes Calender: Ouid. Me∣ta. lib.Proh Superi, quantum mortalia pectoracaecae Noctis habent: ipso sceleris molimine Tereus Creditur essepius, laudemque á crimine sumit. O Lord, what hearts possessed with the night Of deepest ignorance, depriu'd of sauing light, Can grace with praise such deedes of darknesse right. These politicke Priests, knowing these their Lay-disci∣ples Quis tulerit Gracchos de sedi∣tione querentes? to be of turbulent, and treasonable Spirits, imitated Gracchus striplings, stirring vp such as be offended alrea∣dy, making them their Captaines and Standard bearers, while they might with security expect the hoped issue of this fearefull Treachery. So that these Priests, next to the Prince of the Aire, (who caused these children of disobe∣dience to worke vnder the earth) may challenge the chiefe place, and precedencie in the Plot: and may say, da locum, giue vs the place, you were the Actors, we Authors, com∣manding you to do all seruice for the Catholicke cause, to aduenture your lifes & blood for replanting our religion, to spare neither head, or mebers, but to strike at the Root, to make such a confusion as might beget a new alteration; to labor with Esop: frogs for a Cicoia, an Italian Storke,
and stranger to rule heere, so to suster no Protestant ruler, nolumus hunc regnare, we will haue none such rule ouer vs, and for the effecting of it, you know our Doctrine, and practise. Flectere sinequeo superos, Acheronta mouebo: If we cannot preuaile with God aboue, As low as hell shall our inuentions mooue. And because some may thinke I doe them wrong, in gi∣uing such badges, and aspersions to the Iesuited Aequiuocans animal, penitusque Sinonià proles: doctum mancipi∣um, tuba, fax, & Machina Martis. flocke, in making them the Trumpetors of treason, and procurers, and practisers of King-killing, (an Art highly commen∣ded in their Schoole) I will take vpon me briefely to de∣clare, how welcome Traytors be to that Tribe, and how highly by them they are commended, who of all the world beside are loathed, and abhorred. CHAP. V. Popish applause of Traytors. IT is commonly knowen, that Iacobus Cle∣mens a Frier vowed to kill Henry the third, the French King; this his treason he imparts to Father Comelett, and other Iesuits: addunt calcaria, they spurre him on to this villanie, by promising Abbacies, Bishoprickes, &c. Aut sidefecerit, aut non successerit, if faile in deede, which he did follow in desire, then to be graced with the glory of Martirdome, and Papall Canonization, and to haue a place aboue the  Sext. Q. pane∣gyr. in Consist. An. 1589. O pulchum, & Sanctum facinus Scholatota sonâ bit. Apostles in heauen. The Traytor proceeds in his hellish proiect, and killes the King, and Et calo donare scelus, superisque beare. Sextus Quintui (the head of Rome) spoiles his braine, and spend his tongue to com∣mend it, rarum, inauditum, memor abile facinus, &c. A rare, vnheard, memorable exploit: a rare, vnheard Panegyricke to commend a murtherer for shedding▪ Royall blood. Ca∣cillus that great vndertaken for Verres would be ashamed to Causa patroci∣nio non bona peior rit. patronize such parties: but Popes are past shame, and
haue no blood in their cheekes, who will commend the shedding of blood: We Rod. Botter. comment. pag. 109. & 106. read, that when Chastell that wounded the French King, was examined, by whose tea∣ching, and perswasion he had done it; answered, that he heard many say, that the murder was lawfull, because they called him a Tyrant: and being demanded, whether the Iesuits vsed to say so, he sayd, he had heard many of them say, that fact was lawfull, because hee was out of the Church, and excommunicated. And one of them hath written a booke namely Fran. de. Apol. pro. Io. Chastell. Ʋeron. Constant. calling it, an Apology for Iohn Chastell, maintaining Pag. 133. Et pag. 40. read Card. Allens apo∣logy for Stanlies Treason. Chastells deede: In which worke, (he sayth) if Harmodius, and Aristogiton, Scaeuola, and Brutus onely for loue of their Country, hauing no other lights to goe before them, cast themselues into such danger by murde∣ring Tyrants; what thinke you ought a Christian, and a Frenchman, and one that burnes with the zeale of Phinees, Ehud, and Elias, to doe for the Catholicke Church, for which Christ died, and in which we are sure of saluation? And agreeably with him writes Amphithea. pag. 101. Bonarscius, otherwise called Carolus Scribonius, hath the Pope (saith he) no pow∣er against the French King? shall Dionysius, Machanidas Aristotimus, Tyrants, Monsters of the world oppresse Fraunce, and shall no Pope encourage vp a Dion, a Timo∣leon to dispatch them? shall many monsters hold the Com∣mon-wealth in bonds, and shall no Thrasibulus mooue his hand? shall no man play the Souldier vpon this beast, mea∣ning the French King? So the Iesuite Derege. Mariana highly commends King killers, Praeclare cumrebus humanis ageretur, si multi, &c. It were excellent, if many such, meaning King killers could be found: and commends such greatly, and prescribesto them also rules, and caueats in the poisoning of Kings, not to poyson them by meate, or drinke, least the King taking it with his owne hand be guilty of selfe fellonie; but rather to be poysoned by his chaire, apparell, robes, after the ex∣ample of the Mauritanian Kings, to be poysoned by sent, or contact: O hell hound, sprung from cursed, and cruell
Caine, art thou a tutor of Parricide? how comes it that the Pope hath nor called in this worke of that wicked wretch, and yet hath called in some others of his bookes? it argues King killers please him well, and he makes great vse of them. To passe ouer forraine Stories of famous Kings, destroy∣ed by them (which in the next Chapter shall be touched) how was D. Parry encouraged, and animated (the appoin∣ted slaughterman of Queene Elizabeth) by letters to pro∣secute his intended mischiefe, and that from no meane, tri∣uiall, or forlorne fellow, but euen from one of the Popes Cardinals? The tenor of which letter fellowes: Sir, the ho∣linesse of our Lord the Pope, hath seene your Letter with credit enclosed, and cannot but praise your good disposi∣tion, and resolution, which you writ, holdeth to the ser∣uice, and benefit publicke. Wherein his Holinesse exhor∣teth you to continue, and to bring to passe your promise: and that you may be the better ayded by that good Spirit, which hath induced you to this, his Blessednesse grants you full pardon, and forgiuenesse of your sinnes, and his Holinesse will further make himselfe a debtor to you, to acknowledge your deseruings in the best maner he may: put in act your holy, and honorable thoughts, and looke to your safety: and I wish you all good, and happy successe: from Rome. 30. of Ianuarie. 1584. Yours to dispose, N. Cardinall of Come. By which letter we may see their liking of such workes, and workers, euen their Pope praising such for their good disposition and resolution, which all godly Christians call abomination, and rebellion. Non sie mor det ouis, non sunt hac facta columbae, Sedlup a dilauiat, maretrix mat improbe caedes: No lambe so bit as, no such deedes likes the Doue, But wolfe▪ will worry, barlot bloodshed loue. It is well sayd of In Rom. 2. Defensio peccati duplicat pecca∣tum: vitia quia amant defendunt, & malunt potius excusare, quam excutere. Sen. epist. 116. Primasius Nemo per, peccat, quam qui peccat, none sin more dangerously, then
they which defend their sinne: how deadly then sinne they, who not onely defend it, but commend that crying sinne of blood, promising pardon of sinnes, for perpetra∣ting most horrible sinnes: So that it puts me in minde of the saying of the painter to the Duke of Vrbine, who be∣ing hired by a Cardinall to paint the picture of Paul and Peter, painted them with an high colour: the Cardinall thinking they were too high coloured, the painter answe∣red, that indeede Paul and Peter while they liued, were dead coloured, and pale with preaching, but since they were dead, they were high coloured, blushing at the wic∣kednesse of their supposed (and but supposed) successors, ashamed of the Doctrine, and practises of your Church of Rome, and that this shame had altered their colour. And sure all Gods seruants, who haue the feare of God before their eyes, are ashamed, and abhorre such abominable practises. The cause (as Bodin saith) which mooued Taci∣tus Quaesiui Romam in Roma, & non, inueni Romam. Facta est iam Ro∣ma lupandi: or Roma Radix om∣nium malorum. Orci vicaria Roma. to exclaime against Christians was, quia Christiani af∣fectarunt crimina, quae Ethniti abhorruerunt, Because Christians affect those sinne, with the Ethnickes doe ab∣horre: if Tacitus were now aliue, how would he exclaime against the Church of Rome, for animating people to commit such villanies, which all Ethnickes, (except saua∣ges or Cannibals) abhorre, and condemne? Behold how Roma nocens nocet, atque viam docet ipsa nocendi: iamque dolnt cecidisse minus faeliciter ausa. Rome is degenerated from her primitiue State; time was, she loathed such deedes, either to com∣mend, or canonize Trators. Facta haec Roma olim, nec sancta, nec Ethnica, nouit. Such workes in ancient times this Rome did hate, In her first Christian, yea in Ethnicke State. But now, Quod natura nefas odit, doctrina capescit: Which nature most detest, Doctrine defend. Yea, haue not some of them laboured to extenuate the deuillish deuise of these superlatiue Powder-traytors with these words, Alas it was the attempt of some few, and vn∣fortunate Gentlemen: vnfortunate as they count, because they failed in performance: or as others of them, These Ca∣tholickes held the King, no King, or not their King; and ex∣pectanda
erat diuturna persecutio, a perpetuall persecution was to be expected: and Eudemen a Iesuite hath write to defend Garnets Treason, and rightly played the Daemon: and haue not some others excused the fact of Rauilliacke (one of Marianas Schollers) who stabbed Henry the fourth, the late famous French King, (whose death neuer sufficiently to be lamented, and neuer of Kings sufficiently reuenged) with these pretences, Fuit stolidit as regis ob sus∣ceptum haereticorum patrocinium, It was the folly of the King for patronising these heretickes, meaning Prote∣stants? So that I may define these Iesuits to be, Wiclef. Tria log. p. 14. 3. as one did de∣fine a Frier to be, cadauer mortuum è sepulchro veniens, mis∣sum à daemone inter homines, a dead Carrion comming out of his graue, sent of the deuill among men: and truly such are rather monsters then men, who will commend, or command murther, applaud murtherers, and Traytors, who are portenta virorum, viri portentorum, monsters of men, or men monsters, viri sanguinum, men of blood, viri oc∣cisionis, slaughter men: and though in all professions some are bad, A Cham will be in the Arke, Saul among the Prophets, and Cum Iesu Iu∣das, cum Simone fur Ananias, in Templo Christi semper sunt qua∣tuor isti. Illyricus. Iudas among the Apostoles, some may fall into murther, or Treason &c. Yet when such come to their end and punishment, they vsually confesse their faulte to be in their nature, not in their religion, excep∣ting onely Roman Catholickes, who seeke to fetch poy∣son from heauen, and to prooue murther by the Scrip∣ture: * Onely I make a difference be∣twixt a Mache∣uillian Iesuite, and an ignorant Papist, who though he be not a sound member of the Church, may be a faithfull Sub∣iect to Caesar, per possibile. Dogmatis atque Scholae sunt haec, non crimina morum. So that these cannot say with Cassiodorus, follow my doctrine, but not my maners, for both precepts, and prac∣tise treasonble. And that I may giue a little tast, or touch of their prac∣tises in this kind (least I should seeme to condemne them without cause) I will in the next Chapter demonstrate, how that many Popes of Rome, (who are the heads of Po∣pery, which is the 2. Thessa. 2. 7. mystery of iniquity) haue caused, and procured many Emperors, Kings, Princes, and worthy
men to be greatly persecuted, and grieuously killed. So that we may say to them as our Sauiour to the Luke 11. 49. 50. Pharisees, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, and of them they shall slay and persecute, that the bloud of all the Prophets (with many Kings, Princes, and learned men) may be re∣quired of this generation. CHAP. VI. A short Catalogue, or rehearsall of certaine Emperors, Kings, and famous men, who haue beene perse∣cuted by the Antichrist of Rome. I Cannot nor will not enterprise to declare all the particular persecutions of the Church of Rome against seuerall Kings, and Potentates, who distasted, and in some sort opposed themselues against their corruptions; for that would require a long Vide the tragedy of Traytors. cap. 7. Tractate to discouer the miserable mischiefes of the whore of Babilon, Reu. 17. 6. drunken with the bloud of Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Iesus Christ: for that were an endlesse worke, and the Spirit of truth might say to me, as to Ezechiel, Ezech. 8. 15: Turne thee againe, and thou shalt see greater abhominations then these; I will confine my selfe to a few examples. The Emperour Philippicus Bardanius, because hee com∣manded 1. Emperors. all Images to be remoued out of the Churches, by the counsell and consent of Iohn Patriarke of Constanti∣nople, was denounced an Hereticke, publiquely excom∣municated by Pope Constantine, and commanded no gold Vrspergens. nor siluer to be stamped with his Image, nor any mention made of him in their common prayers. Lodouicus Pius the Emperor, eight hundred yeares after Christ, was thrust out of his Kingdome by the French Cleargie and the Sollicitato in pa∣trem Gregorio pō∣tifice Romano: Pa∣pir. Masson. annal. pag. 104. Pope. Philip the Emperor by the procurement of the Pope
Innocent the third, who said, Vrspergens. p. 319 Eyther he would haue Phi∣lips Crowne, or Philip his Miter; continually opposed himselfe against him, and stirred vp Idem. p. 324. Count Otho against him, who miserably did slay him at Bamberge in his priuy chamber. Henry the seuenth oppressed by the Naucler. p. 990. Pope and his Car∣dinals. Auentin. p. 597. stirring vp enemies against him, was at last poy∣soned by Idem. p. 598. a Monke in the Sacrament. I omit to speake of the other Henry the 1. Henry the 4. Henry the 5. &c. Emperors. Henries, tragically vexed by tyrannicall Popes, the extreamities and indignities whereunto they brought them, haue replenished the world with plentifull histories: The Emperor Fredericke the seauenth truely complaining, Pet de Ʋin. lib. 1. cp. 31. That the happines of Emperors was alwaies opposed by the Popes enuy. Neyther haue the Kings of the earth found better vse, some of them by Popes deposed from their Kingdomes, as 2 Kings. Papir▪ Masson. annal. in Child. pag. 83. Bel. de Rom. pontif. lib. 5. Childericke the French King by the Pope deposed, vnder pretence of stupidity, and thrust into a Monastery: Philip the first for matrimoniall causes. Philip called the faire for collating of benefices: Rachis King of the Lombards by Pope Zachary put into a Monastery, with many others which might be named. Nay not onely by Popes deposed, but of their liues de∣priued. Manfred the King of Naples and Sicily, had the Duke of Anien Naucl. p▪ 946. armed against him by Pope Ʋrbane the fourth, by whom hee was slaine. So Conradinus King of Naples and Sicilye, being taken prisoner by Charles, bro∣ther to the French King, Paral. sperg. p. 11. was miserably put to death by the Popes Counsell. King Iohn of England Math. Par. p. 223 was vilely vexed, and depriued of his Kingdome by the Pope and his Bishops, and the French King set vp against him, and at last was See Acts & Mo∣num. prope finem. poysoned by a Monke. Ioane the Queene of Naples was Paud. Collē. p. 221 depriued of her Kingdome by Pope Vrbane, who consented to Naucler. p. 1024 her mur∣ther. Gemin Otto the brother of the great Turke, being priso∣ner, was poysoned by the Guicciard. hist. pag, 66. Pope, hired thereunto by a
P. Joui. hist. lib. 1. pag. 25. promise of two hundred thousand Crownes, and the seamelesse coate of Christ: This Pope was Pope Alex∣ander the sixth, of which thing reade Cuspinian in Baia∣zet the 2. Henry the second of England was by the Popes Mat. Par. p. 125. ap∣pointment whipt of the Monkes. Iulian and Lawrence the Dukes of Florence, by the Popes Conscio, & ad∣nuente pontifice. Volater. pag. 51. practise were assaulted in the Church at the time of the eleuation of the host, and the one greeuously woun∣ded, the other murdered. Henry the third of France, after many treasons of the Sorbonists against him, Meter. Belg. hist pag. 494. 490. was at last murdered by a Domi∣nican Frier, which murder the Pope in a solemne oration extolled to the skies. Henry the fourth his successor, first wounded by Cha∣stell, a Disciple of the Iesuites, for which they were then banished the Realme: and afterward treacherously murde∣red by a popish miscreant Rauilliacke. This Henry assaul∣ted by sixe Popes, Gregory the thirteenth, Sixtus the fift, Vrbane the seuenth, Gregory the fourteenth, Innocentius the ninth, Clement the eight, the last hauing brought the King to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, Liber qui inscri∣bitur, de victoria Clemen. 8. de Hen∣rico 4. gloriose tri∣umphantis. triumphed ouer him; and yet this King thus their owne, because hee seemed to fauor the Protestants, must die a bloudy death. The Prince of Orenge lamentably murdered Dinoth. de Bel. ciu. belg. p. 398. by a Pa∣pist, who for the said Parricide is highly commended by the Friar Comment. rerum. in orb gest. p. 1122. Surius, his name was Balthazar Gerardus. Our late famous Queene Elizabeth (of happy memory) since the tenth yeare of her raigne, (about which time Pius Quintus excommunicated her,) till her dying day was not free from the treasons of Papists, Parries, Campians, &c. the Popes with their adherents raising vp inuasions, and so farre as they were able laboured to haue wrought her de∣struction. Our high Soueraigne that now is, hath had experience in Scotland of Popish treason, and in England this Pow∣der-plot makes it perspicuous. I need not produce other examples which in all nations 3. Princes and Subiects.
abound, of high personages and Peeres destroyed by po∣pish hands. The Viceroy of Rauenna vnder Leo the third Emperor, with his sonne slaine by the Popes faction. The Prince of Condie poysoned. William Prince of Aurance slaine by a Popish villaine. Charles the King of Spaines Fredericke the 2. Emperor by poi∣son, or by a pil∣low, destroyed by Manfredus, by the meanes of the Pope. who daily deuised to destroy him. usp. in Fre∣der. 2. and there writes that not long be∣fore 4. Conspira∣tors apprehēded, who should haue made away the Emperor, cōfes∣sing that the Pope did set them on worke. sonne, because he was thought to fauor Protestants, made an end of by their inquisitors. In a word; let the Supra 30000. homines trucidati. Jacob. Aug. in hi∣histor. Anni 1572. Massacre in Paris, in which were destroyed in a night and few daies, many noble and religious Protestants, among the which Noble Caspar Colignius slaine. Let the fires and faggots in England in Queene Maries reigne, in which were cru∣elly burned many zealous and deuout Christians, who for the Gospels sake sacrificed their bloud in fiery flames, and wonne the glory and Crowne of Martyrdome. Let this Power-Treason inuented by Popish people, ratified by popish Priests, in which they intended to haue made a ge∣nerall martyrdome. Let the Spanish Inquisition which hath put to death with exquisite torments many thousand people. Let these foure speake for all, and surely they will speak that, or more▪ then that which Eberhardus the Arch∣bishop of Saltsburge, a good old man, once spake, who when he had knowen ten Romane Bishops, and had dili∣gently marked their practises, vnder Fredericke the first, Henry the sixt his sonne, and Fredericke the second his ne∣phew for fifty yeares together, deciphered or described the Pope for a rauenous Their spirituall Father fatted both with the milke and bloud of the flocke. wolfe vnder a Shepheards weed, compounded wholly of Auarice, Luxury, Contention, Warres, Discord, and desire of Rule, with such like attri∣butes: whose oration at large is extant in Annal. lib. 7. fol. 683. Auentine a Ro∣man Catholike writer. Or will speake that which the Poet Massaeus writes of Pope Iulius the second, as great a bloud sucker as euer reigned in Rome, by Genebra. Guicciardine saith of Pope Alexan∣der the 6. hee ne∣uer did what he∣said, and his son Borgia neuer said what hee  to doe. whose meanes in seauen yeares 200000 Christians were destroyed of this Pope the Poet hath this Epitaph; Genua euipatrem, gentricem, Graecia, partum Pontus & vnda dedit, num bunus esse potest? Fallaces Ligures, & mendax Graecia, pont Nulla fides, in te singulasolm habes. Thy Father Genoan, Mother Grecian borne, In Ocean Sea, can goodnesse thèe adorne? Genoans are full of fraud, Greece lyes maintaine, In Sea no trust, all these in thee one raigne.
So that I will end this point with this obseruation, that Mahomet, Phocas, and Boniface the third, who first had the stile of vniuersall Bishop, liued all about the Magdeburgens. Cent. 7. col. 21. Anno. 607. same time: So that Mahometisme, Popery, and murthering of Christian Kings began all at once, and now conioyned in one. And all the people of Great Britanny haue cause to thanke God that they are free from this Head, the Head of these mischiefes, and I would the land were free from all his members; yet they are among vs, as Labans Idols Gen. 31. in Iacobs tent vpon Record, not by allowance: and many wish that such a voice might eccho in our Soueraignes eares (who is a mercifull King) as once came from Oth. meland. the Smiths forge to the hearing of the Landgrave of Hesse, a mild Prince, the Smith striking his iron saide, Duresce in∣quam, duresce, vtinam & Langrauius durescat, waxe hard, waxe hard, would to God the Landgraue would waxe hard: So it might bee wished that the Oramus gladium Domini, & Gideo∣nis nostri. The Harlot Theo∣dote checkt So∣crates, saying, her power was grea∣ter then his, for she allured many of his Schollers, he none of her louers. so this po∣pery is a Theodote or Dalila. sword of Iustice were sharper against seducing Iesuites, that their haunts and harbors were stopt, places of entertainment scoured, and the femall Hierarchy, which breedes many, were put downe: for these serpents will first tempt Eue, the weaker vessell; and women soone induced, hardly reclaimed. So should God be serued with more holy deuotion in true re∣ligion, and our King and Country be freed from treason and rebellion.
CHAP. VII. I Haue a little touched the persons, as well Authors as Actors, shewing that originally and ordinarily this sinne of Treason flowes from the sinke or sea of Rome, because Car∣dinall In his letter to Blackwell. Bellarmine would outface the world with, It was neuer heard of from the Churches infancie, that any Prince, though an heretike or persecutor, was murdered by the Sixte iaces tandē nostri discordia sacli. Popes command or allowance: when it is shewed that not only allowance or recognizance, but consent, content, yea head, heart, and all haue ioyned to∣gether in the destruction of Princes: so that I may say to him, Tute-lepus es, &c. He hath deliuered many treasona∣ble positions, of deposing, degrading, exciting Armes, &c. and can a traytor be vnwelcome to him? it may be so, for; Proditores etiam ijs, qui mercede condcunt, inuisi sunt, Traytors are hated of them who hire them, but they like the treason, if effected, and many times the St. Becket, St. Saunders, both Traytors. Baron. Martyrolog. traitors too, and euen canonize them for good members, whose pedi∣gree in the hangmans heraldry is knowne to be base mur∣derers, and abhorred traytors; it Is very strange, . Si fur displiceat Verri? homicida Miloni? I had rather say with the Prophet Hosc. 6. 9. Osee, As theeues wait for a man, so the company of Priests murther in the way by consent, for they worke mischiefe: and may say of their Priests as an olde Poet speakes of their Pope. Illyric. vet. Poemat.Qui fore debuit gratia datinus, Factus est ecclesia ablatus: Of Grace who should be the Datiue case, Is now become the Ablatiue of grace. A Bishop or Priest should be no 1 Tim. 3. 3. striker or fighter, no warrior, no man of bloud, no tutor to Traytors, no tea∣cher of rebellion, to publish doctrine of King-killing: Oh but will some Iesuite reply, It is abhominable to kill a King: marke their euasion, or Aeqiuocatio simulatio  . equiuocation: but a King excommunicated, or at least deposed by the Pope, is no
King, no King in popery: then if he command, take Potentiores, cum rogant, iubent. Cuiuis potest acci∣dere, quod cuiquā potest. him by the throat, presently In hunc Tarba  sa— They will haue some desperate Rauilliacke, Chastell, or Gerard, to touch the Lords Annointed. Iesuites will com∣passe Sea and land, Sollicitando, pollicendo, as Simo char∣geth Crito in the Comedie, solliciting, promising, and per∣swading, no obedience is to be giuen to Kings excommu∣nicated or deposed, as Parsons and Campian did after the Bull of Pius the fift, and what followes? Rebellion in the North. Haec Cornua quibus ventilabis Israel, These are the hornes which proceed from Papall Bulles, rebellion, trea∣son; which if at any time it succeeds according to their ex∣pectation, they triumph in it, and say, Hic digitus Dei est, It was the Lords worke: and as Prou. 2. 14. Salomon of the wicked, They reioyce in doing euill, imitating Dyonisius, who af∣ter the robbing of a Temple, finding the winde and wea∣ther Prosperum scelus vocatur virtus. fauourable to his shippes, burst foorth into this hel∣lish voice, Ecce dij approbant sacrilegium, Behold the gods approue of our sacriledge: but let them know, that at last, Faux his speech, It was not God, but the Deuill that hindered the worke. though perchance too late, they shall finde and confesse, Inven: sat. 13.Nec surdum, nec Tiresiam quenquam esse deorum. God is not deafe, or blinde, he sees all sin, Abhors all sinners, who delight therein. And therefore (you of the Church of Rome) who are, or should be guides for the blinde, Rom. 2. 20. iustructers of them who lacke discretion, teachers of the vnlearned, hate and ab∣horre your former doctrine, the doctrine of Deuils, in tea∣ching disobedience to Gods Annointed, or to be your selues actors, authors or fautors of so abhominable practi∣ses, as King-killing: for know this, Religion with bloud builded, will be in bloud buried: and that voice from hea∣uen concerning this Babilon shall bee verified. Reuel. 18. 6. Reward her euen as she hath rewarded you, and in the cup that she hath filled to you, fill her the double: For the Lord will condemne this great whore, which corrupts the earth with her fornicati∣on, Reu. 19. 2. and auenge the bloud of his seruants shedby her hand.
And you who style your selues Lay-Romane-Catho∣likes, behold the persons, plotters of this treason, brought to a miserable confusion. Consider, ortum scelerum obitum sceleratorum, the birth of their treason, the death of these traytors, God confounding both scelera; & sceleratos, the Nemo impune malus. actors and their actions; Gods eyes are pure and abhorre such practises, and likes not such who walke in the coun∣sell of the vngodly: for both the workes and the Psal. 1. 6. way of the wicked shall perish. As for the final and eternall doom of the Iudge of quicke and dead, vpon these dead Malefa∣ctors, it belongs not to vs to search after it; and say with Greg. lib. 32. moral. Pope Innocent the 4. herd this voice a day before his death, Veni miser in iudicium Dei. So these. Gregorie, Diuina iudicia nesciuntur, non audacisermone discutienda sunt, sed formidoloso silentio veneranda, Gods iudgements are vnknowne to vs, and are not rashly to be spoken of, but with fearefull silence to be reuerenced: he Rom. 9. 18. will haue mercy vpon whom hee will haue mercy. They that were apprehended, satisfied Iustice on earth, (yet mixed with mercy) so that for the persons I haue no more to say, but end this in the Apostles wordes, 1. Cor. 10. 6. 11. Now these are examples to vs, to the intent wee should not lust after euill things, as they lusted; and are written to admonish vs, to beware of sinne, and aboue all, such capitall and crying sins as these. Sequitur Rebelles vltor à tergo Deus, Gods plagues and punishments hang ouer Rebels heads, Sen. Prou. ruina praecedentium do∣cet posteros. Ex vitio alte∣rius sapiens emendat suum, and therefore let others harmes make all beware to flie from this sinne of treason, as from a serpent. CHAP. VIII. 3. The Causes. THE motiues or inducements which pro∣uoked these Practisers and Conspirators to inuent this Tragedy, was onely, and meerely Nequitiae classes candida vela fe∣runt. religion: they were no banke∣rupt persons, or discontented vpon occa∣sion of any disgraces done vnto them; for
then it might haue seemed a worke of reuenge: but it was onely (as they confessed) the cause of religion, which mo∣ued them to this Treason. A deplored and desperate reli∣gion Ecclesid non propa∣gatur armis, sed propugnatur. Bloud-red mur∣ther, and blacke conspiracy in white robes of religion. Preces, & patiētia olim Christicolis artes, haec arma fuere. which must stand for a stawking-horse to practise re∣bellion. This colour of religion, like the Fowlers glasse and feather, serues to draw some within the reach and net of treason, to lay snares to catch the children of God, and bring them to destruction. Grace vses no sword, Faith no knife, the Church no bloudy tooles, Non mactando homines, Christum{que} fidem{que} docere: Ecclesia arma ara, non laniena macelli, The Church by force the faith did neuer plant, Her Altar-prayers her Armes, she shambles want. But the They make their Church Acheldama a field of bloud. Church of Rome vses these tooles, when their prayers can doe no good they fall to weapons, and would seeme to doe the Lords worke, in the destroying of the Lords people: farre better were it for them to follow the counsel of 1 King. 18. 24. Elias, to try themselues whether they be Baals Prophets or no? to call vpon the name of their God, to prepare a sacrifice, and see if the Lord will send a fire from heauen, as hee did for 38. Elias to manifest the trueth of their cause and religion: but their prayers are so bad, in∣uocating dead Saints, and adoring dumbe Images, that though they cry like Baals Priests from 1. Kings 18. 26. morning vntill noone, not a voice or word can they get from their wood∣den gods, no fire from heauen; then they will fetch fire from hell, the hope of the plantation of their Romish reli∣gion shall be the ruine of an whole nation: for, Non stetis∣set A cruell and car∣nall religion sa∣uouring of a re∣uengefull, spirit. nostra Troia, si cecidisset noster Priamus, for our Land could not haue stood happy, if our Priamus, Prince, Peeres and Parliament had beene destroyed, as they intended. And indeed a long time these Pope-Catholike men haue vsed a pretence of religion, by which goodly vizard they haue practised most horrible butchery, cruelty, and abho∣mination. It is lamentable which is of late Polanus: Non est humano sanguine cretus, illum sed genuit praeduris cautibus horrens Caucas{us}, hyrcanae{que} admorunt Ʋbera Tygres. Virg. Aenead. reported of Ferdinandus Mendoza a Spanish Catholike, who with his cruell company in Westphalia, spared neyther sexe nor age, no not them which submitted themselues: ripping vp
womens bellies, taking out their infants, and hung them about their Mothers neckes, compelled the men with long famine to eat their owne children, with such brutish but∣chery as is abhominable. And so the Pope when he sent his secular armes the Spa∣niards among the Indians, vnder a faire errand to winne Read Dr: White way to the Church. 1. part. pag. 360. them to religion, they vsed them in an heathenish, yea hel∣lish cruelty; rosted them with fire, worried them with dogs, &c. so that in forty yeares space they destroyed (as Polanus ex Bar∣tholo. Casa. Span. Colo. pag 2. 13. &c some write) fifteene millions of men, that is, 150 hun∣dred thousand, wasted and vnpeopled fiue times as much ground as all Spaine containeth: But woe to them that build vp Sion with bloud, and Ierusalem with iniquity, saith Micah. 3. 10. Mi∣cah, Whose Esay 59. 3. hands are defiled with bloud; the Lord will prepare them vnto bloud, and bloud shall pursue them; except thou hate bloud, euen bloud shall pursue thee, saith the Lord by the mouth of Ezech. 35. 6. Ezekiel. But these imitate Iulius Caesar, (the first Emperour of Rome) who held a sword in one hand, and a booke in the o∣ther, with this Motto; Ex vtre{que} Caesar: So these Roma∣nists will hold a sword in one hand, and a Bible in the o∣ther, changing the word, the sword of the spirit, into a ma∣teriall sword to murder mens bodies: but Caesar who shed much blood abroad, had his owne blood By Brutus and Cassius in the Se∣nate house of Rome. shed at home. Yet Caesar was farre of a more mercifull mind; for as Austen. ep. 5. Au∣sten speakes of him, Hee gloried in nothing so much, as in pardoning his enemies, and gratifying his friends. Or they follow blood-thirsty Cyrus, who at last was slaine by Queene Tomyris, and his head cut off, and put in∣to a vessell of blood, with these words; Sanguinem sitijstit, nunc sanguine saturatus esta, Thou hast thirsted for blood, now drinke thy fill: so these thirst for blood, Quem babit hic auide, quàm bibit ante merum: As greedily he drinkes mens blood, As men doe wine, and thinkes as good. But Dauid, because he was a man of blood, might not build God a materiall Temple, and will you build Gods spirituall Temple with bloody hands? God abhorres
blood-thirsty and deceitfull men: Deus non est autor eius, cuius est vltor, God is a reuenger of such villanies, and what he affects, he will effect by good meanes. And there∣fore though Papists colour this treason vnder the cloke of Religion, and for the good of the Catholicke cause, the Lord Luk. 13. 27. will say to them; I know ye not, Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. Then Psa. 109. 29. shall they couer themselues with confusion, as with a cloake. And truly these fiery and furious Iesuited Roman Catholickes, maske and shroud their faction and treason vnder the cloake of Religion, as the Dominicans lurke vnder our Ladies frock; crying out, The Catholicke Cause, and for the good of the Church; so that we may say, as once wittily Erasmus demanded, VVhat is Charity? answered, It is a Monkes cloake, for it couers a multitude of sinnes: So what is Popery? It is a cloake to couer a multitude of sinnes; and (as they say) Puritan sohismes are sowen together with Sisters-threed, so Popish schismes are patched together out of the cloake of Rebellion, yet vnder the mantle of Religion: yet so farre are these people from being ashamed of these things, or reclaimed from such practises, much lesse to repent for them, as that being apprehended for them, or hauing ac∣complished their deuices, they are still insensible of sor∣row, contrary to all other Malefactors; for as the Poet, —quid fas, Iuv. At{que} nefas, tandem incipiunt sentire peractis Criminibus:— How good, or bad, their deeds were, they then see; When once their mischiefes accomplisht be. But these would with Nero laugh, and leape to see our Bloodthirsty men do hate the righ∣teous. Pro. 29. 10. Cities on fire: and as Guido Faux, the foreman of this fiery stratageme, being demanded, what hee would haue done, when as he had put fire to the powder, said; Goe see the sport in the field: A voice fit for a villaine, or a cruell Ʋi∣tellius, who said, as Tacit. Hist. lib. 3. Tacitus records it; Sepauisse oculos, spectata in imici morte, nempe Blaesi He did feed his eyes with the dead spectacle of his aduersary Blesus. But Caesar wept when the head of Pompey his enemy was presented to him,
saying; Plutar. in Caesar: id em dixit, non mi∣hi placet vindicta, sed victoria. Ego Pompeij casum deploro, & meam fortunā metuo I lament Pompeys fall, and feare mine owne fortune: but the enemies of Sion, as they haue Crocodile eyes to weepe and laugh at murthered obiects, so they haue deuouring mouthes, and teeth to water after such preyes. I will not iudge all of them to be of so bloody a disposition: for I presume some Iesuites, and Priests, and Monkes, are like Aristippus, looke for nothing but meat for their belly, and a maide for their bed; little busie their braines with o∣ther matterrs: or some may follow their study, which yet is not vsuall, especially among the secular Priests, whom the Quodlibet 1. Art 2. Iesuites call; Ebrios, stultos, illiteratos, Ecclesia excre∣menta, Drunkards, Dolts, Dunces, the excrements of the Church: and the same secular Import. Consider. pag. 3. Priests brand the Iesuites with infamous markes, Statistas, Atheistas, Machiauelistas, quot Iesuitae, totidem Iudae, Statists, Atheists, Machiauclists, So many Iesuites, so many Iudasses. But indeed the least medlers in these matters are the Monkes, and therein to be commended; who if they were as carefull to feede their braines, as their bellies, I should thinke them the best of the bunch: but herein they are faulty, being onely as the Poet, Epicuri de grege porcos: Horat. Most of them sordide and stupide fellowes, without any Natos homines ab∣domini. industry in labour, or generosity in life. And as long ago it was written of them, Liber Pater praeponitur libro patrum; Calicibus epotandis, non codicibus emendandis, Rich. Dunelm. Phi∣lobibl. c. 5. Indulget bodie studium Monachorum, Cantus ludentis, non planctus lugentis, Officium efficitur Monachale. Greges, & vellera, fruges & Horrea, Porri, & olera potus & patera, Lectiones sunt hodie, & studia Monachorum: In a word, thus: One Bacchus more they loue, then Muses nine; They fat their bellies, while their braines do pine. But to leaue these, whom the Pope least loues; for the
Iesuites are his Pulli, & puppi, His Minions and Darlings, he knowes them by their hands, as the Eagle knowes his young ones by the eyes; a pen in one hand, and a ponyard in the other, to write for him, and to fight for him. We will accuse no more, but the parties in view, whereof Faux should haue beene the Executioner; and as they say, An hangman must haue a cruell heart: so this appointed wretch had a cruell heart, to count such a sight as this Faux speech, that the Diuell, and not God was the discouerer of it. should haue beene a sport: and when he was apprehended, he discouered no fignes of sorrow or repentance, except onely that he repented for not being able to performe it. Nil Christus Domini, nil illi proxima Coniux, Nil Princeps Carolus charus, spes altera Regni, Vtra{que} nobilitas pietate insignis, & armis; Maiestas{que} loci, veterum tot Curia regum, Nil haec crudeli potuere obstare furori? Our royall King with his illustrious Spouse, That Prince Henry then liuing. Decus olim, nunc dolor orbis, as Hun∣tindon. Hist. lib. 7. said of Henry the first of England. Phoenix gone vnto a better place; And next succeeding hope, Prince Charles his Grace, The noble Peeres, the Prelates of Gods House; And other Monuments, which might well rouse More feare, then fury: yet this vile Consort To blow vp all with powder, counts it sport. The vertues (indeed vices) which were in Tigellinus, Neros Secretary, were, as Tacitus names them, Cruelty and Luxury: so these abounded with the first, if not with the second. And yet they had no cause to moue them to such cruelty: One of the specials of them, Percy, a Pensioner Improbus à nullo flectitur obsequio. in an honourable place; the others with worship & wealth in the Common-wealth, no penall Lawes vrged vpon them, with many other prouocations to peace, and amity. —Quorum si singula duram Some being a∣bout wicked pur∣poses, doe bow downe their heads, and their inward parts burne with de∣ceit. Ecclus. 19. 25. Flectere non poterant, potuissent omnia, mentem: If some of these could not, yet all conioind; Might well haue turnd to loue, a Lyons mind. But all could not: for howsoeuer they made a shew of obedience, it was counterfeit; Ore tenus, Honouring with lippes, not hearts. They surely had receiued the Present of
their Pope, long agoe sent to his deare Children here, namely, the fiue wounds of Christ with this poesie; Fili da mihi car tuum, & sufficit: My sonne giue me thy heart, and it sufficeth. Rome had their heart, England their hate; and wee might of them haue complained (had not the Lord helped) with the Prophet Dauid; Psal. 60. 2. Thou hast made the Land to tremble, and hast made it to gape, heale the brea∣ches thereof, for it is shaken: Thou hast made vs to drinke 3▪ the wine of giddinesse. Yet these could flatter with Iudas, Auc Rabbi, Haile Master, or, Mat. 26. 25. Adulatio fallax crudelis est. Aug. lib. 2. contra. lit. Petil. Master is it I? Yet for all Syren-songs, let vs looke to our selues; for Vi fidus affectus, quorum diuersa fides, saith Chrysostome: VVhose faith is different, their fide∣lity is doubtfull: Their words sweeter then hony, yet Ʋnl∣pina cauda semper prominet, rictus, & rugitus Leonem prodit; The Foxe may be knowne by his taile, the Lyon by his iawes, clawes, and roaring: Math. 7. 20. A Equiuocationem esse vtilem autem, & bonam pruden∣tiam, & idea Mar∣tinus Nauarrus Azpilcueta tract∣tum de aequiuca∣tione, in gratiam Jesuitarum scrip∣sit. By their fruits ye shall know them. Trust not their iugred speeches, for they haue lear∣ned the language of the Low-Countries, I meane of hell; their art of equiuocation, to speake one thing, and meane another: and you know by equiuocation, Iudas and Iesuits, may be taken for honest men. And how can their fidelity be good? (I meane them of their Clergy) for as euery popish Bishop is sworne obedi∣ence to the Pope, and Sea of Rome, and to defend to death Rogalia Sancti Petri; The Regalities of Saint Peter: so in the English Nauarr. Colledge of Rome it is a Statute-Law, or pa∣pall constitution, that whosoeuer doe enter into it, hee is q Consil. lib. 3. de Regular. cons. 1. bound to sweare, after certaine yeeres (being perfectly Ie∣suited) to returne into England for the defence of the Ca∣tholicke Faith, and there publikely or priuately to preach the same. Now their Faith, which they call Catholicke, granteth to their Roman Church, power to free subiects from all duty of obedience, as doth appeare in the foure∣teene section, and seuenth Chapter of their late Councell of Trent, from which fountaine flowes: T: So that they will not submit themselues to any Protestant King in any loyall and faithfull , as did in somelately
appeare in refusing the Oath of Alleagiance; wherein his Maiesty specially aimed, Separare pretiosum à v, As the Lord by Ier. 15. 19. Occasioned to exact this lawfull oath vpon this Powder Treason. Ieremy, to separate the precious from the vile, to discerne and distinguish the Pseudocatholickes of this Climate, from others of his sound and faithfull subiects: And how I pray you was this oath impugned, by the Popes Briefes, by Bellarmine, and others, accounting it vn∣lawfull, prohibiting all Popish Sectaries to accept it? which oath yet specially touched their alleagiance to the King against the Popes primacy pretended in temporall things, and but little the supremacy in spirituall things: so that they who are thus rooted, and vnmoueably grounded Clerkes haue no∣thing to doe with Crownes: Religi∣on turned into Statisme, will proue Atheisme. B. Lincolne. in all the mysteries of the Church of Rome, beleeuing the Pope, the supreme Head of all, hauing power to excom∣municate Kings, to depriue them, to absolue subiects from alleagiance, to giue authority to kill Kings, and accoun∣ting such deeds done meritorious, are Clancularij prodito∣res, Clancular Traytors, Schoole-Traytors; who though they liue Ʋespertilionum instar, Like the night-birds in obscurity, and neuer reduce their Theoricke into Practick, yet are they Traytors in Esse, though not in Actu. But to leaue these, and to returne againe to our Powder-men, Traytors both in fore, and fieri; Claneular at first, their Chamber was a Mine vnder the Earth, but being discoue∣red, then they shewed themselues, Damonesmeridiani, Noone day Diuels, and were Psal. 91. 5. Sagittae volantes in die; Ar∣rowes that flie by day: for perceiuing their purpose disco∣uered, and treachery preuented, and disappointed of their priuate blow and blast, which should haue beene acted in Dolus Apochry∣phus. secret; now they resolue to runne a desperate race, and practise a publicke rebellion: And so gathering their Ca∣tholicke Company, and pretending the quarrell of Religi∣on (which they thought had had the vertue of a snow ball, to encrease their number by tumbling vp and downe) and hauing gotten such prouision of Armor, Horses and Pow∣der as time would permit; they ranged about, as open, and auowed Rebels: The story whereof I omit to rehearse, be∣cause it is vulgarly knowne, and in a Called A dis∣course of this late intended Treason. Booke at large re∣hearsed.
Well, the Catholicke cause moued these to this cursed Treason, in which impiety behold their policy; for if their villany had succceded, (which God in his mercy preuen∣ted) they had deuised to haue laid all the blame vpon the Puritans. The poore Puritans must haue the shame of Pa∣pists Quicquid delirant reges plectūtur A∣ch. impurities and impieties: Here in they shewed them∣selues to be Neroes brats, who when he had set fire on the City, laied the fault vpon the Christians, as Tacitus writes of him; or as in old time, in the dayes of the ten persecu∣tions of the Primitiue Church, if any thing had befallen the world, euen by Gods hand, as plague, or famine, &c. all reproaches were put vpon the Christians, and crying out; Christianos ad Leones, Cast the Christians to the lions: A shamefull and shamelesse shift, to translate the infamy of so odious a fact vpon the innocent: but it verifies the Prouerbe, Hoc calciamentum consuit Hystiam, Aristago∣ras induit, Hystaus hath sowen the shooe, and Aristagoras Adagium in eos, qui callide sua ma∣lefacta in alios, reijciunt. Erasm. puts it on: but thankes be to God, Inciderunt in foueam quam fecerunt, The fact and fault, was knowne to be their owne, and brought these delinquents to a shamefull fall. Another policy they had pretended, appointing an hun∣ting match against the time of this treacherous designe, thinking with Esau to haue brought dainty Venison to their Father, not Isaacke, but Antichrist, and to haue sur∣prized the person of the Lady Elizabeth (now the Prince∣ly wife to the County Palatine of Rheine): Thus they shew∣ed themselues right Nimrods, Gen. 10. 9. who was a mighty hunter, and in name also Nimrod-like, (who is by interpretation a Ierome. Rebell) rebellious hunters, or rather Fowlers to lay such snares, but yet all may say with the Psalmist; Psal. 91. 3. Escaped out of the snare of the Fowlers, the snare is broken, and we are deliuered. Psa. 124. 7. The Lord hath deliuered vs from the snare of the hunter, praised be his goodnesse for euer. But to passe ouer their policy in this worke of impiety, painted ouer vnder a pretence of restauration of religion: Is murder and massacres the seed of Rome, from which these seedes-men would fetch Religion? will the darnell of death produce the seed of life? For the publike good Gods seruants haue wished themselues to be anathematized, but
neuer others. Can Gods Church be wonne, or woed with swords, and armes? Indeed Phil ostratus. Phillip of Macedon led an Ar∣my against Bizantium, and said; that hearing of the beauty of the City, he was come to make loue to her: but the O∣tator tels him, It was not the manner of Louers to wooe with instruments of warre, but musicke. The City of Gods Church will be wonne with no warlike Engines, the wea∣pons of our warfare are not carnall, 2 Cor. 10. 4. saith Paul; The Church of Christ was neuer planted by blood, except pas∣siuely; and so Tertullian. Quo magis san∣guinis effusum, e magis effloruit Ec∣clesia. Cyprian. Semen Ecclesiae fuit sanguis Martyrum, The blood of Martyrs, the seed of the Church: But these par∣ties would build vp their Church with blood actiuely, as if lately they had passed from Deut. 11. 29. Mount Gerizim, to Mount E∣ball, to curse, and consume all. It is a weighty and worthy worke to plant the Gospell, the glad tidings of peace, and no better way to doe it, then by prayers and peace: but in this worke the Papists euer vsed the wrong toole, labou∣ring Theologi Ro∣mani argumen∣ta ferrea, & ignea Spirant, nō Scrip∣ta atramento, sed Sanguine. to make men Haeredes vineae, exhaeredes vitae: Dispos∣sesse them of life here, howsoeuer hereafter. If their arts faile, their armes follow: fit souldiers for Bacchus, who is described with Buls hornes, Semper paratus ad feriendum, Alwayes prepared to strike, and fight; but it is a pretty saying of one; Nemo ita tenetur inter duo vitia, quin ei exi∣tus patet abs{que} tertio, No man is so included betwixt two vices, but he may get out without making a third. If these men were so confident of the truth of their Religion (and none more confident then the ignorant) why did they not follow the Counsell of truth it selfe, Math. 10. 23. if they persecute you in this City, flie into another: yet they had no cause to say so truly; why did they not forsake all, and flie to Rome? there were their hearts, what did their bodies here? or if Luk. 9. 59. 61. Valedicere jis qui domi sunt with him, they would first kisse their Father and Mother, before they would follow Christ, had a naturall affection to the things on earth; yet why were they not willing with the Apostles to submit themselues to the higher Powers in bodily obedience, but in spirituall seruice, to say with Acts 4. 19. Peter and Iohn; Whether it be right in the sight of God to obey you, rather then God, iudge ye.
But how comes it to passe, that such Lay-Papists of small knowledge, and lesse grace, should take vpon them to be reformers of Religion? Were they extraordinarily called to this worke, as Iudg. 3. 15. 21. Ehud was to be a Sauiour to Is∣rael, in destroying King Eglon; or as 2. King. 9. & 10. Iehu in killing Ioram, and the stocke of Achab? had the Lord said vnto them, as to Ioshua, Iosh. 1. 2. 9. Arise, goe ouer this Iordan, feare not, nor be discouraged; for I the Lord thy God wil be with thee, &c. They write indeed, that God and man had concurred, ra∣ther the diuell and his Angels had consented, Iudas heart, Esawes hand, and Achitophels head had all conspired. Concurrêre homines, sed quales? quippe profani, Impuri, infames, scelerati, sanguinolenti, Horribiles medici, funesti, seditioss, Tales demissi coelo censores? A crue combind, but who? prophane, impure, Infamous, wicked, such as all would cure With blood, and fire, Phisitians that with powder Would blow vp all diseases: cry yet lowder, Heralds from heauen these sent the Church to plant, If God sent such, then God good men doth want: If such be good, in hell ill men are scant. But the Lord gaue such no Commission, for, such wic∣ked, and Psal. 11. 5. him that loues iniquity doth his soule hate: the Lord Exod. 23. 7. will iustifie no wicked men: nor imploy them in any wicked action. But these had their Commission from the deuill, and were at his command set to this worke, and might say with Chrysalus Plautus in Bacch. in Plautus. Insanum, magnum molior neg otium, Ver possim rocte vt emolier. A mad peece of worke I goe about, And feare I shall not doe it as Iought. And because they failed in the performance of it, there∣fore manus manum fricat, one Traytor bemnes an other, Must mutuose scabunt. alas vnfortunate Gentlemen, grieuing that it was their ill fortune to haue their hopes frustrated: for it is very true which Sueton. in vit. Domit.  obscrues, conspiracies discouered, will not be credited, or will be impayred by report,  occisi
principibus, vnlesse the Princes (the obiects of their mis∣chiefe) be slaine: which if at any time it Then ready to cry with Liuie in another kind, Dij, hominesque illi affuere pugnae. lib. 7. come to passe, and the conspirator escape, how highly he is magnified, imitating a people of whom I haue read, who worship Iudas for a God, because he did betray Christ to the Iewes to be crucified, by whose death comes saluation. Thus this Catholicke cause should haue produced a Catholicke curse vpon our Common wealth, but when they cursed vs, God blessed vs, defeated the deuises of the wicked, dispersed these fogges, and mistes of Sathans spi∣rits, and made it manifest to all the world, that both their cause, and course was bad. Causa mala est, fructus edidit illa malos. For a Matth. 7. 17. 19. corrupt tree bringeth forth euill fruit, and there∣fore were they cut downe with the axe of Iustice, and were not Gods mercy aboue all his workes, cast into fire. CHAP. IX. Fourthly the Ends. WE are come to the last act of this intended Tragedy, the ends of it, which is almost without end. In their expectation, (though frustrated in the execution) they had set vp Hercules Pillars, Nil vltra, no humane ma∣lice or mischiefe could reach any further: Hoc Scelus Abyssus, & ex Abyssu natum, A boundlesse pro∣digy sprung from the bottomlesse pit: I will not, nay can∣not fully finish this taske, onely touch it. Magnum opus hoc moueo: maior reliquis datur ordo Nec recitare, nec reticere possum. Perficere in captum.— This point I onely touch, and leaue the rest To them, who are with greater gifts possest. And so many learned men by Preaching, and Printing haue laboured in this worke, and still out of the store of
matter this Subiect affords, will annually spend their breath in the declaration of this deuillish mischiefe, and deliuery by Diuine mercy, that I may forbeare any large discourse. And truly if all of vs, were as (some say) the seauenty Interpreters appointed by Ptoloms, were put, in diuersas cellulas, aman sio diuisi, eadem scriptitarunt, into seuerall Roomes, yet all separated, they writ the same things: which Praefat. Hier. in Pentateuch. Moysi. & Authorē allegat Aristaeum, & Josephum, qui dicunt, eos in vna Basilica congrega∣tos, &c. S. Ierome thinkes a fabulous figment: So if all of vs were put apart, heerein we should agree, and sing Song of the three children. Verse 88. Verse. 89. with Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, Blesse yee the Lord, praise him, and exalt him aboue all things for euer: for he hath deliuered vs from the hell, and saued vs from the hand of death, and deliuered vs from the furnace, and burning flame (of powder) euen from that fire hath he de∣liuered vs. Therfore, cōfesse vnto the Lord that he is graci∣ous, and his mercy endureth for euer: wherein for better order sake to touch the Tragicall ends, and dismall effects of this confused Babell, a monstrous, and multiplying Hydra of horrible desolation; (had not Gods power and pitty preuented this their intention and inuention) we will part it into three Heads: all directly tending to ouer∣throw: 1. The Temporall estate: 2. The Politicall estate: 3. The Spirituall estate of our flourishing Church, famous King, and fortunate Kingdome. O  in terris anima, & caelestium inanes. Oh crooked mindes, voyd of celestiall grace, Who with such ruine would our land deface. I will beginne with the two first; It would haue sub∣uerted the Temporall and Politicall estate of the King∣dome. The effects of this Powder treason would haue ex∣ceeded those mischiefes, which Caesar reckons to be the Salust, Qua data porta, ruunt caedes, Sce∣lus, vndique Sanguis. fruits of Catilins conspiracie, Rapiuntur virgines, &c. Vir∣gins deflowred, Matrons made the obiects of the victors lust, children killed in their parents bosome, houses bur∣ned, men murthered, all places full of weapons, carcases, blood, and lamentation: So who can tell, what mischiefe,
what murther, what rebellion, what inuasion, what rapine, destruction, and desolation would haue beene the fruits and effects of this barbarous Treason? it would haue prooued carnificinaregni, the very death, and downfall of Facinus aeterna flamma vindican∣dum. the Kingdome, and therefore may be called officina scele∣rum, the shop of all mischiefe, the vault of all villanie. Quid Rex, quid Regina comes, quid regia proles, Quid proceres, Sanctique patres, populusque fidelis, Quid tantum meruere mali? committere tantum In vos quod potuere Scelus? potuistis in vnam Funera tot cumulare struem? tot corporalaetho Congerere, & tantum moliri caedis aceruum? What hath our King, his Queene, and Princely sonne, Our Peeres and Prelats, and the people done To merite such a mischiefe? what offence Against them iustly can you now commence, Which might prouoke your malice to deuise To murther them, as you did enterprize. No age can produce a proiect, proportionable to this Nulla s vidit, audiuit, cogitauit. immanity: Tyrannorum carbones, eculei, rotae, funes, fustes, cruces, gladij &c. nihil si ad haec comparentur: The exquisite torments of Tyrants not comparable with the fury of this truculent Tragedy. The destruction of Troy was lamenta∣ble, by fire and sword in the night: Virg. Inadunt vrbem somno, vinoque sepultam. They inuade the Citty buried in sleepe, and wine, and at Fraus quâm vis odiosior. Cicero. vnawares set vpon them by a perfidious Treachery: yet there they might fight for their liues, and make resistance to reuenge themselues. Idem. Aut versare dolos, aut certae occumbere morti. But heerein these Trayterous Architects had so contri∣ued their worke, and world of woes, that with one blast, or blow, all to be consumed, and yet Treshams letter. Ictu oculi omnes, & omnia cuerti. not to see who hurts them: with a floude of fire to deuoure the choisest flowres of the world, the Cant. 2. 1. Rose of the field, and Lillies of the val∣lies, the royall Rose with the rest of the regall stemme: the noble Lillies of the land. Flos delibatus populi, Suadaeque medulla.
The flourishing Nobilitie, most reuerend Cleargie, pru∣dent and politicke Gentry, all to passe the fiery region of corporall combustion, when as this fire should come out of the Iudg. 9. 15. bramble to consume the Cedars of Lebanon. So terrible a blow or blast it would haue beene to the Tem∣porall welfare of the state of this Kingdome in generall, to be 2. King. 2. 12. depriued of the father, chariots, and horsemen of Isra∣el, (rapt vp in a whirlewind of fire) that it could leaue no∣thing but lamentations to posterity, & wish with weeping Ier 9. 1. Ieremie for an head full of water, and eyes fountaine of teares to weepe day and night for the slaine of them: and none but monsters of men, habituated in villany, and radicated in cruelty, would haue an hand in so heauy a ca∣lamity: Then we all might alwayes meditate of mourne∣full Elegies and make large Commentaries vpon Ieremies Lamentations, and cry with him, Lament. 1. 1. How doth the Citty re∣maine solitary that was full of people? she is a widowe: she that was great among the nations, & Princesse among the Prouinces, is made tributary: she weepeth continual∣ly: she dwelleth among the heathen, and finds no rest; her 2. 3. 4. persecutors tooke her in the Straits. The waies of Sion lament, because no man commeth to the solemne feasts: all her gates are desolate; the Priests sigh, her Virgines are discomfited, and she is in heauinesse, and might ingeminate a dolefull ecce; Behold, and see if 12. there be any sorrow, like vnto my sorrow, which is done vnto me. I cannot apprehend the hundred part of the miseries of Vmbratilem eius speciem depingere nequeo. this intended mischiefe: for it would haue made our land in face, though not in fashion, like the land Iob speakes of, Iob 10. 21. 22. Terram tenbrosam, & opertam mortis caligine, terram mi∣seria, & tenebranum, vbi vbra mortis, & nullus ordo: A land of darkenesse, and shadow of death: a land of miscry, where is no order, but horror: That day intended had beene to our land, Ioel. 2. 2. Thetraytors with Titus Ʋespasian cried, amici, dicus perdidi: vti re∣fert S in ius vita. a day of darkenesse, and of blacknesse, a day of clouds and obscurity, none like it from our be∣ginning, neither shall be any more (as we hope) vnto the yeares of any generations.
Our land had then beene like a ship forlorne, her Pilot, Maister, and Mariners gone; Her Top-gallant taken a∣way, and they who sate at the Sterne to guide, drowned in the Ocean; and then a tempest beating vpon the ship, the wind, and weather driuen her to the Rockes, in what perill and perplexity are all her mournefull passengers? and might particularly cry. In medijs lacera puppe relinquor aquis. We are left in a torne and tottering ship, couered with waues of woe, no earthly comfort comes, only we pray to Christ, Matth. 8. 5. Maister saue vs, we perish. This day intended would haue prooued a blacke, and bloody day to the Common-wealth of England, when as her principall pillars had beene perished. The Esay. 3. 2. strong man and the man of warre, the Iudge, and the Prophet, the Prudent, and the aged: they had layed their Matth. 3. 10. Axe to the roote of the Trees, to hew downe and cast into their fire, the chiefe Cedars, to stretch ouer vs 2. King. 21. 13. the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, wiping England, as the Lord doth threaten Ierusalem there, as a man wipeth a dish, which he wipeth, and turneth vpside downe: and so they would haue wiped, or washed with blood our Ierusa∣lem, turning it vpside downe, that there should haue beene a generall ruine of our flourishing Kingdome, Neque rex, nequelex, neque religio, resp. Salua. King, Nobility, Church, Gouernement, Commonwealth, all perishing in this pro∣digious powder confusion: First our King, the Lament. 4. 20. breath of our nostrils, the annointed of the Lord, should haue beene taken in their nets, of whom we sayd, vnder his shadow we shall be preserued aliue among the heathen: and then his most Princely Queene, posterity-male, the hopefull blessing of perpetuall peace, the famous Peeres, and Coun∣sellors of state, with all other most noble Lords, Spirituall, and Temporall, the wife and worthy Iudges, Knights, Bur∣gesses, and whole body of the Parliament house, (the head heart, eyes, braines, and vitall spirits of the politicke body of the Kingdome) all cut off at one blow, the kingdome left
headlesse, heartlesse, hopelesse, depriued of her directing Iethroes: Dij, quibus imperium hoc steterat. Virg. The pillars, and supporters of this Christian Monar∣chy, and changed it to a confused Anarchy, then preuailing as Garnet the Arch-Priest, and Archtraytor praied, Auferte gentem istam perfidam de finibus credentium, Take away Non pacem peti∣mus, superi, date gentibus iras. Oratio Garn. this perfidious nation, meaning vs Protestants, from the borders of true belieuers, vnderstanding Romanists: vt laudes Deo debitas alacriter persoluamus, that we may praise God for the same ioyfully. But such prayers of the Pro 15. 8. wicked is an abhomination vn∣to the Lord; and though Esay 1. 15. they make many prayers, the Lord will not heare them, because their hands are full of blood: the enemies to our King and Kingdome, Lament. 2. 16. opened their mouthes against vs, saying; Let vs deuoure them: Certainely this is the day that we looked for; yea, which they longed for: wherein they hoped to haue Psal. 124. 3. swallowed vs vp quicke, when their wrath was kindled against vs, to haue ouerthrowne the temporall and politicke estate of our Kingdome, by the ruine of the royall Head, and the most noble members of the same; but the Lords eyes were Psal. 101. 6. vpon the faithfull of the Land, to shield them vnder the shadow of his wings, when as the 140. 5. proud had laid a snare for them, and spread a net with cords in their way, and set grins for them; then did the Lord deliuer them from those euill men, and preserued them from those cruell men, and Psal. 4. 23. recompenced them their wickednes, and destroied them in their owne malice: to moue all Gods people in great Britanny to say with Zachary; Luke 1. 74. That being deliuered out of the hands of our enemies, we should serue him without feare, in holinesse and righteousnesse before him, all the dayes of our liues. Yea, this pernicious proiect had not onely procured a fatall disturbance, and destruction of the temporall and 3. Spirituall estate. politicall welfare of the Kingdome; but also aimed to al∣ter the State of our Religion, and to set vp the abhomina∣tion of desolation in the holy place, to establish the cor∣rupt
profession of popish superstition: this was the Helena for which these Greekes contended. Then all of vs might with the children of Israel led cap∣tiue to Babilon, cry like them, By Psal. 137. 1. the riuers of Babilon we sate downe and wept, when wee remembred thee O Sion: for then wee should haue liued in captiuity to the Romish Babilon, and haue sung the songs of Sion in a strange land and strange tongue. Then England should haue beene againe, (as once Math. Paris. one called it) the Popes Asse, to beare his burthens in a miserable bondage. Those de∣bosht and banished Popelings, Iesuites, Seminaries, and Masse-Priests, who can cry to their Images like Baals Priests, 1 Kin. 18. 26. O Baal heare vs: lo, then Gen. 21. 14. Hagar and Ismael, not long since cast out with bagge and baggage, reen tring againe, insolently insulting ouer honourable Dame Sara, and would driue her and Isaak out of the familie. VVhat heart zealous of the glory of God, and religious to the pure Gospell of Christ, that would not with Dauid Psal. 6. 6. euery night water his couch with his teares, to behold the Can∣dlestickes of our Church, who hold the light of the word, broken in peeces, I meane, the spirituall labourers in the worde, to be thrust out of the vineyard of the Church, and the loyterers of Rome, (haruest-men for Antichrist) to take the howses of God in possession? So that with Dauid we might cry, *O God, thine enemies are come into thine Psal. 79. 1. inheritance, thy holy Temple they haue defiled, &c. Romes Hic dolus est magnus, lupus est qui creditur agnus. wolues in sheepes cloathing worrying the Lambes of Christ; Sathans Foxes running vpon the mountaines of Sion, and stealing away the soules of the simple, making them drunke with the dregs of the Romish grape enchan∣ted with their Circes cup, in which is the Reuel. 17. 4. wine of infecti∣on, spirituall fornication, and abhomination. The people then should haue beene depriued of the pure riuer of the water of life, and for lacke of the bread of life compelled to complaine in the famine of their soules, like the distres∣sed Iewes in the famine of their bodies. Lam. 2. 12. Where is bread, and drinke? where is the Manna which once was tasted? the worde of grace wherewith wee once were feasted?
where are the painefull Pastors of our soules who once re∣freshed vs? fedde our hearts with bread from heauen, and filled our cares with comfortable tidings of peace; who prayed for our soules with zealous spirits, and spent them∣selues like vnwearied messengers in the worke of the Gos∣pell: Oh the Priests lippes Mal. 2. 7. which preserued knowledge, they are silenced and sent to their graues, expelled the Church, or put in prison, or turned to ashes in Popish flames; their Lam. 4. 19. persecutors are swifter then the Eagles of heauen, who pursue them vpon the mountaines, and lay wait for them in the wildernesse; they hunt their steppes that they cannot goe in the streetes, their end is neere; for 18. their daies are fulfilled, their end is come. Oh this is come vpon vs for our cold loue, and churlish entertainement of the Gospell, when we had free liberty to call one another; Esa. 2. 3. Come let vs goe vp to the mountaine of the Lord, to the God of Iacob and hee will teach vs his waies, and we will walke in his paths; but then wee stopped our eares Psal. 58. 5. like deafe Adders, against the voice of those charmes most ex∣pert in charming; they Matth. 11. 17. piped vnto vs but we would not dance, we then regarded not those songs of Sion and now both harpes and harpers are Psalm. 137. 2. hung vpon the willow trees: our soules are starued with Latine Masses, wee haue no English Bibles, wodden blockes are called the Lay-mens bookes, we cannot see the way we should walke in, but must like blinde men be guided by the spectacles of pur∣blinde guides: we must beleeue as they beleeue, and yet doe not know what they beleeue: all ready to repeat that wishing voice of Iob, Iob 29. 2. 3. Oh that wee were as in times past, when God preserued vs; when his light shined vpon our heads, and when by his light we walked through darke∣nesse: all saying with Ʋalerius, (though not in the same case) who when Caligula that monster was killed, and it could not be found out who had done it, Noble Valerius rose vp, and said, vtinam ego, would to God I had killed that monster: So will they cry, vtinam ego, would to God wee had killed that monster (which whisome wee indul∣gently cherished in our bosomes) Ingratitude and Con∣tempt
of the Gospell, then while we had the same in plen∣ty, and purity without commixtion of drosse and darnell, trash and tares, we began with the Israelites to loath this Manna, Num. 11. 6. & 21. 5. We can see nothing but this Manna, our soule loatheth this light bread: and now, Ʋerbum amissum quae∣rimus inuidi. Wee Amos 8. 12. wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North to the East, to seeke the worde of the Lord, and cannot finde it. Now the Lords complaint is verified vp∣on vs, Hosee. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lacke of knowledge: the seeds-men of the worde sent from the blessed Math. 13. 3. sower, who broke vp our stony hearts, and made them flexible, and did labour to Dan. 12. 3. turne many to righteousnesse; they are taken from vs, and now Virg. Fclog. Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit, Barbarus has segetes— Not Masse, but Mars-Priests in the Churches field, Possesse the fruits which others labours tilld: These and more pittifull mones would haue beene fresh, and frequent in this land, crying with Ieremy, Lam. 5. 15. 16. 5. The ioy of our heart is gone, our dance is turned to mourning, the Crowne of our head is fallen, woe vnto vs that wee haue sinned; our necks are vnder persecution, wee are weary, and haue no rest. Our King, a Esay 49. 23. Nursing Father to the Church and Com∣mon-wealth: Our Lamen. 4. 2. Noble men of Sion comparable to fine Gold: Our reuerend Prelates and Pastors, the Math. 5. 13. 14. salt of the earth, and light of the land: the chiefe Iudges, and choice Gentry of the Kingdom, who were as Iob. 29. 15. Custodes vtrius{que} tabula perijssent. eyes to the blinde, and feete to the lame. All the pillars of Church and Common-wealth, maintainers of the Law and Gos∣pell, had perished in this intended Massacre: So that the Math. 26. 31. shepheard being smitten, the sheepe will be scattered; yea, sheepe not hauing a shepheard will fall into the hands of wolfes, who will deuoure their flesh and their fleeces. And looke still further, and behold these powder-trai∣tors (men nourished with Tygers milke) who enterprised not onely to procure a temporall, politicall, and spirituall ouerthrow of Church and Common-wealth, but also so
farre as in their power they could, seeked to procure the eternall death of body and soule, vnawares Vide Luther po∣still. maior. in Mat. 13. 24. by force of fire to part vnprepared soules, and blow vp with a fiery Dimittis bodies and soules before they could haue time to say feelingly, Inmanus tuas Domine, O Lord into thy hands we commend our soules: heerein shewing themselues de∣sirous to be bloudy murtherers, to murder the body with death temporall, and also to make away the soule with death eternall, which second death worse then millions of corporall deaths, Continet Myriades mortis: Prima mors animam dolentempellit de corpore, secunda mors animā nolen∣tem tenet in corpore, as De ciuit. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 3. Austen: The first death driues the pained soule out of the body, the second death keepes the vnwilling soule in the body; for then men shall seeke Reu. 9. 6. death, and shall not finde it: for in life there is some ease, in death an end, but in the second death neyther ease, nor end: Mors sine morte, finis sine fine. So that to draw all to a conclusion (which should haue beene the conclusion, yea confusion of vs all) I may sup∣ply my defects in the description of this immatchable treason, with the Poets excuse, Virgil. Non mihi si centum linguae sint, ora{que} centum, Ferreavox, omnes scelerum cōprendere formas, Omnia poenarum peccurrere nomina possem: No tongue can tell, no pen descry This Map of mischiefe, the Powder-Tragedy. The Lord of Hosts, who Psal. 120. 4. neither slumbers nor sleepes, who in pitty and prouidence prouides for the safety of his Church and Children, beheld our English Israel and Po∣pish Amaleck, the members of the Church militant, and malignant, the one secretly plotting to blow vp the other; but the Lord, against Pro. 21. 30. whom no wisdome nor vnderstan∣ding, nor counsell can preuaile, became an impenetrable shield, suffered not one of his seruants haires to be burnt with fire, but besotted these Traytors to communicate their counsels, though darkly to others; by which meanes they were discouered. And we are perswaded and confir∣med of the all-sauing protection of our good God to∣wards
his deare Seruant, and our dread Soueraigne; with the rest of the religious assembly congregated for the glo∣ry of his name, and good of his Church, in that Honoura∣ble House of Parliament: that if the Lord had suffred them to haue made a further progresse to the instant of that dis∣astrous and dismall action, that hee would haue disabled the party, who with his vnhappy hand should haue kindled that fatall fire, as he did the hand of infamous 1 Kin. 13. 4. Ieroboam, in the very act of stretching it against the Prophet, it wi∣thered: or like the hand of Sext. Aurel. Valens the Emperor, when hee tooke his pen to confirme the sentence of Basils banish∣ment, strucken of God, shooke, and shrunke, not able to hold the pen: So surely the Lord would haue benummed that accursed hand, which sought to ouerthrow Christs Church among vs: for it is as easie to pull Christ from Hea∣uen, as to put his Church out of the Earth: Christ cannot be a bodilesse Head, nor the Church an headlesse body; and though outward meanes of deliuerance to vs may seeme defectiue, yet stand comforted and couragious, for the Math 16. 18. gates of hell shall not preuaile against the Church. It is a lame and halting confidence, which cannot goe to God without the stilts and crutches of externall meanes: for 2 Pet. 2. 9. the Lord knoweth to deliuer the godly, and in the very point and article of time, will be a present helpe in trouble. God came to Gen. 3. 15. Adam with a promise in the time of despaire, to Abraham with Gen. 22. 15. supply in the time of sacri∣fice, to Isaacke Gen. 26. with reliefe in the time of famine and dan∣ger, to Ioseph Gen. 41. with honour in the time of exile, to 1 Kin. 19 5. Elias with comfort in the time of persecution, to Iudg. 7. 2. Gideon with helpe in the time of battle, to Dan. 6. 22 Daniel with safety in the Lyons denne, to Ionas 2. 10. Ionas with release in the Whales belly, to Histor. of Su∣sanna, v. 45. Susanna with life condemned to death, to Dan. 3. the three Children with a protecting Angell in the fiery Furnace: yea, to this Kingdome of England with a most mercifull preseruation, neere the time of the appointed Powder-destruction, to make all our English Israel alwayes in all distresses and dangers, say with Moses; Exod. 14. 13 Feare not, stand still, behold the deliuerance of the Lord; which he shewed vnto you this day:
——Dies Ista Salutis erat, candore notabilis ipso. The Lord would not haue this Powder-proiect to haue power to burne one Dan. 3. 27: haire of his seruants head, or any smell of fire come vpon them; yet caused some of these vault-pyoners to be wounded, and disfigured with pow∣der; In quo peccarunt, in eodem plectuntur, Wherewith Wis. 11. 13. Calix mortis mul∣tis praeparatus, per∣petuus esset calix Benedictionis. they sinned, by the same they were also punished. So that all these extraordinary mercies of Almighty God summed vp together, should haue more then a Magneticall attra∣ction, to draw all Christian hearts euer to praise his infi∣nite goodnesse, and continually inuite and induce all to a serious consideration and conseruation of this admira∣ble deliuery from this intended miserable calamity: agni∣zing God, the sole and supreme cause in preuenting of it, and therefore ascribing all the glory to him; who hath preserued still his Church in tranquility, our King in glory, the State in safety, the Realme in prosperity. Iutuere rupem, & erige ratem. The snares of death and destruction prepared by the wicked, were by the wisedome of our gratious God esca∣ped, and the wicked Psal. 9. 10. Non est speciosa laus in ore peccato∣ris. were snared in the worke of their owne hands: A deliuery deseruing eternall Trophies of Triumphs: to glorifie God with our prayers and praises, with our lips and liues; and neuer follow them, of whom the Apostle, who Rom. 11 21. glorified not God, neyther were they thankefull: but may continually call vp our hearts to this duty, and cry with the Psalmist, Psalm. 56. 13. Come and hearken all yee that feare God, and I will tell you what hee hath done to my soule: for he hath Psalm. 56. 13. deliuered our soules from death, and our feet from falling, that we should walke before God in the land of the liuing. Therefore, Psalm. 66. 8. praise our God yee people, and make the voice of his praise bee heard; and say with the children of Reuben, Gad, and Manasses, Ioshua 22. 29. God forbid that we should rebel against the Lord, and turne this day away from the Lord, &c. And as the children of Israel after their returne from the captiuity in Babilon, and hearing Nehem. 8. 3. Ezra reade the Law (the ioy of their soules) Ezra 6 prai∣sed
the Lord the great God, and all the people answered, Amen, Amen, lifting vp their hands and bowing them∣selues, worshipping the Lord with their faces towards the ground: and Nehemiah with Ezra and the Leuites tels the people, 9 This day is holy vnto the Lord your God: so let our English Israel deliuered from the intended bon∣dage of Babilon, hearken to their Ezraes in the 4. Pulpit, made for the preaching of Gods Law (wherof they should haue beene depriued) and with their Priests praise the Lord, our great and good God, answering Amen, Amen, bowing themselues in all humility at the footestoole of Gods Maiesty, annually celebrating the fift day of No∣uember, with praises of thankesgiuing, and saying, This day is holy vnto the Lord our God. This Exod. 11. 14. day shall be vnto vs a remembrance, and wee will keep it an holy feast vnto the Lord throughout our generations: we will keep it holy by an ordinance for euer; to remember this mar∣uellous worke of Englands deliuerance from the plotted powder-destruction, to Psal. 106. 47. praise Gods holy name, and glo∣ry in his praise, singing and saying cheerefully with our tongues, and deuoutly with our hearts, Blessed Psal. 106. 48. be the Lord God of Israel for euer audeuer, and let all the people say, Amen, Amen. To the ternall and eternall glorious Godhead, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, one and the same God in na∣ture, and number indiuisible, inuisible, inuincible, our sole and soueraigne protector, and preseruer, God ouer all, blessed for euer, be all praise, power, faith, feare, glo∣ry, and maiesty yeelded by vs, by ours, and by all his redeemed, for all his mercies in gene∣rall, and for this speciall deliuerance in particular, humbly, heartily, holily for euer and euer: Amen. Glory be to God in the high Heauens and peace on earth, Luke 2. 14. FINIS.
A SHORT DISSVVASIVE FROM POPERY: To all Lay-Papists, who desire to be true seruants to their Sauiour, or good Subiects to their Soueraigne. 1. Kings 18. 21. How long halt yee betweene two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal be he, then goe after him. Tert. de resurr. carn. Aufer haereticis quae cum Ethnieis sapiunt, vt de Scripturis solis quaestiones suas sistant, & stare non poterunt. Hugo de Claustro anim. lib. 1. Superstitio dicitur verae religioni superaddita falsa religiō. Melancthon. Ex malo dogmate, & malis moribus, dignoscuntur lupi. By SAMVEL GAREY, a Preacher of Gods Word and a perpetuall petitioner to God for your happy conuersion to Gods holy Truth. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Beale for Henry Fether stone, and Iohn Parker. 1618.
To the Right VVorshipfull Sir Philip Kniet Baronet, and his worthy Lady, The Spirit of Grace, Truth, and Wisedome be multiplied. Right VVorshipfull, I Am bold, vpon experienced acquain∣tance with your generous qualities, and gentle fauours towards me, to send this vnworthy Treatise to your worthy viewe. I know whose iudge∣ment it must passe, yet am fearelesse: not in a grosse stupidity of mine owne weakenesse, but in an hope∣full presumption of your vsuall Gentlenesse: a dis∣position euen naturalized in your courteous breasts, whereof I acknowledge with gratefulnesse the accep∣table fruites of your long, and large loue towards me, and for which I euer rest your thankefull friend, and ingaged debtor: in part of requitall whereof, I haue presumed to offer to you this Handfull of my duty, and hearty loue towards you, and vnder your worthy name to send it to the world, that they who are bettered by it, may thanke you for it. A short Dis∣swasiue from Popery, necessary for these Times,
wherein you may behold in part some points of the corrupt Doctrine of the Romish Church, which is the common Mother of corruption & superstition: For that Church must needes be a Chappell of er∣rors, which enlarge the sacred Canon with Adferunt haere∣tici Apocryphorum Librorum multitu∣dinem, vt stupefa∣ciant amentes, &c. Iraen. lib. 1. c. 17. Apochry∣phalls, diminish Cum ex Scriptu∣ris arguuntur, in accusationem con∣uertuntur Scrip∣turarum &c. raen. lib. 3. c. 2. Popery is a witchcraft of re∣ligion, teaching her people to eate their God, kill their King, subuert the Scriptures, adore Idols, Deifie the dead, equalize their Pope with God, &c. the authority of the Scripture with Traditions, ouerthrow the Originall with Translati∣ons, & peruert the Text with Glosses: as the Romish Church doth. Yea to maintaine her errors, she con∣ceales the light of Truth, the Scripture, from Lay people vnder the curtaine of the Latin language; and euen in the Schooles among the learned she is put to poore shifts, often forced to conclude arguments out of meere Allegories, lame Similitudes, fained mira∣cles, naked names of Fathers, hired Testimonies of Schoolemen, and other deboshed vassailes and proc∣tors of the Romane Court, who with all artificiall pollicy labour to adorne the Romane Harlot with painted trimmings, whereby the vnwary young age of many (more credulous, then iudicious) is deceiued, and deluded. The whole subiect of our former worke, well perused, and indifferently weighed, doth giue good light (looking vpon her corrupt precepts, and cursed practises) to discouer that smooky King∣dome of Antichrist: but perchance you may say to me with Seneca, Ep. 49. Quidme torques, & lacer as in quae∣stbus? Subtilius est contempsisse, quam , Why doe you trouble me with such questions? it is more subtilty to contemne them, then to confute them. Worthy Sir, it shall not be, I hope, labour lost, if to your priuate contemplations you shall adioyne these short, and sacred speculations, specially penned for your seruice, and published for the bee of all
who are willing to open their eyes to walke in Truth. I giue all but a small kind of taste in these points of Popish fragments; if any mans appetite long for it, I dare promise him heereafter more full dishes. The Lord giue vnto you a Christian care in the profession of the Truth, which with a sincere heart I haue preached vnto you; and perfit your first Pro∣gresse in the grace of God, to the holy Sanctification, and happy Saluation of your bodies and soules for euer. For which mercy and grace, to be bestowed on you, I shall euer vnfainedly pray to God, and rest, Your Worshipes poore Orator in Christ. Samuel Garey.
A SHORT DISSVVA∣siue to all Lay-papists, who desire to be true seruants to their Sauiour, or good sub∣iects to their Souereigne. I Hauing finished, yet in great weake∣nesse, our former worke, wherein I doe humbly craue of all sorts a friendly and fauourable construction and accepta∣tion: and there still remaining a few pa∣ges vnwritten, I thought it not labout lost, if I did annexe some common, yet courteous direction to the Lay-papists of the land to dis∣swade them from the corrupt Doctrine of the Church of Rome, vnto the which they are induced by the inchaun∣ting allurements of Popish Priests; men whose learning and wits are tempting baites, yea bawdes, Gen. 38. 14, &c. Thamar-like prostitute themselues, so that they may haue children, they will deceiue their owne father Iudah; as also by the igno∣rance of these Lay-disciples, whose right eyes of know∣ledge they thrust out, as 1 Sam. 11. 2. Nahash the Ammonite would haue done to the men of Iabesh Gilead; depriuing them of the word of knowledge, the Scripture, and saying, It Mart. peres. de Trad. pag. 44. was the Deuills inuention to permit the people to reade the Bible, as one of their fide writes: and therfore the Index lib. prohib. Reg 4. Church of Rome forbiddeth the reading of it among the people: By which meanes, oh wofull meanes, and to cry with their owne mman. Sa. A∣phor: verbo paro∣chus. pag. 298. Com. Doctor to their Cleargy for it, (woe to our Parish Priests, woe to our Bishops, woe to our Pre∣lates)
they haue brought in such a floud of prodigious ig∣norance, as that many of them are as ignorant, as that Knight was; of whom Claudius In 2 Tim. pa. 118. Espncaem tells of, who being demanded his beliefe touching the holy Ghost, an∣swered, he knew not whether there was an holy Ghost, or no. So that their followers being so blind, not able to iudge of colours, & wanting the word of Truth, the Scrip∣ture, Scripturarum authoritate res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet. Aug. contra Man. lib. 3. c. 14. in the tongue they vnderstand; which is the lapis Lydius, the touchstone to try the truth from error, diuina statera, as De Baptis. con∣tra Donatist. Henry the second of England, said to the Popes Le∣gate, hauing kil∣led a Stagge in hunting, Looke Lord Legate, how fat the Stag is, and yet did neuer heare a Masse. Augustin calles it, the diuine ballance to weigh truth from falsehood; it is easie to winde such into selfe∣losing labyrinthes, and to driue them with their painted clothes like woodcockes into their nets, and to goe with them with Domitius Chalderinus (yet hee learned) who when he should goe to the Masse, accustomed to say, Ea∣mus ad communem errorem, Let vs goe to the common er∣ror: So these are content to goe to Masse, the common or Catholicke mother of all Bastard errors. The attractiue motiues which draw many to fancy and follow the religion of the Church of Rome, may be re∣duced to three Heads. 1. The Antiquitie: 2. The Vniuer∣sality: 3. The Vnity of that Church: which three (if they could be found there) were of powerfull consequence to mooue reuerence; but neither of these can be found there: for the moderne Romane Church, which coines so often new Bulla Pij 4. Su∣per forma iura∣menti professionis fidei. Creedes, and Articles of faith, and is reuolted from herselfe in substance of doctrine, is no more like herselfe in her primitiue State, then Lais the Curtizan is an honest woman. I could demonstrate this I say without controule∣ment, if I were purposed to write a common-place-booke of Controuersies in this point; but it hath beene handled so largely, and learnedly by other Diuines of our Church, The Church of Rome is ancient, not her errors: neither doe wee differ from it, wherein it is not departed from it selfe. that I may at this time forbeare any long discourse. I will but touch it: and instance this I write, how the moderne Church of Rome is swarued from herselfe, not onely from the Truth, which primitiue Rome embraced, but also va∣ried from herselfe, declining into heresie, innouating those Articles, and dogmaticall points of faith (as they count
them) which in the processe of her fall she professed: it might be specified in most of the points of Doctrine she maintaines at this present time, but I will rest with these few, for I write but an Epitome. 1 Example shall be in the Sacrament. At Geo: Cassand. de∣fen: lib. de offic: Pij viri. the first the people receiued the cup, as well as the bread, for the space of a thousand yeeres: yea, afterward, the Romance Church commanded the wine to be consecra∣ted, that the lay-people might fully communicate, saith Lib. de Eccle. ob∣seruat. c. 19. pag. 388. Micrologus: most and the best Papists liked this well, that the people should communicate in both kinds; but after∣ward, the Councell of Sess. 13. §. item ipsa. Constance forbad it, and after that, the Councell of Bohemis conces∣sit eam facultatem: teste Aen. Syl. in hist. Bohe. c. 52. Pope Gelasius calles the taking away the Cup from the Laity, Sacrilegam muti∣lationem, A sacri∣legious mang∣ling of the Sa∣crament. Basil released the decree of Constance to some; and after that, the Councell of Trent, the mint of er∣rors, confirmed it againe, and depriued the Laity of the Cup: Sect. 21. c. 2. So that this point of Doctrine, now maintained in the Church of Rome, can pleade no antiquity, being now so oft renewed, put vp, and put downe; and their most ancient Liturgies shew, how the people receiued the wine, as well as the bread: and this custome (saith 3 Part. Thom. qu. 80. Art. 12. q. 3. Caietan) endured long in the Church, and as Ouand. 4. p. 221. one of their Church say; It were better if this custome were renewed againe. 2 Example in Transubstantiation. Transubstantiation lately brought into the Church, and made a matter of faith by a silly Pope Innocent the third, in the Lateran Councell, within these 400 yeeres: and the Soto. 4. d. 9. q. 2. Art. & 4. Suar. tom. 3. d. 5. §. 1. Papists themselues say, this opinion is very new, and late∣ly brought into the Church, and beleeued onely vpon the authority of the Lateran Councell; and speake so vncer∣tainely, and inconstantly in this point, and doe so stagger, & enterfere in their opinion herein, Scot. 4. d. 11. q. Bell. Eucher. lib. 3. c. 23. confessing that there is no Scripture to conuince it, vnlesse ye bring the Church of Romes exposition; so that hitherto we can see no great antiquity, nor good vniuersality in their doctrine.
3 Example in Popes supremacy. The Councell of Sess. 4 & 5. Constance, and Sess. 2 & 18. Basil decreed. That a generall Councell was of greater authority then the Pope: but long after that, the Councels Con. Later. sub Leon. Sess. 11. of Lateran and Trent decreed contrary. The Councels of Act 16. Chalcedon and Sext Synod. in Trull. can. 36. Con∣stantinople, make the Bishop of Constantinople equall with the Bishop of Rome: yet now he arrogates a supremacy a∣boue Bishops, aboue Councels, aboue Kings aboue all; his title no lesse then vniuersall Bishop: yet L. 6. Ep. 30. Gregory who * A papa ad conci∣lium non appellan dum: Iacobatius de Concil: lib. 1. Art. 1. Nu 36. was Pope of Rome, saith; I hat he dare confidently say, He is the forerunner of Antichrist in his pride, whosoeuer he be that calleth himselfe vniuersall Bishop: but this smoaky pompe of pride the Pope now likes well enough, and makes it an Rulla Pij 4▪ super forma iuramenti professio fidei: in fie. Article of Faith to sweae obedience to his primacy; and he that denies this, denies Fidem Catholicam, The Catholicke Faith, faith Bellarmine. I might here produce other examples of Popish Do∣ctrine, crept in by degrees; as their abhominable Image∣worship brought in by the second Act. Zonar. Tom. 3. pag 9. Councell of Nice: the first restraint of Priests marriage by Pope Siritius, the do∣ctrine of the merit of workes lately by the Schoolemen, as Sacrament: tit. 1. ca. 7. p. 30. Waldensis writes: Their prayers to the dead, Popes par∣dons, Purgatory, (a Platonicall, or poeticall fiction) Auri∣cular confession, with other like triuiall trash, which if they haue any colour of antiquity, yet they haue no colour of verity. And what is antiquity without verity? Saint Cyprian: Ep. 74. Cy∣prian tels vs; Consuetudo sine veritate, est vestustas erroris, Continuance without truth is the antiquity of error: And syp. lib. 2. contra gentes. againe, Non hom ines consuei dinem sequi porter, sed Dei veritatem, Wee may not follow the custome of men, but the truth of God: for as Lib. de veland Ʋirg. Tertullian, Quodcun{que} contra ve∣ritatem sapit, hoc erit haeresit, etiam consuetudo, Whatsoeuer is contrary to truth, is heresie, euen custome and anti∣quity. Epist. ad, Phila∣delphias. Ignatius writes, that he heard some say; Nisi Euange∣lium in nt quis inuenero, non credam Vnlesse I find the Gos∣pel among the Ancients, I will not beleeue it: Pgani (saith
Aug. nou. & vet. test. qu. 114. Austen) Antiquitatis causa, se verum tenere contendunt; The Pagans for the cause of antiquity, contend they hold the truth: If antiquity might carry it, the Iewes Bellar. de Eccle. milit. lib. 4. c. 5. §. in omni: ex Judaeis coepit Christiana religio. might carry it from the Christians. The Church of Antioch from the Church of Rome: for so saith Lib. 2. de rom. pontif. Bellarmine; Petrus Antio∣chiae Cathedram suam aliquandiu tenebat, priusquam ad Ro∣mam eam transtulisset, Peter did set his Chaire at Antioch, before he translated it to Rome. Indeed the woman of Iohn 4. 20. Sa∣maria pleades antiquity to Christ, our Fathers worshipped in this mountaine, and ye say; that in Ierusalem is the place where men ought to worship: so say our Lay-Papists, Our Fathers worshipped God with Images, with the Masse &c. But Christ will say to them, as to that 22. woman; ye worship that which ye know not: Away with your wicked and wil-worship, I will be worshipped according to my word. The great hinderance (saith the Iesuite De salute Indo∣rum: lib. 2. cap. 18. Acosta) to the plan∣tation of the Roman Faith among the Indians, Ex inuete∣rata consuetudine proficiscitur, proceeds from their ancient custome, wherein before they were inured, and from it hardly reclaimed: and as the Iesuite Lib. 4. epist. 1. Rochardus King of Frizeland by Wol∣franius perswaded to be baptized, hauing one foote in the Font, as∣ked, whither went most of his Predecessors? To Hell, said Wolfra∣nius, then he Rec∣tius est plures, quā pauciores sequi: The very answer of many Papists. Fulg. lib. 3. Xauerius saith; Indi, ne Christiani fierent, hanc causam afferebant, so à maioribus suis semper cultores extitisse, &c. The Indians, that they should not be made Christians, alleadged this cause, that they had alwayes beene worshippers according to their Forefathers. The same is the answere of many Papists. We serue God as our Fathers did, and yet the Lord saith to all, Ezech. 20. 18 19 walke not in the ordinances of your Forefathers, neither obserue their manners, nor defile your selues with their I∣dols: I am the Lord your God, walke in my Statutes, &c. Men should not doe, as the most doe, but as they must doe: God doth not say, walke as others doe; but, Esay 30. 21. Haec est via, ambulate in ea, This is the way, walke ye in it Truth is not to be tried by antiquity, or vniuersality, but by the Scrip∣ture: Nabuchadnezars idolatry graced with Dan. 3. vniuersality, onely three doe gainesay it. In a word with Cyprian, Mul∣titude errantium non parit errori patrocinium, An erring multitude doth not patronize error. It hath beene a long time the calumny and reproaches
of Popish Priests (men who haue an infirmity to void ex∣crements at their mouth) to defame our Church with an Where was our Church before Luther lay with Bora? cry these Catholicke ca∣lumniators: Our Religion a ragge torne from their coate. vpstart nouelty: where was your Church before Martin Luthers time? We doe not fetch our Religion from Mar∣tin Luther (a worthy man) but from the Scripture, from Christ and his Apostles: we want no antiquity, hauing the Scripture; your Greg. Valent. A∣nalys. lib. 1. c. 16. Iesuite will tell you so much, Sanctarum Scropturarum summa est antiquitas, &c. The Holy Scripture is of the greatest antiquity, and that Church, whose do∣ctrine agrees with it, is most ancient. Yet Martin Luther is more ancient, then your Triden∣tine Fathers, and brood of Iesuites, the Atlasses to support your falling Church. But many hundred yeeres before Lu∣thers dayes, there wanted not famous and zealous men, who resisted the corrupt doctrine of the Church of Rome, the persons, and the points, the time when, in all Ages are compendiously recited, by a iudicious and very learned Doct. White: first part of the way to the Church. Digress, 52. Diuine of our Church, to whose Booke for breuity sake, I referre my Reader. The nakednesse of the Roman Diana was discouered long agoe, for which dscouery many good men haue beene Acteon-like hunted by bloody hounds to death. Corruptions spread by degrees, Et tanquam cancer See D. Willet: Com. vpon 11 Chapter of Daniel. pa. 449. serpit, as Espencaeus; creepes stealing like a Canker, infects one part, then another. Such hath beene the malady of the Church of Rome, their creeping corruptions canker-like, first one part, then another point, that it is hard to set downe the precise time, when these corruptions ingende∣red. The Greekes debated long on this probleme: The ship Argos, wherin Iason sayled for the golden Flecce, after the Plutarke. voyage ended, was laied vp in the roade for a Monument: where decaying by degrees, it was repaired by peeces a∣new; in the end, the whole substance of the vessell extinct, and nothing left, but onely the reparations successiuely made. Now the question was, whether-this ship (suppose it Peters) were the same that he sayled in when he liued, or an other renewed? and whether can any man tell, when such a peece was added, such a part supplied? And if this cannot be so precisely shewed, doth it follow infallibly,
that it was the very Argosie: wherein Iason sayled? So in this case, their ship, their Church, so often peeced, so many new points added, euery Pope almost changing his Pre∣decessors decrees, abrogating this point, and augmenting it with another, that it is indeed a new ship, and can iustly pleade no great antiquity. And for vniuersality, and vnity in Doctrine, no Church so much diuided. VVe doe reade, how Popes vsually haue condemned that, which other Popes haue confirmed: Councels contra∣dicted that which others haue concluded. Their outcries in Schooles, Pulpets, Consistories, one against another, makes their diuision and difcord audible: That we may say of them, which Lucian in Ti∣mon. Lucian of the old Phlosophers; With the noise of their disputations, they haue so filled the eares of Iupiter, and made him deafe, that he cannot heare their prayers. How irreconciliable are the iars and contentions Vide Rhenanum Papistam: Schol. in Luc: Senec. de morte Claud. §. fa∣cilius inter Philo∣sophos. Corpore de Christi lis est, de sanguine lis est, De{que} modo lis est, non habitura mo∣dum. of Scotus, Aquinas, Egidius Romanus, and others? that they imitate the wranglings of the old Academicks, Stoicks, and Peripatetickes. Haue they not Families of the Schoolemen, wherein e∣uery one professeth his particular Sect-Master? Thomas, Scotus, Occham Durandus, both Masters and Scholers, haue spent their lines and liues in opposition. The Dominican and Franciscan Friers, many ages quar∣relling about the conception of the Virgin Mary. Their writers sharping their pens one against another, Armachanus against the Friers, the Iesuites, and secular Priests one against another: Catharinus against Caietan, Catharinus and Soto one against another: Pighius, Gropper, Brus, Peresius, Cassander, Hosius, Almayne, &c great pillars of Popery, some fourescore yeeres agoe, are now by late Iesuites contemned and confuted: who knoweth not (saith De gra. lib. 1 c. 3. Bellarmine that Pighius in many points was miserably se∣duced by reading Caluins Bookes? and of Gropper, and o∣ther Diuines of Collen he De Iustif. lib. 3 cap 3, saith; Their Bookes haue need of the Churches censure. Yea, are not the writers of the last stampe, euen Bellar∣mine,
Gregory of Valence, Stapleton, Suarez, Vasquez, Moli∣na, Egyptians set a∣gainst Egyptians, euery one against his brother, &c. Esay 19. 2. Baronius, &c: vp to the eares in contention and faction among themselues? Bellarmine confuted by Barlayus, Sua∣rez, Carerius, Marsilius; yea, Bellarmine hath often confu∣ted himselfe by contradictions. Suarez confuted by Vas∣ques, Baronius by Mariana, &c. Yea, this Kingdome is so Suis & ipsa Roma viribus ruit: Hor. diuided among it selfe, that we presume, and this presage, it shall not long stand. They that would further behold this Campe of the Iudges 7. 22. Midianites, sheathing their swords in their neighbours sides; let them reade the worke of that learned and reuerend Doctor, D. Hall, in his Booke called the Peace of Rome. And yet the Papists with might and maine exclaime at factions in the Church of England, to whom we may say with our Sauiour; Hypocrita, eijce primùm Trabem de oculo tuo, Math. 7. 5. Hypocrite, first cast the beame out of thine owne eye, sweepe cleane before your owne threshold, before you blame spots in others. They tell the World what an impla∣cable discord and dissention is betwixt the Protestants and the Puritanes, (a name we scarce know, and is proper to none, but onely vnto Iesuites, who thinke themselues so pure, that they will arrogate to be of the society of Iesus:) But we may truly say, that which they shall neuer say; That Cum Iesu Iudas, &c. in the Church of England there is vniuersality and vnity in substance of doctrine and religion, and in circumstance we haue, or hope for a generall vniformity. But they want these, and yet of late they haue a new po∣licy, to purge and raze many of their owne dead Doctors, to speake that in their graues, they neuer thought on in Many Popish Bookes are made right Anatomies their studies; putting out that which they printed; and put∣ting in that which the Authors neuer purposed: Thus haue they serued Caictan, Gratians Glosse, Ferus, Polydore, Lodo∣nic Ʋines, &c. And to this end serue their Indices Expur∣gatorij, Indices Expurga∣torij of all sorts. elgi: Hispan. Lo∣, &c. To purge away their best blood, and leaue them nothing but skinne and bones: And thus haue they serued Andreas Mazius Comments, and Iansenius Harmony vpon the Gospell; yea, whom not, if hee hath touched neuer so tenderly the sores of Rome, this is the medicine to helpe
the malady. But I would this punishment had beene onely inflicted vpon their owne Doctors, and that they had ne∣uer laied their correcting hands in corrupting the Fathers, of whom they haue a long time boasted, (the Fathers, the Fathers, are all of our side): but these are but wind and words and as he said of the Nightingale, Ʋox est praeterea nihil, A meere voice, and nothing else, for these will vse the Fathers, as Solo his Friends or as Merchants vse figures in Accounts for hundreds, if they please them for Cyphers, if they crosse them and truly the ancient Fathers of the best esteeme speae little or nothing on their side in any fun∣damentall points, and difference twixt them and vs except they haue dieted and giuen them vomits and purgations; except they haue so done to them, as Clement the eighth did to his Predecessor Sixtus Quintus, corrupting that his correction of the Bible by a new Translation, which one called a new Transgression; and they haue herein so falsifi∣ed many of the Fathers, and foisted in other counterfet Fathers, that it puts me in mind of a Popes Iester, Pog∣ghius speakes of▪ who when he told the Pope tales to make him sport, did it standing behind a cloath, for being outfa∣ced: So the Fathers, who speake for them, must stand be∣hind a skreene, mantled or mangled by their correction. So that taking away these desperate shifts, which the Church of Rome vseth, there will be found no great anti∣quity vniuersality, or vnity in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. But to leaue these and other motiues (allectiues to ma∣ny to loue the Church of Rome) for I did not intend to mu∣ster vp all their motiues, wherewith they fight against vs; for so I should send out a Ship, and not a Pinnesse; I will rather mention a few markes and apparent tokens, where∣by these children may iustly misdoubt their mother to be an harlot and in part palpably perceiue her corruption: Her first whorish marke is, her blasphemy against the 1 Marke. Scripture, being that woman in Saint Iohns vision. Reu. 17. 3 sit∣ting vpon a scarlet coloured beast, full of the names of blasphemy: and that in foure respects; first her blasphemy
and contempt of the Scripture appeares, because the Church of Rome maintaines, that all things necessary to Diabolicum est, ex∣tra diuinarum Scripturarum au∣thoritatem aliquid diuinum putare: Theophilus lib. 2. Paschal. saluation are not contained in the Holy Scripture; and that the best part of true religion is knowne by vnwritten traditions, and that these traditions are to bee receiued with the same reuerence and affection, wherewith wee re∣ceiue the Scripture, as the Sess. 4 decret. 1. Councell of Trent decreed. Many things belong to Christian Faith, which are not contained in the Scripture openly, nor obscurely, saith Loc. lib. 3. c. 3. pag. 151. Ca∣nus. The greatest part of the Gospell is come to vs by tradi∣tion, very little of it is committed to writing, Confes. Petric. c. 92. pag. 383. idem Iac. Simanch. In∣stit tit. 24. n. 36. & 37. saith Ho∣sius: The D. 40: si papa. in Annot. Margin. Canon Law, set out newly by Pope Gregory the 13. saith, that men doe so reuerence the Apostolicall seate of Rome, that they rather desire to know the auncient in∣stitution of Christian religion from the Popes mouth, then from the holy Scripture. Their workes are full of such words, by which all may see their blasphemy, comparing traditions of men with the infallible worde of God. 2. Their mouthes are full of bitter and irreuerent spee∣ches against the Scripture, calling it Censur. Colon. p. 112. Pigh. cont. 3. a nose of waxe, to be writhed this way, or that way; a dumbe Iudge, as Pighius termes it, dead Peres. de Tradit. praefat. inke, as another: yea Bellarmine Bel. de verb. dei lib. 4. ca. 4. their great Doctor saith, the Scripture is not simply necessary: or as Eck. enchir. c. 1. prop. 4. Eckius, we must liue more according to the autho∣rity of the Church, then after the Scripture: or the Scrip∣tures without the Chem. exa. part. 1. pag. 47. authority of the Church are no better then Aesops fables. And often they will deny the Scrip∣ture it selfe, as Catharinus accuseth Caietan their great Cardinall, (called by Sixt. Sen. bibl. l. 4. in Tho. vius. them an incomparable Diuine, and the most learned of all his age) who doth charge him Cathar. aduers. nova dogmat. Ca∣iet. pag. 1. & inde. for denying the last chapter of Markes Gospell, some par∣cell of S. Luke, the Epistle to the Hebrewes, the Epistle of Iames, the second Epistle of Peter, the second and third of Iohn, the Epistle of Iude, all which are Canonicall: they wil denie the scripture if it make not for them, & say with Eck. de ecclesia. Eckius, Scriptura sine ecclesia authoritate non est authentica,
The Scripture without the authority of the Church, that is the Pope (for so Gregory of Disp. theol. tom. 3. 1. pag 24. Valence saith, by the Church we meane her Head, that is, the Roman Bishop) is not au∣thenticall. 3. They make their Pope Iudge ouer the Scripture; whosoeuer resteth not on the doctrine of the Bishop of Rome, as the infallible rule of God, from whom the holy Scripture takes her strength and authority, hee is an here∣tike, Syluest. Prier. contra Lutherum. saith one of her side. The Pope Henr. doct. ma∣gist. sacr. palatij Romae. ad legat. Bohem. sub Faelice Papa. may change the holy Gospell, and may giue to the Gospell, according to time and place, another sense. We are bound to stand to the Popes iudgement alone; rather then to the iudgement of al the world besides, saith De planct. eccl.  lib. . art. 6. Aluarus Pelagius. The Popes Dist. 19. in Cano∣nic. & gloss. ibidē. The Councell of Trent forbids all other interpre∣tation of the Scripture, then that which agree with the Romish Church. Sess. 4. rescripts and decretall Epistles are Cano∣nicall Scripture. If any man haue the interpretation of the Romane Church, (that is, the Pope) concerning any place of Scrip∣ture, although he neyther know nor vnderstand, whether and how it agreeth with the words of Scripture, yet not∣withstanding he hath ipsissimumverbum Dei, the very word of God, saith De expresso ver∣bo Dei. Hosius: voices most odious to all the Fa∣thers whom they boast of, to name but one, S. Chrysostome Concio. 4. de La∣zaro. saith, Scripturis sacris potius credendum, quam omnibus ho∣minibus in mundo, VVe must beleeue the Scripture before all the men of the world: and not to cleaue to the Popes exposition, for as the same Chrys. in cap. gen. 2. homil. 13. Father, Sacra Scriptura seip∣sam exponit, & auditorem errare non sinit, the holy scripture expounds it selfe, and will not suffer the hearer to erre. Their Cardinall Cusanus hath written a booke, which he entitleth, De Authoritate Ecclesia & Concilij, supra, & contra Scripturam, of the authory of the Church, and of a Councell, aboue and against the Scripture; with many o∣thers who haue vomited out blasphemous speeches, and would infringe the authority of the worde of God, rob∣bing it sacrilegiously of her all-sufficiency, and bestow it vpon their Pope, the Master of the mystery of iniquity and herefie.
4 They prohibit the people to read the Scripture, and odiously exclaime against vs, as Bel. de verbo dei, lib.  c. 15. Bellarmine, & the Rhemists prefac. Rhe∣mists, because our translated Bibles be in the hands of e∣uery husbandman, artificer, prentise, boy, girle, mistresse, maide, man: and for the maintaining of their practise to depriue the people of the worde, they would colour it with certaine paradoxes. 1 The Scripture makes heretickes. 2 Ignorance is the mother of deuotion. 3 Images are the Lay-mens Bookes. 4 They must belieue as the Church belieues implicitly. Christ Iohn 5. 39. commands all, Search the Scriptures: but they say, The Scripture makes heretickes. Paul saith, Let the  C. 3. 16. worde of Christ dwell in you plenteously, but they say, Ignorance is the mother of deuotion: 1 Iohn 5. 21. Iohn saith, Babes keepe your selues fram images, but they say, They are the Lay-mens bookes: Habac. 2. 4. Abakuk saith, The iust shall liue by his faith, but they say, You shal liue by another mans faith: beleeue as the Church beleeues, and doe not know what the Church beleeues. Their doctrine to the Scripture is as opposite as heauen is to hell, and therfore would not haue the people acquainted with the Scripture. It is lamentable to reade how impiously they write in this kind, their great Cardinall and president in the Trent Councell, De expresso ver∣bo dei. p. 91. Hosius saith, It was fitter for women to med∣dle with their distaffe then with Gods word. So Confut. resp. Whi∣tak. rat. 5. p. 148. They take away the word, & giue them drosse, Infoelix lolium, & steriles dominan∣tur auenae. Durae God hath left them, not the bookes of the Scriptures, but Pastors and Doctors. They take away from the Christian Souldier his wea∣pon, scriptum est, and in stead thereof giue him traditum est, a wooden dagger, pictures, legends, and fables, Ier 2. 13. for∣saking the fountaines of liuing waters, and digge them broken pits that can hold no water. They imitate the malicious Gen. 26. 15. Philistims, who stopped the wells of Abra∣ham and filled them vp with earth, to put their memoriall out of minde, so that they might challenge the ground: so these stop the veines of life found in the Scripture, with the earthly drosse of traditions, legends, Sathans songs, to
make a merchandize of ignorant soules, and to starue them with a famine of Gods worde, as if the contents in If the light of the Scripture might freely shine, then Popery would soone vanish. Spanish prouerb. Potos sotos deuo∣tos. Ignorance is the Grandame of all error. Con. To∣let. 4. Can. 24. the Scripture, were like the mysteries of the goddesse Ce∣res, which might not be reuealed; making the bread of life like the shew-bread, whereof it was lawfull for none to eat of it but the Priests onely. To colour this Gorgon with a cleanly vizard they say, Ignorance is mother of de∣uotion; Pessima mater est (saith Austen) itidem pessimae duae filiae; falsitas, & dubietas, illa miserior, ista miserabilior, illa perniciosior, ista molestior, Ignorance is the worst mother, and her two daughters worst, falshood, and doubtfulnes; that very wretched, this more miserable, that more perni∣cious, this more troublesome: but they make much of this mother, for she is the vpholder of the Popes chaire. Pythagoras said well, Aboue all take care to keepe thy body from diseases, the city from sedition, and thy soule from ignorance: But we may say to these popish Interpre∣ters of the Law, as our Sauiour did to the Pharasaicall, Luk. 11. 52. ye haue taken away the key of knowledge, yee enter not in your selues, and them that came ye forbad. I haue the longer insisted vpon this marke (a red lattise to shew the house of the great Reuel 17. 1. whore, which sits vpon ma∣ny waters) by which signe I may say, Pulchrum est digito monstrari, & dicier, haec est: The second meretrician marke, is her outward face, 2 Marke. pontificall pompe and gouernment. How vnlike is her Pope to Peter? Peter arrogated no primacy, no Episco∣pall vniuersality: painefull to Acts 2 14. 3. 12. preach the worde, neuer medling with the temporall sword: To feed Christs Iohn 21. 16. sheep was all his ioy: he neuer had Emperor hold his stirrop, or kisse his toe: neuer deposed King from his Crown: neuer freed subiect from obedience: hee gaue himselfe no other title, but an 1 Pet. . 1. Apostle of Iesus Christ. He neuer gloried in these smoaky titles, Bel. l. 2. de Ro. pont. cap. 31. Vicarius Chri∣sti, sponsusecclesiae, the Vicar of Christ, the husband of the Church: Idem ibidem. § Primo quia. Vniuersalis Episcopus, & caput Ecclesia, Vniuer∣sall Bishop, Head of the Church: or as others stile him, lumen orbis, the light of the world, or vice-deus, in the
roome of God, not a meere man, but mixt; with other Lu∣ciferian titles, which by me are elsewhere touched: his v∣surped prerogatiues and power they may that will finde in Bellarmines bookes de Romano pontifice: yea as (some say) the Goates of Candie haue al their eyes fixed vpon the ca∣nicular star when it ariseth in the Horizon: so all popish eyes fixed vpon this star of Rome, homagers to his chaire, all their tongues saluting with Gallinae fillus albae. Peter and the Apostles were no fishers of Gold, as it may be said of these Popes, praedam quaerunt, non animas, they fish for siluer, not for soules: Innocent the third, a Pope of Rome told Aquinas, being in his Gallery among his gold, that Peter could not shew so much gold when he said, Acts 3, 6. siluer and gold haue I none: to whom Aquinas gaue a good answere and saide, your Holinesse cannot doe that which Peter said, and did to the cripple, surge & ambula, arise and walke. How vnlike are Romes Cardinalls to Christs Apostles? State, pride, ambition and policy are their foure cardinall Platina saith in the life of Dama∣sus the second, that onely ambi∣tious fellows did inuade S. Peters seat, & hee saith in the life of Sil∣uester the third a Pope, that hee who preuailed not in learning and holy life, but in bribery & am∣bition, euen hee alone did obtain the Popedome. Vide Dr. White 1. part. Way, digress. 53. p. 419. vertues: Their stile, ego & Rex, I and the King, their pur∣ple hat and scarlet habit will scarce giue way to regall robes. The pride, ambition, and vaine-glory of the Ro∣mane prelacy hath beene taxed in most histories: yea their owne side hath condemned them for these sinnes, and are branded with these markes by Cusanus, Zarabella, Marsi∣lius, Occham, Duareaus &c. Their selling of Pardons, & symoniacal corruption hath made it a common by-word, —omnia venalia Romae, Templa, sacerdetes, altaria, sacra, coronae, Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale, deus{que}: At Rome all sacred things are to be sold, Temple, priests, prayers, heauen and God for gold. Yea many of their great Popes symoniacall, hereticall, boyes, yea the feminine Pope Ioane was no honest Pope: yea their owne Baan. 908. n. 6 Baronius saith, that a notable strumpet to Adelbert Marquesse of Tuscia, prostituting her daughters to the Popes, did create Popes at the pleasure of the strum∣pets: and he cries An. 912. n. 8. out: How filthy was the face of the Ro∣mane
Church then, when most powerfull, and withall most sordide whores bare all the sway at Rome, and their louers were thrust into Peters seate? At this day (as wee reade) the Pope hath a pension from the stewes at Rome; Were he like Peter, he would abhorre to foule his hands with such stinking gaine, or enrich his coffers with an harlots hire: rather Acts 8. 20. with S. Peter say, Thymony perish with thee: or with our Sauiour to the women taken in a∣dultery, Iohn 8. 11. Goe away and sinne no more; and not to giue them a toleration or dispensation for fornication. To leaue this point, as the Poet left Rome, with this verse: Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse, reuertar, Cum leno, meretrix, scarra, cinaedus ero. Oh Rome farewell, I haue seene, and seene too much, Returne I will, when turne, baud, whore, or such. The third marke may be this, That there is no point of our faith, but many learned in the Church of Rome ap∣proue 3 Marke. the same; and no point of Papistry by vs confuted, but some of the chiefe of their Church haue disliked, as well as we; that we may say to them as our Sauiour did to that bad seruant, Luk. 19. 22. The Papists find this ttue, & ther∣fore haue purged the elder Papists books, & correc∣ted those points, or wholly razed them out. Vide Indic. libr. prohi∣bit. p. 25. §. 3. Ex ore tuo te iudico, of thine owne mouth will I condemne thee. Thus the diuision of the tongues and people of Babilon are a meanes of the plantation and edification of Gods Ierusalem. This point hath beene de∣monstrated in the chiefe questions betwixt them and vs, by many learned Diuines of our Church, and excellently verified and declared by Doctor Morton, a singular orna∣ment of our Church, in many of his workes, but especial∣ly in his first and second part of his Catholicke Apology, wherein he hath ouerthrown the points of Popery of the chiefest difference by the affirmations and assertions of the best learned Papists, to whose labour in this point I refer the iudicious Reader. The fourth marke is this: That many maine points in 4 Marke. popery are absurd, and euen against common sense, and the light of nature.
What man endewed with mother-wit, can perswade himselfe, that the Pope is Iudge and Lord ouer the Scrip∣ture, Church, Councels, and all the world: and that in his breast there is an infallibility of not erring, when as com∣mon and continuall experience speakes the contrary? What likelihood is there in the doctrine of transubstan∣tiation, Corpus Christi, nec in quantum cor∣pus, nec in quantū vnitum diuinitati hoc habet, vt sit in plurib{us} locis simul. Aquinas dist. 27. qu. 1. Vis excidere gra∣tia? acta tua meri∣ta. Aug. in Ps. 31. that the Priest should pull caelum in caenam, Christs body with all his dimensions put in a little boxe, and the same body be in seuerall places and parts at one time? What colour of trueth can there be in the doctrine of workes of Superogation, that a man can merit more then is needfull for him, and that this his ouer-plus of obedi∣ence, by the Churches dispensation, is beneficiall to o∣ther, who want this plenitude? when as our Luk. 17. 10. Beggars crauing an almes shew their wounds, & wants, but Pa∣pists their works to chalenge hea∣uen as a debt. Idem est fingere multos deos, & sanctos mortuos in∣uocare Melancthō. Sauiour saith, VVhen ye haue done al those things which are com∣manded you, say, we are vnprofitable seruants. To pretermit their ridiculous ceremonies which Kem∣nitius well termes Sarcasmi Diaboli, as christning of Bels, sprinkling of holy water, Exorcismes, Annealing, spitting in the baptizeds mouth, creeping to the Crosse, praying vpon beades, &c. or their doctrine of praying to the dead, who can neyther heare nor helpe; or their many Non opus est pa∣tronis apud deum. Chrysost. hom. de profect. Euangel. media∣tors and intercessors, when as Paul saith, There is but one mediator betweene God and man, which is Iesus Christ, 1 Tim. 2. 5. If any man sinne, wee haue an aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the righteous, &c. 1 Iohn 2. 1. or their Their soules they seeme to gaine to God, & sacrifice their bo∣dies to the Deuil. shrift is turned to bawdry. Cor. Agrip. de vanit. c. 64. auricular confession and absolution of their sinnes, yet the very Pharifies could fay, Who can forgiue sinnes but God onely? Luke 5. 21. or that saying of Masse, or sin∣ging Dirges for the dead, could benefit the dead? as well writes S. Lib. de bono mortis. ca. 2. Ambrose herein, qui hic non aocipit renaissionē pec∣catorū, illac non ha, he that doth not receiue remission of his sinnes in this life, shall not find it in the life to come: and as S. Contra Demetri∣anum tract 1. Cyprian, He vita , t tenetur, &c. Here life is to be lost or got, after death, neyther Masses, Dyrges, or Auc-Maries are auaileable. How repugnant to a good mans reason is their popish equiuocation, to dissemble the truth with a mentall reser∣uation.
How doe they follow the counsell of 1 Pet. 2. 1. Peter (of whom they boast) who commands them to lay aside al dis∣simulation: or as S. Eph. 4. 25. Paul, cast off lying, and speake trueth euery man to his neighbour? but the Father of lies will not haue his children to speake truth: this doctrine none but Atheists, Machiauelists or Iesuites can commend. Not to touch all the fringes or fragments belonging to this whore, wherewith she is apparelled, I will but han∣dle foure of her relickes, foure points of popery, which in my weake apprehension are dislonant to common reason, much more to Christian religion. 1. Her Latin seruice: 2. implicit faith. 3. worshipping I will a littlelook vpon, scarce touch the poyso∣nous pommell of the chaire of pe∣stilence. of Images. 4. Popes pardons: a touch and away, not tast of her cup, for it is full of poyson, no not primis labris de∣gustare, onely looke vpon it, and see how vgly it seemes to common sense (excepting eyes, and eares, for therein po∣pery is a bewitching Lady, faire images for the eyes, and sweet musicke for the eares) like the booke giuen to Reuel. 10. 9. Iohn, sweete in the mouth (sweete to carnall and naturall men) but bitter in the belly, very sowre to the soule, which is sanctified and shall be saued. 1. Popish Latin seruice. What possibility is there that Seruice or Praiers said in a tongue which the people vnderstand not should be pro∣fitable to them? As the 1 Cor. 14. 14. 19. Apostle, If I pray in a strange tongue, my vnderstanding is without fruit: and the same Apostle, I had rather in the Church to speake fiue wordes with my vnderstanding, then tenne thousand wordes in a strange tongue: and againe, Except ye vtter words that Cap. 9. haue signification, how shall it be vnderstood what is spo∣ken? for ye shall speake in the aire, and the Apostle seemes vpon purpose in the whole chapter to condemne this Ezra the Priest did read the Law to men and wo∣men to heare it, and vnderstand it, Nehem. 8. 2. point, which chapter, 1 Cor. 14. I commend to all lay Pa∣pists to read it, yet in their mother Tongue, except they vnderstand the Latin. To pray in an vnknowne tongue, is not to pray, but to prate like a Parrot: and yet the Tridentine Sess. 22. c. 8. Councell de∣creed, Non expedire vt diuinum officium vulgari passim lin∣gua
celebretur, not expedient that Diuine Seruice should be celebrated in the vulgar tongue, and they call it an intol∣lerable Intolerabilis Lu∣theranorum error, &c. Azor. Ies. in∣stit. Moral. lib. 8. c. 26. error of the Lutherans who thinke the contrary: And this doctrine of Luther, who requires a knowne tongue in Diuine prayers, Diaboli calliditatem sapit, saith their Senen. bibl. lib, 6 ann. 263. Catharinus, sauors of the Deuill; rather this speech sauors of the Deuill. And truely these Foxes in this chase haue beene so hunted out of all their blinde holes of igno∣rance, and vnable to vphold this Babell of Barbarisme, that they are at last brought to a very desperate defence, to pro∣duce but two of their Champions, who haue drawen out their weapons for the defence of this cause. Their Iesuite Salmeron, and Cardinall Bellarmine: In 1. Cor. 14. disp. 3. § 4. obijcitur. Sal∣meron saith, Finis proprius diuinorum officiorum non est populi instructio, & adificatio, sed potius cultus Deo debitus, The proper end of Diuine duties is not the instruction and edi∣fication of the people, but rather a worship due to God: I will not vouchsafe an argument, but say with that reue∣rend D. Morton. 2. part. Catho. Apolo. lib. 1. c. 24. Deane, Hoc est causae perditissimae vltimum refugium, desperationis plenissimum, omnis authoritatis, & rationis prae∣sidijs destitutum, This is the last refuge of a most wretched cause, full of desperation, and void of all authority and reason. Bel. de verbo dei. c. 16. §. obiectio 4. & § 2. obiectio. Bellarmine saith almost the same words, vsus precum praecipuus non est aedificatio, aut consolatio populi, sed cultus Deo ab ecclesia debitus, the chiefe vse of prayers is not the e∣dification or consolation of the people, but a worship due to God from the Church, and so that God doe vnderstand the tongue, no matter whether men doe or no: a strange argument: God knowes our wants before we pray, why then should we pray at all? or make our petitions to him, and yet know not the tenor of our petitions? Neuer did a∣ny Illam orationem Deus non exaudit, cui bo, quando psallit, non atten∣lit. Gregor. Church teach the people to pray for that which they do not vnderstand, but the Church of Rome. Yet they themselues confesse it, were better if the seruice were in the vulgar tongue, yet will not suffer it: as Bell. supra. Bellarmine, Est melius ad consolationem orantis, It were better for the consolation of him that prayes: melius ad in∣structionem
vt preces intelligantur, say the Rhemist. in no∣uum Testam. Rhemists, bet∣ter for instruction, that the prayers should be vnderstood and Caiet. in 1. Cor. 14 Caietan, better for the edification of the Church; ad fructum deuotionis conducibilius, saith Aquin. lect. 3. in 1. Cor. 14. Aquine, more con∣uenient for the fruit of deuotion: and so their Cardinall Christ. instruct. p. 212. & Tho. lect. 3. in 1 Cor. 14. Contarenus saith, The prayers that men vnderstand not, want the fruit which they should reape, if they vnderstood them. Yea themselues Hard. art. 3. sect. 28. confesse, That in the time of the Pri∣mitiue Church the people in the vulgar tongue did cele∣brate their diuine seruice: In primitiue ecclesia benedictio∣nes, & caetera communia fiebant invulgari, saith Lyranus in the Primitiue Church benedictions, and other common duties done in the vulgar tongue: nay Bel. lib. 2. de verb. Dei. c. 16. § Idem etiam. Bellarmine goes further, Longo tempore post, tempore Chrysostomi, ac Cypria∣ni, ac Ieronymi, ea consuetudo valuit, long after that, in the time of Chrysostome, Cyprian, and Ierome, this custome, to celebrate sacred things in the vulgar tongue, preuailed. The cause which the Trent Sess. 22. c. 1. Councell alleadgeth, why all diuine seruice should bee in the Latin tongue, is this, mos generalis ecclesiae habet, vt tantum tribus linguis, hebrai∣ca, Graeca, & latina celebretur, The generall custome of the Church hath beene, that in these three tongues, He∣brue, Greeke, and Latin, it should bee celebrated: In the Primitiue Church and long after, no such custome, by their owne confession: and if any tongue, rather the Hebrue, the most ancient; but the Hebrue and Greeke originals of the Scripture are by them little regarded, and the vulgar Latin translation of the Scripture is by the Councell of Sess. 4. Trent canonized, charging all to vse it, as the authenti∣call text in all their readings, disputations, sermons, and expositions, and that they doe not reiect it vpon any pre∣tence whatsoeuer. Yea the F. Simen. bibl. Complut. in prolog. Bishop of Toledo putting forth the Bible in diuers languages, printed the Latin be∣tweene the Hebrue and Greeke, saying, hee had placed them as the two theeues on eyther side, but the Romane, or Latin put in the midst betweene them, as Iesus Christ: and yet I thinke neuer did the sunne see any thing more
defectiue and maimed then the vulgar Latin thus by them extolled. I could with my finger point at grosse corrupti∣ons therein, but I may spare that labor, their own tongues shall tell it. Their owne Bishop De opt. gent in∣terpret li. 3. c. 1. 2. 4. 6. We acknowledge that there be ma∣ny faults in our Latin edition of the bible, &c. Sixt Senen. bibl. sanct. lib. 8. p. 365. Lindan saith, it hath monstrous corruptions of all sorts, scarce one coppy hath one booke of Scripture vndefiled: many points translated improperly, abusiuely: with many other learned Papists, who might be named, complaining of seuerall additions, detractions, falsifications, deprauations, and barbarismes of the vulgar Latine, now by them preferred aboue the Hebrue and Greeke coppies. Well, if the Lay people may haue this Latin Bible read vnto them, yet vnderstand neuer a worde of it, and other Church prayers, they thinke this seruice is sufficient which is but a little better then vox porcorum, or mugitus boum, then crying of hogges, or the bellowing of buls: for it is the comparison of De summo bono, lib 3. c. 8. Isidorus, Quid potest strepitus labiorum vbi cor est mutum? oratio sine deuotione, est quasi mugitus boum, what is the sound of the lips, the heart silent? Prayer without deuotion is like the roring of oxen: what deuo∣tion or feeling is in that minde which is senselesse of the wordes of his mouth? a senselesse petitioner, who vnder∣stands not the sense of his petition. If a wauering minded man shall receiue nothing of the Lord, as Iam. 1. 7. Iames, what shall a filly sot obtaine, who is both inconstant and igno∣rant how to pray, and what to pray for? his Pater noster &c, or Credo indeum will stand him in small flead: Sathan Let euery man make his prayer to God in his na∣tiue tongue. Ori∣gen. contra Celsum, lib. 8. in all his shop of fraud hath not a craftier guile to erect his kingdome of iniquity, then this accursed pollicy: There∣fore let all men who feare God and desire his fauour to heare their prayers, follow S. Pauls rule, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Pray with the spirit, and vnderstanding also. 2 Implicite saith. The Church of Rome which rockes her children in the cradle of ignorance, tells them implicite faith is sufficient for them which is the faith of Asses, as images are fit bookes for Idiots. The description of implicit faith I will fetch from themselues who know best the true image of
this their false Idoll: Implicita fides est credere, secundum quod credit Ecclesia, vnde non omnis Christianus tenetur illos articulos fidei scire explicite, sed tantum clerici, saith their Iacob. de Graff. decis. lib. 2. ca. 8. nu. 16. owne writer, Implicite or infold faith is to belieue as the Church beleeues, so that it is not necessary for euery Chri∣stian to know those Articles of faith explicitely, but onely Priests: a strange faith, onely deuised to suppresse know∣ledge, and to countenance ignorance: so Bell. de Justif. lib. . c. 7. §. Iudici∣um autem. Bellarmine, fides melins per ignorantiam, quam per notitiam definitur, Faith is better defined by ignorance, then by knowledge. In their Church a Lay-man may belieue by a proctor, or by a Priest explicitly, but he that thus belieues by a de∣puty, shall goe to heauen by an Attourney. Apolog. translat. by stap. par. pag. 53. This is implicite faith to belieue in generall, all that our holy mother the Church belieues. Dionys. de 25. qu. vnic. p. 215. & Altisiodorensis, sum. li. 3. tract. 3. c. 1. q. 5. This is Card. Allens rule for the vnlearned, to keepe them∣selues in the faith of the Catho∣licke Church, though they know not that faith. Defense of pardons. In princip. Staphilus re∣lates at large a Colliars faith, which Colliar at the point of death, and tempted of the Deuill, to know his Beliefe, sayd, I belieue, and die in the faith of Christs Church: vr∣ged againe, what the faith of Christs Church was? answe∣red. That faith that I belieue in. Thus the Deuill receiuing no other answer was vanquished. This implicite faith, ra∣ther fancy, is that folly which they would haue their laity to loue, excluding knowledge from the nature of faith, and make a naked Assent sufficient for saluation. Thus these Soule-thiefes doe not onely put out the Candle of knowledge, the Scripture, and put it vnder a Bushell, least it should descry them, but would extinguish all light of grace, their Creede, which doth condemne them: To be∣lieue as others belieue, or as the Church belieues, and yet know not the beliefe of the Church: a purblind faith to saue the blind. They teach the people not to trouble themselues with searching into the misteries of Christian religion, or points of faith, but say, (as their Rhem. annot. Luke 2. 11. Rhemists tutor them) that they will liue, and dye in that faith which the Catholicke Church teaches, and this Church can giue a reason of the things belieued: a very quicke way, if it were a good way: but God requires a distinct knowledge of the points of our faith, to be able, and 1. Pet. 3. 15. ready alwayes to giue an answere to euery man that asketh a reason of our hope, and faith: not
to haue the particular knowledge of our faith locked vp in the Church-chest, but in our owne breast: not to send to Rome, or the Pope for an answere, to ground their faith on, for they may be dead, before their message be deliue∣red, or an answere returned. This implicite faith was in no request in Dial. cum Tryph. Iustines time, who writes, that such as could no letter on the booke, vn∣derstood all the mysteries of faith: and indeede it is most necessary for all Christians to know, and learne the funda∣mentall points of faith, which in the Church of Rome by the vnlearned cannot be attained: for how should any know that which is propounded to him in an vnknowne tounge? how should he vnderstand his Creed, that knowes not a word in English of his Credo. It is expounded to them, may some say: Worthily I doe warrant you: when as many of their Priests, and some of their Popes could not be Latin expounders. Their expositions like their Le∣gends (commonly-read by them in the Church to the peo∣ple) full of monstrous lyes: Bar. an. 1028. n. 5. as, the Virgine Mary came downe from heauen to visite sicke S. Fulbert, and gaue him her breasts to sucke; and Gold legend. that Saint Francis vsed to preach to Birds, and instruct them, who did heare him with great deuotion, &c. Good:stuste, to be read in the Church, yet this read in the mother tounge, that they might learne this apace; but the booke of truth, the Scrpture, read in an vnknowen tounge, to belieue that im∣plicitly: still they labour to imprison the people in the dungeon of ignorance, and superstition: It is heresie for a Lay-man to dispute in a point of faith, sayth Naua. manual. cap. 11. . 26. Nauarre: Neither Magi. Geograp. pag. 104. will they suffer the people to reade any bookes, which examine their religion. If any write honestly against their errors, their congre∣gation of Cardinalls serues on them a Prohibition, com∣mit them to the prison of suppression: If Lara speakes of Iupiters lust, her tounge must be cut out: the people may not looke vpon their enemies in the open face; nay their these Bishops, and learned Priests, who should know light from darkenesse, are not permitted this priuiledge, with∣out
a Concedi ijs lecti onem, qui ab ordi∣nario facultatem obtinuerunt. Bell. de verb. dei. c. 16. §. respondeo in∣primis. special Licence therein obtained: and their Au∣thors must be of the Romane stampe, or first purged, before they may peruse them. Whereas our Church giues free liberty to all to reade priuatly their bookes: Veritas non quaerit angulos, truth seekes no corners: and were they not conscious of the guilt of their owne cause, they would neuer take this course: to depriue the people of the word, and reade it in an vnknowen tounge, or tell the people an implicite faith is sufficient. Thrirdly, worshipping of Images. I am come to the third monster of this Reue. 13. 1. Beast, and I am loath to touch it, for the very Iewes abhorre it, Their wor∣shipping of Images: the booke of God euery where cries Deut. 27. 15. Religio nulla est, vbi simulachrum est: Lactant. lib 2. de origen. Erroris. ca. 19. woe to them that worship any carued Images. Cursed are all such: and to shew the vanity, and iniquity of Image∣worship, I first recommend to euery Lay-papist to reade soberly, and diligently the Chapter of Esay, namely the 44. And wheras these Papists commonly excuse themselues with this answere, we worship no Images, but onely they serue vs to put vs in remembrance of God. First let them know, that if they will follow the Doctrine of their Tu∣tors, and I feare they follow them too much, they must worship them with a diuine worship: the old schoolemen (saith the Iesuite Vasq. lib. 2. de adorat. disp. 1. cap. 3. & ca. 8. Vasquez) doe say, Imagines Christi esse colendas adoratione latriae: The Images of Christ are to be worshipped with the highest adoration: their Iesuite Azor. Instit. lib. 9. ca. 6. §. Tota haec. Azorius sayth, Constans est Theologorum sententia, ima∣ginem codem honore, & cultu coli, quo colitur id, cuius est ima∣go, It is the constant opinion of Diuines, that the Image is to be worshipped with the same honor and worship, wherewith that is worshipped, whose Image it is. Is not this I pray plaine idolatry? Bellarmines Lib. 2. de. trium. Eccles. c. 2. in prin∣cip. thesis stultitiae plena. proposition heerein is this: Imagines Chri∣sti, & Sanctorum venerandae sunt, non solum peraccidens, vel improprie, verum etiam proprie: The Images of Christ,
and Saints are to be worshipped, not accidentally, or im∣properly, but also properly: yea the second Con. Nic. 2. Act 7. Councell of Nice decreed that Images are to be worshipped. Their late Con▪ Trid. Sess. 25. Councell of Trent sayth, and commands all to doe it with Diuine honor: So that we truly say, that whosoeuer is a true Papist, is a true idolater: yea their owne writers who write sparingly therein, testifie as much: Dici non potest, quanta Idolatria apud rudem populum alatur per Imagines, Saith Cor. Agrippa. lib. de vanit. ca. 57. Agrippa and Lib. consult. art. 21. Cassander, it cannot be expressed, what great idolatry is nourished among the rude people by Images: Yea as Polyd. Virg lib. de inuent. cap. 13. Magis fidentes diuis, quam deo. Episc. Espens. i 2. Tim. 3. an other, Sunt bene multiqui Imagines colunt, non vt figuras, sed perinde quasi ipsae aliquem sensum habeant, magisque ijs credunt, quam Christo, There are very many, who worship images, not as shapes, but e∣uen as aliue, and more trust their Images, then Christ: Ma∣nifestidus est hoc, quam vt verbo explicaripossit, Saith Cassand. vbi supr. Cas∣sander, This is more manifest, then can be expressed in a word: Dum imaginibus exhibent latriae cultum, Saith Ioh. Gers quaest. de negligen. praelat. num. 7. Ger∣son, while they offer to images the worship of Latria. Let not Praefat. lib. de Beatit. Sancto. Bellarmine outface men with, Quis Catholico∣rum diuinum honorem imaginibus vnquam detulit? Who of the Catholickes euer offered diuine honor to Images? no true Catholickes euer did it, but Papists doe it: and he, with many others teach it: Councells, which they account generall, haue decreed it: indeede the Synod of Frankford condemned the Nicene Councell for it, (yet Papists faine would shift that) but it is manifest against them: for all the learned know, that Charles the Emperor did assemble a Councell at Franckford to condemne the second Coun∣cell of Nice, which had brought in the worshipping of Images: as the booke Praefat. circa Med. Amplector Sanc∣tas & venerabiles Imagines secun∣dum seruitium a∣dorationis, quod consubstantiali Trinitati Emitto, & qui sic non sen∣tiunt anathemati submitto: lib. Ca∣rol. pag. 382. Anno. 1549. of Charles the Great speakes. There was brought forth the question touching the late Synode, concerning the adoring of Images, wherein it was written, that they should be cursed, which did not giue the same seruice and adoration to the Images of Saints, which is giuen to the diuine Trinity▪ This the fathers of Franckford iustly despised. This is acknowledged to be true by Hincmarus, Ado, Vrspergensis, Rhegino, Aimon, A∣uentine,
&c. their welwilling writers. The late Sess. 25. Councell of Trent commands the same. Their schoolemen, and Di∣uines teach the same: as Tho. 3. p. qu. 25. art. 3. & 4. Siluest. v. Latria. n. 2. Turrecremata. 3. p. de Consecr. Crucis. n. 2. and Waldensis, Caietan, Gregory of Valence, Bellarmine, Turrian, Andradius, Posseuina, Saunders, &c. —Magna comitante caterua: All worthy Writers for woodden worship. But how odious are such idolatrizing Maisters and schollers to God and good men? Irenaeus Lib. 1. ca. 24▪ places this among the heresies of Carpocrates, and the Gnostickes, quod haberent, & coronarent Imagines, that they had, and crowned Images: much rather to Pa∣pists, who haue, and craue, and crowtch to Images: and Haeres. 79. Epiphanius taught that such were Heretickes, Qui Imagi∣nem B. Virginis circumferunt, Who did beare and carry a∣bout the Image of the blessed Virgine: And this Ep. ad Ioan. Epipha∣nius fayth, It was against the authority of the Scripture, that any Image should be in the Church: And Contra Celsum. lib. 7. Ʋrigen sayth of his time, we worship no Images: the Clem. Alexand. hort. ad gent. p. 14. Christians in the primitiue Church had no Images: In republica Iu∣daeorum, Imaginum factor, & statuarum fabricator longe ab∣iectus est, &c. Saith Origen, in the Common-wealth of the Iewes, a maker of Images or of Pictures is farre from them remooued, least it should minister any occasion to I∣dolatry: they that make them Psal. 115. 8. are like vnto them, and so are all they that put their trust in them. Thou Exod. 20. 4. 5. shalt make thee no grauen Image, neither the likenesse of any thing: thou shalt not bow downe to them, neither serue thē, saith the Lord: how guilty of the breach of this precept, are these Image-mongers, who not onely bow downe to them, but also worship them? The Reue. 19. 10. Apo∣stle was rebuked for offering to fall downe, and to wor∣ship dead and dumbe stockes & blockes, which haue Psal. 115. 6. eyes and see not, mouthes and speake not, eares and heare not, noses, and smell not: Bowing to a Crucifixe, or such a like piece of wood, and worshipping, saying, Esay 44. 17. Deliuer me, for thou art my God. I know they well reply, They worship
no blockes, stockes, or stones: why, if they will ioyne Is∣sue, Read Bezas Epi∣gram of the pain∣ter, and Baker, Pictor pingat, Pistor pinsat, Pastor iubet esse Deos, &c. we will try the case: Confesse they must, their Crosse, or their Crucifix, &c. is a dead, and dumbe thing, as a stocke or stone, and hath nothing in it worthy of veneration: yet their Iesuits doe teach them, that this Crosse, or Crucifix is to be worshipped, not accidentally, improperly, or by way of representation, but properly. I will produce but three of their side (for in ore duorum, aut trium stet omne verbum) three of their chiefe Iesuits, and these are counted honest & sufficient witnesses among themselues: 1. Coster. Enchir. Coste∣rus sayth, All the honor, that is due to the samplar, is gi∣uen to the Image: is not this to worship the Image? 2. Bell. de Imag. lib. 2. c. 21. Imagines sunt proprie, & per se colendae, nulla ra∣tione habita ad exemplar. Bellarmine explaines it further, This honor is so giuen, that the Image stayeth, and limiteth it in it selfe, as it is an Image, and not onely as it representeth the samplar. 3 Is Tom. 4. 345. Gr̄ogory of Valence, who saith, Images themselues after their maner, are to be worshipped, in respect of the sam∣plar, & thus the Images▪ of Christ must be adored with di∣uine honor per aliud. This is the moderne Doctrine of Rome, yet it sauors so ill in their owne smell, that Bell. vbi supra., ca. 22. Bellarmine confesseth, it is not wholesome for the Pulpet. Their Masse-booke hath a prayer, All haile O Crosse, our onely hope, &c. Thou onely art worthy to beare the ransome of the world, O faithfull Crosse, onely thou art the Noble tree among all &c. Is not this prayer directed onely to the Crosse, which hath so many (onely) words to tye it fast to the Tree? so that the Paynims of old did that which Papists now doe, their Idolles were the Images of the true God, and so worshipped by them, respectiuely, and with relation to God: for the Acts 17. 23. Altar at Athens de∣dicated to the same God, whom Paul preached: few or none among them (saith Peres. Tradit. part. 3. pag. 225. Peresius) thought the matter of their Idolles so grauen, to be Gods, and they had many I∣dolles, whereby they represented the true God: nay some of the Iesuits are not ashamed to write, that not an Image onely or an holy thing, may be worshipped with the same adoration that is giuen to God, but euen any other thing
in the world, whether liuing, or without life: either An∣gell, man, Sunne, Moone, Starres, Earth, or lignum, lapides, de modulo straminis, &c. (saith Ʋasquez Vasque. Adorat. lib. 3. disp. 1. c. 2. & 3. their Iesuite) wood, stones, or a litle strawe: this is as much as they are charged by vs, to worship stockes, and blockes. And moreouer these Roman-pseudo-catholickes maintaine an other idolatrous superstition, the Artolatria est Idolatria. adoration of the Sa∣crament, an inuention brought in among them by C. Sanct. Missa∣rum. Hono∣rius the third, like the idolatry of the Gentiles in oblation, and the sacrifices of Bread, and Wine to Mitbra: no o∣ther Iul. firmic. de errore profan. re∣lig. Iustin. Mart. Apol. 2. for substance, then that which the Gentiles offered: for the naturall substance of bread, and wine remaineth af∣ter the consecration, yet we belieue that to the faithfull receiuer, the body of Christ is infallibly conioyned with the bread, by a sacramentall relation. Yet no way to be worshipped, for we deny the Reall presence corporally, as they affirme: and it is very strange, that they should adore that, who teach, that Cautelae missae. a man hauing receiued his maker, may vomit him vp againe: or as Tho. 3. q. 80. art. 3. ad 3. Suar. Tom. 3. d. 62. s. 2. Thomas, that a brute beast, as a dogge, may eate the Body of Christ. Though we doe not adore the bread and wine, yet we giue more reuerence to it, and teach, that the wicked may take panem Domini, the Bread of the Lord, not panem Do∣minum, the Lord as Bread, sauingly participate this sacred mystery of the Redemption by the body and blood of le∣sus Christ. So that to conclude this point, If it be vnlawfull pingere imaginem Dei in forma hominis, to draw the Image of God in the likenesse of man for which their De Eccl. Trium. c. 8. § haec opinio. Bellarmine taxeth Caluin, yet confesseth that their Albul. Durandus, Peresius hold the same opinion: for the Image visible of the inuisi∣ble God, is the Lena, the baud of the heresie Alph. de Castre. lib. 5. de heraesi¦tit. Deus. of the An∣thropomorphites, who held, Deum ex humanis membris consistere, God did consist of humane members: then how abominable is it to worship God vnder the shape of an I∣mage, and ascribe the same honor to the Image, as they doe to the samplar, (God as they say) by it represented So
that to such, God will say, as the Psal. 97. 7. Prophet speakes, Con∣founded be all they that serue grauen images, or that glo∣ry in Idolles: and as Esay 42. 8. Esay. I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory will I not giue to an other, neither my praise to grauen Images. And I wonder that any should be so bewitched as to delight in Images (historicall vsel deny not, but all spiri∣tuall vse is fornication, and abomination:) but more to creepe, and croutch to them, the visible obiects of dust, or dirt, to Esay 44. 19. bowe to the stocke of a Tree, as the Prophet speakes, this is the basest thing that almost the Sunne euer sawe, vnworthy of man, whose knee should bow to his Maker, and not to the stocke that he hath made himselfe: how odious is the seruice, and sacrifice of such creeping and croutching Idoll-suppliants in the Lords sight? he will Malaeh: 2: 3: cast the dung vpon their owne faces, euen the dung of their solemne feasts, such fordide seruice, such prophane, and heathenish sacrifice, which stinckes in his nostrills, and say, I neuer required this woodden worship at your hands, I neuer commanded you to buy these Bookes, which you say, shall put you in remembrance of me; but you that can∣not remember me without the sight of an Image on earth, I will forget you, and shall neuer haue a sight of my Image in heauen. Thus hauing spoken a little, yet enough, to satisfie a temperate and ingenuous Reader, to behold the corrupti∣ons of Popery in the forepassed points, I will come to our next promised part, Popes pardons, wherein I wil be more briefe, because they are called by them. Bullae tantum revalent, quantum mine . Bullae, Bulls, or Indulgences, rather bubbles, something in appearance, empty in the substance of proofe, or profit. Fourthly, Popes pardons. Their Cardinall Allen in his defence of Popes pardons, saith, that to impugne the power of pardons, is to ouer∣throw the greatest matters which life and Faith doe stand vpon; and saith that Luther; except one Witclife condem∣ned
in the Councell of Constance, was the first that con∣tradicted them, from which point did begin the toyle and tragedy of these times: wherein the Cardinall speakes not  Cathedra, for the Waldenses long before Witclife, and Bo∣hemians before Luther, did contemne and condemne this vsurped power of popish pardons, wherein the pith of po∣pery is inclosed. Indeede when it pleased the Lord to open Luthers eyes to see the truth, he began first to finde fault with the base inundation of picke-purse pardons, though (as hee saith) then he did but fight in the darke: for when Pope Leo the tenth had sent abroad his pardons which were preached by Terelius a Dominicke Frier', Luther admonished the people of the abuses and deceits of the pardons and par∣doners, which long before his time had beene reproued in the Councels of Lateran and Vienna: and complained to the Archbishop of Mentz, to the Bishop of Brandenburg, to the Prouinciall of the Augustine Friers, and to the Pope himselfe: and Surius the Papist confesses that he did iustly In Suppl. Nau. complaine; and afterward compelled by intollerable iniu∣ries, and neglect of manifest truth and reformation, cast off the seruile yoake and vassalage of Antichristian capti∣uity. These Pardons haue no ground in holy Scripture or Primitiue Church, or Fathers of the Church, for a thousand yeares after Christ, but are indeede the impostures of this In principio nascē∣tis ecclesiae nullus fuit Indulgentiarū vsus. Epis. Roffens. art. 18▪ contra Lu∣ther. last age, delusions of Sathan, and the temptations to Epi∣curisme and all vice, when as such pardons for all kinde of sinnes are proffered and prostrated to all such as can pro∣uide money for them. For the Tax: Cancell. Apostolic. Purgatory can haue no rich mē in it, but fooles, and friendlesse. Court of Rome hath an order containing the price to be paid for all kinde of sins, as murther, incest, parricide, sodomy, sacriledge, &c. and they that would see the particular summes of money for all kinde of sinnes and offences, and what their pardon will cost in the Court of Rome for all capitall and horrible faults let them read Musculus common places in the title of the Ministers of the worde of God towards the end. Some of their Antoninus 4. part. summae c. 7. writers confesse, De Indulgentijs nihil
habemus, nec in Scripturis, nec ex dictis antiquarum doctorum, we haue nothing of pardons, neyther in the Scriptures, nor in the ancient Doctors: & their Lib. de indulg. cap. 2. Gregory of Valence saith, that Gratian & Lombard, who liued not aboue 400. yeares agoe, Nihil de indulgentis nisse, haue recorded no∣thing of Indulgences: And the same Lib. 5. de Indulg. Iesuite saith, E∣rant Catholici quidam ante Lutherum, quorum opinionem Thomas▪ Part. 3. qu. 25. art. 5. refent, qui indulgentias pias fraudes esse duxerunt, There were certaine Catholickes before Luther, whose o∣pinion Thomas recites, who accounted these indulgences holy fraud: rather lenocinia diaboli, the enticing impiety of the Deuil and the whore, to be so indulgent to their sons, as rather to cocker, then correct them for their sinnes. So Bonifac. 8. prim{us} qui concessit plena∣rias indulgentias, & Jubileum Ro∣mam visitantibus Tollet. Jes. lib. 6. Instruct. Sacerd. cap. 24. Iubilei nouitas nobilis: & Agrippa. de vanit. Scient. cap. 61. Pope Boniface the 8, the first inuenter of Iubily par∣dons, grants, Non solumplenam, & largiorem, immo plenis∣simam omnim suorum veniam peccatorum, Not onely a full and large pardon, but a most full pardon of all their sinnes; and to giue pardon for many hundred yeares to come, and that for doing a very small seruice; as Pope Gregory who made a prayer about the length of a Creede, which who∣soeuer shall say deuoutly, shall receiue fiue hundred yeares of pardon; quicke worke: yet prouided that at the end of euery verse he say a Pater noster, and an Aue. Sometimes pardons for dayes, as Pope Innocent the sixt, to them who say a short prayer about the scantling of an Aue, hee shall obtaine pardon for twenty thousand daies. Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, giues to them who say a short, Salith: primer called Har B. Marie. prayer, three thousand daies of pardon of mortall sinnes, and twenty thousand daies of venials; and if that prayer too long, or pardon too short, let him say fiue Pater nosters▪ before the Ʋernacle, and hee shall haue ten thousand daies pardon by that Pope. Gregorie the third giues a pardon to them that shall say a prayer as long as three Aues, and kneele before a Cruci∣fice, for sixe thousand, sixe hundred, threescore and sixe daies; iust so many daies as Christ had wounds on his bo∣dy: as some say: saue that our Lord appeared to S. Briget at Rome, and told her that his wounds were but fiue thou∣sand,
foure hundred and fourescore: or as others Ludolf. vit. Chri∣sti part. 2. c. 58. Eck. Ser. de passi∣one. tell it, fiue thousand foure hundred fourescore and ten, excepting the prickes of his crowne, which Suare. Tom. 2. pag: 347. were threescore and twelue. But some other Popes haue beene more liberall in the grant of these pardons: Pope Sixtus the fourth graunted to them, who say a prayer of his making, which hath not aboue fiue and forty words, forty thousand yeares of par∣don. Read a Bull of Confirmation granted by Pope Leo the tenth, Anno 1513. sept. id. Martij, pontificis anno pri∣mo, the which Bull was granted, Hospitali sancti spiritus in Saxia almae vrbis: in which is an approbation of all for∣mer pardons obtained to the saide Hospitall, and the members thereof, as Innocent the third grants to all that visit the saide Hospitall two thousand and eight hundred yeares of pardon. Pope Alexander the fourth grants foure thousand yeares, & eight hundred Lents of pardon. Pope Celestine the fifth grants also to the saide Hospitall and the members, an hundred thousand yeares of pardon. Pope Clement the fift grants also two thousand and eight hun∣dred yeares of pardon. Pope Boniface the eight, 2500. yeares of pardons. Pope Clement the sixt, 8000 yeares and 8000 Lents, & full remission of al their sins. Pope Innocent the sixt, 2000 years, and 2000 Lents of pardons. Pope Be∣nedict the 12, 3000 years, & as many Lents of pardons. All which grants of pardons by the Popes confirmed to the said Hospitall and the members: if this were as good ware as they make some beleiue, who would not goe visit this Hospitall? yea be a member of it? Can any Papist goe to the Deuill who may haue a Tesserae veniale vaenales. Budaeus. lib: 1: de asse. pardon for a little money, and Ʋide Nicol: Sa∣licet. Antidot Ani∣mae. saying ouer a prayer or two? which prayers haue such power, that when S. Bernard said one before a Rood, it so pleased the said Rood, that it bowed it selfe, and embra∣ced him in the armes: Like the Rood of Naples which Anton: Chro. part. 3. tit: 23▪ p. 206. spake so kindely to Thomas Aquinas: Or like the Sibi oranti cru∣cifixi imaginem inclinare caput a∣pexit. Bar. Anno 1051. u: 1. Cruci∣fixe which nodded the head to the Monke Gualbertus. In∣deed if Popes prayers be like Amphions harpe to mooue stones,
Hor. Saxa moueresono testudinis, & prece bland Ducerè quò vellet— The famous Amphion with his harpe could play To moue the stones: so popish harpers pray. If Popes can giue so large pardons for sinnes, and haue so good prayers, I muse they cannot cure the Papists of bodily sicknesse: for sicknesse is the punishment of sinne. rather Popes doe encrease their sicknesse by procuring Gods plagues and punishments to be inflicted vpon them for affecting such practises to haue their sinnes pardoned of Popes, when as it appertaineth onely to God. They who are Gods dearest Ministers (I feare the Pope is none) haue no other power heerein, then to declare in Gods name forgiuenesse of sinne, (not to make them a pardon for money) if they truely beleeue in Christ, and re∣pent, and so release the band of discipline in open offen∣ders, where the fruites of repentance appeare: and so the meanest minister of Christ by vertue of his spirituall office may declare absolution of sinnes to the truely penitent; but to forgiue sinnes, none can or may doe it, but God a∣lone. I, Esay 43. 25. euen I, am hee that putteth away thy iniquities for mine owne sake, and will not remember thy sinnes: Math. 11. 28. Luke 5. 21. Come vnto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you; with a thousand places of Scripture, exhorting all to come vnto Christ, and apply his bloud vnto their soules for the remission of their sinnes. Acts 4. 12. There is no other way by which wee can be saued, or our sinnes pardoned: ad impetrandam nostris sceleribus veniam non pecunias impen∣dere, sed hoc facere &c. saith In epist. ad Phi∣lem. hom. 1. Chrysostome, To get a pardon for sinne, money will not doe it, but to beleeue in Christ. And indeed the Pardon-Procters are so dazeled in the defence of them, like the sodomites smitten with blinde∣nesse at Lots doore, that they cannot tell how to finde any ground for them, but are compelled abruptly to say with Lib: 2. de Indulg. & Iubil. c. 10. in∣dulgentiarum pro∣ane nouitas.  Bellarmine, Sufficit ad Indulgentias, & Bullas defendendas Ecelesia authorit as, The authority of the Church, allead∣ged, not proued, is sufficient to defend Bulles and Indul∣gences:
a weake argument to defend wicked pardons. But their Glosse vpon that great Bull of Boniface the 8, saith, Foure things concurre as principall, to make a par∣don effectuall. 1 Authority in the granter. 2 Capacity in the receiuer. 3 Piety in the end. 4 vtility in the worke: But authority heerein the Pope hath none: idoneity, or capacity in the receiuer, namely that he be a true member Oportet quod ca∣pax indulgentiae sit purgatus à cul∣pa, quod sit in con∣tritione paenitons, & etiam confessus: glossa vt supra. of Christ, and purged from his fault, the Pope cannot tell: Piety in the end is none, for it opens a wide way to all im∣piety; vtility to the party none, for hee is robbed of his money, and deluded in his soule; the onely vtility comes to the Pope, to enrich his coffers; for by this deuice a world of wealth is raised: for men who doe beleeue these pardon-mongers, to be released out of the paines of Pur∣gatory, The Pope by his▪ power of Iurisdi∣ction may spoile all purgatory. Aug: de Ancona de potest. eccles∣quaest: 32. telling them what a grieuous punishment it is to lye in Purgatory fire, which is indeed ignis fatuus, or the fire of the Popes kitchin, to warme his backe and belly; they will willingly giue their money to goe to Heauen by a pardon. Thus it is written of Theod: à Niem. de scism. lib. 1. c. 68. pag. 20. Boniface the ninth, who sent into diuers kingdomes his Treasurers with pardons, who extorted great summes of money from simple peo∣ple, that in some one Prouince they would get together a∣boue an hundred thousand florens, omnia peccata relaxan∣tes, releasing all offences whatsoeuer. Math. 10. 8. Christ, said to his Apostles, freely you haue receiued, freely giue: But heere no penny, no pardon, no pater noster: so that wee may say of these Popes as Bartholomaeus vuesthemerus. one doth of Gregory the ninth, O aua∣rum cor, vbi Petri paupert as quamiactatis? O couetous hart, where is Peters pouerty whom yee boast of? that to play impostors to the world, will sell such ware as you fetch from the Deuils shop; to cozen the simple of their money, & bring them into a fooles Paradise, to hope of pardon of their sinne by buying your mercenary indulgences, and Buls, the basest trash that can be inuented; to sell for siluer remission of sinnes, and euen saluation of soules, as Iudas did for thirty peeces his Sauiour. But heerein let Gods children say to the Pope as Dan. 5. 7. Daniel did to Balshazzer, keepe thy rewards to thy selfe, and giue thy gifts to ano∣ther:
keepe your paltry pardons to your selues, saying as Dauid did to the Prophet Gad, 2 Sam. 24. 14. Let vs fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies are great, and not into the hands of men, (the Pope or his Priests) for the very Pro. 12. 10. mercies of the wicked are cruell. The inuention of Popes pardons was to maintaine their pride, the power vnlawfull, the causes vngodly, the vse abhominable, and the end deceiueable, neyther by the Scriptures, or practise of the Primitiue Church warran∣table. I hasten to put this Piunace into harbour, weary with being on the Sea of Rome; therefore to bee briefe, let all that desire to be faithfull seruants to their Lord and Saui∣our, who as yet halt betwixt God and Baal, being as one cals them, Lunae vituli, Moone-Calfes, once a moneth come to the Temple, hoping to walke to heauen with sta∣tute-legges: or others who are more setled vpon their lees, whose mindes as 2 Cor. 4. 4. yet the God of this world hath blin∣ded, that the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ, which is the image of God should not shine vnto them: let them all know that these voices sound from heauen vnto them, to their conuersion and consolation, if they accept them; or condemnation and confusion if they reiect them. 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18. Come out from among them, & separate your selues, saith the Lord, and touch no vncleane thing, and I will receiue you, and I will be a Father vnto you, and you shall be my sonnes and daugh∣ters, saith the Lord. This voice is not the voice of man, but of God, Reu. 18. 4. 5. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues: for her sinnes are come vp into heauen, and God hath remembred her iniquities, as it is there prophecied of the fall of mysticall Babylon, which is Rome. Therefore let my exhortati∣on bee that vnto you which a reuerend and learned Do∣ctor gaue as a farewell to his friends, Commendo vos dile∣ctioni Doctor Holland. Dei, & odio papatus, I exhort you to loue God, and leaue the corrupt doctrine of Popery, which is a forme of Religion, yet, Non secundum Iesum Christum, nec verbum, nec tenet capt, Not according to Iesus Christ or his Gos∣pell,
nor doth it rightly hold the head, making the Church a monster with two heads, the Pope a visible Head on earth, and Christ in heauen the inuisible Head. We beseech you in the tender bowels of Christ to haue pitty vpon your owne soules, open your eyes without partiality, or preiudice to behold the truth and embrace it; and to moue your hearts with Peters wordes, 1 Pet, 2. 2. as newborne babes de∣sire the sincere milke of the word, that ye may grow there∣by: so shall you, and we haue infinite cause to reioyce, and our Church say with Peter, yee were as sheepe going a∣stray, but are now returned vnto the chiefe shepheard and cap. 2. 25. Bishop of your soules: With which sauing Grace the God of all grace and goodnesse, Iesus Christ, enrich your soules withall, 2 Pet. 3. 18. to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ, to him bee glory, both now and for euer. Thus hauing declared in part the corruptions of popish Doctrine, which must be reiected of all who desire to be faithfull seruants to our Sauiour, or performe seruice ac∣ceptable vnto him; for what concord hath 2 Cor. 6. 15. 16. Christ with Belial? what agreement hath the Temple of God with I∣dols? Take heede of the Leauen of Rome, as our Sauiour Math. 16. 6. warnes his Disciples of the leauen of the Pharisees and Sadduces, their pernicious doctrine full of errors, repug∣nant and decrogatory to Christ and his Gospell. It remaines and followes in the next place to touch, That if you beleeue and embrace al the points of moderne Popery, now broached and maintained in the Church of Rome, you cannot bee dutifull and obedient Subiects to our and your Soueraigne: and since I haue in my former Tractates, obiter, by the way, promiscuously touched le∣suiticall precepts, and practise in this kinde, papall depo∣sitions of Kings from their Regiment, and absolutions of subiects from loyall obedience, applauding traytors by canonization & commendation for treasonable attempts: I will not be large and liberall heerein, onely propound a few positions, and propositions to your consideration to iudge of them, whether they be not opposite to all loyall
obedience; which are maintained and divulged to the world by your great Doctors and Pillars of the Romane Church. And first you are not ignorant, that very lately, Anno 1606. Pope Paul the fifth prohibited all the Romane Ca∣tholickes (so tearmed) by his Breue, that they should not take the oath of Allegiance, vnto which they were enioy∣ned by the Kings Maiesty; which argues hee would haue them refractary, in matters which onely, concerne ciuill o∣bedience: for the scope of that oath tended to professe and practise a dutifull allegiance to the King in all loyall sub∣mission. The like also did Pius quintus Pope, to the late Queene Elizabeth, commanding her Subiects to rebell, and discharging them from allegiance. But omitting these things as vulgarly knowne, I will goe to the Iesuites schoole, and heare how they teach you. If a Christian King become an All Christian Kings counted Heretickes, who are not Romane Catholickes. Hereticke, immediat∣ly his people are freed from his command and their subie∣ction, saith, Lib: Instit: Cath: Sect. 11. c. 23. Symancha: But all Christian Kings are estee∣med Heretickes, who are not Catholikes of the Romane size, Ergo. The Iesuite Creswel vnder the name of Andreas Philopa∣tor, against the Decree of the Queene of England, sect. 2. u. 157. deliuers this proposition: Principem, qui a Catho∣lica religione deflexit, excidere statim omnipotestate: a Prince who declines from their Catholike religion (rather super∣stition) falls presently from his Regall power: But all Pro∣testant Princes decline from that religion: Ergo no King, or no power. The same Iesuite, num. 160. saith, Omnium Catholico∣rum esse sententiam, obligatos esse subditos ad principes haere∣ticos depellendos, qui sidei Catholicae inuriosi sunt, si modo vi∣res ad hoc habeant idoneas: It is the sentence of all Catho∣likes, that the subiects are bound to driue away hereticall Princes, who are iniurious to the Catholike Faith, if they haue forces fit for this purpose. And againe, num. 162. Subti di Principes suos non tantum legitime possunt , sedetiam ad hoc praecepts divine, & conscientiae
arctissimo vincul, ac extremo animarum suarum periculo te∣nentur. Subiects may not onely lawfully trouble such Princes, but are bound to doe it by Diuine precept, and most strict band of conscience, and extreame perill of their owne soules: And the same Iesuite againe, Si Imperator, vel Rex haereticū fauore prosequatur, ipso facto regnum amit∣tet: If an Emperor or King fauour an heretike, he shall lose his kingdome, ipso facto. Now Protestants in their Ca∣lendar are branded for heretickes. Ergo. And to these accord and publish the like doctrine many others of their writers. Ribadeneira de principe, lib. 1. cap. 18. pa. 177. &c. 26. pag. 172. &c. Paulus Chirlandus de hae∣ret. q. 3. nu 2. Conradus Brunus de haeret. lib 3. cap. vltimo. Io. Paulus Windeck de extirp. haer. Antidoto 10. pag. 404. & Antidot. 11. pag. 408. Stapleton in oratione contra politicos Duaci habita. Baronius Card. in Epistola contra Venetos. Bellarmine the Cardinall full of such stuffe: Hee affirmes, that Kings are subiect to Popes, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and would prooue this inferiority by Scriptures and Fa∣thers: De laicis lib. 3. He holds many other propositions, disgracefull to Kings, vndutifull for subiects, and contradictory to all Creswell loco prae∣dicto ait potestatē regiam esse iuris ciuilis, ergo in ar∣bitrio populs esse, rex quis fit, an non. pag 145. Scripture: Secular principality is ordained by men, and hath his being by the law of Nations: de Rom. Pontif. lib. 1. c. 7. §. praeterea: a grosse Assertion for so great a Doctor. In causes onely Temporall Cleargimen are bound to o∣bey Princes: and no longer obey, then the Pope will: de clericis. lib. 1. cap. Per totum caput: So ridiculous positions, as the very naming of them, is a confutation. Simancha, and Creswell haue concluded, that no here∣ticke, (that is, a Protestant) is capable of a Crowne, and though a lawfull heire, yet no iust possessor, hauing obtai∣nedit. And to this effect Pope Clements Bull was, After the death of the late Queene, whether by course of nature, or otherwise, whosoeuer should lay claime or Title to the Crowne of England, though neuer so directly or neerely interessed therein by descent and Blood royall; yet vnlesse
he were such an one, as would not onely tollerate the Ca∣tholicke Romane religion, but by all endeuours, and force promote it, they should admit, or receiue none to the Crowne of England. And Samancha Tit. 64. Sect. 75. faith, The father may be deposed for an hereticke, and his sonne and heire also ex∣cluded from claime of succession, vnlesse he be a Romane Catholicke. Thus they seeke to dispossesse Kings, who are enthroned by God, and haue their Scepters from the King of Kings: yea they ind Kings to their good behauiour, if they doe displease the Pope, then depose them, and so no Kings. Molina saith, The King can vse his Temporall sword but at the Popes becke: Tract. 2. de Institut. Di. 29. Thus debasing Kings, the highest powers on earth, to be subiects to the Pope, who yet in a counterfeit style cals himselfe, Seruus seruorum, a seruant of seruants: Sonat hu∣milit as in voce sed superbia in actione, Saith Gregory, Iacobs voice; and Esawes hands: Hypocriticall humility, is worse then manifest pride. And truly if the Pope had a sparke of the spirit of hu∣mility, he would condemne his Parasites Fra. Bozius Eug. de temp. eccl. monar. lib. 1. c. 3. &c. 11. voices, Papa est, per quereges regnant, The Pope is he, by whom Kings reigne: Saith Bozius: or Lib▪ 1. cere. ro∣cur. Sect. 7. pag. 85. Papa data est omnis potest as in caelo, & in terra, Dominatur amarivsque admare, à flumine vsque adtermin os orbis: To the Pope is giuen all power in heauen and earth, and reignes from one Sea to an other, from the stood to the end of the world: or, C. sollicitae. 6. de maior. & obedien. Papa potest omnia facere, quae Deus potest, The Pope can doe all that God can doe: horrible impiety, and intollerable flattery. And these tell the world, he can make and vnmake Kings, and the Popes like it well enough, excommunicating Kings, deposing them, and disposing of their Kingdomes to others. So that it mooued Art  King of Peru to say (as Benzo, and Lopez tell it) Insigniter fatuum esse oper∣tere papam, qui quae non haberet, alijs liberaliter largitur, vel carte impedentem nebulonem, qui eiectis veris possessoribus, alienas terras peregrinis addiceret, & in mutuas cades mor∣tale genus armaret: That either the Pope was an egregi∣ous
Sot, who would liberally giue things which he had not, or a very impudent companion, who expulsing the true possessors, giues it to strangers, arming the world to mutuall, yea mortall slaughters. I will not trouble my selfe to behold the nakednesse, rather wickednesse of these drunken Gen. 9 21. Noes, vncouered in the midst of their Tents, vomiting out vile positions, full of sedition, and disobedience against the Kings of the earth: it require rather teares to bewaile it, then a pen to report it: and the learned heerein know more then I write, and for the ignorant, it is good for them in this case to be ignorant still: yet I confesse I aimed most in this labour to informe the ignorant, hauing no minde to meddle with seducing Professed pan∣dars to the Romish Curtezan, inuiola∣bly fixed to her folly and forni∣cation. Priests (I cannot charme such deafe Adders:) if this litle handfull of my loue and labour presented vnto you may be profitable to win any of you, I will say, and end with the Iames 5. 19. 20. Apostle Iames, Brethren, if any of you haue erred from the Truth, and some man hath conuerted him, let him know that hee which hath conuerted the sinner from going astray out of his way, shall saue a soule from death, and shall hide a multitude of sinnes. The Lord, who is a God of Truth, for his mercy sake, and for Christs merits sake, open all your eies to behold the Truth, and your hearts to embrace it, that we may all hold one Head in vnity, and haue one heart in verity, that all with one minde, and mouth may praise, and pray vnto the Lord in the militant Church on earth, and be thrice happy members of the Triumphant Church in heauen. Amen. Candido lectori: Humanum est errare, errata hic corrige (lector) quae penna, aut praelo lapsa fuisse vides. FINIS.
