12112 99839062 3458
THE DIGNITIE Of CHIVALRIE; Set forth in A SERMON Preached before the ARTILLERY Company of LONDON, Iune xiij. 1626. By WILLIAM GOVGE, B. of Diuinity and Preacher of Gods Word, in Black-frier's London. EXOD. 15. 3.The LORD is a Man of Warre. CHRYS. ad Pop. Hom. 4.. Antiquitùs Deus Dux erat bellorum. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Ralph Mab, 1626.
TO THE RIGHT VVorshipfull, HVGH HAM∣MERSLY Esquire, One of the Aldermen and Coronels of the Honourable Citie of LON∣DON, and President of the Martiall Company, ex∣ercising Armes in the Artil∣lery Garden: AND, To all the Captaines and Gentle∣men of the said Company, Such va∣lour as may make them victoriously stand against all sorts of Enemies. Worthy President, Captaines, and Gentlemen. AS by a free Election of you all, I was called to preach that which is heere presented to you, so by the first motion &
earnest sollicitation of many of you, I am enduced to publish it. How farre mine owne purpose was from any such pur∣pose, God is my witnesse How farre your desire preuailed to alter that my pur∣pose, this euidence is an apparent eui∣dence. Among other motiues mentioned by you that in the name of the rest were Solliciters in this busines this, which by some of you was alledged, most preuailed with me, that the more common this Sermon was made, the more commo∣dious it might bee to your Company. How my poore paines may adde any ad∣uantage to your important employmēts I know not. This I know, and doe openly acknowledge, & publikely professe, that my heart is set vpon your Artillery C∣pany: I loue it: I admire it: I honour it: I praise God for it: I wil cōtinue to pray to the Lord of Hosts for his blessing vp∣on it: and to my poore power I will doe, what I can for the aduancement therof. As one though a very meane and weake proofe thereof, I doe heere dedicate to you in particular, that which by your meanes, and for your sake is divulged to
all in general. I confesse, that as the mat∣ter therof, so the manner of handling it, is somewhat differing from my ordi∣nary course. For I had respect to the kinde of Auditory before which I spake. Among Souldiers I endeauou∣red to speake souldier-like. If offence bee taken at matter or manner, I shroud my selfe vnder your shields for defence Now that you haue brought me forth into the open field, & fet me vp to be gazed on, & baited at by the dif∣fering censures of diuers censors, leaue me not to shift for my selfe. Be not back∣ward to patronize what you haue beene forward to produce. I may the rather expect all iust defence from you, because by appearing somewhat otherwise in your Assembly then I vse to doe in my vsual Auditory, I take you, worthy Pre∣sident for my president, yea all you vali∣ant Captaines, and other Gentlemen whom I make as one Patrone, for my patterne herein. Me thinkes, o prudent President, when in a forenoone I see you sitting, & giuing aduice among the wise Senators of our Citie, and in an after∣noone
marching before the martiall Gentlemen of your company, me thinks the same man is not the same man. But of old, such hath beene the demeanor of those who haue beene gifted for the one & the other place, to be both graue Se∣nators and braue Souldiers. Such were Brutus, Scipio the one and the other, Camillus, Marius, Pompoy, Cesar, and many other who were both ogati and Armati, prudent Consulls, potent Cap∣taines. The like I may say of all you Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden: You that are, wheresoeuer you are, in your persons the same Persons, doe with that decotum obserue the busines which you are about, as in your ordinary voca∣tion, and Military profession, you seeme to be other and other men. Hereby you manifest your prudence & prouidence. Prudence, by sitting your selues to that which is fit for the present. Prouidence, both by improuing the time of peace, & making the best aduantage therof in the duties of your particular callings, and also by preparing your selues against the time of War, & preuenting the damage
which might otherwise thence ensue. So Nulli qui est deputa∣tus ad ali∣quod offici∣um, li: id per quod so officio incongruu redditur. Vnde cleri∣cis omnino non licet bella gerere &c. Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 40. Artic. 2 well haue I ouer approued this your course, as if my coate and calling had been answerable, long ere this, I had en∣deauoured to haue been of your Artille∣ry Company. But for those whose edu∣cation appertaineth to me, I verily pur∣pose, and openly professe, that if euer any Son of mine be a Citizen of London, & of sufficient ability, I will endeauour to haue him a member of this your Com∣pany. Of which minde I would more persons and parents were. If they were & their childrens minde, when they are of age, answerable thereto, both City & Kingdome would be much more honou∣red, and secured by this and other like Societies. My desire is therefore, that this which is likely to come to the view of many more then at first heard it, may preuaile with those many, to doe as you doe, and to adde able men and a∣uaileable meanes to the aduancement of your company. As for you, the present President, Head & Chiefe of this true∣ly honoured Society, who (if God, accor∣ding to our desire and hope, preserue you
among vs) within these two yeeres and few moneths, is to bee the President, Head, and Chiefe, vnder the Kings Maiesty, of this honourable City, when you come to that high honour, haue this your Company in remembrance and let that See page 15. double honour, which then you shall doe thereto, be to posterity a mo∣numem that in such a yeere the Presi∣dent of the Artillery Society: was in such an honourable place, & of such an honourable minde. To conclude, if any aduancement (O noble President, Cap∣taines and Gentlemen of the Artillery Company) may any way by your desire to haue that, which once your selues heard, lie open to the view of all, be at∣tained, the end of yeelding to your de∣sire is obtained. For this end therefore, humble and hearty prayer is and shall be made (to him that hath power to moue the mindes of all men according to his owne minde) by him that promiseth to be Black-Freyers London. Iul. 10. 1026. Your daily Oratour, WILLIAM GOVGE.
THE DIGNITIE OF CHIVALRY; Set forth in a Sermon preached before the Artillery Com∣pany of London, 13. Iune 1626. 2 CHRON. 8. 9. .THEY were MEN of WARRE. THe Dignity of Chiualry The Sum of Text, & Sermon. (a point very perti∣nent for this present appointment) is the Pearle that is enclosed in the casket of my Text. Hereof that you may take the better view, I will set open this casket in your sight. Bee pleased therefore to take notice of the generall Scope whereat the holy Ghost aimeth in this Chap∣ter: thereby you may discerne that
the forenamed point, The dignity of Chiualry, is not violently wrested, but properly ariseth out of my Text. The Summe of this Chapter is A Declara∣tion of the Magnificence of Salomon. Among other euidences thereof this is one, that his natiue Subiects, Chil∣dren of Israel, THEY were MEN of WARRE. The originall expresseth none but words of weight: Circum∣stantiall words, which are as bonds to knit word to word, it leaueth to bee vnderstood. There are therefore three onely words in the originall, all which set out the Dignity of Chiualry, and that by the Persons, their Property, and Part whereunto they were put, The first word  THEY no∣teth The Parts of the Text. out Singular Persons. The second,  MEN, a Speci∣all Property. The third,  WARRE, a Select imployment. THEY were MEN of WARRE. In the two verses before my Text, it is said, that there were left of the 2 Chron. 8. 7, 8.
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizites, and the Hiuits, and the Ie∣busites, who were not of Israel: and that being left, they were so brought vnder, as Salomon made them to pay tribute. They might therefore haue beene put to any office or worke that the King would: yet were not THEY MEN of WARRE. They were too meane and vnmeet persons, for a fun∣ction Who not fit for Warre. so high and honourable. On the contrary, in the words immediately before my Text, it is said, Of the chil∣dren 2 Chron. 8. 9. of Israel, did Salomon make no seruants for his worke. They being men of better note and name, were reser∣ued for a more honourable imploy∣ment, which my Text thus expresseth, THEY were MEN of WARRE: which words are inferred on the for∣mer, by way of opposition, with this aduersatiue Particle BVT. They were no seruants for worke: BVT THEY were MEN of WARRE. As Who fit for Warre the meaner and baser sort were made seruants for Worke, so the better and excellenter sort were made Souldiers
for Warre. THEY were MEN of WARRE. Nor Hittites, nor Amo∣rites, nor Perizites, nor Hiuits, nor Iebusites, BVT Israelites, THEY were MEN of WARRE. No Slaues, no Captiues, no Aliens, no Forrainers, but Fre men, Free-borno, Natiue Sub∣iects, Naturall Citizens, THEY were MEN of WARRE. Thus this re∣latiue Particle  THEY, as here it is vsed, is to be taken  with an excellency, as importing some emi∣nency of the Persons here meant. This choice then of Persons, maketh much to the Dignity of Chiualry. 2. As there was choice made of The proper∣ty of men of Warre. persons in regard of their outward priuiledge, Israelites, Natiues, Citi∣zens: so also in regard of their inward property. For the second word of my Text,  MEN, though it be oft vsed for mortal men, subiect to many mise∣ries, yet is it also put for  va∣lourous men, and attributed to those choice men which were taken out of the twelue seuerall Tribes of Israel, Numb. 13. 2, 3. and sent to spie the Land of Canaan.
Yea, this very word is twice vsed in that exhortation which the Philistims vse to encourage one another, when they heard that the Arke of the LORD was brought into the hoste of the Is∣raelites: and it is used to set out va∣lour and courage in men. For thus, word for word, it may be translated, 1 Sam. 19.  estte vi∣ri.  Situ viri. Be Men: some translate it thus, Play the MEN: Others thus, Quit you like MEN.  by trāspositiō of a let∣ter, are  Men of place & pow∣er, Commanders, Captaines. Thus the MEN here meant, may be distingui∣shed from the vulgar, common sort of men. The Hebrew put such a diffe∣rence betwixt  and  as the Grecians doe betwixt  and , and the Latines betwixt Vir and Homo.  importeth such an one as hath in him  Fire, Life, and Spi∣rit: but.  a man of the earth. Vir by the Latines is so called of virtue & prowesse: but homo ab humo, as  . Herod. in Poly. of the earth. In Greeke, they most properly are stiled  who are , virtuous, valorous, magnani∣mious:
but all of all sorts . Our English is herein penurious, it wanteth fit words to expresse this dif∣ference: we call all, whether mighty or meane, Men: yet sometimes this word MEN in our tongue hath his Emphasis, as in these and such like phrases, They haue played the MEN. They haue shewed themselues MEN. They are MEN indeed. Thus in the english translation of the Scripture it is vsed, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Quit you like MEN. And 2 Sam. 10. 12. Let vs play the MEN. That the word here in my Text is so to be taken, is euident by comparing this with like places. Those valiant men that came out of 1. Chr. 12. 23. sundrie Tribes to Dauid in Hebron, to turne the Kingdome of Saul to him, of whose courage and prouesse much is spoken, are stiled with the words here in my Text,  Men of —Ver. 38 Ioel 2. 7. Warre. The Prophet Ioel applieth these two phrases  Mighty men, &  Men of War, —3. 9. to the same persons. Where the mag∣nificence of Iehosaphat is set out as Sa∣lomons 2. Chr. 17. 13.
magnificence is here set out, in Ierusalem there are said to bee  Men of Warre, and by way of exposition, they are further stiled  Mighty men of va∣lour. They were therefore choice Men of courage, Men of valour, that are here ment in my Text: so as their Pro∣pertie doth further setout the Digni∣ty of Chiualry, In that, though Na∣tiues onely and Israelites were de∣puted to the imployment here men∣tioned, yet not all sorts of Natiues and Israelites, but such as were well reputed of for virtue and valour, and fit for their imployment. 3. These Natiues of name, select Preparation for warre vnder a Prince of peace. Subiects, Men of mighty minds, to what imployment were they appoin∣ted? Euen to Warre. They were Men of WARRE. What need might there then bee thought to bee of Men of Warre? Had all the Nations round about proclaimed Warre against Is∣rael, as in Ioshuahs time? Or was Ios. 5. 8. Warre within their gates, as before Deborahs daies? Or were their ene∣mies Iudg. 5. 8.
Rulers ouer them, as when Iudg. 15. 11 Sampson began to be a Iudge in Isra∣el? No such matter. What then? Was this the time to take reuenge of Isra∣els enemies for former wrongs, to se∣cure the Land of them, and to bring them vnder subiection? Surely noe: All that was sufficiently done by Da∣uid, 2 Sam. 8. 1. &c. that mighty man of War. Salomon now raigned. Salomon that Prince of Peace. His name proported Peace. For Salomon had his denomination from  Peace. Peace also was promised to be in his daies. Both the forenamed Name of Peace, and also the promise of Peace are expresly mentioned by God himselfe, where he thus speaketh to Dauid, Behold a 1 Chron. 12. 9. Sonne shall be borne to thee, who shall be a man of rest: and I will giue him rest from all his enemies round about: for his name shall be Salomon: and I will giue peace and quietnes to Israel all his daies. This Salomō was herein an espe∣ciall Type of the great Prince of Isa. 9. 6. Ephes. 2. 14 Peace, Christ Iesus, who is Our Peace. In that then, where there was no feare
of danger, nor any instant, vrgent ne∣cessity required, in a time and place of Peace, vnder the raigne of a Prince of Peace, They, of whom you heard before, They were Men of WARRE. Surely preparation for Warre, Exer∣cises thereto, Martiall discipline, Ar∣tillery tacticks, and Military trainings are matters of moment, commenda∣ble and honourable, not to be reiected or neglected, but duly to be respected, and daily practised, at all times, in all places whether of perill or peace. This third and last branch therefore (as it is here set downe) euen the Part which the forenamed Persons performed, amplifieth the Dignity of Chiualry. For, They were Men of WARRE. Thus haue I cleared the generall scope of my Text, and laid open to your view this promised Pearle, the Dignity of Chiualry: by shewing how euery word of my Text eyeth that marke, and euery part and particle thereof much aduanceth the same. With your good patience I purpose to diue yet more deepely into the
depth of my Text. For the three Parts raised out of the three words there∣of, as they haue beene opened before you, (namely, 1. The singular Persons, THEY, 2. Their speciall Property, MEN, 3. Their select Imployment. WAR. THEY were MEN of WARRE) These three points I say, afford to our heedfull consideration these three vsefull Obseruations. 1. The three principall points of the Text. a C Phormio de Imperato∣ris essi o. & omni re mili∣tari sic dix∣isset, vt caete∣ri qui illum audirent ve∣hementer es sent delelati, Annibal in∣tegatus quid de illo Philosopho iudicaret, re∣spondit, ol∣tos se deliros senes sapè vi∣disse, sed qui magis quam Phormio de∣liraret, vidis∣se neminem. Cic. de Orat. lib. 2. The Artilery profession is an ho∣norable function. 2. Military men must be of migh∣ty mindes. 3. In peace to prepare for Warre, is a principall part of prudence. Of these in order: And first of the first. The Artillery profession is an ho∣nourable function. To treate much of the Artillery profession, before this Artilery Compa∣ny would be to act Phormio his part before so many Anniballs as are here present. You all know that the Arti∣lery Profession is a Military Disci∣pline,
whereby choice persons are in∣structed and enabled well to manage weapons of Warre, orderly to march in their due place, wisely to encampe, and skilfully to embattaile. That to bee trained vp hereto, and well exercised herein, is an honourable function, be∣longeth to me, and to the matter in The souldi∣ers professi∣on, and ho∣nourable function. hand, to proue. How it appeareth by my Text to be an honourable function yee haue heard. Hittites, Amorites, Perizites, Hiuites, Iebusites, and such like seruile persons comming from a base ofspring were counted vnworthy hereof. In Israel Israelites, Children of the euer renowned Patriarchs, Abra∣ham, Isaak, and Iaakob, Men of high∣est and greatest esteeme, THEY were Men of Warre. That function where∣of base people were counted vnwor∣thy, and whereunto Men of best ac∣count must be deputed, is  without contradiction an honourable function. To like purpose it is noted that Abraham himselfe, that Prince of God (as hee is for excellency sake Gen. 23. 6.—14. 14. stiled) trained vp in Artillery exerci∣ses,
not bond slaues, bought with his money, but such as were borne and brought vp in his house, whom he had in high esteeme. THEY were Men of Warre. Where as old Ishai, an vn∣derstanding and wise man had eight sonnes, the three most honourable of 1 Sam 17. 12, 13. them all, euen the three eldest, were trained vp in an Artillery profession, THEY were Men of Warre. And though Dauid, being the youngest of all, were by his Father deputed to be a shepheard, yet his braue minde affe∣cting more honourable imployments, 1 Sam. 17. 32. &c. whereunto also he was incited by di∣uine instinct, hee would needs proue to be a man of War, & indeed proued to be an approued Man of War. Saul himselfe though a King, Ionathan, that -18. 27 30. Who of old were men of Warre. louely Ionathan, the Kings Sonne and heire, other of his brethren, all Kings Sons, THEY were Men of Warre. Of old, the best of a Nation, best in blood and birth, as Kings, Princes, Nobles, their children & kindred: best in stature & propernes of body, as the three talle, proper sons of Ishai: best in courage, va∣lour,
and strength, as they whom Saul 1 Sam. 14. 52. chose to follow him: best any other way, THEY were Men of War. What shall I more say? For the time would faile mee to speake in particular of Io∣suah, Gedeon, Iepthah, Dauid, Iehosa∣phat, Hezekiah, Iosiah, and otherlike worthies, royall persons, that were trained vp in the Artillery profession, and thereupon waged many battailes valiantly & victoriously. THEY were Men of War. We reade of few battails in Scripture, wherein Kings, or other chiefe Gouernors had not their place & part. In Assyria, Persia, Greece and Rome the foure great Monarchies of the World, & the most famous States that euer were among the Heathen. all that in any excellēcy surpassed others, & were chosen to high & honourable places, for the most part, THEY were Men of Warre. The like may be noted of other well disciplined and well go∣uerned polities. Most of our Digni∣ties and Titles of honour haue risen from Artillery exercises, and Milita∣ry imployments. Imperatores, Empe∣rors
were at first Generalls of armies: Duces Dukes, were Captaines of Titles of ho∣nour most due to men of warre. bands: Comites Earles, were Liefte∣nants, or Prouosts-Marshalls: Mili∣tes, Knights were choice Souldiers: Equites, Esquires were horsemen in Warre. These and other like honoura∣ble titles were at first giuen to men, because THEY were Men of Warre. The honour of Knight-hood is knowne properly to belong to such as haue well deserued in Warre. Our Ancestors got their greatest renowne Maiores nostri sum∣mam rebus bellicis re∣tulere glo ria. Amb. Offic. l. 1. c. 35. by warlike affaires. Can any now de∣nie the Artillery profession to haue beene accounted an honourable fun∣ction? Many honourable parts and endowments are requisite to make a man expert in the Artillery profession, as Soundnesse of iudgement, Sharpe∣nesse Things re∣quisite to make men fit sro War. of wit, Quicknesse of conceit, Stoutnesse and courage of minde, Vn∣dantednesse in danger, Discretion mix∣ed with passion, Prudence, Patience, Ability and Agility of body, and of the seuerall parts thereof, with the like: all which doe demonstrate that
the function whereunto they are re∣quired, is an honourable function. Matter both of Enducement and also of Encouragement doth this first obseruation afford. Enducement to men of place, Double ho∣nour due to such as exercise Armes. power, and parts, to Gouernours, to Nobles, to Rich men, to all that can any way adde any honour to this profession, to doe what they can to the aduancement of that which is in it selfe so honourable as hath beene shewed, and worthy of all the honour that can be done vnto it. The Apostle maketh mention of a double honour. 1 Tim. 517. That double honour is Countenance and Maintenance: both which are most due to this profession: and most meete it is that both be giuen thereto. Honos alit artes. Cic. Tusc. quaest. lib. 1. By this double honour haue all pro∣fessions in all ages beene brought to that perfection whereunto in any kinde they haue attained. The respect and reward which of old hath beene afforded to valourous, & couragious, well exercised, and well experienced Captaines and Souldiers in the foure
forenamed Monarchies made them so abound with Men of Warre, as the whole world was made to tremble at the heare-say of them. When once a question was moued, why after Uir∣gils time there were no more such ex∣cellent Poets as he was, such an an∣swer as this was made. Sint Mea∣nates non derunt Flacce Marones: Virgilium∣que tibi vel tua rura dabunt. Martial l. 8. Epigr. 56. Good Pots thriue where liberall Patrons liue. Their countries will another Virgil giue. An answer very pertinent to the point in hand: and fitly it may be ap∣plied to Captaines & Souldiers, who vndoubtedly will abound in number, and grow very expert in all warlike exercises where they are plentifully sustained, and highly honoured. Were Artillery Gardens, and Military Fields for Martiall discipline and war∣like trainings, fostered and honoured thorow-out this land, as it is meete they should be, Greece could haue no cause to boast before England of her Achilles, Diomedes, Themistocles; Pe∣ricles, Pyrrhus, &c. nor Rome of her
Scipioes, Horatij, Fabij, Pompeis, or Caesars. Meanes among vs are more wanting then Men, or Minds. Oh that this Enducement might preuaile with Men of Meanes to afford the ho∣nour of Regard, and honour of Re∣ward to this Artillery profession which is so worthy of double ho∣nour! The Encouragement concerneth Encourage∣ment to Ar∣tillery Gét. you, the Commanders and other Members of this commendable and honourable Company. Howsoeuer your Profession and practise bee reie∣cted or neglected by such as ought most to respect it, yet it being honou∣rable in it selfe, be encouraged to goe on therein. The practise of a good thing is then most commendable, when, for the goodnesse of it, it is practised. The puissant Princesse De∣borah, that rose vp a Mother in Isra∣el, and a Iudge therein, with admira∣tion said, of such as offered them∣selues willingly, My heart is on them. Iudg. 5. 9. Had your Mother London, or your Grand-mother England a tongue to
expresse her minde, shee would with like approbation say to you, that shew your selues not onely  wil∣ling, but all  forward to all Mar∣tiall exercises, My heart is on you: yea the heart of him that loueth them that doe good things cheerefully and willingly, and can and will honour them that honour him, his heart is on you. Hee accepteth the good things which are done of the doers owne ac∣cord, without compulsion by others, or remuneration from others, hee ac∣cepteth them as done for his owne sake. For Compare Rom 13. 5 with 1 Pet. 2. 13. 2 Chron. 17 16. that which is done for conscience sake, is done for the Lords sake. In this respect it is said of Ama∣siah the sonne of Zichri a great Cap∣taine and Commander of two hundred thousand mighty men of valour, vnder King Iehosaphat, that he willingly offe∣red himselfe vnto the Lord: that is, he vndertaking his function willingly, he did it as to the Lord. Thus of you that are of the same minde it may bee said, yee offer your selues willingly to the Lord. And will not the Lord
graciously accept such? Abraham Quoniam sibi merce∣dem ab ho∣mine non quaesiuit, à deo accepit, sicut legi∣mus &c. Ambr. de Abr. Pat. l. 1. c. 3. Motiue to draw more to the Ar∣tillery Gar∣den. who in this kinde nor expected nor accepted reward of man, heard God thus speaking to him, Feare not, Abraham: I am thy shield, and thine exceeding great reward. Giue me leaue to extend this En∣couragement, to such as are not yet of your Fraternity, nor haue yet giuen their names to be of your Societie, I meane such as are in the flowre of their age, of sufficient stature and strength, well able to afford time and meanes for Artillery exercises, to offer themselues readily and cheerefully to this honourable seruice. The time which may be, and vsually is spared from your particular callings cannot be better spent, (exceptis semper ex∣cipiendis, except duties of piety and charity, whereby all other things are seasoned and sanctified) I say vacant houres cannot better be spent then in the Artillery Garden, and in the pra∣ctise of Martiall discipline there exer∣cised, as shall Page 40. afterwards bee more fully cleared.
But thus much of the first point, your honourable Function. The next concerning your Ualou∣rous Disposition, is this. Military Men must be of mighty mindes. They must bee Men indeed, Valour re∣quisite for Souldiers. and able to play the Men. The signe of difference betwixt such as were fit, and vnfit for Warre, that God caused Gedeon to obserue for re∣taining some, and dismissing o∣thers, tendeth to this purpose. The signe was this; They which lapped wa∣ter with their tongues were entertai∣ned: Iudg. 7. 5. Expoun∣ded. They which kneeled downe to drinke were cashiered. The Reason was this. They that kneeled downe to drinke, manifested thereby a lus∣kish, fluggish disposition, and desire to soope vp their bellies full. The o∣ther that tooke vp water in their hands, and lapped it with their tongues, shewed that their minde was so on their work which they had to doe, as they would nor tarry to kneele downe; they would onely lap and be gone, a little for present
necessity, so much as might some∣what slacke their thirst, and refresh them, was sufficient. Gods appoin∣ting such onely to bee retained for Warre, proueth the point in hand. Much more the expresse precepts which by God himselfe and his Mini∣sters, were giuen vnto those that were set apart for Warre, to be valiant, and couragious. When God deputed Io∣shuah to be Generall ouer all Israel, he gaue him this expresse charge, Bee Ios. 1. 6. strong and of a good courage: which he further thus enforceth, Haue not I —9. commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage: Be not afraid, neither bee thou dismated. The like charge did Moses in the name of the Lord giue to all Israel, that were deputed to Warre, in these words; Be strong and of a good courage, feare not, nor be Deut 31. 7 afraid of them. Yea, God ordained it for a perpetuall Law, that when his people were to goe to Warre, this Proclamation should be made, What Deut. 20. 8 man is there that is fearefull and faint∣hearted, let him goe and returne vnto
his house. This Law God commanded Gideon, to proclaime before his ar∣mie. Iudg. 7. 3. The equity thereof was so cleare∣ly discerned by the very light of na∣ture, as many of the heathen put it in practise, by name Iphicrates the Athe∣nian, and Epaminondas the Theban. If such as are fearefull and saint-hear∣ted be not fit for Warre, neither are they fit to bee trained vp in Martiall exercises. Most meete it is that Mi∣litary Men be of mighty mindes. It is vsuall with the holy Ghost to set De Israeli∣tarum vir∣tute in bel∣lis gerendis lege Aug. de Mirab. S. Script. l. 2 c. 34. out such men as were trained vp and set apart to Warre, to set them out by their power and prowesse. Of those foure hundred thousand men, that out of all the Tribes of Isra∣el were chosen to fight against Benia∣min and Gibeah, of euery one of them it is said that he was  Iudg 20. 17  Uir belli, a true Man of Warre, a va∣liant, a mighty man. Of those many hundred thousands which Ioab num∣bred in Dauids time, it is said that they were valiant men that drew swords, euen euery one of them (as
the Hebrew phrase implyeth.) And  of those many hundred thousands also which out of Iudah & Israel were ga∣thered together in two armies to fight one against another in Abijahs, and Ieroboams time, it is said that they 2 Chron. 13. 3. were The He∣brew is very emphaticall,  the emphasis whereof be∣ing obser∣ued by the LXX. is thus expressed.  mighty in might. 2 Sam. 10. 17. 1. Sam. 14. 52. valiant men of Warre, mighty men of valour: which commendation is also giuen to those many troopes of trained souldiers which Iehosaphat maintained in Ierusalem, 2 Chron. 17. 13. When Dauid purposed to take vengeance of Ammon for the indigni∣ty and ignominy which was offered to his Ambassadours, he sent Ioah and all the Hoste of the Mighty men a∣gainst them. Before the good Spirit of God left Saul, when hee saw any strong man, or any valiant man, hee tooke him vnto him, namely to traine him vp in Martiall discipline. Of Da∣uid 2 Sam. 17. 10. himselfe, and of such as followed him, it is said, that all Israel knew that he was a mighty man, and they vali∣ant men. And of those that came to him in Ziklag it is said that they were 1 Chron. 12. 1. 2 8, 21 Mighty Men, mighty men of valour,
that could vse both the right hand and the left: men of might; men of Warre; fit for the battell: that could handle shield and buckler: whose faces were like the faces of Lyons, &c. Doth not this frequent mention of the might, and valour of such as were for War, shew that they that take vpon them to bee Military men, must bee of mighty mindes: and that timerous, weake, and feeble persons are not fit for the Artillery profession? Where GOD first enacted the fore-named Law, that no fearefull persons should goe to Warre, he rendereth this Rea∣son, Lest his brethrens heart faine like Deut. 20. 8. his. Lamentable experience hath gi∣uen too great euidence of the truth Damage of timerous Souldiers. hereof. A few white-liuerd, faint∣hearted Souldiers haue oft beene the ruine of a great strong Army, which hath beene put to rout by reason of their fainting, and yeelding. So as such men are more fit to stoope downe to a sythe then to take vp a sword, to lift a pitchforke then to tosse a picke, to handle a mattock then
to hold a musket, and to carrie a bush-bill rather then a battle-axe. But on the other side, of such vse are Numerauit 318. Vi sci∣as non quā∣titatem nu∣meri sed meritum electionis expressum. Ambr. de Abr. Pair. l. 1. c. 3. 2 Sam. 23. 8, 9. &c. 1 Chron. 12. 14. valiant men and valourous mindes, as their courage may supply the want of number: and though they bee but few, not feare the face of many. It is noted that Abraham armed three hundred and eighteene, to expresse not the number of many, but the worth of choice ones. Well weigh the mighty and great exploits that were atchieued by Dauids Worthies, by reason of their valour and courage, and you shall finde, that a few coura∣gious men to great armies of cowards are as so many Lyons to whole heards of deere: Fiue may chase an hun∣dred, Leuit. 26. 8 and an hundred put tenne thou∣sand to slight. Is it not then most meete that Military Men bee of mighty mindes In applying this point, I will giue Who vale∣rous who timerous. you a diuine direction for attaining to that which hath beene proued to bee so requisite, valour and courage. The direction is grounded on one of Salo∣mons
Prouerbe, which is this, The Pro. 28. 1. wicked slie when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a Lyon. Righteousnesse then maketh men va∣lorous, Quis tam sortis quam sanctus. Amb. Offic. l. 1. c. 39. Who to be accounted righteous. wickednesse timerous. They who know who are righteous, who wicked, cannot but acknowledge the truth of this prouerbe. A righteous man cannot be heere thought to bee such an one as hath in euery part, point, and degree fulfilled the Law of Psal. 14. 3. Rom 3. 10 Impauidus profecto miles, & omni ex parte secu∣rus, qui vt corpus ser∣ro. sic ani∣mum fidei lorica in∣duitur, vtrius{que} ni∣mirum in∣dutus armis, nee dae mone timet. nec hominem. Bern serm. ad Mil. Temp. c. 1. righteousnesse according to the exact rule thereof. So there is none righte∣ous: no not one. But in Gospel-phrase hee is accounted righteous, that by true Faith applying to his soule the bloud of Christ, for purging away all his vnrighteousnesse, and laying hold on Christs righteousnesse to be iustifi∣ed thereby, doth his vtter most endea∣uour to keepe a cleere conscience be∣fore God and Man. This man of all others must needs be the most valou∣rous, whose soule is fenced with the brest-plate of righteousnesse, and shield of Faith, as well as his body with armour and weapons of steele.
He feareth nor Diuell nor Man. His conscience will make him fight in none but a good cause. His Faith will make him couragious in that cause. If in his body he be wounded, hee hath Pro. 18. 14 a Spirit to sustaine his infirmity. No passion can so supply the want of bloud and support a man, as this Spi∣rit. Might of minde may ouercome S Laurentius  ignis naturā.  Ossic. l 1 c. 41 Fisi hostes no perimant, ul∣lum tamen ad animas periculum migrat &c. Crys Hom. 7. in 1 Tim c. 2. Siue in lecto, siue in bello qu motur, preciosa et sine dubio in conspectu do∣num mors sinctorum. Caterum in bello taniò profecto pre∣tiosior quan∣t gloriosior. Bern Loc. citat. the force of fire. But if the earthen vessell of his body bee so broken as it can no longer retaine this spirit, then flieth it vpward to the place of rest and triumph, passage being made for that righteous soule to ascend to the socie∣ty of the soules of iust men made per∣fect: so as the supposed conquest ouer such an one is the cause of his tri∣umph, and maketh him more then a Conqueror. The death of his Saints is pretious in the sight of the Lord. But in Warre so much more pretious it is, by how much more glorious. Get Faith therefore and a good consci∣ence, get them, and keepe them, and they will keepe you from faint hear∣tednesse: they will put life, and spirit,
and virtue, and valour into you: they will make you fit for the Artillery profession: they will make you Men indeed, true military men, of mighty mindes. On the contrary side, A wicked Who to be accounted wicked. man must not euery one bee accoun∣ted, that hath committed any sin, (for All haue sinned:) but such an one Rom 3 23. as loueth wickednesse, and liueth therein, and that without true repen∣tance. Faith which is accompanied with repentance, receiueth absoluti∣on from God. Absolution from God maketh sinnes to bee as not commit∣ted. For the bloud of Christ, which 1 Iob. 1. 7. clenseth vs from all sinne, clenseth all that beleeue and repent. But infide∣lity, and impenitency lay all sinnes open to the wrath and vengeance of God. Knowledge and conscience thereof cannot but fill the soule with many feares and terrors: whence it commeth to passe that such wicked men feare & flie, when none pursueth them. Thus much is expresly threatned against such wicked men. I will send,
saith God, a faintnes into their hearts, Leu. 16. 36 and the sound of a shaken lease shall chase them, and they shall flie as flying from a sword, and they shall fall when none pursueth, &c. It was the speech of the valourous Earle of Essex, that D. Barlow in his Ser∣mon prea∣ched at Pauls Crosse, March 1. 1600. be∣ing the next Sun∣day after the execu∣tion of the late Earle of Essex. Sometimes in the field encountering the enemy, the weight of his sinnes lying heauy vpon his conscience, being not re∣conciled to God, quelled his spirits, and made him the most timerous and feare∣full man that might bee. Take heede therefore O yee Captaines, Comman∣ders, and other Members of the Ar∣tillery Company, take heede, as you would haue your inward disposition fit for your outward profession, of suffering sin to lie vpon your soules. Let your function bee a motiue to make you trie the truth of your conuersion. Be yee righteous, that you may bee indeede couragi∣ous. And to take occasion from your Courage a∣gainst spi∣rituall ene∣mies. externall profession to put you in minde of your spirituall condition, which is, to be Souldiers of Christs
bands, vnder his colours, whose Ar∣tillery Garden is the Church Mili∣tant, where your Martiall discipline in which you are daily trained vp, is not for recreation and pastime, but in very good earnest, to conquer, vnlesse you will be conquered, and that in a combate of great consequence, wherein no earthly, but an heauenly inheritance is fought for, and for at∣taining thereto not liberty of this world, but of the world to come, not a temporall, but eternal life is in great hazard. If yee ouercome, yee are free for euer, and gaine an inheritance in∣corruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 4 and vndefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserued in heauen. If yee bee ouercome, yee are perpetuall slaues to Satan, that malicious enemie, who will hold you with euerlasting chaines vnder darkenesse in torture and torment endlesse and ease-lesse, merci lesse and remedilesse. To put you in minde, I say, of this your spiri∣tuall condition, know that if valour, and the fore-mentioned ground thereof be so requisite, as hath beene
shewed, against bodily enemies, which are but flesh and blood, how much more against spirituall enemies, which are not flesh and blood, but prin∣cipalities and powers. These especial∣ly, wee ought to resist stedfast in the Faith. The chiefe spirituall enemie of our soules, the Diuell, from whom all our other spirituall enemies re∣ceiue their strength and courage, is like a Wolfe, and that as in fiercenes, so in fearefulnesse. A Wolfe, if he be stoutly resisted, will flie away: but if he be fearefully shunned or yeelded vnto, then hee will the more fiercely Iam. 4. 7. Libentius te insuitur aduersarius fugientem, qum susti∣neat repug∣nantem: & audaius in∣fi à tergo quam resistat in faciem. Bern. Epist. 1. ad Rob Ne∣pot. suum. Ephes. 6. 10 11. assault, and more greedily deuoure. Euen so the Diuell: Resist the Diuell and he will slie from you. Giue place, and yeeld, and he wil the more eager∣ly persue, and the more easily pre∣uaile. Neither, if he preuaile, will he any whit the more spare thee for thy yeelding to him, but rather the more proudly insult ouer thee. Wherefore, my Brethren, bee strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: Put on the whole armour of GOD, that yee
may be able to stand against the wiles of the Diuell. Being thus armed, Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like 1 Cor. 16. 13. men, and be strong: stand couragiously and yee shall stand victoriously. Hitherto ye haue heard of the Ho∣nour of your profession, and of the Va∣lour required by virtue thereof. The last point noteth the necessity and be∣nefit thereof, which is this, In peace to prepare for Warre, is a principall part of prudence. Warre to be prepared for in Peace. The most prudent Prince that euer gouerned people, put in practise this point of policie: euen Salomon, to whom God said, I haue giuen thee a wise & an vnderstanding heart, so that 1 King 3. 12. there was none like thee before thee, nei∣ther after thee shall any arise like thee. This Salomon enioyed much peace, & had a promise to enioy peace all his daies, and had no cause to feare any assaults or inuasions of enemies, all the nations round about being brought vnder by his Father Dauid: Yet this Prince of Peace built senced cities with walles, gates and barres, 2 Chron. 8 5, 6, 9.
and chariot-cities, and cities of horse∣men, and had his trained men of War, which are heere noted in my Text; yea, to shew his store of warlike pro∣uision, it is expressely noted, that hee had forty thousand stalles of horses for 1 King 4. 26. 2 Chron. 1. 14. his chariots, a thousand foure hundred chariots, and twelue thousand horse men. The first Father of that stocke, wise Abraham, whose house was a Abrahams Artillery Garden. place of peace, (for the feare of God fell vpon all nations round about him, they honoured and reuerenced him, they accounted him a Prince of God) yet had this Abraham his Artillery Garden, wherein were trained vp and Gen. 14. 14 The num∣ber by Pa∣tent gran∣ted to the Artillery Company of London, is 00. which number was not full at the time of preaching this Ser∣mon. fitted for Warre, such as were borne and brought vp in his house: the num∣ber of which Company, I suppose was greater then the number of your Company. For at once on a sudden he armed and led to the Warre more then three hundred trained men. And it is not likely that hee left his house destitute of all defence. He had que∣stionlesse many more of that his Artil∣lery Company. Now note the benefit
hereof. On a sudden, in a time of ne∣cessity, and case of extremity, hee had them ready to rescue fiue Kings, that were ouerthrowne by their enemies. To presse this patterne yet further for the point in hand, the holy Ghost noteth that Melchizedeck, King of Salem, whose name declared him to be a King of Righteousnesse, whose na∣tion shewed him to bee a Prince of Peace, this Melchizedeck King of Gen. 14. 18 19. 20. Heb 7. 1. 2 . Salem▪ met Abraham with his sore∣named troopes, blessed him and them, gaue good entertainement to them al, and congratulated their returne, gi∣uing thereby an euident demonstrati∣on of his approbation of Abrahams prouidence and prudence in maintai∣ning an Artillery garden for his house. The condition of Iehosaphats King∣dome (who was the fourth Son that by lineall descent came from Salomon, and sate on his Throne) was much like to Salomons. For the feare of the Lord was vpon all the kingdomes of the land 2 Chron. 17. 10, 11, 13 &c. that were round about Iudah, so that they made no War against Iehosaphat:
But in testimony of amity, they sent him yeere after yeere many presents: Yet he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Iudah, and set garrisons in the Land, and had eleuen hundred and threescore thousand Men of Warre, mighty men of valour that waited on him, besides those whom hee put in the fenced cities thorow out all Iudah. Ad∣mirable it is, and (but that the word of truth records it) incredible, that in so small a Kingdome as Iudah was, there should be so many trained, ex∣pert, valiant men of Warre, as were in Iehosaphats time. When Iudah and all Israel were ioyned together, euen all the twelue Tribes in one Kingdome, that Kingdome was nothing so spati∣ous as England is. For some of our shires are larger then some of their Tribes were: and yet our shires are in number aboue foure times more then their Tribes were: For wee haue In En∣gland 39. n Wales 13. aboue foure times twelue shires. How farre then doe the three King∣domes vnder the Dominion of our Soueraigne, England, Scotland and
Ireland, how farre doe they exceede in spatiousnesse, the Kingdome of Ie∣hosaphat? Yet question may bee made, whether in these three King∣domes, there be so many score thou∣sands of trained Souldiers, well disci∣plined men of Warre, mighty men of valour, as there were hūdred thousāds in Iudah. We account twenty or thir∣ty thousand a great Army: fiftie thou∣sand a royall Army. What then an hundred thousand? What an hundred thousand eleuen times multiplied, and threescore thousand added there∣to? All these were vnder their Cap∣taines, by name, Ready fr Warre, Wai∣ting on the King, to bee sent forth at his command: and yet all the fenced cities, which were very many, well replenished with Garrisons, ouer and aboue those 1160000. Surely they counted it an honour and safety to their land to haue store of trained souldiers, men expert, and ready for Warre at all times. Therefore frequent mention is made thereof. To omit other particulars, in Dauids time, Ioah
gaue vp the number and summe of fineteene hundred and seuentie thou∣sand 1 Chron. 21. 5. men of Warre, and yet left two Tribes vnnumbred. Surely there must needs be many Artillery Gardens, and they well replenished, Martiall disci∣pline must needs be there much exer∣cised, where were so many thousands, yea hundred thousands trained vp to Warre. If the wiseman might send men to the Ants to learne of them to Pro. 6. 6. &c. prouide meate in the summer, and to gather foode in the haruest, much bet∣ter may men be sent to such worthy patternes as were guided and appro∣ued by God, to bee alwaies prouided with expert Souldiers trained vp to War, euen in times of peace. A maine difference is herein put betwixt wise∣men and footes. We haue a prouer be that saith, A foote will take his cloake in fowle weather. But a wiseman takes it with him at all times. He knoweth that a bright sun-shine day may bee soone turned into a cloudy rainy day. Peace is not like the rumoue able mountaines, but rather like to the va∣riable
skie. Wisedome teacheth men to forecast the worst, that they may be prouided against the word, yea and thereby preuent the worst. It in an old and true Motto, Pax armis, Peace is procured, preseued, seured by preparations and pouisions for War. Where are many Antillery Gardens, and they much frequented, and Mar∣tiall Benefits of Antillery Gardens. discipline therein daily and duly exercised, Amitie with such King∣domes will be earnestly desired, and welcomely embraced: Kings of such Kingdomes will be admired of their friends, and feared of their foes: Sub∣iects of such Kingdomes wil finde lust and kinde entertainement in forraine parts: Natiues and Allies will be scu∣red: All manner of callings freely ex∣ercised: Lands & inheritances quietly enioyed: Enemies dented: Inuasions and insurrections preuented: and ma∣ny, many euills auoided. They who reuerence nor God nor man, where they see or heare of an our-mastering power, will be kept within compasset and though conscience doe, not alter
their inward disposition, yet con∣straint will order their outward con∣uersation. But on the contrary, by The da∣mage of neglecting Armes. fearelesse, and carelesse security, by neglect of Artillery and Military exer∣cises, by want of men meete for War, whole Cities, and Kingdomes are oft made a bootie and prey to their ene∣mies, and suddenly ruinated. Instance Laish, they were a people that were at Iudg. 18. 27. quiet and secure, and the Danites on a sudden smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt their Cities with fire. For a citie and nation to bee without Artillery Gardens, is as dan∣gerous as for a traueller to be without a sword. If the fore-mentioned patternes of prudent Princes, and wise States-men, recorded & approued in Gods Word, for training vp armies of men in war∣like exercises, and that in times and places of peace: If the many great be∣nefits which thereby arise and acrue to a Land and Kingdome, and the many great mischiefes which are like to follow, vpon a carelesse neglect
thereof, bee motiues of force, motiues of force are not wanting to proue, that, In peace to prepare for Warre, is a principall part of prudence. The Application of this point, Iustificatiō of Artiller; exercises. doth as neerely concerne this Artillery Company, as any of the former, both for iustification, and also for approba∣tion and commendation thereof. Were our daies more halcyon, more quiet, and peaceable then they are, or were they more free from feare of danger then they are, yet were your Artillery exercises lawfull, needfull, vsefull. True it is, that they are not in pitcht fields, pede pes, & cuspide cuspis, face to face, foot to foot, speare to speare against enemies. They are in a quiet Citie, in a time of peace among your selues. They are like the Olympian games (instituted by potent and prudent Hercules) and the Isthmi∣an Plutarch. in Vita Thesei. sports (ordained by Theseus in imi∣tation of Hercules) as delightsome preparations for Warre. They are like to the Pyrrick dancing which was in∣uented . Athen. by Pyrrhus, called armed dan∣cing,
because it was performed by . Plat. men clad in armour, and warlike dan∣cing, because it was a representation of sundry kindes of battailes, and a meanes to make them well to weld their Armour in Warre. They are like those Warre-like sports and pastimes Xenoph. de Cyri. instit. lib. 1. Idem de Cyri min. Exped. l. 5. which were practised by Cyrus when he was a youth, and by his coequalls, and play-fellowes. They are delight∣some recreations. But what then? Are they therefore not lawfull? Or not needfull? Or not vsefull? Hee is too seuere and censorious, and goeth be∣yond the liberty of Gods Word, that condemneth all recreations, all de∣lightsome pastimes. He is too impro∣uident and imprudent, that concei∣ueth nothing needfull or vsefull, whereof there is not necessary vse in that present and instant time wherein it is vsed. Were your Artillery exercises onely for recreati∣on, they are the best recreations that can be vsed. Were there at this time no need or vse of them, they may bee hereafter of absolute necessity. De∣light
in the things which men doe, swalloweth vp the paines that is taken about them, makes men the more dili∣gent and constant in their exercises, and bringeth them to the greater ex∣perience and perfection therein. Not onely expert souldiers, but experien∣ced Captaines also are made by Mili∣tary recreations vsed in Artillery Gar∣dens. So as if suddenly Armies were to be raised of more men then all the Military Companies can afford, yeo might sufficient store of Cap∣taines, and other Commanders and officers be taken out of your compa∣nies to gouerne and guide, to instruct and encourage such as for want of former exercising were altogether in∣experienced. Of the fiftie thousand that out of Zabulen came to Dauid in Hebron, by way of commendation, it is said that they could set a battell in aray, & leade an Army. This implieth, 1 Chron. 12. 33 38. that by their practising of Artillery exercises, they were all able to leade, and order armies, to set them in aray, & goe before them Besides the policy
of other nations and ages, our Ance∣stors well discerned the neede, vse, and benefit of such recreations as might fit men for Warre: which moued them to make such strict Statute Lawes for the exercise of shooting, as they did: For, 1. Euery Master of a Family (ex∣cept 9. Statute 33. yeare of Hen 8. spirituall men, and Iustices of one Bench or other) was to exercise shooting himselfe. 2. He was to keepe bowes and ar∣rowes continually in his house. 3. Hee was to bring vp those that were in his house in the exercise of shooting. 4. If hee suffered any betwixt the age of seuen and seuenteene, sonne or seruant to abide in his house with∣out bow or arrowes a moneth toge∣ther, for euery such default hee was to pay forty shillings. 5. If a seruant tooke wages, his Master might buy him bow, and ar∣rowes, and deduct the price out of his wages. 6. If any man-seruant betwixt the
yeeres of seuenteene and threescore, that took wages, were a moneth with∣out bow and arrowes, for euery such default hee forfeited six shillings and eight pence. In those daies gunnes (the sure and soare messengers of death) were not so in vse as now they are. Strength and skill in shooting was it that made our english nation famous for Warre. Their exercise therof in time of peace, and that for recreation, made them so expert, as they were, therein, at times of Warre. The Gen 48. 22. Ios. 24. 12. 1 King. 22. 34. 2 King. 6. 22.—9. 24.—13 15. &c. 1 Chron. 5. 18.—8 40.—12. 2.—17. 17.—26. 14.—35. 13. Psal. 44. 6.—76. 3. frequent mention of bowes and arrowes, in Scripture, as in∣struments of Warre, sheweth that of antient time they haue beene vsed to that purpose: and 1 Sam. 20 20. Ionathans vsing his bow and arrowes for recreation, sheweth that of old among Gods people such recreations were vsed as might the better fit men to War. The men of Gibeah without question from their youth were exercised in sport, to sling stones at a marke, or else they could neuer haue attained to such ex∣traordinary skill, as to Iudg. 20. 16. sling stones at
an haires bredth and not faile. The skil which the men of Beniamin (of which Tribe those Gibeonites were) are after this noted to haue in slinging stones with the right and left hand, sheweth, 1 Chron. 12 2. that this was an vsuall exercise of the youth and men of that Tribe. Such recreations in peace as are pre∣parations vnto Warre, iustly deserue to be reckoned vp among those neces∣sarie vocations whereby Polities are preserued: and while you are exerci∣sing your selues therein, you are im∣ployed in your calling, and you goe on in that way, wherein God promiseth to giue his Angels charge ouer you, to Psal. 91. 11 12. beare you vp in their hands, least you dash your feete against a stone. When I duely weigh that little which hath beene said, and withall consider how much more might bee said of, and for the warrant, honour, need, vse, and benefit of your Artillery profession, I cannot sfficiently won∣der at the blindnesse, carelesnesse, im∣prouidence, and security of this our age, in neglecting and disrespecting a
matter of so great consequence, so nearely concerning the glory, tran∣quillity, and safety of the whole land, and of all the societies and seuerall persons therein. Me thinkes that it is more then meete that euery Citie and Corporation, if not euery Towne and Village throughout the Land, should haue an Artillery Garden: and that the great populous Cities, especially LONDON, should haue as many Ar∣tillery Gardens, as it hath Wards: and that publique allowances should bee afforded to such as willingly offer themselues to these Militarie exerci∣ses. I haue heard of liberall legacies, & bountiful donations giuen for ma∣king Cawsies, mending High-waies, building Bridges, and other such like workes, but little or nothing for pur∣chasing and maintaining Artillerie Gardens, and the Warre-like exerci∣ses appertaining thereto. I cannot therefore much wonder that there are no more such Companies, as yours is, and no more of your company. But because euery rare thing is pretious, I
reioyce that you are of those, who, by Quiae omne rarum pre∣tiosum, gau∣deo te de illis esse, qui quano ra∣riores, tanto apparebūt gloriosiores. Bern. ep. 1. ad Rob. p. suum. how much the more rare they are, by so much the more glorious they ap∣peare to be. By you it must be effected, if it be effected, that the antient en∣glish name and Renowne for Martiall discipline be preserued (if not repaired also) & propagated to posterity. Be not therefore now slacke in prosecuting that which you haue so wel begun. Be diligent to keepe your training daies, & to exercise your armes, that such as by much practise are well experienced may be presidents and patternes to o∣thers: and those others by like constāt practise may attaine to answerable ex∣perience. Let no discouragements dis∣may you. The lesse encouragemēt you haue from others, the greater is your praise, that so willingly take such paines at your own cost to make your selues seruiceable for the defence, se∣curity, and safety of the Land & King∣dome where you liue. In you my Text is in our daies & Land verified; for of you it may be truely said, THEY were MEN of WARRE. FINIS.
