1233 99836371 637
NEWES FROM ITALY OF A SECOND MOSES OR, THE LIFE OF GALEACIVS CARACCIOLVS the noble Mar∣quesse of Vico. Containing the story of his admirable con∣uersion from popery, and his forsaking of a rich Marquesse dome for the Gospels sake. Written first in Italian, thence translated into latin by reuerend Beza, and for the benefit of our people put into English: and now published BY W. CRASHAVV Batcheler in Diuinitie, and Prea∣cher at the Temple. In memoria sempiterna erit Iusius. PSALME. 112. The iust shalf be had in an euerlasting remembrance. Printed by H. B. for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint Dunstans Church∣yard in Fleetestreete. 1608.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MY VERY GOOD LORD, ED∣mund Lord Sheffeild, Lord Lieutenant in the North, and Lord President of his Highnes Counsell there, of the noble order of the Garter: and to the right ho∣nourable and religious Ladies, the Lady Dowglasse his mother, and Lady Vrsula his wife, and to all the vertuous of-spring of that noble race, Grace and Peace, &c. GIVE me leaue (right Honourable) to put you all in one Epistle, whom God and nature haue linked so well toge∣ther: Nature in the neerest bond, and God in the holiest Religion. For a simple new-yeares gift, I present you with as strange a story, as (out of the holy stories) was euer heard. Will your Honours haue the whole in briefe, a∣fore it be laid downe at large? Thus it is. Galeacius Caracciolus sonne and heire apparent to Calantonius, Mar∣quesse of Vicum in Naples, bred, borne, and brought vp in Popery, a Courti∣er to the Emperour Charles the fift, nephew to the Pope Paul the fourth, being married to the Duke of Nucernes daughter, and hauing by her six goodly chil∣dren; at a Sermon of Peter Martyrs was first touched, after by reading Scrip∣ture and other good meanes, was fully conuerted: laboured with his Lady, but could not perswade her. Therefore that he might enioy Christ, and serue him with a quiet conscience, he left the lands, liuings, and honoures of a Marques∣dome, the comsorts of his Lady and children, the pleasures of Italy, his credit with the Emperour, his kinred with the Pope, and forsaking all for the loue of Iesus Christ, came to Geneua, and there liued a poore and meane, but yet an ho∣nourable and an holy life for fortie yeares. And though his father, his Lady, his kinsemen; yea the Emperour and the Pope did all they could to reclaime him, yet continued he constant to the end, and liued and died the blessed seruant of God, about fifteene yeares agoe, leauing behind him a rare example to all ages. This (right Houourable) is a briefe of the whole, and it is a story admirable and imitable if any other in this later age of the world. Some vse to craue of great personages, not to respect the gift but the gi∣uer: but in this case I contrariwise intreat your honours, not to respect the giuer but the gift: of the giuer I say enough if I say nothing; but of the gift,
I meane of noble Galeacius, I say too little, when I haue said all I can. But this I must needs say: So religions, so noble, so vertuous was the man, so resolute, so holy, so heroicall was the fact, so strange the beginning, so ad∣mirable and extraordinary the perseuerance, as if the story were not de∣based by the rudenes of my translation; I durst say, none so great but might reade it, nor so good but might follow it. I may say much ratherGenes. 47. then Iacob, Few and euill haue my das beene: Yet in these few daies of mine something haue I seene; more haue I read, more haue I heard; yet neuer saw I, heard I, or read I any example (al things laid together) more neerely seconding the example of Moses then this, of this most renowned Mar∣quesse Galeacius. Moses was the adopted sonne of a Kings daughter: Ga∣leacius the naturall sonne, and heire apparent to a Marquesse: Mosesa Courtier in the Court of Pharaoh: Galeacius in the Court of the Emperour Charles the fift: Moses by adoption a kinne to a Queene: Galeacius by mar∣riage a kinne to a Duke: by blood, sonne to a Marquesse, nephew to a Pope: Moses in possibility of a Kingdome: he in possession of a Marques∣dome: Moses in his youth brought vp in the heathenisme of Egypt: Galea∣cius nooeled in the superstition of Popery: Moses at last saw the truth and embraced it, so did Galeacius: Moses openly fell from the heathenisme of E∣gypt▪ so did Galeac us from the superstition of Popery. But all this is nothing to that which they both suffred for their conscience. What Moses suffred Saint Paul tels vs: Moses when he was come to yeares refused toHeb. 11. be called the sonne of Pharaohs daughter: and chose rather to suffer aduersitie with the people of God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season; steeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt: Nay Moses had rather be a base bricke-maker amongst the oppressed Israelites, being true Christians; then to be the sonne of a Kings daughter in the Court of Pharaoh amongst Idolaters. In like case noble Galeacius, when he was come to yeares and knowledge of Christ, refused to be called sonne and heire to a Marquesse, Cup▪hearer to an Emperour, Nephew to a Pope; and chose rather to suffer affliction, persecution, banishment, losse of lands, liuings, wife, children; honours, and preferments, then to enioy the sinfull pleasures of Italy for a season; esteeming the rebuke of Christ grea∣ter riches then the honours of a Marquesdome without Christ: and there∣fore seeing hee must either want Christ or want them, hee dispoyled himselfe of all these to gaine Christ. If (right Honourable) the wife fooles of this world might haue the censuring of these two men and their actions, they would presently iudge them a couple of impassionate and stoicall fellowes, or else melancholike and brame-sicke men, to refuse Marquesdomes and Kingdomes for scruple of co nscience: but no matter as long as the men are Saints in heauen, and their actions honoured of God and his Angels; admired of good men, and neglected of none, but those who as they will not follow them on earth, so are they sure neuer to follow them to heauen. So excellent was the fact of Moses, and so heroicall, that the holy Ghost vouchsafes it remembrance both in the olde and new Testament, that so the Church
in all ages might know it and admire it: and doth Chronicle it in the Epistle to the H brewes, almost two thousand yeares after it was done. If God himselfe did so to Moses, shall not Gods Church be carefull to com∣mend to posterity this second Moses? whose loue to Christ Iesus was so zealous, and so inflamed by the heauenly fire of Gods spirit, that no earth∣ly temptations could either quench or abate it; but to winne Christ, and to enioy him in the liberty of his word and Sacraments, he delicately contemned the honors and pleasures of the Marquesdome of Vicum. Vicum one of the Paradises of Naples: Naples the Paradise of Italy: Italy of Eu∣rope: Europe o▪the earth: yet all these Paradises were nothing to him, in comparison of attaining the celestiall Paradise, there to liue with Iesus Christ. If any Papists (musing as they vse, and measuring vs by themselues) do suspect the story to be some fained thing, deuised to allure and intise the peoples minds; and to set a flourish vpon our Religion, as they by a thou∣sand false and fained stories and mirables vse to doe. I answere, first in the generall; farre be it from vs and our Religion to vse such meanes, ei∣ther for our selues, or against our aduersaries: No, we are content the Church of Rome haue the glory of that garland: Popery being a sandie and a shaken, a rotten and a tottering building needs such proppes to vn∣derset it: but truth dare shew her selfe, and feares no colours. But for the particular, I answere: cunning liers (as many Monkes were) framed their tales of men that liued long agoe, and places a farre off and vnknowen; that so their reports may not too easily be brought to triall. But in this case it is far otherwise; the circumstances are notorious; the persons and pla∣ces famously knowen: Vicum, Naples, Italy, Geneua, are places wel knowen: Calantonius his father, Charles the fist, his Lord and Master, Pope Paul the fourth his vncle, were persons well knowen: examine either places or persons, and spare none; truth seekes no corners; disproue the story who can, we craue no sparing: neither is the time too farre past, but may soone be examined. He was borne within these hundred years, and died at Gene∣ua within these twenty yeares: and his sonnes sonne at this day is Mar∣quesse of Vicum. Let any Papist doe what he can, he shall haue more com∣fort in following the example, then credit in seeking to disproue the storie. In the course of my poore reading (right Honourable) I haue often found mention of this noble Marquesse, and of his strange conuersion; but the storie it selfe, I first found it in the exquisit Library of the good gentle∣man Master Gee; one that honours learning in others, and cherisheth it in himselfe; and hauing not once red it, but often perused it, I thought it great losse to our Church to want so rare a iewel; and therfore could not but take the benefit of some stolne houres to put the same into our tongue, for the benefit of my brethren in this Realme, who want knowledge in Ita∣lian and Latine tongues. And now being translated, I humbly offer and consecrate it to my holy mother the Church of Fngland; who may re∣ioyce to see her Religion spredding it selfe priuily in the heart of Italy; and to see the Popes nephew become her sonne. And next of all vnto you (right Honourable) to whom I am bound in so many bonds of duety, and
to whom this story doth so fitly appertaine. You (my honourable good Lord) may here see a noble gentleman of your own rank in descent, birth, education, aduancements like your selfe; to be like you also in the loue and liking of the same holy Religion. And you good Madam, may here con∣ceiue & iudge by your selfe, how much more happy this noble Marquesse had bin, if his Lady Madam Victoria had bin like your selfe. I meane, if she had followed and accompanied her Lord in that his most holy and happy conuersion. And you all (right Honourable) in this noble Marquesse as in a crystal glasse, may behold your selues: of whom I hope you wil giue me leaue to speake (that which to the great glory of God you spare not to speake of your selues) that you were once darknes, but now are light in the Lord: Blessed be that God the father of light, whose glorious light hath shined into your hearts: Behold (right honorable) you are not alone; be∣hold an Italian; behold a noble Marquesse hath broken the ice, and troden the path before you: In him you may see that Gods Religion is as well in Italy as in England: I meane that though the face of Italy be the seat of Au∣tichrist, yet in the heart thereof there is a remnant of the Lord of hosts. You may see this noble Marquesse in this story now after his death, whom in his life time so many noble Princes desired to see. His body hath lien in the bowels of the earth these seuenteene yeares, but his soule liues in heauen in the bosome of Iesus Christ, and his Religion in your hearts, and his name shall liue for euer in this story. Accept it therfore (right honourable) and if for my sake you will vouchsafe to read it once ouer, I dare say that after∣wards for your owne sake you will read it ouer and ouer againe: which if you do, you shall find it wil stir vp your pure minds, & inflame your hearts with a yet more earnest zeale to the truth: and wil be an effectuall meanes to increase your faith, your feare of God, your humility, patience, cōstancy, and al other holy vertues of regeneration. And for my part, I freely & true∣ly professe I haue bin often rauisht with admiration of this noble example; to see an Italian, so excellent a Christian, one so neere the Pope, so neere to Iesus Christ; and such blessed fruit to blossome in the Popes own garden; and to see a noble man of Italy forsake that for Christ, for which, I feare, many amongst vs would forsake Christ himselfe. And surely (I confesse truth) the serious consideration of this so late, so true, so strange an exam∣ple, hath bin a spur to my slownes, & whetted my dul spirits, and made me to esteeme more highly of Religion then I did before. I know it is an accu∣sation of my selfe, & a disclosing of my own shame to confesse thus much; but it is a glory to God, an honour to Religion, a credit to the truth, and a praise to this noble Marquesse, and therefore I will not hide it. And why should I shame to confesse it? when that famous & renown∣ed man of God, holy Caluine freely confesseth (as in the sequell of this sto∣ry you shall heare) that this noble mans example did greatly confirme him in his Religion, and did reuiue and strengthen his faith, and cheere vp all the holy graces of God in him. And surely (most worthy Lord, and hono∣rable Ladies) this cannot but confirme and comfort you in your holy courses, and as it were put a new life vnto the graces of God in you, when you see, what; not the common people, but euen such as were like your
selues haue suffred for Religion; and when you see that not only the poore and baser sort of men, but euen the mighty and honourable (as your selues are) doe thinke themselues honored by embracing Religion. Pardon my plainenes and too much boldnes with your honors, & vouchsafe to accept it as proceeding from one who much tendreth your saluations, and reioy∣ceth with many thousands more, to behold the mighty & gracious work of God in you. Goe forward right noble Lord, in the name of the Lord of hosts, still to honour that honorable place you hold, stil to defeat the vaine expectation of Gods enemies; and to satisfie the godly hopes and desires of holy men: still to discountenance Popery and all prophanenes: stil by your personall diligence in frequenting holy exercises, to bring on that backward citie: by your godly discipline in your familie, to reforme or to condemne the dissolutnes and disorder of the most great families in this country: stil to minister iustice without delay; to cut vp contentions, & saue the lawyers labour: still to relieue the fatherlesse and the widow, and helpe the poore against their oppressors: and which is all in all, still to supplant superstition, popery, ignorance, and wilfull blindnes; and to plant and dis∣perse true Religion in that citie, and these Northern countries. By al these meanes still shewing your selfe an holy and zealous Phinehes (vnder the great Phinehes our most worthy Soueraigne) to execute Gods iudgement, and to take vengeance on the Zimri and Cozbi of our nation: namely, on Popery and prophanenes; the two great sinnes which haue pulled downe Gods plagues on our land, and the due and zealous punishment whereof, will be the meanes againe to remoue them. But I wrong your Honours to trouble you with these my too many and too ragged lines: and I wrong this noble Gentleman to cloth his golden story with this my rude and home-spun English stile: and I wrong you all to keepe you so long from being acquainted with this noble Marquesse, so like your selues; at whose meeting and acquaintance I am sure there will be so much reioycing, and mutuall congratulating at the mighty and gratious worke of God in you all. The same God and mercifull father I humbly beseech, and euer will, to accomplish his good worke in you, as he did in that noble Marquesse: and as he hath already made you so many waies blessed; blessed in your selues, blessed one in another, blessed in your conuersions, blessed aboue many, in your many and religious children: so at last he may make you most of all blessed in your ends; that so after this life, you may attaine the eternall glory of a better world, whither this noble Marquesse is gone before you. From my studie, Ian. 12. 1603. Your Honours in all Christian duety, W. CRASHAVV.
TO THE CRISTIAN and courteous Reader. GOOD Reader, conceiue I pray thee, that this translation being made diuers yeares agoe, and communicated to my priuate friends; I thought to haue suppressed it from spreading further: but being pres∣sed by importunitie, and vrged with vnauoidable reasons, I haue now yeelded to let it passe in publike: the rather consi∣dering, that though at this day almost euery houre yeeldes a new booke, yet many ages affoord scarce one example like to this. I haue diuided it into Chapters for thy better ease in reading and remembring: and seeing I find in other Au∣thors often mention of this noble Marquesse, and his heroi∣callfact: I haue therefore not tied my selfe precisely to the words of the Latine story, but keeping the sense and scope, haue sometime inlarged my selfe as the circumstance seemed to re∣quire, or as I had warrant and direction from other stories. Reade it with an holy and an humble heart, and prayer to God, and account me thy debter, if thou thinke not thy labour well bestowed. And when thou findest a blessing, and rea∣pest spiritual comfort hereby, then vouchsase to remember me in thy prayers. Temple, Septem. 30. 1608. Thy brother in Christ, W. CRASHAVV.
CHAP. 1. Of the linage, birth, and infancy of Galeacius Caracciolus the noble Marquesse of Vico. My purpose is to commit to writing the life of Galeacius Ca∣racciolus: as being a rare example of a most strange and sel∣dome seene constancy in the defence of Godlinesse and true Chri∣stian Religion. HE was borne at Naples, a renowned Citie in Italie, in the moneth of Ianuary, in the yeare of Christ 1517.The very yeare when Luther began to preach the Gospell. His fathers name was Calanto∣nius, who was descended of the ancient and noble house of the Caracciolies in the Country of Capua. This Calantonius euen in his youth, was not onely well respected, but highly esteemed, and a familiar friend of that noble Prince of Orarge, who after the taking and sacking of Rome, was placed in the roome of the Duke of Borben: yea his faithfulnesse and industry was so well ap∣proued to the Prince (as often times afore, so especially) at the siege of Naples, what time it was assaulted by Lotrechius, as that afterward, when the Emperour Charles the fist of that name, (who then was at Rome to receiue the Imperiall crowne and other ornaments of the Empire) did appoint the said Prince with certaine forces, to go and besiege the Citie of Florence; he thought it needfull to take the said Calantonius with him, for his wisedome and graue counsell. From whence when that seruice was ended, he being sent to Casar himselfe, he did so wisely demeane himselfe in all his affaires, and did so sufficiently satisfie the Emperour in
all things, that he made good in euery point, that worthy testimony which the Prince had giuen of him; whereupon he being at that time most honourably entertained of the Emperour himselfe, was by him not only aduanced to the state and title of a Marquesse, but also equally ioyned in commission with the Viceroy of Naples (for his wisedome and experience in all kind of affaires) to be assistant vnto him, and fellow with him in swaying the Scepter of that Kingdome. In which office and function hee so caried himselfe, as he wonne the good will of both small and great, as wel of the Nobles, as of the Commonalty: yea insomuch as he was deepely inuested in the fauour of the Emperour Charles and king Philip his sonne. And so he continued in this dignitie till the last day of his life, which was in the moneth of February, in the yeare 1562. he being himselfe more then three score and ten yeares of age. Such a father, and no worse had this Galeacius. As for his mother, she was descended of the noble familie of the Caraffi: and her owne brother was afterwardThat is, Pope Paul the fourth. Pope of Rome. Which I affirm notto that end, as though this in it self was any true praise or honour to Galeacius, but that his loue to true Religion, and his constancy in defence thereof, (e∣uen against such mighty ones) may appeare the more ad∣mirable to all that heare it, as it hereby did to all that knew him. Ofwhich his loue to true Religion, we shall speake more anon. Galeacius being twenty yeares olde, and the onely sonne of his mother, who was now deceased; his father Calantoni∣us being desirous to continue his name, to preserue his house and posteritie, and to maintaine his estate and patri∣monie, whose lands amounted to the summe of fiue thou∣sand poundes a yeare and vpward; did therefore prouide him a wife, a Virgin of noble birth, called Victoria, daughter to the Duke of Nuceria, one of the principal Peeres of Italy, with whom he had in name of portion or dowrie sixe thou∣sand fiue hundred pounds. He liued with his wife Victoria vnto the yeare 1551. at which time he forsooke house, fami∣lie,
and country for Religions sake: and in that time he had by his wife six children, (foure sonnes and two daughters.) His eldest sonne died at Panorma, in the yeare 1577. leauing behind him one sonne and one daughter: the sonne obtay∣ning by inheritance the Marquesdome of Vicum▪ (amongst diuers other things) married a wife of noble birth afore his grandfather Galeacius died. By whom, as I heare, he hath two children, to whom this Galeacius is great Grandfather. Now all these particulars doe I thus set downe to this end, that the perseuerance of so great a man may appeare the better by all these circumstances, which is no lesse then a most glorious victory ouer so many temptations. CHAP. II. Of his preferment at Court, and the first occasion of his conuersion. THe Marquesse Calantonius seeing so good hope of the continuance of his house and posterity, desiring not to preserue onely, but to increase and augment the dignity of his house, purposed therefore that his sonne Galeacius should seeke further honour and follow the Court. Where∣fore making offer of him to the Emperour Charles, he was most kindly entertained into the Emperours house and ser∣uice, and soone after was made the Emperours Gentleman∣sewer. In which place and office within short time, he both wonne the fauour of the Nobility, and the rest of the Court, and grewe to be of speciall account euen with the Empe∣rour himselfe: for all mens opinion and iudgement of him was, that there was not one of many to be compared with him, for innocency of life, elegancy of manners, sound iudgement and knowledge of many things. Thus Galeaci∣us was in all mens opinions, in the high way to all honour and estimation: for the Prince whom he serued was most mighty, and the Monarch of the biggest part of the Christi∣an world. But all this was little: for God, the king of
kings, of his singular mercy and grace did purpose to call him to farre greater dignity, and to more certaine and du∣rable riches. And this so great and rare a work did the Lord bring to passe, by strange and speciall meanes. So it was that in those daies a certaine Spaniard, a noble man, did soiourne at Naplcs, who had to name Iohannes Waldesius: this Gentleman being come to some knowledge of the truth of the Gospell, and especially of the doctrine of Iustification; vsed often to conferre with, and to instruct diuers other noble men his companions and familiars, in points of Reli∣gion, confuting the false opinions of our owne inherent Iustification, and of the merits of good workes, and so consequently detecting the vanity of many Popish points, and the fondnesse of their superstitions: by which meanes he so preuailed, or rather the Lord by him, that di∣uers of these noble Gentlemen began to creepe out of Popish darkenesse, and to perceiue some light of the truth: Amongst these, was there one Iohannes Franciscus Caesarta, a noble Gentleman and kinseman to this our Ga∣leacius. Of this Gentleman first of all did Galeacius heare diuers things in conference, which seemed to him much contrary to the course of the vaine world; yea much to crosse euen his age and estate, and course of life; as namely of the true meanes of our Iustification, of the excellency and power of Gods word, of the vanity of the most of Popish superstiti∣ons, &c. For Galeacius esteemed and vsed this Gentleman as his familiar friend, both being neere of his blood, and espe∣cially for that hee was▪ a Gentleman of very good parts. Now although the speeches of this gentleman did not at the first so farre preuaile with him, as to make him forsake the vanities of this life; notwithstanding it was not altoge∣ther in vaine: for that God which had ordeined him to be a speciall instrument of his glory, would not suffer so good seed to perish, though it seemed for a time to be cast euen a∣mongst thornes: neither will it be beside the purpose to set downe particularly the meanes, which it pleased God to
vse for the working of this strange conuersion: amongst which this was one. CHAP. III. Of the meanes of his further Sanctification. AT that time Peter Martyr Vermilius a Florentine, was a publik Preacher and Reader at Naples. This man was a Canon regular (as they call them) a man since then of great name, for his singular knowledge in Christian Reli∣gion, his godly manners and behauiours, and for his sweet and copious teaching; for he afterward casting away his monkes coule, and renouncing the superstitions of Pope∣rie, he shone so brightly in Gods Church, that he dispersed and strangely droue away the darkenesse and mists of po∣pery. Galeacius was once content at Caeserta his motion to be drawen to heare Peter Martyrs Sermon; yet not so much for any desire he had to learne, as moued and tickled with a curious humour, to heare so famous a man as then Mar∣tyr was accounted. At that time Peter Martyr was in hand with Pauls first Epistle to the Corinthians, and as he was she∣wing the weakenesse and deceitfulnes of the iudgement of mans reason in spirituall things, as likewise the power and efficacy of the word of God, in those men in whom the Lord worketh by his spirit; amongst other things he vsed this similie or comparison: If a man walking in a large place, see a farre off men and women dancing together, and heare no sound of instrument, he wil iudge them mad, or at least foolish; but if he come neerer them, and perceiue their order and heare their musicke, and marke their mea∣sures and their courses, he will then be of another minde, and not onely take delight in seeing them, but feele a desire in himself to beare them company and dance with them. E∣uen the same (said Martyr) betides many men, who whē they behold in others a suddain and great change of their looks, apparell, behauiour, and whole course of life, at the first
sight they impute it to melancholy or some other foolish humour; but if they looke more narrowly into the matter, and begin to heare and perceiue the harmony and sweete concent of Gods spirit, and his word in them, (by the ioint power of which two, this change was made and wrought, which afore they counted folly,) then they change their opinion of them, and first of all begin to like them, and that change in them, and afterward feele in themselues a motion and desire to imitate them, and to be of the number of such men, who forsaking the world and his vanities, doe thinke that they ought to reforme their liues by the rule of the Gospell, that so they may come to true and sound holinesse. This comparison by the grace of Gods Spirit wrought so wonderfully with Galeacius, (as himselfe hath often toldeSee how the first step of a mans conuer∣sion from po∣pery, is true and sound mortification of carnall lusts, and a change of life. See also how the first meanes to bring a man out of error to the truth, is study of holy Scriptures. his friends) that from that houre he resolued with himselfe, more carefully to restraine his affections from following the world, and his pleasures, as before they did, and to set his mind about seeking out the truth of Religion, and the way to true happinesse. To this purpose he began to reade the Scriptures euery day, being perswaded, that truth of Religion and soundnesse of wisedome was to be drawen out of that fountaine, and that the high way to heauen was thence to be sought. And further, all his acquaintance and familiarity did he turne into such company, as out of whose life and conferences, he was perswaded he might reape the fruit of godlinesse and pure Religion. And thus farre in this short time had the Lord wrought with him by that Sermon: as first, to considerwith himself seriously whether he was right or no: secondly, to take vp an exercise con∣tinuall of reading Scripture: thirdly, to change his former company, and make choice of better. And this was done in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred fortie and one, and in the foure and twentieth yeare of his age.
CHAP. IIII. Of the strange censures the world gaue of his conuersion, and how the better sort reioyced at it. BVt when this sudden alteration of this noble and yong Galeacius was seene and perceiued in Naples, it can be scarce set downe how greatly it amazed his old compani∣ons, which as yet cleaued to the world▪ and to the affections of the flesh: many of them able to render no cause of it, could not tell what to say of it; some iudged it but a melan∣cholicke passion; others thought it plaine follie, and feared he would become simple and doting and that his wit began by some meanes to be empaired Thus euery one gaue his verdict and censure of him, but all wondred, and doubted what it would turne to. But the better sort of men and such as feared God, and had their mind enlightned with some knowledge of Religion, as they wondred no lesse to see so great a change in so great a man, so likewise they were sur∣prized with exceeding ioy to see it: for they were perswa∣ded that God had some great and extraordinary work in it; that a yong gallant, a noble man of such wealth, and honor as he was, liuing in such delight and pleasures, in so general a corruption of life, both in court and countrey, but espe∣cially this age, nobility, wealth and honour being ioyned with the wanton deliciousnes of the courtly life: I say, that such a man should bee indued with the spirit of holinesse, and so farre affected with repentance, as that he should contemne all those in respect of heauen; they esteemed of it (as it was indeed) a rare matter and seldome seene in the world: and therefore they greatly reioyced at it, and prai∣sed the Lord on his behalfe. Amongst those men that thus reioyced at his conuersion, was one Marcus Antonius Fla∣minius a scholar of great name, and an excellent Poet, as his Paraphrase on the Psalmes, and other very good Poems do sufficiently testifie. Galeacius about this time receiued a
letter from this Flaminius, wherein▪ he did congratulate and reioyce with him, for the grace and gift of God, which was besto wed on him in his conuersion. This letter I thought good to insert into the bodie of this story, (as being worthy of no lesse) to the end that it might be a witnes in times to come, of the good opinion which such men had conceiued of him, who knew the foundatiō of true Iustification, thogh they were yet possessed with other errours, as about the Sa∣craments, and of the Masse, &c. which alas as yet they were not able to discerne of, as after by the greater grace of God this Galeacius did. The copy of the letter is this. CHAP. V. Marcus Antonius Flaminius a great scholar in Italie, writeth to Galeacius, and congratulateth with him, for his holy and happy change. To the right honourable Galeacius Caracciolus. RIght noble Lord, when I consider seriously these words of Paul. *Brethren you see your calling, that not1. Cor. 1. 26, 27. many noble, not many wise, according to the flesh, not many mightie are called: but God hath chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and weake things to confound the mightie, and base things in the world, and things not accounted of, and things that are not, to bring to nought things that are. When I say, I con∣sider of these words so often, I admire at that rare blessing of God, which he hath vouchsafed to you a noble and mighty man: namely, that he should grace you with that true and incomparable nobility, which is attained by true faith in Christ Iesus, and a holy life. As much greater as this blessing is, so much the more holy and sincere ought your life to be, and so much the more vprightly are you to walke with your God; lest that your thornes (that is, riches, pleasures, and honours,) should choke the seede of the Gos∣pell
which is sowne in you. For this I am sure of, that God hath begun some great worke in you, which he will finish to the glory of his owne name, and will bring to passe; that as heretofore you had care so to liue a noble man, amongst noble men, that you might obserue the de∣corum and maintine the dignity of nobilitie: so hereafter that you may employ your whole selfe in this, that you may defend and vphold the honor & dignity of the children of God; whose duety it is to aime at the perfection of their fa∣ther with al endeuors; and in their life vpon the earth to re∣semble that holy & heauenly life, which they shal lead in the world to come. Call to mind continually (my good Lord) in all your words and deedes, that we are graced with this honour to be made the sonnes of God by Iesus Christ: for that mediation will by the helpe of the holy Ghost, worke this care in vs, that we neuer commit any thing vnworthy of that holy name of Christ, by which we are called. And yet alas, such is our estate, as that if we do endeuour to please Christ, we are sure to displease men, and must bee content to contemne the vaine glory of the world, that we may enioy heauenly and eternall glory with God; for it is impossible (as Christ saith) for him to beleeue in God, whichIohn. seekes the honour and praise of men. I meane of the men of this world, which as the kingly Prophet saith, are lighter andPsal. vainer then vanity it selfe. And therefore their iudgement is little worth, and lesse to be esteemed; but rather the iudge∣ment of God, who seeth not all our actions onely, but euen our most hidden thoughts and purposes. Which being so, were it not folly and madnesse to displease such a God, to please so fond a world? It were a shamefull thing if a wife should endeuour to please other men, rather then her husband. How much more then vnworthy is it if our soules should rather ayme to please the vaine world, then their most holy spouse Christ Iesus? If the onely sonne of God was content, not only to be reuiled, yea and scourged; but euen to die vpon the crosse as a cursed malefactor, and all for vs: why should not we much more beare patiently
the taunts and mockes, yea euen the slanders of Gods ene∣mies? Let vs therfore arme our selues as it were with a ho∣ly pride, and (in a sort) scorne and laugh at their mockes: and putting vpon vs mercy and pity as the feeling mem∣bers of Christ, let vs bewaile so great blindnesse in them, and let vs intreat the Lord for them, to pull them out of that palpable darknesse into his true and marueilous light, lest Satan binde them to himselfe in his euerlasting prenti∣shippe; and so being his bondslanes, and hired sworne ser∣uants of his blacke guard, doe send them out to persecute Iesus Christ in his members. Which when they haue done all they can, and all that the diuell their master can teach them, though the diuell himselfe should burst with malice, and they for anger grinde their teeth; yet shall it all tend to the magnifying of Gods glory, which they labour to obscure, and to the furtherance of their saluation whom they so disdained: yea to the increase of their glory in a better world, whom in this world they thought worthy of nothing, but of all disgrace. And surely (my most honou∣rable Lord) he that is possessed with the certaintie of this faith, will without doubt make open warre with the cor∣rupt affections of his owne nature, and with all the world: yea euen with the diuell himselfe, and will not doubt but in time euen to ouercome them al. Therfore let vs humble our selues to our God and Father euerlasting, that he would in∣crease that saith in vs, & bring forth in vs those most blessed & sweet fruits of faith in our harts & liues, which he vseth to work in them whom he hath elected: that so our faith being fruitful of good works, may appeare to be not a fained but a true faith: not a dead but a liuing faith: not a humane but a diuine worke in vs: that so it may be to vs an infallible pledge of our saluation to come. Let vs labour to shew our selues the legitimate and vndoubted children of God, in seeking aboue all things, that his most holy name may be sanctified in our selues and others; and in imitating his ad∣mirable loue and gentlenesse, which makes his sunne to shine on good and badde. Let vs worship his heauenly
Maiestie in spirit and truth: and let vs yeeld vp the temple of our heartsto Christ Iesus as an acceptable sacrifice vnto him: yea letvs shew our selues members of the heauenly high Priest Christ Iesus, in sacificing to God our owne bo∣dies, and in crucifying the flesh with the affections and the lusts thereof; that sinne being dead in vs, the spirit of God may create in vs a spirituall life, whereby Christ Iesus may liue in vs. Let vs die to sinne, and die to our selues, and to the world, that we may liue blessedly to God and Christ Ie∣sus: yea let vs acknowledge and shew by our liues, that we were once ad; but now are raised to the life of grace, by the power of Christ Iesus. Let our conuersation be heauen∣ly, though we liue on the earth: let vs begin that life here which we hope to lead in heauen: let the image of God shine bright in vs: let vs disgrace and weare out the olde image of sinne and satan, and labour to renue the image of Christ Iesus, that all that see vs may acknowledge Gods i∣mage in vs. Which holy image of grace, as it is beautifull and glorious in all Gods Saints; so in you (my good Lord) it shall be so much more glorious, in as much as you go be∣fore others in birth, nobility, honour, and high place. O what a pleasant sight is it to all true Christian men; yea to the Angels; yea how acceptable to the Lord himselfe, to behold a man of your place and estate, so farre to forget the world and denie himselfe: so deepely to consider the frailty of his own nature, and the vanity of all temporal things as to say with Christ, I am a worms and no man: and to crie out with Dauid, turne thy face to me and haue mercy vpon me, for I amPsal. desolate and poore? O happy and true rich man, which hath attained to this spirituall and heauenly pouerty, and can giue a farewell to himselfe, and the world, and all things that he hath for Christs sake, and can freely renounce and forsake carnall reason, humane learning, company and counsell of friends, wealth, honours, lord shippes, pleasures of all sorts, delight of the court, high places and prefer∣ments, dignity and offices; yea fauour of Princes; yea his owneselfe! How welcome shall he be to Christ, which
can denie all those for Christs sake? Such a one may go for a foole in the world; but he shalbe of the Almighties coun∣sell: such a man knoweth that felicity consists not in any thing that this world can afford, and therefore in the midst of all his wealth and abundance, he crieth out to God as though he had nothing, euen out of the feeling of his heart; Giue vs this day our daily bread. Such a man preferreth the rebuke of Christ before the honour of the world, and the afflictions of Christs religion, before the pleasures of the world: and because hee despiseth all things in respect of Christ, and his righteousnes, and is possessed and grounded with Gods spirit; therefore hee sings with true ioy ofPsalme. heart, with the kingly Prophet; The Lord is my shepheard, therefore I can want nothing: neither will I feare hunger or a∣ny outward thing▪ he feeds me in greene pastures, and leads me forth besides the water of comfort. This man distrusts himselfe and all the creatures in the world, that he may trust and cleaue onely to God: neither aimes he at any plea∣sure, any wisedome, any honour, any riches, any credit or e∣stimation; but such as comes from God himselfe: and ther∣forePsalme. he professeth with the same Prophet, I haue none in heauen but thee alone, and none in the earth doe I desire but thee: my slesh consumeth with longing after thee, and thou Lord art my heritage and portion for euer. He that spake thus was a weal∣thy and mighty King, yet suffered he not the eyes ofhis mind to be blinded or dazled with the glittering glory of riches, pleasures, or honour, or ought else that a kingdome could giue: for he knew wel that they al came of God, and were held vnder God, and must all be vsed to his glory, and that he that gaue them hath farre better things to giue his children. And therefore that King and Prophet makes1. Chron. 28. his heauenly proclamation before al his people; Blessed art thou O Lord God our father for euer and euer: thine O Lord is greatnes, and power, and glory, and victory: all that is in heauen and earth is thine, thine is the kingdome Lord, and thou excellest as head ouer all: riches and honour come of thee, and thou art Lord of all: in thy hand is power, and strength, honour, and dignitis, and king∣domes
are in thy disposition: therefore wee giue thee thankes O God, and we extoll thy great and glorious name. But who am I, and what is my people, that we should promise such things to thee? For we are strangers before thee, and soiourners as all our fathers were; our daies are like a shadow vpon the earth, and here is no a∣biding. See how Dauid cannot content himselfe in abasing him∣selfe, and extolling the Lord: and in how many words his affections vtter themselues. This was Dauids meditation, and let this be your looking-glasse; and into the looking-glasse of this meditation looke once a day, and pray daily that God would still open your eyes to behold your owne vilenesse; and his incomprehensible power and loue to yee, that with King Dauid you may humble your selfe vnder the mighty hand of his Maiesty, and acknowledge all power and glory to belong to God alone, that so you may be made partaker of those heauenly graces, which God bestoweth not on the proud and lofty, but on the humble and meeke. Remember that ordinance of the e∣ternall God, that saith: Let not the wise man glory in his wise∣dome, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in hisIeremy. riches, but let him that glorieth, glorie in this, in that he vnderstan∣deth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which doe mercy and iustice on earth: for these things please me, saith the Lord. (There∣fore my good Lord) if you list to boast, boast not as the world doth, that you are rich, or that you are of noble birth, or that you are in fauour with the Emperour and other Princes, or that you are heire apparant of a rich Marques∣dome, or that you haue married so noble a waman: leaue this kind of boasting to them, who haue their minds glued to the world, and therefore haue no better things to boast on: whose portion being here in this life, they can looke for nothing in heauen. But rather reioyce you in that you are entred into the kingdome of grace; glory in this that the King of kings hath had mercy on you, and hath drawen you out of the misty darkenesse of errors, hath gi∣uen you to feele his endlesse loue and mercy in Christ, hath
made you of the childe of wrath▪ his owne sonne; of a ser∣uant to finne and the diuell, an heire of heauen; and of a bondslaue to hell, a free denision of the heauenly Ierusa∣lem; and glory in this, that euen Christ Iesus himselfe is giuen you, and made your owne, and with him all things else. So that as Paul saith, All are yours, whether the world, or life, or death, things present or things to come, all are yours in and by Christ, who is the onely felicity of our soules; and therefore whosoeuer haue him, haue with him all thing else. This is the true glory and the sound boasting of Christianity: for hereby is Gods mercy extolled, and mans pride troden vn∣der foote, by which a man trusting too much to himselfe, rebelleth against God. This glorious boasting makes vs humble euen in our highest honours: modest and meeke in prosperity: patient and quiet in aduersity: in troubles strong and couragious: gentle towards all men: ioyfull in hope: feruent in praier: full of the loue of God, but empty of all loue of our selues or ought in the world: yea it makes vs Christs true beadsmen, and his sworn seruants, and maks vs yeelde vp our selues wholly to imitate and follow Christ, and to esteeme all things else as fraile and vaine; yeaPhillip. dung and drosse that we may winne him. Right honourable and my good Lord, you see that I am so willingly employed in this seruice of writing to your honour, and in conferring with you of heauenly matters, that I haue forgot my selfe, or rather your honour, in being so tedious, which in the beginning I purposed not. I am priuie to my selfe and of my owneignorance; and guilty of mine owne insufficiency, as being fitter to be a scholar then a teacher; and to heare and learne my selfe, rather then to teach others: and therefore I craue pardon of your honour. Farewell. The most reuerend Embassadour desireth in his heart he had occasion to testifie indeede, that true good will which in his soule he beares you: In the meane time he sa∣lutes you, & so doth the illustrious Princesse of Piscarta her highnesse; and all other the honourable personages which are with me▪ all which reioyce for this good worke of God
in you, and in all kindnes do kisse your hands; and they do all earnestly intreat the Lord for you, that he that hath be∣gun so great a worke in you, would accomplish the same to the end: and the richer you are in temporall goods, in lands, and lord shippes, that he would make you so much the more poore in spirit; that so your spirituall pouerty, may doe that which your worldly riches and honour can∣not: namely, bring you at last to the eternall and neuer fa∣ding riches of the world to come: Amen. Farewell. From Viterbium. Your honours most humbly addicted, and most louing brother in Christ, M. Antonius Flaminius. CHAP. VI. Of the many temptations the diuell vsed to pull him backe, as by his father, his wife, and by noble men of his acquaintance. BY this and other holy meanes Galeacius was confirmed in the doctrine of the truth, and went forward con∣stantly in the course of Gods calling, and the way of godli∣nes. But the more couragiously he went on, the more fierce∣ly the diuell raged against him by his temptations; ende∣uouring thereby to hinder him in that happy course: yea and if it were possible to driue him backe againe, which course lie commonly takes against those, who haue pro∣pounded to themselues to tame the rebellion of the slesh, and to relinquish the vanities of the world. And first of all, this zealous course of his in Religion procured him an infinit number of mockes, and made him subiect to most vile slanders; yea made him incurre the hatred of a great number, but especially did he herein displease & vex his fa∣ther, as one that was not only of a contrary religion, but one
who onely intended the honour of his house, and the ad∣uancing of his posterity, which in respect of Religion Gale∣acius cared not for at all: and therefore he did often sharpe∣ly chide him, and charged him with his fatherly authoritie, to put away those melancholy conceits (as hee termed them.) No doubt but this was most grieuous to him, who alwaies was most submisse and obedient to his father. But another griefe did more inwardly afflict him, which was in respect of his wife Victoria. Who though she was alwaies a most kind and dutifull wife, as also very wise, yet shee would by no meanes yeelde to this motion and change of Religion; because she thought and feared it would breed infamy and reproch, to her self and her house; and therfore was continually working on him by all meanes and deuices she could: labouring to mooue him by teares and com∣plaints, and by all kinds of intreaty that a wife could vse to her husband: and withall sometimes vrging him with such vaine and fond reasons as commonly women of that Reli∣gion are furnished withall. What a vexation this was, and what an impediment to his conuersion, such may iudge easily, who are cumbred with husbands or wiues of a con∣trary Religion. And no little griefe and temptation was it to him, besides all these, that the most part of the noble men in and about Naples (being either of his blood, or kin∣red, or his familiar friends) vsed continually to resort vnto him, to follow their old and ordinary sports and pleasures. Alas how hard a thing was it to shake off all these on a sud∣den, and to take vpon him a direct contrary course of life to that he had ledde with them afore; which he must needs doe if he would goe on as he had begun? And further, it was no little vexation to his soule to liue in the Court, when his office and place called him thereunto: for there hee might heare of any thing rather then of Religion: and not a word by any meanes of Gods word, but talke enough of common and worldly preferments and pleasures, and de∣uising of meanes for the most cruell handling and dispatch∣ing out of the way all such as should depart from the Ro∣mish
faith. Any Christian heart may easily conceiue how deepely those temptations and hinderances vexed his righ∣teous soule in this his course towards God: insomuch as a thousand to one, they had turned him backe againe; and doubtlesse they had done so indeed, had not God assisted him with speciall grace. CHAP. VII. How he escaped the snares of the Arrian Anabaptists, and▪ after of the Waldesians: and of his resolution to leaue his countrey, hono urs, and liuings, to enioy the liberty of Gods Religion. BVt aboue all these, Satan had one assault strongest of all, whereby he attempted to seduce him from the true and sincere Religion of God. About that time the Realme of Naples was sore pestred with Arrians and Anabaptists: who daily broched their heresies amongst the common people, colouring them ouer with glorious shewes. These fellowes perceiuing Galeacius not fully setled as yet in Re∣ligion, nor yet sufficiently groūded in the scripture, tried al meanes they could to intangle him in their errours and blasphemous fancies: wherein the mightie worke of God was admirable towards him: for he being a youth, a gentle∣man, but a meane scholar▪ and little studied, and but lately entred into the schoole of Christian Religion; who would haue thought that euer he could haue resisted and escaped the snares of those heretikes; many of them being great and grounded scholars, and throughly studied in the Scripture? Notwithstanding, by the sincere simplicity and plainnesse of Gods truth, and the inspiration of the holy Ghost, hee not onely descried the fondnesse of their heresies, but euen vntied the knots, and brake their nets, and deliuered him∣selfe, and mightily confuted them: yea such was the work∣ing of God, as being sometime in their meetings, hee was
strongly confirmed in the doctrine of the truth by seeing and hearing them. Thus by Gods mercie he escaped and was conquerour in this sight. But the diuell had not so done with him, for another and more dangerous battell presently followed. The Wal∣desians, of whom wee spake before, were at that time in Naples in good number. With them did Galeacius daily con∣uerse, their courses of life and study being not farre vnlike. These disciples of Waldesius knew as yet no more in Religi∣on but the point of Iustification: and misliked and eschew∣ed some abuses in Popery; and neuerthelesse still frequen∣ted Popish Churches; heard Masses, and were present or∣dinarily at vile Idolatries. Galeacius for a time conuersed with these men, and followed their way: which course doubtlesse would haue spoiled him, as it did a great sort of them; who afterwards being taken and committed for the truth, were easily brought to recant their Religion, because they wanted the chiefe and the most excellent points, nor were sufficiently setled: and yet afterwards againe, not daring to forsake their hold in Iustification; and therefore comming to it againe, were taken as relapsers and backsli∣ders, and put to extreame torments and cruell death. In the like danger had Galeacius beene, but that the good pro∣uidence of God otherwise disposed, and better prouided for him: for his office and place that he bare in the Empe∣rours Court, called him into Germany, and so withdrew him from his companions the Waldesians: for the Lord had a greater worke to worke in him then the Waldesians were able to teach him: for there in Germany hee learned (that he neuer knew afore) that the knowledge of the truth of Iustification was not sufficient for saluation; whilst in the meane time a man wittingly defiled himselfe with Ido∣latry, which the Scripture cals spirituall whordome: and of no man did he reape more sound and comfortable instructi∣on then of Peter Martyr, of whom we spake afore, whom God had lately called out of Italy, and confirmed him in the truth. This Martyr instructed Galeacius soundly, in the
way of the truth, and made it plaine vnto him, by priuate conferences as well as publicke reading: for he was at that time publick professor of diuinity at Stransbrough in Germa∣ny. Galeacius furnished with those holy instructions, retur∣ned to Naples, and presently resorting to his companions, the Waldesians, amongst other points, conferred with them about the eschewing of Idolatry, and deliuered his iudgement therein. But they not induring scarce to heare it, presently forsooke him, for they would by no meanes en∣tertaine that doctrine, which they knew was sure to bring vpon them afflictions, persecutions, losse of goods and ho∣nours, or else would cause them to forsake country, house, and land, wife, and childe, and so euery way threatened a miserable estate to the professors thereof. Now this their forsaking of him, and telling him of the danger of this pro∣fession, was another strong temptation to keepe him wrap∣ped in their Idolatry, and to make him content himselfe with their imperfect and peeced Religion. But GOD which had in his eternall election predestinate him, that he should be a singular example of constancy to the edificati∣on of many, and the confusion and condemnation of luke∣warme professors; gaue him that excellent resolution, and that heauenly courage, as he escaped at last conquerour o∣uer all those temptations and assaults of Satan; and nothing could suffice or content him but the pure Religion, and also the profession of it: and therefore seeing no hope of refor∣mation in Naples, nor any hope to haue the Waldesians ioyne with him, and seeing plainely that he could not serue God in that countrey; he resolued vndoubtedly that hee would forsake the countrey, and seeke for Christ and his Religion wheresoeuer hee might find them; and that hee would rather forsake father, wife, children, goods and lands, offices and preferments to winne Christ, then to en∣ioy them all and want Christ Iesus.
CHAP. VIII. Of the grieuous combats betwixt the flesh and the spirit, when he resolued of his departure. NOw heree by the way it may not be omitted, what kind of cogitations he hath often said came into his mind, as he was deliberating about this great matter. For first of all, as often as he looked on his father, which he did almost euery houre, who decrely loued him, and whom a∣gaine he respected in all duety and reuerence: so often doubtlesse he was striken at the heart with vnspeakeable griefe to thinke of his departure; his mind no doubt often thinking thus: What, and must I needes forsake my deere and louing fathr, and cannot I else haue God my Father? O miserable and vnhappy father of my body, which must stand in comparison with the Father of my soule! And must I needes faile in duety to him, if I performe my duety to God? O miserable old man! for what deeper wound can pierce him, then thus to be depriued of the onely staffe and comfort of his old age! Alas shall I thus leaue him in such a sea of troubles; and shall I bee the onely meanes to strike into his heart the deepest wound of griese that yet e∣uer pierced him in all his life? This my departure is sure to make my selfe the obloquy of the world: yea to breede reproch and shame to the Marquesse my father, and to my whole stocke and kinred. How is it possible that the good old man can ouercome or indure so great a griefe, but rather he must needs be swallowed vp of it, & so with woe and misery end his life? Shall I then be the cause of death to my father, who would if neede had beene redeemed my life with his owne death? alas what a misery is this like to be either to me, or him, or vs both? yet must I care lesse for bringing his gray head with sorrow vnto the graue, then for casting my owne poore soule with horror into hell. And no lesse inwardly was he grieued in respect ofhis noble wife
Victoria: for hauing no hope that she would renounce Po∣pery, and go with him, therefore he durst not make known vnto her the purpose of his departure; but rather resolued for Christs sake to leaue her and all, and to follow Christ. Shee was now as he was himselfe in the prime of youth, a Lady of great birth, faire, wise and modest; but her loue and loyalty to her husband surpassed all. How was it possible patiently to leaue such a wise, so that his perplexed mind discoursed on this fashion when he lookt on her: And shall I so, yea so suddenly, and so vnkindly leaue and forsake my wife, my most deere and louing wife, the onely ioy of my heart in this world, my companion and partner in all my griefe and labour; the augmenter of my ioy, the lessener of my woe? And shal I leaue her, not for a time, (as hertofore Idid when the Emperors seruice called me from her) but for euer, neuer againe to enioy her: yea it may be neuer to see her? And shall I depriue my selfe of her, & thereby depriue my selfe ofal others also, & of al the comfort of the coniug all life & married estate? And shal I so leaue her desolate & a∣lone in that estate & age whereof she is? Alas poore Lady, what shal she doe, what shal become of her, and of her litle ones when I am gone? How many dolefull dayes without comfort, many waking nights without sleep, shal she passe ouer? What wil she do but weep & waile, & pine away with grief? And as he cast these things in his mind, he thought he euen saw his wife, how she tooke on with her self, sighing & sobbing and weeping; yea howling & crying, & running after him with these pitifull out-cries: Ah my deere Lord, and sweete husband; whither will you goe? and will you Ieaue me miserable woman, comfortlesse and succourlesse? What shal become of me when you are gone: what can ho∣nors, pompes, riches, gold, siluer, iewels, friends, company, all delights and pleasures in the earth; what can they all do to my comfort when I want you? And what ioy can I haue in my children without you, but rather my griefe to be doubled to looke on them? And how can I or the world be perswaded that you care for them, and for my selfe? Is
this the loue that thou hast so often boasted of? Ah, mise∣rable loue which hath this issue! either neuer didst thou loue me, else neuer had true loue so strange an end as this of yours hath, And yet which is worse then all this, you neuer shewed me cause of this your strange departue; had I knowen cause, it would neuer haue grieued mee halfe so much: But now that the cause is not knowen, what will the world iudge, but that the fault is in me? at least, if they can∣not condemne me for it; yet how reprochfull will it be to me, when euen euery base companion dare lay it in my dish, and point at me with their fingers when I go by, and say, this is that fond woman who married him with whom she could not liue, and whom her husband disdained to liue withall? This is that simple foole, who is desolate hauing a husband; and a widow, her husband yet beeing aliue. Either shall I be counted wicked, which haue caused thee to leaue me; or foolish, miserable, and vnhappy, who chose so fondly, as to take him, whom I could not be sure of when I had him. In a word, I shall be depriued of thee: yea of all possibility of hauing any other, and so hauing a husband, I shal liue in al misery altogether without a husband. These two cogitations of his father and his wife greatly tormen∣ted him, and the more because hee laboured to keepe close this fire, which burned and boiled in hisheart: namely, to conceale his departure, lest by being knowne it might haue beene hindred, which he would not for a world. Yet there was a third and speciall care that pinched him, and that was for his children, which were sixe in all; goodly and towardly children, and worthy of so noble pa∣rents: the more griefe was it, in that they were so yong, as that they could not yet conceiue what it was to wanta fa∣ther; the eldest was scarce fifteene, and the yongest scarce foure yeares old: hee loued them with most tender and fa∣therly affection, and was againe loued and honoured of them. It is wonderfull to thinke, how when his wife the Lady did giue into his armes his yongest childe to play withall (as oftentimes wiues vse to doe) how it were possi∣ble
for him, and what a do he had with himselfe to containe from floods of teares; especially because his eyes seeing them, and his hands holding them, and his heart taking de∣light and pleasure in them, his minde could not but dis∣course on this manner: And shall I within these few daies vtterly forsake these sweete babes, and leaue them to the wide and wicked world, as though they had neuer beene my children nor I their father? Yea happy had I bin if I had either neuer had them, or hauing them might enioy them. To be a father is a comfort, but a father of no children, and yet to haue children, that is a misery. And you poore Or∣phans, what shal become of you whē I am gone? your hap is hard euen to be fatherlesse, your father yet liuing: and what can your great birth now helpe you? for by my departure you shall lose all your honour, all your liuing and wealth, and all dignity whatsoeuer; which otherwise you had bin sure of: nay my departure shall not onely depriue you of al this, but lay you open to all infamy, reproch, and slander, and bring vpon you all kind of misery: and thus miserable man that I am, shall the time be cursed that euer they had me to their father. And what can your wofull mother doe when she looketh on you, but weepe and wring her hands, her griefe still increasing as she lookes vpon you? Yet thus must I leaue you al confounded together in heaps of griefe, weeping and wailing one with another, and I in the meane time weeping and wailing for you all. Many other griefes, temptations, and hinderances assaulted him, though they were not so weighty as these formerly named, yet which might haue beene able to haue hindred any mans depar∣ture, being in his case; as to leaue the company of so many gallant noblemen and gentlemen, his kinred and acquain∣taince; to lose so honourable an office and place as he bare in the Emperours Court; to leaue for euer his natiue soile the delicate Italy; to depriue himselfe and his posterity of the noble tittle and rich liuing of a Marquesdome; to vnder∣take a most long and tedious iourney; to cast himselfe into exile, pouerty, shame, and many other miseries without
hope of recouery for euer: to change his former pleasant life into all hardnesse, and to giue a farewel to al the delica∣cies of Italy, wherein he was brought vppe; to leaue that goodly garden of his father the Marquesses, which once should be his owne; the goodliest garden almost in all Italy or all Cristendome; which was furnished with plants of all sorts; and these not onely of all such as grow in Italy, but e∣uen such as were to be got out of all other countries: this garden and Orchard was so exquisite both this way, and in diuers other sorts of elegancies, that a great number of men of all qualities resorted daily out of all countries to see it. But this and all other the pleasures and delicacies of this present life could doe nothing with him to remooue him from his purpose; but he renounced them all, and resolued to leaue them all to follow Christ: so strong and admirable was the constancy of this noble Gentleman. CHAP. IX. How after all the temptations which flesh and blood laid in his way to hinder his departure, he consulted with the Lord, and from him receiued grace to o∣uercome them all. BVt it may be asked, whereupon was grounded so great vnmoueablenesse of this purpose, or whence came it? If we aske the world and common iudgement, they will answere, that doubtlesse melancholike humours preuailing in him, spoiled the man of his iudgement and naturall af∣fections, and empaired common sense and reason; and thence proceeded this obstinate and desperate purpose, as the world iudgeth of it. But if a man lift vp his eyes higher and behold the matter more seriously, he might haue manifestly seene that it came to passe by the mercifull blessing and strong hand of God, who from al eternity had predestinate him, that hee should stand so vnmoueable a∣gainst
all temptations, and continue in one tenour steady and stedfast, vntill he had made voyde all the attempts of Satan, and remoued all the stumbling blockes which his flesh and blood and carnall reason could cast in the way; for the which purpose the spirit of God enabled him to rea∣son with himselfe on this sort: Thou Lord art hee who drew and deliueredst me out of the thick and misty darknes of ignorance, and hast enlightned my mind with the light of thy holy spirit, and with the heauenly knowledge of thy truth: thou hast made knowen to me the way of salua∣tion, and hast ransomed me to thy selfe by the blood of thy Sonne. Now therefore good Lord and holy father, I am wholly thine, and consecrated to thy glory; and as I am thine, I will follow thee, and obey thee, and walke in the way of thy will whithersoeuer thou shalt call me. Not my father, nor my wife, nor my children, nor my honours, nor my lands, nor my riches, nor all my delicacies and pleasures shall hold or hinder me one houre from following thee. I denie my selfe O Lord, and I deny this whole world for thee and thy sake: O Lord thou knowest me, and the readinesse of my mind to wait vpon thee; and how that my heart is inflamed with the fire of thy loue: yet thou seest againe how many enemies compasse mee, how many hinderances lie in me way, and how many temptations and impedi∣ments lie vpon me, so that I am scarce able to moue or lift vp my head vnto thee: O Lord I am now in the depthes of those troubles, out of which the holy Prophet Dauid once cried to thee as I doe now; O Lord haue mercy on me and deli∣uer my soule. And although Satan and my owne flesh doe affright me in this my purpose, whilst they set before my eyes, the crosse, and the infamy, and the pouerty, and so ma∣ny miseries, which I am like in this my new profession to vndergoe: notwithstanding O Lord, I lift vp my selfe in the contemplation and beholding of thy infinite Maiesty; and therein I see and confesse that that crosse and affliction is blessed and glorious, which makes me like and confor∣mable to Christ my head; and that infamy to be honorable
which sets me in the way to true honour; and that pouerty to be desired, which depriuing a man of some temporall goods, wil reward him with an heauenly inheritance, then which, there is nothing more pretious: I meane O Lord with thy owne selfe, and thy glory O euerlasting God, and that by thy onely son Iesus Christ; that so I enioying thy glorious presence, may liue for euer with thee in that hea∣nenly society: O blessed and happy these miseries which pull me out of the worlds vanities, and sinke of sinne; that I may be made heire of an euerlasting glory. Welcome ther∣fore the crosse of Christ, I wil take it vp O Lord, and wil fol∣low thee: With these & such like holy meditations & other holy meanes, he ouercame at last all the attempts of Satan, al his owne natural and carnal affections: yea and the world it selfe, and verified that in himselfe which Paul affirmeth of Gods true elect, that they that are Christs haue crucified the flesh with the affections and the lusts: that is, haue crucified their soules for Christ, who crucified himselfe for them. O Satan, Gods enemy and his childrens, how vaine were all thy attempts, and how light al thy assaults? In vaine dost thou set vpon those for whom Christ vouchsafed to die, and suffer on the crosse: vpon which crosse he so brake thy head and thy po∣wer, and so trampled ouer thee, that now thou shalt not be able to touch the least haire of the head of any of those for whom he died. And as for Galeacius, hee had builded his house on the rocke, and founded it so sure, that no wind, no raine, nay no floods of griefes, nor tempests of troubles, nor whirlewind of temptations could once remoue him: and so he continued resolute as a Christian souldier & conqueror; fully minded to leaue his country at the next opportunity he could take: his mind I cannot tell whether more rauish∣ed with ioy one way, or more perplexed with griefe ano∣ther way; but betwixt ioy and griefe he still continued his purpose, vntill at last his spiritual ioy ouercomming his na∣turall and carnal griefe, he fully concluded that in despight of the diuell and all impediments in the world, hee would surely goe.
CHAP. X. How he performed his heroicall resolution, leauing all for Christ, and going to Geneua. WHereupon making knowen his mind but to a few, & those his most familiar friends, and of whom he hoped wel for religion; he wrought vpon them so far, as that they promised and vowed that they would accompany him in this voluntary & Christian banishment, that so they migh enioy the true liberty and peace of conscience in the true Church of God. But how deepe and vnsearchable the iudgements of God are, the euent afterward shewed: for diuers of them (though not all) who for a time seemed to be indued and led with a most earnest zeale of Gods glorie in this action; when they came to the borders of Italy, & con∣sidered what they forsooke, and to what they now tooke themselues: first began to looke backe againe to Italy; after∣wards went backe againe indeed, and so turned againe to the vomit of their pleasures. But this ingratitude to the Lord for so great a fauour offred them, the Lord pursued with a iust reuenge: for purposing to serue God in their pleasures, and in the midst of Popery, they were after taken by the Spanish Inquisition; and so publikely recanting and abiu∣ring Christian Religion, they were afterward subiect to all misery & infamy; neither trusted nor loued of the one side nor the other. This fearful desertiō & backsliding of theirs, doubtlesse was most grieuous to Galeacius; & verily the di∣uel hoped hereby yet once again to haue diuerted him from his intended course, in making him be forsaken of those by whose company and society he hoped to haue been greatly comforted in this discomfortable voyage. But notwith∣standing al this, Galeacius continued resolute in his purpose, and at last finding opportunity, attempted his departure, and made fit for it; yet made no shew of any such matter; but rather coloured and concealed his intent, lest the au∣thoritie
of his father might any wayes hinder his so godly a purpose: and so gathering together some thousand markes of his mothers goods which she had left him: on the one and twentieth of March, 1551. in the yere ofhis age the foure and thirtieth, he departed from Naples in manner as he was wont to doe afore, making it knowne that he purposed to go into Germany to the Emperour; who at that time held his court at Auspurge: and thither indeed he went accordingly, and stayed seruing in his place and office till the sixe and twentieth of May in the same yeare: Vpon which day▪ leauing the court and the Emperours ser∣uice, & his honorable office which there he beare; & taking his last and euerlasting farewel at the court, and all worldly delights, (and yet departing in ordinary sort as afore, and in purpose to goe into the Low countries, as some thought) he tooke his iourney straight towad Geneua, and thither came by Gods good hand the eight of Iune, and there rested his weary body, and reposed his much more wearied con∣science, with a full ioyfull heart: yea with the greatestioy that euer came to him in all his life, but onely at the time of his conuersion. CHAP. XI. Of his arriuall at Geneua, and his entertainment there: and especially his acquaintance and friendship with Caluine. In the city of Ceneua (though there was a Church of Italians who likewise were come thither for the Gospell) yet hee found not one whom he knew, saue one Lactantius Rangoni∣us, a noble man of Siena in Italy: this Gentleman had beene one of his familiar acquaintance when they were at home, and now was preacher of Gods word to the Church and Congregations of the Italians, who were then at Geneua, Now when he saw that the mercy of God had granted him to ariue at this quiet and happy hauen, where he might with
liberty of conscience serue God, free from the corruptions of the world, and the abominable superstitions & Idolatry of Antichrist; presently he ioyned himselfe in friendship, and yeelded himselfe to the instruction of Master Iohn Cal∣uine, the chiefe Minister and Preacher of that Church. Cal∣uine being a man of deep insight and exquisite iudgement, perceiuing him to be a man of good knowledge and expe∣rience, of a moderate and quiet spirit, of an innocent and vpright life, and indued with true and sincere godlinesle; did therefore most kindly and louingly intertaine him into his fellowshippe: for the good man of God in his wisdome foresaw that such a man as this, would doubtlesse become a speciall instrument of Gods glory, and a meanes of the con∣firmation of many (but especially of Italians) in the know∣ledge and loue of Religion: this holy loue and Christian friendshippe thus begunne, was so strongly grounded be∣twixt this noble Marquesse and renowned Caluine, that it continued till the yeare 1564. which was the last yeare of Caluines pilgrimage in the earth, and the entrance into his heauenly rest. The Church and people of Geneua can te∣stifie of their true and constant friendshippe; but it needes not: for there is extant at this day a speciall testimony thereof, euen from Caluine himselfe in a Preface of his; wherein he dedicates to Galeacius, his Commentary vpon the first Epistle to the Corinths; which I thought good here to set downe word by word, that thereby it may appeare how great∣ly Caluine esteemed ofhim.
CHAP. XII. Caluines Epistle to Galeacius, congratulating his holy and happy conuersion. To the noble Gentleman, and as well honourable for his excellent vertues, as for his high descent and linage, Galeacius Carac∣ciolus, the onely sonne and heire apparent to the Marquesse of Vicum: Iohn Caluine sendeth greeting in our Lord. I Wish that when I first put out this Commen∣tary, I had either not knowen at all, or atleast more throughly knowen that man, whose name I am now constrained to blot out of this my Epistle: Yet I feare not at al, lest he should either vpbraid me with inconstancy▪ or complaine of iniu∣rie offred him, in taking thatfrom him which afore I besto∣wed on him; because it was his owne seeking, both to e∣strange himselfe from mee, and from all society with our Church: wherefore he may thanke himselfe and take the blame on his owne necke: for, for my owne part I am vn∣willingly drawne thus farre to change my accustomed ma∣ner, as to race out any mans name out of my writing. And I bewaile that the man hath throwne himselfe downe from that seat of fame wherein I had placed him: namely, in the forefront of my booke, where my desire was he should haue stood, thereby to haue beene made famous to the world. But the fault is not in me, for as then I held him worthy, so since then hee hath made himselfe vnworthy; and therefore let him be as he is, and he for mee buried in obliuion: and so for the good will I once bare to him, I spare to speake any more of him. And as for you (right
honourable Sir,) I might seeke excuse why I put you now in his roome, but that I am so sufficiently perswaded of your great good will and true loue to me; the truth where∣of can be testified by so many witnesses in our Church. And that I may make one wish more, I wish from my heart that I had knowen you as well ten years agoe, for then I should haue had no cause to haue altred the dedicatiō of my booke, as now I do. And as for the publicke estate of the Church, it is well that it shall not onely lose nothing by forgetting that man, whose name I now blotte out, but by your com∣ming into his stead, shal receiue a far greater gain, and a suf∣ficient recompence. For though I know you desire not the pub licke applause of the world, but rest contented in the testimony of Gods spirit in your conscience: (neither is it my purpose to publish your praises to the world) not∣withstanding, I thinke it my duety to make knowne to the readers some things concerning you, and whereof my selfe and this Church and City are daily eye witnesses: and yet not so much for your praise, as for the benefit & instruction of the readers. And this is it that I would all men should know & make vse of; that a Gentleman, a Lord, so wel and highly borne, flourishing in wealth & honor, blessed with a noble & vertuous & louing wife, and many goodly chil∣dren, liuing in al peace & quietnes at home & abroad, wan∣ting nothing that nature could desire, & euery way blessed of God for all things of this life, should willingly & of his owne accord leaue al those, & forsake his country, a rich & fruitfull & pleasant soile; so goodly a patrimony & inheri∣tance, so stately a house, seated so commodiously & so plea∣santly, to cast off al domestical delight and ioy which hee might haue had in so good a father, wife, children, kinred, af∣finity, and acquaintauce, and all that for this onely, that he might come & serue Christ Iesus in the hard & vnpleasant warfare of Christianity; and should depriue himselfe of so many alluring delights of nature, & to content himself with that slēder measure of al things which the distressed estateof our Church is able to affoord, & frō al the superfluities of a
Courly & Lordly life, here amongst vs to betake himself to an easie rate and frugal kind of life, euen as though he were no better then one of vs: and yet I so recite al this to others, as I let it not passe without vse to my selfe. For if I do set out your vertues in this my Epistle, as on the toppe of a Towre for all men to see them; that so they may conforme them∣selues to the imitation of them; it should be shame for my selfe not to be much more neerely and inwardly touched with a loue of them, who am continually an eye witnesse of them, and daily behold them, not in an Epistle, but in the cleare glasse of your owne life: and therefore because that I find in experience how much your example preuailes in me, for the strengthning of my faith, and the increase of godlines in me (yea and all other holy men who dwel in the city, doe acknowledge as well as I, that this your example hath beene greatly to their edification in al grace) I thought it therefore a necessary duety to impart this rare example of yours to the world; that so the profit and benefit of vs might inlarge it selfe, and spread out of this citie into all the Churches of God; for otherwise it were a needlesse labour to make knowne to the furthest parts of Christendome, the vertues of such a man, whose nature and disposition is so out of loue with pride, and so farre remoued from all osten∣tation. Now if it shall please God that many others (who dwelling farre off, haue not hitherto heard of you;) shall by the strangenesse of this your example addresse them∣selues to the imitation of it, and leaue their pleasant nests, whereto the world hath setled them so fast; I shall thinke my selfe bountifully rewarded for these my paines: for out of question it should be common and vsuall amongst Chri∣stians, not onely to leaue liuings and lord ships, and castles and townes, and offices and promotions, when the case so stands that a man may not enioy both Christ and them: but euen willingly and cheerefully to despise and shake off whatsoeuer vnder the Sunne (though it be neuer so deere and pretious, so pleasant and comfortable) in respect and comparison of Christ. But such is the slownesse and slug∣gishnesse
of the most of vs, that we doe but coldly and for∣mally professe the Gospell: but not one of a hundred, if he haue but some little land, or peece of a Lordship, that will forsake and despise it for the Gospel, sake: yea not one of many, but very hardly is drawn to renounce euen the least gaine or pleasure, to follow Christ without it: so farre are they from denying themselues and laying downe their liues for the defence of it. I wish these men would looke at you, and obserue what it is you haue forsaken for loue of Christ; and especially I wish that all men who haue taken vpon them already the profession of Religion, would labor to resemble you in the denial of themselues, (which indeed is the chiefe of all heauenly vertues:) for you can very suf∣ficiently testifie with me, as I can with you, how little ioy we take in these mens companies; whose liues make it ma∣nifest, that though they haue left their countries, yet they haue brought hither with them the same affections and dis∣positions which they had at home: which if they had also renounced, as wel as they did their countries; then had they beene indeed true deniers of themselues, and beene parta∣ker with you of that true praise; wherein alas, you haue but few compartners. But because I had rather the Reader should gather the truth and strangenes of this your exam∣ple, then I should goe about in words to expresse it; I will therefore spare further speech, and turne my selfe to God in praier, desiring of his mercy, that as he hath indued you hitherto with an heroicall courage, and spiritual boldnesse; so he would furnish you with an inuincible constancy to endure to the end: for I am not ignorant how strangely the Lord hath exercised you heretofore, and what dangerous pikes you haue passed ere you came to this: by which for∣mer experience your spiritual wisdome is able to conclude, that a hard and toilsome warfare doeth still remaine and wait for you; and what neede there is to haue the hand of God from heauen raught out to assist vs, you haue so suf∣ficiently lea rned in your former conflicts, as I am sure you will ioyne with me in prayer, for the gift of perseuerance to
vs both: and for my part I will not cease to beseech Iesus Christ our King and God (to whom all power was giuen of his father, and in whom are kept all the treasures of spi∣ritual blessings) that he would stil preserue you safe in soule and body, and arme you against all temptations to come, and that still he would proceed to triumph in you ouer the diuell and all his vile and wicked faction, to the magnifying of his owne glory, and the inlarging of his kingdome in your selfe, and others of his children. 9. Call. Feb. 1556. at Geneua. Your honours most assured in the Lord, IOHN CALVINE. CHAP. XIII. Newes of his departure to Geneua came to Naples, and the Emperours Court: and how the old Marquesse his fa∣ther and other his friends were affected with the newes. AND thus (to returne againe to our story) Galencius set∣led himselfe downe at Geneua as at a ioyfull resting place. But when the newes of so sudden and strange a departure, and so wilfull an exile came to Naples, and were made knowen in the Emperours Court: it would scarce be beleeued or thought, how strangely it affected & moued al that heard it. All men wondred at it, and the most could not be perswaded it was so; but when it was certainely knowen and out of doubt, it was strange to see, how euery man gaue his verdit of the matter: some one way, some an other, as the course of men in such cases is. But aboue all, it so abashed and astonished his owne friends and familie, that nothing was heard or seene amongst them, but cries and lamentations, most bitter teares and pitiful complaints. And surely to haue beholden the state of that family, how
miserably it seemed at that time to bee distressed: a man would haue thought it euen a liuely paterne and picture of all woe and misery. But none was more inwardly pinched then the Marquesse his father, whose age and experience being great, seemed to assure him of nothing to follow hereupon but infamy and reproch, yea the vtter vndoing and subuersion of his whole estate and family; notwith∣standing, passing ouer that fit of sorrow as soone and as easi∣ly as he could, the wretched and carefull olde man began to bethinke himselfe by what meanes he might preuent so mi∣serable a ruine and fall, which seemed to hang ouer him and his. One thing amongst other came into his mind, which also had once caused many grieuous temptations to Galea∣cius, and had much troubled his mind afore his departure. It was this. CHAP. XIIII. The first meanes vsed by his father the old Marquesse to re∣call him home againe: he sent a kinsman of his, whom he knew his sonne deerely loued, to perswade him to returne, but he could not preuaile. GAleacius had a cosen-german, whom alwaies hee estee∣med and loued as his brother: this Gentleman so ten∣derly loued of Galeacius did the Marquesse send to Geneua to his sonne▪ with commission and letters full of authority, full of protestations, full of pitifull complaints, full of cry∣ings and intreatings that he would come home againe; and thereby cheere vp his old father, and make happy againe his vnhappy wife; be a comfort to his distressed children, a re∣ioycing to his kinsfolkes, and to the whole citie of Naples, and saue his whole house and posteritie from that extreame ruine, which otherwise it would be sure to fall into. Thus this Gentleman was dispatched away and hasted to Geneua,
with great hope for their ancient and faithful loue to haue preuailed with Galeacius. Where by the way wee are to re∣member that Galeacius did alwaies so loue him, that the gen∣tleman was not so sorrowful for his departure: but Galea∣cius was much more sorowfull that he could not winne him to haue gone with him, in this holy pilgrimage for religions sake; but he so much feared to haue bin hindred himselfe, that he durst not deale with this gentleman his dearest co∣fin, no nor with his wife, to perswade them to haue gone with him. The gentleman comming to Geneua inquired af∣ter Galeacius. At that time Galeacius dwelt in an ordinary & meane house which he had taken to his owne vse, hauing no more attendance, but onely two seruants: the gentle∣man at last found him out, and presented himselfe into his sight: It had bin a pitiful spectacle to haue seene the mee∣ting of those two gentlemen: their first meeting and imbra∣cings were nothing at all, but sighes and sobs, and teares, and vnutterable signes of griefe: such vnspeakeable sorow did their naturall affections breed in them, that for diuers houres they could not speake a word one to other: but at last the gentleman, burning in desire to inioy againe his dearest Galeacius, brast forth into speeches, & mixing teares and sobs with euery worde, deliuered his letters, till hee could come to more liberty of speech: and at last hauing obtained of his affections leaue to speake, he added to his letters, exhortations, strong perswasions, earnest entrea∣ties, and withall plentie of teares, that he would haue res∣pect to the ouerthrow of his house, the griefe of his olde fa∣ther, the desperate estate of his wife and children, the con∣tinual complaints made by all his friends and kinsfolks: all which notwithstanding were not so past cure, but that yet they might be remedied by his returne again. This was the substance of his message. Galeacius taking not long time to aduise himselfe, in this which the world would thinke so waighty a case, addressed him immediatly this answere in briefe: that he perceiued very wel▪ al to be true that he said; but as for his departure it was not done rashly, nor vpon
any fond conceit, but vpon mature deliberation; that the Lord was the author of the action, that Gods grace was the cause mouing him, and the meanes whereby he brought it to passe: which grace of God, he said, had opened his eyes, and enlightned his mind with the knowledge of the truth; and made him see and discerne the cosenages, and supersti∣tions and Idolatry of Popery, which by an impious and sa∣crilegious distribution diuideth the glory of God (which is incōmunicable) & imparteth the same with fained & filthy Idols: he likewise told him that he wel foresaw all the infa∣mies & miseries which would ensue vpon this his conuersi∣on: and al the danger & damage which therby his house and children were likely to incur. But he said, that seeing one of those must needes be chosen, either to stay at home with a conscience burdened with a heauy heape of errors and su∣perstitions piled together by the sleight of satans art, & eue∣ry momēt to sin against the Maiesty of God so many thou∣sand waies; or else to leaue his house, his goods his family, his country, yea the world and all the glory of it, and there∣by purchase liberty of conscience to serue the Lord accor∣ding to his word: that therefore he resolued of the two euils to chuse the lesse, and of the two good to chuse the greater, and rather to shut his eies at all these, then the sight of them should hinder him from yeelding to the cal and voice of his Sauiour Christ: who saith, That a man is not worthy to be his disciple, who leaueth not father & mother, & children, & brethren, and sisters; yea and his owne life, in comparison of him. And this he said was the cause, why he did forsake parents, and wife, and children, and all his friends, and had renounced all his wealth and dignities: because hee could not enioy both Christ and them. And as for them all, hee was sorie that either they would not come to him, or that hee might not more safely liue with them, thereby to comfort them. But as for himselfe, hee said, hee had riches, and honour, and ioy enough: yea all sufficient happinesse, as long as (with these two seruants and his little cotage) he might liue in the true Church of God, and might
priuily serue him, and might enioy Gods word and sacra∣ments, not being mixed and defiled with the superstitious deuises of mans braine; and as long as he might liue in the company of godly men; and haue time and liberty to me∣ditate by himselfe, and to conferre with them of the great blessings which in his conuersion his good God had vouch▪ safed to him: that so he might with true contentation and perfect peace of conscience, aime & aspire at that immortal glory which Christ Iesus hath prepared for al his children: yea he concluded, that his want was abundance, his pouer∣ty pleasant, and his meane estate honourable in his eyes, as long as he indured them for these conditions. This his answere was as hardly entertained of his kins∣man, as it was vnlooked for afore it came: but seeing he could not reply with any reason, nor answere him with a∣ny shew of argument; and perceiued it hard, or rather im∣possible to remoue the man one iot from his resolution; for that he had grounded it, not on any reason or will of man, but vpon the holy word of God, and his powerfull and vnresistable calling; therefore with a sorrowfull heart hee held his tongue, bitterly complaining within himself of his so hard hap, and vncomfortable successe: and so resolued to returne home againe; heartily wishing he had neuer ta∣ken that iourney in hand: and so at last he went indeed and tooke his leaue of his beloued Galeacius, but not without plenty of teares on both sides, with many a wofull crie and pitifull farewell. And no maruell: for besides neerenes in blood, their likenesse in manners and daily conuersation together, had linked them in a sure bond of friendshippe: but there wanted in one of them the surest linke in that chaine, that is, Religion, and so it could not hold: and there∣fore the world pulling one of them from Christ, and Christ pulling the other of them from the world: so these two friends left each other, being in feare neuer to see one the other againe.
CHAP. XV. Of his cosens returue to Naples without successe, and how Galeacius was proclaimed Traytor for his departure. ANd thus at last he came home to Naples with heauie cheare. Whose approch being hard of, there was run∣ning on all sides to heare good newes: but when he had de∣liuered his message; alas how all their sorrow was redoub∣led vpon them; and how his father, wife, children, and al his friends were ouerwhelmed with griefe: and the rather, be∣cause as at the same time an edict was published, wherein Galeacius was proclaimed guilty of high treason: and there∣fore al his goods comming to him by his mother, were con∣fiscate, and himselfe, and all his posterity vtterly cut off and excluded from all right of succession in his fathers Mar∣quesdome; which thing (aboue all other) grieuously af∣fected the old Marquesse, and grieued the good old man at the very heart; the aduancing and honouring of his po∣sterity being the onely thing hee had aimed at all his life. Whereupon hee bethought himselfe as old as he was to make a iourney to Caesar the Emperour, and thereby if it were possible to preuent this mischiefe; purposing to make but this sute to his Maiesty, that his sonnes departure from the Roman Church, might not preiudice nor hinder the suc∣cession and honour of his children and posterity, but that he himselfe might onely beare the punishment of his owne fault.
CHAP. XVI. Of the second meanes vsed to recall him: his father sent for him to come and meete him at Verona; but all he could doe by himselfe or others whom he set on, preuailed nothing at all. AND whilst he was resoluing of this purpose, hee bethought him of another remedy and meanes, whereby he hoped to remoue his sons mind from his pur∣pose, and withdraw him from the company of these here∣tikes of Geneua, as hee and the world accounted of them. Therefore in hast he dispatched away a messenger with let∣ters to his sonne, commanding him by the authority of a fa∣ther to meete him at a certaine day appointed at the citie of Verona in the Dominion of the Venetians; at which towne he promised to stay for him, as he went to wards Germany to the Emperour: and for his sonnes more securitie, he procu∣red a safe conduct from the Duke and Signory of Venice; that his sonne might goe and come without danger of life or liberty. Galeacius receiuing the letters, and being resol∣ued by his owne conscience, and them to whom he impar∣ted the matter, that hee might not any way with good conscience disobey so reasonable a request and lawfull a commandement of his father, answered that he would goe; although he feared that by this meeting, and talke of his father and him, his fathers minde would but be more ve∣hemently exasperate against him: for he firmely resolued afore he went, that all the threatnings, intreaties, counsels, and temptations that his father could deuise, should not stirre him one inch from that course of Religion, whereby he had begun to serue the Lord. With this purpose he de∣parted Geneua, Aprilis 19. 1553. furnished with heauenly fortitude, assisted aiers of the Church, and armed with constancy, and with the sword of Gods word; where∣by he hoped to sustaine and beat backe all the darts of
temptations whereby hee knew hee should be assaulted. Comming to Verona, there he found the Marquesse his fa∣father, who receiued and vsed him kindly, though he could not but manifest in his countenance the inward anger and griefe ofhis heart. After a few salutations, the father began with all his cunning to deale with him about his returne home againe, laying open to the ful that perpetuall in famy, which was sure to fall on his house and posterity, vnlesse that Galeacius did preuent so great a mischiefe: which (saith he) thou easily maiest doe, and of right oughtest to doe: and I know thou wilt doe, if there be in thee but one sparke of naturall affection to father, wife, or children. Galeacius the sonne with such reuerence as was due to his father, answe∣red with all subsion that his bodie and estate is his fa∣thers, but his conscience is the Lords: and tels him he can by no meanes returne home, but he should make shipwrack of a good conscience: he proues it to him by good reasons, and such as his father could not resist; and therefore hum∣blie intreats his father, that seeing his desire is onely to obey the Lord, and saue his soule; that therefore he would not vrge him to respect more the good estate of his children, then the glory of God, and his owne soules health. The Marquesse perceiued he laboured in vaine to remoue his sonne from his resolution, which he iudged to be nothing but a peruerse stubbornnesse against the Catholike Religi∣on, as he thought: and therefore with griefe ofminde cea∣sed that sute; and imparted to him the cause ofhis iourney to the Emperour; strictly enioyning him that he should not returne to Geneua, but abide in Italy till he had obtained his sute at the Emperours hand, and was returned out of Germany; which thing Galeacius promised and performed: for he a bode in Italy vntill August: at what time he had notice that his father had preuailed in his sute bfore the Em∣perour. During which time, one Hieronymus Fracastorius,Hieronymus Fracastorius. a notable Philosopher, Physition, and Poet (being procu∣red and set on by the Marquesse) dealt with Galeacius with all his might and eloquence, to perswade him to yeelde to
his father; adding withall, that that new sect (as he termed) was false and deceitfull, and not worthy to be beleeued. Galeacius heard all he could say, and answered him point by point: and finally, by the pure simplicity of the word of God, he so satisfied him (though he was both wise and lear∣ned) that he willingly held his tongue; and at last friend∣ly intreated him, that he would not be angrie for that his importunitie and boldnesse with him. CHAP. XVII. Of his returne to Geneua, where he founded and setled a forme of discipline in the Italian Church. THus Galeacius hearing of his fathers successe, returned with a ioyfull heart towards Geneua; for that he saw his father deliuered from the feare of that infamy, which the confiscation of his goods, and forfeiture of his lands, might haue brought vpon his family: and therefore he ho∣ped he would be the lesse moued against him. Whereup∣pon setling himselfe downe againe at Geneua, and deuising how to spend his time in doing good; he began to consider seriously of setling the discipline in the Church of the Itali∣ans, which was then at Geneua (for thither had a great number of Italians transported themselues and their families for Re∣ligions sake, flying the tyranny of the vnholy inquisition.) And about that time it fell out fitly that Calume going Em∣bassadour from Geneua to Basill in causes of Religion and o∣ther matters; intreated Galeacius to beare him company: whereunto he willingly condescended. At Basill he found an Italian called Celsas, whose right name was Maximilian, and was descended of the noble house of the Earles of Martinongo in Italy: this man had got a great name in Italy amongst the Papists for his eloquency & speech, and lately by the mercy of God was escaped out of the mite of popish superstitions. Galeacius right glad of him, perswaded him to breake off the purpose that he had for England, and goe to
Geneua with him, where he might liue in the fellowship of a great number of his country men Italians, and inioy the be∣nefit of the company, conference and familiarity of many worthy men, but especially the most sweete acquaintance of that great Caluin, and al those, with the liberty of a good conscience. The good gentleman yeelded, and so they com∣ming to Geneua by their industry and good meanes (toge∣ther with the helpe and direction of Caluin in all things) that forme of discipline was established in the Italian Church, which at this day standeth & florisheth in the same church, & remaineth recorded in a book for that purpose: & Maxi∣milian the Earle, of whom we spake afore, was the first Pa∣stor elect of that church, & vndertooke the charge, purely to expound the word of God, and to administer the Sa∣craments that Christ left behinde him, and to watch ouer that flocke and people: certaine Elders were ioyned as as∣sistants to him, to whom was committed the care of the Church, to looke to the puritie of doctrine and life in all estates; the principall of the Elders was Galeacius himselfe, vnto whom the honour is due of bringing to passe so wor∣thy an enterprise, and the rather for that by his authority, diligence and watchful care, he preserued the same in good and sure estate all his life time; and after him it hath conti∣nued, being deriued to others, to the great good and profit of many soules. And thus he passed this yere 1554. withioy and comfort. CHAP. XVIII. The third temptation to drawe him away: liberty of consci∣ence offered him by his vncle, Pope Paul the fourth: which after many temptations of flesh and blood to the contrary, at last by the assistance of Gods grace he refused. NExt succeeded in order the yere 1555. wherein Satan assauted him with new stratagems and deuices: for
that yere his vncle which was Paulus quartus, his mothers brother, attained the feate of the Papacy of Rome, whereby the Marquesse his father conceiued good hope, by this meanes either to draw his sonne home againe, or at least to procure him liberty of conscience, and leaue to liue in some Citie of Italy, where he might inioy the society of his wife and children, and they of him. Whereupon hauing occasion of businesse to trauel that way, hee sent letters to his sonne to Geneua, commaunding him to meete him at Mantua in Italy, and for his easier dispatch hee sent him prouision of money for the iourney. Galeacius obey∣ing againe his fathers will, tooke his iourney from Gene∣ua, and came to Mantua the fifteenth of Iune, where hee was entertayned by his father with more then ordinarie kindnesse, and in more louing maner then heretofore was accustomed. And at last hee opened his minde vnto him, the substance and effect whereof was: that hee had ob∣tained of his vncle, who now was Pope▪ a dispensation for him; whereby liberty was granted him, to liue in any City within the iuristiction of the Venetians, wheresoeuer he would without any molestation to be offred him, about his Religion or conscience. His father tels him that if he doe this, this will bee a greater solace to his olde age, then his departure and absence hath beene griefe vnto him: besides all this, the good old man most earnestly intreated him (though hee was the father and spake to the sonne) that hee would gratifie him in this his request: and ad∣ded many beseechings, who in any lawfull thing might by his authoritie haue commanded him: and euery word that he spake was so seasoned, as comming from the af∣fection of a father; and at last with many strong reasons perswaded him, not to reiect this so extraordinary a fauor offered him by the Pope in so speciall and rare clemency, whereby he might without hurt of his conscience liue more commodiously then euer afore, and be restored to his for∣mer honour, and place, and estate: and recouer the former loue and estimation of all his friends: yea and of many
strangers, who hearing of this his obedience to his father, would loue him for it, vnto which obedience to me (saith the father to his sonne) thou art bound both by the bond of nature, and by the law and word of God, which thou so much talkest of and vrgest to me: therefore, saith he, if there be in thee either sparke of naturall affection, or any Religi∣on and conscience of thy duety, thou wilt yeelde vnto me in this, especially seeing thou maist doe it without hurt or endangering of thy conscience and Religion. This talke and request of the Marquesse diuersly affected Galeacius: for the thing he requested, and the reasons he vrged seemed to be such, as he could with no good reason contradict them; and yet he durst not presently entertaine the motion: besides that, the presence, authority, and reuerent regard of his father, the vehemency and affection of his mind, and e∣specially the naturall bond and obligation, wherein the son stands tied to the father in things law full and indifferent (e∣specially when by that obedience no violence is offred to good conscience) all these did greatly moue him. Also naturall and carnall reason for their parts, assaulted him no lesse violently with such kind of arguments, as for the most part preuaile with all men. For his father offred him year∣ly reuenues, competent and fit for his estate, the solace of his children, and society of his wife: which two things he desired aboue all other in the world. So that to this moti∣on and request of his father the Marquesse, Galeacius knew not well what to answere on the sudden, but stood for a time musing and doubtfull what to say; and the rather, for that he then wanted his speciall friend, faithfull Caluine, with whom he might consult in so waighty a cause. It see∣med to him impious and vngodly, not to yeeld to his father in so lawfull and reasonable a request, and he saw no way how he might denie it, but he must needes incurre and vn∣dergoe his fathers extreame displeasure: and yet how hee might yeelde to it with safety of conscience he much doub∣ted; for he feared that more danger to his profession and Religion, and consequently more hurt to his soule might
hereupon insue, then he could presently perceiue: so that he stood altogether vnresolued in his owne reason what to doe; therefore in this extremity he denied himselfe and re∣nounced his owne wit, and in humble and feruent prayer betooke himselfe in this difficulty to the blessing and dire∣ction of his God and Sauiour, the author and true fountain of wisedome and constancy: humbly crauing of the Lord to assist him with his holy spirit, that in this extreamity hee might aduise and resolue of the best and safest course, for Gods glory and his owne sound comfort. (O how truely sung that sweete singer of Israel King Dauid, when he said, How happy and blessed are they that feare God, for God will teach them the way they should walke!) Galeacius found it most true in his owne experience; for vpon this his submission and prayer, the Lord from heauen resolued him in this sort: That seeing the Pope did (Antichrist-like) directly oppose himselfe to Christ▪ and his Religion and Church; that therefore he might by no meanes sue for, or accept any fa∣uour at his hands, nor be by any meanes beholden to him at all. Because what shew of seruice soeuer was done to him by the enemy of Christ, seemed to bee taken from Christ himselfe. Further, Gods spirit perswaded him it ca∣ried too great a shew of Apostasie, or backsliding; to for∣sake the company of godly professors, and the fellowship of Christs Church; and to liue amongst Idolaters in the midst of all abominations. The same spirit of God set be∣fore his eyes that scandall and offence, which this fact of his would breed in the minds of the faithfull▪ which would thinke that he had taken his farewel at Religion, and would now shake hands again, & renue his acquaintance with his old friend the world: that he had lightly esteemed the spiri∣tuall blessings & heauenly iewels of graces, which God di∣stributeth daily in his Church; and would now betake him∣self again to the olde affections of his flesh. The same spirit resolued him, that thus to forsake the ordinary meanes, and depriue himselfe of the true vse of the word and Sacra∣ments, and to liue in a place where was nothing but Idola∣trie,
was to tempt God in the highest degree. God like∣wise opened his eyes, that he perceiued the sleight of Satan by this his fathers dt: namely, to entangle him againe in the net of worldly cares, to wrappe his mind in the snards of Italian pleasures; and so to dazle his eies with the honours, and pleasures, and sensuall delights▪ which once he had bin brought vp in, that his Religion might decay by little and little and that all godlinesse might by the heat of these new pleasures, fall and melt away like as waxe before the fire: and lastly, the Lord vpon his prayer granted him the wise∣dome of his holy spirit, to answere al his fathers obiections, and confute all his arguments. And amongst many other, he earnestly intreated his father that he would not do that vnto him, which afterward hee would repent that euer hee had done: namely▪ that he would not be a meanes to make him a prey to the Papists; which had confirmed for a law, and ratified it by many examples, that promise, faith, nor oath is to be kept with any man whom they call heretikes. Whereupon, said he, it is better for me, and more ioy to you, to liue as I doe with this poore estate, then with hope of bet∣ter to endanger my life, and so our whole posterity. By these, and such like perswasions it pleased God so to worke vpon the Marquesse, that hee was ouercome in this sute, wherein he supposed to haue preuailed; and therefore he yeelded against his will: and so with a sorrowfull heart he returned to Naples. And as he went, he certified the Pope the obstinacy of his sonne, and so the father and the vncle bewailed together their ill successe. CHAP. XIX. Of his acquaintance with Franciscus Portus, and the Reli∣gious Dutches of Ferrara in his returne home to Geneua. BVt in the meane time Galeacius after he had accompa∣nied his sorrowfull father somewhat on the way, re∣turned with a full glad heart; and came to the city of Fer∣rara▪
where he was ioyfully receiued of Franciscus Portus, a noble and renowned man for learning, and who after∣wards taught publikely at Geneua many yeares, and read the Greeke Lecture with great profit to the audience, and praise to himselfe. This Portus bought Galeacius into ac∣quaintance with the noble Dutches of Ferrara, who enter∣tained him honourably: and after much conferrence had with him of the alteration of his Religion, of the successe of his long voyages, and tedious iourneies; of the Church of Geneua, of Caluine, and of many chiefe points of Christian Religion; she dismissed him, and left him to his iourney; but not without all courtesies that she could affoord him: and namely for one, to relieue the length and tediousnes of the way, she lent him her owne chariot: and thus Galeacius was conueyed in the chariot of so great a Princesse as far as to the towne of Francolium: from whence hauing a pleasant tide down the riuer of Po, or Padus, he came by water into Venice: where taking shippe and crossing the sea, he went thorow Switzerland to Geneua, and thither came the foure∣teenth of October in the same yeare, the whole congrega∣tion, and especially his chiefe friends, reioycing with ioy vnspeakeable, for the safety of his returne. And thus this cruell tempests thus being ouer-blowen and now quieted, and Satan seeing he preuailed not by any of those forcible assaults; yet thought to trie him with one more, and there∣fore came vpon him a fresh, like as a second fitte of an ague stronger then the first: and by this Satan feared not but to giue him the ouerthrow▪ and to bring him home a∣gaine into Italy: and thus it was.
CHAP. XX. The fourth assault that Satan vsed to bring him backe a∣gaine, was by his wife, who by her letters won him to come and meete her in Italy: which he yeelded vnto, and gaue her meeting. HIS wife Victoria burned in long loue and hearty affe∣ction toward her husband Galeacius, so that it cannot be vttered how vehemently she desired his company: wher∣upon shee neuer ceased writing to him, and intreating him to returne againe to her and his children. But when shee saw her womanly arguments and vaine scribling did no good, at last shee in all earnest manner desired him to meete her in some City within the territorie of the Venetians, not farre from the kingdome of Naples. To this motion Galeacius yeelded: and thus the husband and wife promised to meet; but the ends that they aymed at were diuers: she hoped by her slattery and faire speeches, her teares and lamentations, to winne her husband home againe: on the other side he was much more busie in de∣uising how he might perswade her to deliuer her selfe out of the filth of Popery, and come and dwell with him. With these resolutions they both going forward, shee came to Vico, to her father in law the Marquesse. He came from Geneua to Laesina, a citie in Dalmatia. This Laesina is distant from Vicum an hundred Italian miles by water; and standeth iust ouer against Vicum; and the sea called the Venetian gulfe lieth betwixt them. Galeacius here abode and expe∣ctedSinus Adriati∣cus. his wife: but at that time she came not as she had pro∣mised, and he expected. Yet he could neuer learn the cause of her staying at that time, nor what it was that moued her so to disappoint him; yet though she came not her selfe she sent two of her eldest sons to their father; whose sight was most welcome, & their company most cōfortable to Galea∣cius:
but one way it grieued him the more; because the sight and company of them more affected him with the absence of his wife; for whose sake and company especially he had taken so long a iourney: therefore sending them soone af∣ter home againe, he went away sorowfull to Geneua. Where he had rested but a few daies, but another packet of letters came posting from his wife, beseeching him not to thinke much at her former negligence, and to vouchsafe once a∣gaine to come to the same place; where, without all faile, she would most gladly attend him, and solemnly vowed with largeprotestations she would not disappoint him. The request was very vnreasonable, & it was a hard case for Ga∣leacius thus to spend his time, and wearie his mind and body in so long and dangerous iournies, and to so little purpose as hitherto he had. Notwithstanding, one thing mooued him to yeelde euen to this motion also: namely, a perswa∣sion that he had, that when he first forsoke his country, he did not fully discharge his duety, in labouring to winne his wife to haue gone with him; by explaining to her the chiefe heads of Christian doctrine, whereby she might pos∣sibly haue receiued some tast, and so haue taken some liking of true Religion: desiring therefore now if it were possible to make amends for his former negligence, he yeelded to goe. And so obtayning for his better security in going and returning, a pasport or safe-conduct from the high Court of Rhoetia; he departed from Geneua the seuenth of March, in the yeare 1558. and came to Laesina in Dolmatia, ouer against Vicum: where he had intelligence that the Mar∣quesse his father, his wife, his children, and his vncles sonne (he of whom we heard before) were already come to Vicum, with purpose to haue beene by that time at Laesina with Ga∣leacius; but they could not, by reason that a mariner of Venice had broken promise with them, and disappointed them: by reason whereof, and of other dangers of the sea, they could not as yet take shipping, nor durst venture ouer the water. Whereupon Galeacius not induring patiently so long de∣layes, resolued to goe himselfe ouer to Vicum. Such was
his faith in the Lord, and his loue to his friends, that hee re∣spected not the imminent danger: but constantly relied on the Lords protection; knowing that no fleshly affections droue him to his iourney, but a sincere zeale to Gods ho∣nour, and the soules health of his kinred, and the discharg∣ing of his owne duety vnto them; whereunto he was per∣swaded that he had a speciall calling. CHAP. XXI. Of his arriuall at Vico, his fathers chiefe house, and his en∣tertainment there: and what meanes were vsed to seduce him: and how his wife refused not onely to goe with him, but euen to lie with him, because he was an heretike: being thereto, as she said, commanded by her Confessor. AND so arriuing by Gods mercy on the coast of Italy, not farre from Vicum, he gaue intelligence of his ap∣proch to his father the Marquesse; who presently sent his children to meete their father: and all his retinue to attend him into the castle; at whose entrance, it cannot be ex∣pressed how great ioy was in all that house and noble fa∣milie; and how all the Nobles and Gentlemen of his kinred and acquaintance reioyced at his returne; and beganne to cheere vp their hearts with a new hope which hitherto had beene cast downe and oppressed with griefe and despaire. But aboue all other his wife (Madam Victoria) surpassed in ioy and new conceiued delight; hoping she had now re∣couered her most deere Lord and beloued husband, the on∣ly comfort and the sweete solace of her life. All (but Gale∣acius) exceedingly reioyced at this meeting here; though indeed it greatly ioyed his naturall affection, to enioy the company of his friends, so many, so neere, and so deere vnto him: yet his ioy was tempered and allayed with a certaine doubting feare which ranne in his minde night and day.
for the wise Gentleman well foresaw, that the fruition of that pleasure was but to last a while, and soone would haue an end▪ for the end of his comming was not that which they imagined: and euery day new matters ranne in his heads the consideration whereof did not a little trouble him. Hee hath often since discoursed vn to his friends, that all those dayes he liued in continuall feare, to be suddenly appre∣hended, and cast into some filthy prison; where he should spend his daies in languishing and lamentations, without any solace of his friends: yea and be vtterly debarred of the comfortable reading of Gods holy word. But returne to the matter. At his first arriuall hee was entertained with much ioy on all sides, and many cherefull countenan∣ces and kind welcomes. But alas, within a few daies all this mirth and ioy was turned into teares and lamentation, and vnmeasurable griefe: for when once he had opened to his father the Marquesse his constant purpose to per∣seuere in the truth of that Religion hee had begunne to professe; and that hee would rather die in the defence of it, then be drawen from it; then alas, what fighing, what crying, yea what dolefull lamentation did it moue in them all! But then let the Christian reader iudge what a troubled spirit and wofull heart that good man had in this so fearefull a combatte betwixt the grace of God and his naturall affections; and what a torment it was vnto him, to see them all so neere and deere vnto him, labour to withdraw him from God; and to see his constancy in Religion so to grieue them, which was the ioy of his owne heart. Yet taking vp with himselfe as well as nature could, and comforting himselfe in his God, he afterward dealt with his wife in all louing and yet earnest manner that she would follow him her husband, and delay no longer time, but come and liue with him according as the law of God and nature required: which if she would doe, he promised her liberty of her conscience and Religi∣on, to liue as she would▪ But for his owne part, he told her a∣forehand, as she should after find; namely, that he was firm∣lie
esolued to liue and die in that Religion, which (by the hand of God leading him) hee had vndertaken; and for the which he had forsaken countrey, kinred, and all those excellent and comfortable blessings of thus life, which God had giuen him. Here I leaue it to the reader, but especially to the harts of such women, as being wiues, do truely loue their husbands, to iudge with what sobs and heart-breaking the silly Gentlewoman heard these words of her husband, whom she now saw past all hope to be perswaded to stay with her; which she desired aboue all worldly things. Yet it appears it was but in meere carnal and worldly respects, as the consequent shewed: for though she loued him and desired his company neuer so much; yet beeing a wise, worldly, wilfull, and indeed a right Papist, she answered him plainely (though with many teares) that she would ne∣uer go with him to Geneua, nor to any other place, where was any other Religion, but that of Rome; & that she would not liue with him as long as he was intangled with those he∣resies (as she called them) wherby it appeares that she was a carnall politike Papist. She loued him, but where? in Italy; and there would line with him, but not at Geneua: and why? for in Italy he might aduance her to the state of a Marchio∣nesse; in Geneua he could not: there she might liue with him a life ful of al delights; but in Geneua a hard, base, & obscure life, and subiect to many outward dangers and miseries. In which respects it was that she was so instant vpō him to stay with her. But the conclusion was, her desire was to enioy him & Italy both: but rather then she would leaue Italy and the delicacies therof, she chose plainely to forsake him; & to withdraw the duty of a wife from him. For it may in no case be omitted (which afterward hee imparted to some his in∣tierest and most inward friends) that shee euen then and there denied him that duetie which a wife is bound to yeeld to her husband by the law of God and nature: that is, she would by no meanes giue him due beneuolence, nor consent to lie with him as man and wife: and gaue this reason; that shee was expresly forbidden of her
Confessor, vnder paine of excommunication, because hee was an heretike. Where behold Popish Religion what it is, that can separate man and wife for disparity in Religion; and can discharge men and women from those dueties of marriage with which God hath charged them. How this monstrous vnkindnes and vnwomanly answer pierced his heart, let any Christian man iudge, whom God hath hono∣red to be an husband. Yet he ouercame and euen deuou∣red all these tormenting griefes, and beare them with an in∣uincible constancy and quietnes of mind. Yet he purposed not to beare so great an iniury for cuer, but to redresse and helpe it if it were possible: and therefore he further procee∣ded with her, and openly and plainely denounced to her, that vnlesse she would yeeld him that matrimoniall duety, which by Gods law she ought: namely, to eate, and lie, and liue with him; it would be a cause to make him sue out a di∣uorce against her, and so procure a finall separation; which if she were the cause of, she might thanke or rather blame her selfe, who withdrew her necke from that yoke of duety towards him which marriage required, and which he for his part said, he would neuer haue done to her, though her Re∣ligion was so farre differing from his. Yet notwithstan∣ding▪ he said, that she first refusing him, hee had then iust cause to refuse her, who had first by refusall of that duety refused her selfe as it were, and denied her selfe to bee his wife. And so he concluded with her, that vnlesse she would be his wife, he would no longer be her husband. This protestation no doubt, amazed and troubled her not a little, and vexed the silly womans mind; especially for that he was and had alwaies beene such a husband to her, so good and kind, and euery way so well deseruing, that she loued him as her owne eyes (therefore more was she to blame, that she esteemed him not as the light of her eyes:) but though this troubled her sore, yet it moued her not to her duety; so good a scholar was she in this Popish lear∣ning, that she would rather incur her husbands, yea Gods displeasure then her Confessors; and rather breake their
commandements so holy and iust, then his, which was so vngodlie, and so vnreasonable: and it also lesse preuayled with her because she imagined he would not so doe (though he spake so) but onely did it to feare her, and so in feare hereof to make her yeeld vnto him. CHAP. XXII. Seeing he could not reclaime his Ladie, he resolued to returne to Geneua: and of the greeuous temptations he endu∣red: where he tooke his last farewell of his father, wife, children, and friends: and of his hea∣uenly courage, in bearing and pas∣sing thorow them all. WHen therefore the good gentleman saw all things so farre amisse, that euen his wife was against him of all other, and gaue him a deeper wound then all other his friends; denying him that societie and fellowship which the bond of marriage yeeldeth, & seeing that the time pas∣sed without any good doing, but rather to the increasing of griefe on all sides; hee theerfore resolued to depart, and so calling his wife Ʋictoria againe, he iterated vnto her his former protestation; and so bad her take it as his last war∣ning. The dolefull day of his departing being come, hee held on his purpose, and so entred into the chamber of his father the Marquesse to do his duetie vnto him, and to take his leaue: Who seeing his son thus past al hope of recouery, quenching his fatherly affection in fury and raging mad∣nesse, like a frantike or desperate man, reuiled him in most dispitefull termes, and at last giues him his farewel with ma∣ny a heauy and bitter curse. This so strange and extraordi∣nary persecution, did this good gentleman suffer for Christs sake; and it is marueile that it did not cause him to looke backe againe, and turne his course. But it was Gods doing that his father should vse these extreme and violent curses,
rather then to goe about to winne him by allurements and gentle perswasions: for hee hath often vsed to tell his friends, that this monstrous inhumanity and vnnaturalnes of his father did rather confirme and settle his minde; his nature being rather to be ledde then drawen, and rather to be wonne by friendlinesse and faire meanes, then to be vr∣ged by extremities. But God would haue his seruant to be tried by both meanes: namely, the allurements of his wife and the minacings of his father. Thus God would purge him in the fire of all kind of temptations. And thus by the power of Gods grace hauing passed thorow this fire, be∣hold a hotter is to be ventured on. Departing his fathers chamber, with that burden of curses (which the Lord tur∣ned into blessings) he came into the great chamber, and so into the hall; where he found his wife, his children, his vncles sonne (afore spoken of) diuers noble gentlemen his kinsfolks, and some his ancient familiars and domestick friends: all fraught with griefe, and making heauy cheere; nothing was heard but sighes, and sobbes, and cries; no∣thing was seene but teares and wringing of hands: his wife embracing him, and taking him about the necke, beseeched him in most louing and most pitifull maner, that be would haue care of himselfe, of her, and of all his children, and whole house; and not so wilfully to cast them all away. His yong children all vpon their knees, with armes stretched ou t, and hands holden vp, and faces swolne with teares, cried vnto him to haue pitie on them his owne bowels; and not to make them fatherlesse before the time. His cosen and other kinsmen with heauie countenances and watrie eyes looked rufully on him; and though for griefe they were not able to speake one word to him; yet euery looke, and euery countenance, and euery gesture was a loud crie, and a strong intreatie, that he would stay, and not leaue so ancient and noble a house in such wosull and desolate case. No words can suffice to expresse the griefe of that doleful company, nor that lamentable departure that there was to be seene. Vnutterable was the griefe on their side,
and vnspeakeable was the torment & temptation which the no∣ble gentleman felt in this agonv, when he must either leaue Christ Iesus or leaue all these for him. But amongst & aboue al, there was one most lamētable sight, which would euen haue wrung tears frō a hart of flint. Amongst al his children he had one daughter, a to∣wardly & goodly yong gentlewoman of xij. yeres old, who cry∣ing out amain & wallowing in teares, fell downe, & catching fast hold about his thighes and knees, held him so hard as he could by no means shake her off: & the affectiō of a father wroght so with him, as he could not offer with violence to hurt her; he labored to be loose, but she held faster; he went away, but she trailed after, crying to him not to be so cruell to her his childe; who came into the world by him. This so wonderfully wrought with his nature, he being a man of a most louing & kind affection; that he hath of∣ten reported he thought that all his bowels rowled about within him & that his hart would haue burst presently, & there instant∣ly haue died, his child so hauing him fast about the legs. But not∣withstāding al this, he being armed with a supernatural & heauē∣ly fortitude, he brake thorow al these tēptations, & treading vn∣der foot whatsoeuer might hinder him frō Christ, he escaped out ofthis perillous battell a glorious cōquerer; & so leauing that sor∣rowful house & dolorus cōpany, he came with speed to the shore: where presētly taking shipping, he caused them to hoist vp sailes towards Laesina with a turmoiled & distressed mind, one way sur∣charged with sorow to remēber the maner of his departure; ano∣ther way surprized with ioy to remēber that he had escaped. And euen as a ship in a tēpestuoussea, the boisterous waues tossing it vp & down, is thrown about, somtime touching the clouds▪ somtime plunged into the depth: So no doubt the noble mind of this yong marquesse was no lesse distracted with cotrary cogitations; being as it were in a labyrinth of distempered affections: sometimes he could not but remēber that lamētable estate wherin he left his fa∣ther, wife, & children: he often imagined he was stil amongst thē; he thought he hard them cry & cal vpon him; thought he still felt his litle deere daughter clasping him about the legs & trailing after him; neither could he contain but breake out into tears; nei∣ther could he for his life but often looke backe at that princely house, with al those goodly orchards, gardēs, granges, fields & te∣ritories: to al which he was the only heire apparēt; yet al which he saw he must leaue for Christ sake. But one thing pierced his heart
to see his wife, and children, and other his alliance stan∣ding on the shore; who when they could not speake to him, looked at him; and when they could not see him cea∣sed not to looke after the shippe as long as it was in sight; neither could hee refraine but with a wofull countenance looke at them againe as long as hee could discerne them: and withall he called to minde the bitter words and heauy farewell which the Marquesse his father gaue him at his de∣parture; all which cogitations running in his head, did doubtlesse wring from his sorrowfull heart many a deepe sigh and heauy grone, and many a bitter teare from his wa∣trie eyes: and yet notwithstanding all these, the spirituall strength and courage of his minde was constant and inuin∣cible. And euen as a good Pilot in a raging sea, when clouds and darkenesse, thunder and lightnings, storme and tempest runne together, and tosse the shippe from waue to waue, as lightly as a ball from hand to hand; yet for all that he sits still at the helme, with vndanted courage, and markes his compasse; and by his courage and skill toge∣ther keepes on a right and stedfast course thorow all the rage of sea and weather: euen so this our thrice noble Ga∣leacius taking hold of the holy and heauenly anchor; namely, a liuely faith in Christ, and a stedfast hope in God, he surmounts the clouds, and fixeth those anchor-holdes in heauen, and looking stedfastly with a spirituall eye, at the true load starre: namely, Christ Iesus and the hope of eter∣nall happinesse; he directs his course towards the same with an heroicall spirit, and heauenly resolution thorow the tempestuous waues of those fearefull temptations: and the shippe that caried his body, did not so fast transport him from delicate Italy towards Dalmatia, as the shippe of heauenly constancy and loue of God withdrew his minde and meditation from all naturall respects and worldly de∣lights, and made it mount alost in holy contemplation. And thus the presence and grace of Gods spirit, hauing ouer∣come the power of naturall affections; he began to cheere vp himselfe after this tempest: and first of all, bending the
knees of his heart to the eternall father in heauen; hee yeel∣ded his Maiesty most hearty thankes, for that he had fur∣nished his soule with such a portion of his grace, as to with∣stand and conquere Satan in such a perillous battell: and for that hee had deliuered him from the danger of Popish thraldome, from the inquisition, and from that perpetuall imprisonment both of conscience and body which the Po∣pish Church would haue brought him vnto, had he not thus escaped their hands. Hee likewise praised God vn∣fainedly, that he vouchsafed to giue him time, opportunity, and grace to discharge that duety to his wife the yong Marchionesse, which at his first departure he had omitted, and which oftentimes he had with great griefe bewailed, and that he had enabled him to omit nothing which might haue perswaded her to haue left Sodome, and to haue vn∣dertaken with him this blessed pilgrimage towards the heauenly Ierusalem. The remembrance of these things much refreshed his troubled minde. It also much conten∣ted and satisfied his conscience, that vpon that monstrous and vndutifull behauiour of his wife towards him (spoken of before) hee had made that protestation which hee did: namely, that he would vse the lawfull meanes to be diuor∣ced from her, who had first of al diuorced & cut off her selfe from him, by denying that duety of loue, which the wife may not denie to the husband, nor the husband to the wife: he perswaded himselfe that this protestation would worke well with her, and make her more confirmeable to her due∣tie, when she had aduisedly thought of it.
CHAP. XXIII. Of his iourney home againe by Venice, and thorow Rhoetia, Switzerland: and his safe arriuall at Geneua: and of the great ioy he brought to the Church by his safe returne. REuiuing his troubled spirits with these cogitations, he arriued at Lasina in Dalmatia, which is the countrey o∣uer against Italy; from whence he passed in a very quiet passage, and calme sea to Venice: where hee found many faithfull seruants of God, and good Christians; who hauing heard afore that he was gone to Vicum, were exceedingly afraid for that imminent and ineuitable danger they saw he was in, either to haue his conscience a slaue to Popish vanity, or his person a prisoner to Popish cruelty; there∣fore they ceased not to pray for him night and day: and yet for all that they feared greatly what would become of him. But when now at last they saw him returne, both sound in conscience, and safe in person; & such a glorious conquerer ouer Satan, and ouer so many strong temptati∣ons with which the world and naturall affections had as∣sailed him: their feare was turned into comfort, their sor∣row into ioy, and they all glorified the Lord for him. And so after mutuall comfort giuen and receiued, he departed from Venice, and trauelled thorow Rhoetia and Switzerland; where he visited the Churches of the Protestants, and com∣forted them greatly with his presence, and by telling them what great things the Lord had done for him: and so by the good hand of his God vpon him, he came in safety to Geneua the fourth of October in the yeare 1558. His safe arriuall brought exceeding ioy to the whole Church there; but especially to the Italian Congregation: for his long ab∣sence had brought them into some suspence and doubt, not of any alteration of his Religion, but of some cruell and false measures to haue beene offred him by the deceitfull
Papists. But when they saw him so safely returned, vn∣toucht in conscience, and vnhurt in his person; and that he had passed so many pikes of temptations which they knew had beene pitcht against him; they gaue great thankes to the Lord for him. But when he had discourst vnto them particularly the whole course of the proceedings: first, what a strong battry of temptations and assaults the diuell and the world had planted against him, then how manfully he fought and withstood, and at last ouercame them all; they fell into admiration of so rare constancy, and thought him worthy of all honour, to whom it is giuen (as the Apo∣stle saith) to suffer so much for Christ and for Religions sake: and in all earnest manner they magnified the singu∣lar grace and mercy of God towards him, and towards the whole Church in him; which had not suffred his seruant (this noble Galeacius) to be seduced out of the way of that holy calling whereto the Lord had called him: and who had deliuered him from so subtile a traine, laid by the poli∣cy of the enemy Satan, to haue intrapt his soule and consci∣ence, by ouerturning him in the race of his Religion: and they all acknowledged that this noble and godly Gentle∣man found it verified in himselfe, which the kingly Pro∣phet saith in the Psalme: Because he hath trusted in me, there∣fore I will set him free: I will be with him in his troubles, I will de∣liuer him, and crowne him with honour: and in another place, he that trusteth in the Lord shall neuer be confounded. And thus the Church receiued a double benefit by him: for first, his practise was an example vnto them all of a most extraor∣dinary and heauenly constancy in the loue and profession of true Religion: secondly, the mercifull dealing of the Lord with him, was a notable confirmation of their faith, and an encouragement to them to perseuere and stand to the truth, with assurance that the Lord himselfe would stand by them.
CHAP. XXIIII. Certaine yeares after his returne to Geueua, he begins to feele in himselfe a necessity of marriage: he deliuers his case to Caluin, who refused to consent: the matter is referred to the Churches of Switzerland, and by them he is resolued that he is free from his first wife, and may marry againe. AND thus with vnspeakeable contentment in his owne conscience, and with publike ioy and thankes∣giuing of the whole Church, he setled himselfe at Geneua in his former priuate and quiet life. Where after a few yeares he began to find in himselfe some reasons which perswaded him to thinke it needefull for him to liue in the estate of marriage: and therefore hauing thus long waited and ex∣pected a more wise and duetiful answer from his wife; and perceiuing by her not answering, that she still persisted in that monstrous and vnnatural wilfulnes, which her blinded Popish mind had formerly vndertaken by the perswasion of her blind and Popish guides; he therefore purposed to take such course for his remedie, as by the law of God and his Church should in that case seeme allowable: namely, to be diuorced from her; who for her part had broken the bond and vntied the knot of matrimonie. And first of all he imparted his mind and purpose to M. Caluine, and craued his godly and wholsome counsel in a case of so great importance. His counsell was first of all, that it was more conuenient and lesse scandalous to the enemies of Religion, if he could abstaine. But the Gentleman replied, that the case was so with him, as he could not abstaine, and gaue him many weighty reasons which drew him to mar∣riage; and withall participated vnto him some secret rea∣sons: for the which he affirmed it was altogether necessary
for him to marry. Holy Caluine as he was a man indued from God with sharpenesse of iudgement, and a wise and discerning spirit: so he foresaw plainely that many would speake euill of the fact, others would take offence at it, some would plainely condemne it, and speake euill of Re∣ligion for it; and the rather because (as he truely said) very few did rightly conceiue the full truth in the doctrine of di∣uorcement: but fewest of all would or could know the whole circumstance of this particular fact. He likewise wisely considered that the like president was seldome seene, especially in the Italian Church, whereof this Gen∣tleman was a principall member, and of speciall account, both for his nobility, birth, and descent, and for his zealous loue to Religion. All which considerations, with diuers other, made reuerend Caluine not too easily to subscribe to this purpose and motion of Galeacius. Notwithstanding, when the Gentleman vrged him out of the word of God and good conscience, with arguments which he saw and confessed he could not sufficiently answere; therefore lest he should burden and trouble the conscience of so good a man, which alledged for himselfe, that he was driuen by necessity to that course; he yeelded thus farre to him: that if he would repaire vnto the learned and reuerend Diuine Peter Martyr, and aske his opinion, and the opinions of all the learned and chiefe Diuines of Rhoetia, and Switzer∣land; and desire them seriously to consider of it (as in a matter of such moment, and of so great consequence, it was requi∣site) and then set downe their iudgements in the matter, and the reasons mouing them thereunto; he promised that he would also subscribe vnto them, and most willingly yeelde vnto him, what liberty soeuer they did allow him: alwaies prouided, that he also should submit himselfe vnto their censure, and stand to the triall of their iudgements in this case. Galeacius most willingly yeelded hereunto, as who desired nothing, but that which the Lord by his word, and by the voyce of his Church, should allow vnto him; and so taking the course that Caluine had aduised him,
he caused letters to be drawen and sent to Zurich, Berue, and other the Churches of Switzerland; opening the whole cir∣cumstance of the matter, and expounding the case truely and fully; and humbly craued the iudgement of the Church in a case of conscience so great and doubtfull. The chiefe Preachers and most learned Diuines yeelded to his honest and godly request, and assembled about it: the matter was much and long debated, and argued at large on both sides: and after mature deliberation, and sufficient consultation had; it was concluded and agreed on by them all with one consent̄, that he might with safe conscience, depart from that wife, which had first of all on her owne part broken the bond, and dissolued the marriage knot: and for the proofe of this their opinion, many causes and reasons were alledged and laid downe out of the Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and out of the Ciuil law, which is the law almost ofal countries in Christendome. All which (both their con∣clusions & their reasons) were put in writing, and are regi∣stred and safely recorded; and are kept to this day ready to be shewed to whomsoeuer and whensoeuer neede shall so require: for it was thought good by the Church so to doe; both for that the case was extraordinary, and would be sinisterly spoken of, and censured by many; who knew not sufficiently how it stood: and especially for the pre∣uenting of any slander or cauill, which the enemies might obiect against our Religion. CHAP. XXV. By publike sentence of the Church and iudgement of the law, he is diuorced from his former wife: and after a time he marrieth a French Gentlewoman, a widow of about fortie yeares of age, himselfe then be∣ing about three and fortie. GAleacius hauing thus laid his foundation▪ proceeded further; but still with the consent of the Church, and
obseruing the due forme of Law, and the ordinary course of Iustice in such cases, he craued publikely of the Magi∣strate that he might be diuorced, that is, that he might bee pronounced to be free and discharged from that wife, who had already cut off her felfe from him. The Magistrate considering the trueth and circumstance of the case, toge∣ther with the iudgement of the Diuines, wherunto also was agreable the iudgement of the Law, graunted vnto him, as by his aduocates it was required; & so in publik Court, and by sentence definite, and irreuocable he was diuorced, and was pronounced to be free, and discharged of his former wife Victoria; and that it was lawful for him and in his choice to liue vnmaried, or to marrie as hee himselfe would. After which liberty obtained, hee imparted the matter to his friends, and applying himselfe to thinke of another wife, he asked their aduices in this point also. And herein hee tooke that course, which generally men in the world take, not; for in his choice he respected not so much wealth, birth nor beauty, but onely to find a fit companion of his life, and such a one, as with whom he might lead that which remai∣ned of his life, in a comfortable contentment, in tranquillity of minde and peace of conscience; that so hee might the more cheerefully serue the Lord, and waite for the comming of Iesus Christ. Which course of his is more to be noted, es∣pecially in so great a man, and so honorably discended; and the rather to crosse and controle the carnall and worldly courses, which men for the most part and women also ob∣serue in their mariages; respecting those things first, which should be last, and that last or not at al which should be first and aboue all. Galeacius continuing this his purpose, and looking about for his choice, the prouidence of God (which doth neuerfaile his children, especially in so great matters) did offer vnto him a fit opportunity. For so it was that at the same time, a certaine gentlewoman of France, a wido we came from Roan to Geneua, for true religions sake, which she loued and professed, and for the loue of it left her country, & came thither for liberty of her conscience. She was a ma∣tronelie,
and a graue woman, and well reported of for her modesty, honesty, feare of God, and for manifold good qua∣lities: her name was Anna Fremeria, and was about fortie yeares of age. All which circumstances Galeacius well ob∣seruing, thought her a fit and conuenient wife for him: and so with the consent and liking of other his good friends, he tooke her to wife, and married her the sixteenth day of Ia∣nuary, in the yeare 1560. and in the three and fortieth yeare of his age; and they liued together many yeares after with much comfort one of another, & in an excellent agreement, being both of the same Religion, and of one mind; alwaies drawing in one yoke, and bearing one burden; diuiding it betwixt them; whether it was ioy or sorrow: so that the vn∣quietnes of his life past, was now recompenced with a life full ofall contentment; and so louing her, and being truely loued ofher, they spent their daies in all mutuall comfort, solacing themselues in their quiet and priuate life, and ioy∣ing in the mutuall faithfulnes and loyalty which one per∣formed to another. Loe thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. CHAP. XXVI. Of his course of life after his marriage: his frugality. NOw being married, he laboured to deliuer and disbur∣den himselfe of worldly cares; and therefore he pre∣scribed to himselfe a sparing and frugall course of life; re∣soluing to keepe himselfe within the compasse of his reue∣nue▪ which although it was as much againe as it was afore, by his wiues dowrie: yet by many other hinderances was farre lesse then heretofore it had beene. And first for his houshold, his care was to haue it little as might be, and there∣foreHis seruants, but two. for his seruice and attendance, he onely kept two maid∣seruants: and for himselfe, he ledde his life in great sobri∣etie, and in very meane estate, yet alwaies free from sordid basenes, and alwaies keeping a seemely decorum; neuerHis attire plaine, but comely. wanting any thing that was necessary, nor hauing much that was superfluous. His attire was plaine and homely,
but alwaies comely, cleane and handsome: and he that in his owne countrey might haue beene Lord of so many te∣nants, and commander of so many seruants, did now walke the streets of Geneua alone, often not hauing the attendance of one man: yea he would not disdain to come himselfe intoHis humilitie and lowly minde. the market, nor think scorn to prouide himself of necessaries: and sometime would buy and cary home fruits, herbs, roots, and such other things. And this course of life, together with liberty oftrue Religion, he esteemed greater happines then the Marquesdome of Vicum. And although by this course of life he could scarce be discerned from an ordinary man, and from the common sort of people: notwithstan∣dingEuidences of nobility shi∣ning in his actions and behauiours. in his countenance appeared that grauity in his ge∣stures, behauiours, and in his whole body shone that comely maiesty; as any wise man to haue seene him, and well con∣sidered him, would haue presently iudged that he came of noble race; and that he had beene fit for the greatest im∣ployments of the world: which also was so much the grea∣ter, because that with his excellency of birth and person, & perfection of all gentlemanly behauiours was ioyned true godlines, & the feare of God; which of it selfe is of such force as it is able euen to honour him, who wanteth these worldly ornaments and outward perfections. How much therefore did it magnifie him, who had it in so great measure, and ac∣companied with so many true complements of gentry and honor? By alwhich it came to passe that so many parts of the chiefest excellencies meeting in that one man, made him to shine aboue other the members of the Church, euen as the moone amongst the stars. So that the Italian Church, though but little of it selfe; yet by the vertues and worthinesse of this one noble gentleman, seemed worthy to be compared with the whole Church of Geneua. And as he was a creditHow greatly he was estee∣med in Ge∣neua. and honour vnto that Church, so was he againe most hono∣rablie esteemed of that Church: yea not onely of that Church, but of the whole Church and State of Geneua: for not one Senator nor Magistrate of the City, not one of the Preachers & Ministers of the church was to be found, which
had not alwaies in their mouthes, the commendation of no∣ble Galeacius: yea he was honored and highly esteemed of bythem all, and it was hard to say whether hee was more loued, or admired amongst them. In a word, he was loued of all men, lookt at of all men, spoken of by all men, magni∣fied and extolled, yea wondred at of all men; and though he knew not many himselfe, yet all men laboured to knowe him. No publike meeting was appointed, no solemne feast was made, wherto this our Galeacius was not most solemnly called: yea euery man was desirous of him, and happy was he that might haue his company: yea they thought their meetings graced, and their houses honoured with his presence; and in all assemblies the chiefest and highest roome was offred him: yeawas thrust vpon him, thoughThey stil cal∣led him by the title of Marquesse. he nothing at all respected it. And although he refused the name and title of Marquesse; because, he said, the Em∣perour had cut off his succession, and depriued him of that honour because of his Religion: notwithstanding, do what he could, he was called byno other name al his life long, and that not by some few his friends and fauorites, but by all sorts of men, euen strangers themselues, and such as were not of his Religion. For all men thinking that he had iniu∣ry to be depriued of his lawfull succession; therfore though they could not giue him the liuing and estate, yet they gaue him all they could▪ that is, the name and title. Such were his noble and gentlemanly qualities (besides his Christian vertues) that they wonne the loue and liking of all men; and caused them to honour him far aboue that he desired orHe was al∣waies visited by strangers, and trauel∣lers, especial∣ly Princes and noble men. cared for: yea euery one laboured to shew any seruice or to performe any duety of loue and kindnes towards him: nay strangers themselues were desirous to see him, and were drawen into an admiration ofhim: insomuch as whensoe∣uer any of the nobility or Princes of Christendome, especi∣ally of Italy, did trauell to see forraine nations; and for the most part taking Geneua in their way (which place generally all trauellers haue a great desire to see) they would by no meanes omit to see and visit Galeacius. Thus did Francis and
Alphonsus the yong Dukes of Ferrara, Octauius the Prince of Selerum: and thus did Fernesius the Duke of Parma, and diuers other: who in their trauell comming by Geneua en∣tertained him in all the complements of courtesie and of ho∣nour, no lesse then if he had beene at Naples in his former glorie; or if he had still beene a courtier in the Emperours Court, as heretofore he had beene. In a word, no Noble man, no Embassador, no great scholar, no man of note, of a∣ny forraine nation came that way, but presently they vsed meanes to haue a sight of this noble Marquesse; and for the most part desired to haue some company and conference with him: So that he was resorted vnto continually by men of all sorts; as though he had not beene a priuate man, keeping a meane estate and dwelling in a little house; but rather as though he had beene a great Prince in the Court, or one neere in place to the Emperour himselfe. But though all men desired his acquaintance and company, and he againe was not curious in that point, but courteous toHis company and conuer∣sation. all as occasion was offred: yet for the most part, his most familiar conuersation was with the men of his owne nation: namely, with his countrimen the Italians, of whom there was a flourishing Church at Geneua at the same time; and which also flourished the better by his meanes, as heretofore hath beene declared. Amongst whom though he behaued him∣selfe, it is doubtfull whether more ciuilly, or more humbly; yet for all that he was honoured of them all, and vsed more like a Lord then a priuate man: which although he in euery respect deserued, yet by no meanes desired. And so besides all his worthy and excellent parts, his humble minde andHis courtesie and affabili∣tie. friendly conuersation made him more honourable. And to speake but truth of him, out of all question hee was not onely a good Christian, but (which is not alwaies seene) a perfect and an absolute man: yea a man can hardly name any of those good parts and amiable qualities; which forHis rare per∣fections. the most part doe winne a man loue in the world; which were not to be found in this noble gentleman. For besides his noble birth and Princely education, his Religion and
true feare of God; he was also humble minded, affable, cur∣teous and friendly to all men: he was wise, discreete, of goodHis elo∣quence and ability of speech. conceit, and of an excellent speech and discourse. It would haue delighted a man to haue heard him speake; for as his memory was exceeding good, so his naturall eloquence, his smooth stile, his easie, quiet and seemely deliuerie, made his speech to be greatly commended of all that heard him. A man would haue wondred to haue seene how many, euen of the best sort, would haue laboured to haue bin in his company, and as it were haue catcht vp & eaten his words from his mouth, when it pleased him to discourse of some of those exploits and aduentures, which had fallen within the compasse of his own knowledg: as of the Emperor Charles the fift his voiage into Prouence, and of his warres which he waged in Gelderland, against the Duke of Cleeue, and of many other great affaires and special imployments. Neither was hee onely a fit companion for gentlemen and men ofHis mildnesse to his inferi∣ors. estate, but such was the mildnes of his nature and dispositi∣on, that he was also kind and courteous to men of lower place, and most ofall to the poore, amongst whom, if they were godly and honest he would conuerse as familiarly, as with his equals, or with men of greater place. He was also of a free and liberall hart, no poore or distressed man did euerHis charity to the poore. require his assistance, or craue his helpe, but presently hee would reach vuto them his helping hand, and relieue them by all meanes he could, yea the want of his former wealth and losse of his Marquesdome, did neuer grieue him, but when he had not wherewithall to exercise his charitie, to∣wards the poore soules of God: it was his ioy and delight to be lending and giuing to those that wanted, and in that res∣pect onely he often wished himselfe as great a man in Gene∣ua as he was in Italy: but to his power and ability his good workes did farre exceed the proude and pharisaical pa∣pists,His good workes and charitable deedes. who glorie in their workes, and will bee saued by them. Prisoners & men in danger did often feele his boun∣tie; hee omitted not to visite his sicke brethren, and that most diligently: such as were poore hee relieued; yea the
richest and learnedst of all, did thinke themselues in their sicknesses happy to haue him with them; his presence andHis ordinary exercises of Religion, publike and priuate. company, but especially his talke and Christian exhortati∣ons were so comfortable vnto them. His ordinary exerci∣ses were these; euery day hee repaired to the Church and heard diuine seruice, and missed not to be present at pray∣ers with the congregation, especially he neuer omitted to heare the Sermons and the word preached; which he did al∣waies with wonderful deuotion & reuerence to the word of God; for he iudged and esteemed that the true happines of a man, and the onely sweete and pleasant life consisted in liuing holily, in walking in Gods waies, in meeting with Satans temptations, in bridling the corruptions of his na∣ture, and in seruing God truely and sincerely without hy∣pocrisie: vnto all which steps of happines he thought he could neuer attaine, but by the preaching of the word; wher∣unto he also adioyned a daily course of reading the Scrip∣ture; thus labouring out of the Scriptures to lay the founda∣tions of his own saluatiō, which he applied to the profit and comfort, not ofhimselfe, alone, but of many others with him. Besides al this, for the loue he beare vnto the Church, and the desire he had to do al good he could; he tooke vpon himHis particu∣lar and per∣sonall calling. the office of an Elder in the Church: the duety whereof he supplied daily, carefully obseruing and inquiring into the maners and liues of professors; allowing & incouraging the good, and censuring the offenders, which he did with great care & conscience, lest that scandals & offences might ariseHis courage and iustice. in the Church, whereby either the quiet and good estate ofthe Church at home might be disturbed, or the enemie might haue any occasion to slander the profession of Religi∣on. Neither stayed he here, but beside this publike care andHis loue of peace, and continuall ending of con∣tentions, and setting men at vnity that were at vari∣ance. labour, hee also was daily well occupied in more priuate matters: for where euer he saw, obserued, or heard of any dissensions, sutes in law, or controuersies amongst Chri∣stian neighbours, hee was exceeding carefull to end and compasse them; and for that end, as he had a ripe wit and a good conceit and deepe insight, so hee would imploy them all to the finding out the trueth and state of the
cause: and hauing found it, hee would vse all his authority, yea he would make himselfe beholden to men, on condition they would yeelde one to another, and  in peace. In a word, his whole course of life sauoured of grace, and did shew him to to be a sanctified man; yet doubtlesse he thoght himselfe borne not for himselfe, but for God and for the Church; and he thought no time so well spent, nor any busi∣nes so wel dispatcht, as that wherin, not any priuate gain, or pleasure to himselfe was sought or obtained, but only Gods glory aduanced, his Church edified, religion maintained, and the good worke of Gods grace confirmed in himselfe and others. CHAP. XXVII. Being aged he falleth into a long and languish∣ing sicknesse. ANd thus he liued at Geneua many yeres full of ioy and quietnes, comfort, and contentment: farre from all worldly ambition, and as it were forgetting what he was, & what he was borne to in this world, onely respecting what he was to inherite in the world to come; & as he had begun, so he continued in a loathing and detestation of all popish superstition, and impieties. But with this great quietnes of mind and conscience there wanted not some outward and corporal vexations: for after his long peace, new afflictions & storms came vpon him, wherby the Almighty would yet better trie him, and make his faith, his hope, his patience and perseuerance to shine more gloriously; that so afterward he might receiue a more excellent reward, and a more glorious crowne. For first of all, he fell sicke of a grieuous, doubtful & dangerous disease, which had bred vpon him by abundance of rheume, wherby he became so short winded that he could hardly draw his breath; by force of such weakenes he was exceedingly tormented night and day: for the good gentle∣man was constrained oftentimes to sit vp whole nights to∣gether
and was faine to be remoued from roome to roome, and from one place to another, to see if by any meanes he might take some sleepe, which by the vehemency of this disease was almost quit gone from him. This disease had growen vpon him by reason of his many and long and sore iournies, which he had taken by sea and by land for his conscience sake: and of the great distempers and alte∣rations of the state of his body, which for his soules sake he had vndergone. CHAP. XXVIII. A new temptation assaults him: a Iesuite is sent from his friends in Italy to reclaime him, by offring him great summes of money, and to▪make his yonger sonne a Cardinall: but he valiantly scorneth it all, and sends him backe with shame. BVt this languishing sickenesse did not so much afflict his weake and aged body as Satan laboured by another deuice, and a new temptation to trouble and vex his righte∣ous soule. For it came to passe that about the same time, when this disease had seazed vpon him, there came to Ge∣neua out of Italy a nephew of his, the naturall sonne of his owne sister, with letters to him from his former wife Victoria the Marchionesse, as also from his eldest sonne the yong Marquesse: vnto which letters this yong gentleman being also a scholar, added many words of his owne to little pur∣pose; labouring to perswade and allure him with much and vaine babling, that now at the last he would acknowledge his error, and returne home againe to his owne countrie to his former Religion, and to his ancient inheritance, that goodly Marquesdome. The principall cause both of their writing, and his comming so farre was this: be∣cause that if he would now at last returne againe, hereby he said that out of all doubt he might aduance his yongest sonne Charles, either to the princely State of a Cardinall, or at least to be some great Bishop. For, saith he, whereas your sonne is now admitted into holy orders, and is (for his great
friends and alliance, and for his special towardlines) in possi∣bility of so great preferment, your pertinacy and obstinate peruersenes, in following and defending a new found and vpstart Religion; and condemned (as he said) by al the great estates of Italy, is the very only hindrance of your sons pre∣ferment. These kind of news how highly they offended the holy and Christian soule of this thrice noble Galeasius, who from his hart abhorred, and in his soule detested those vaine and vngodly and prophane dignities in the popish Church; I leaue it to be iudged by the Christian reader. And therfore hauing with much griefe of mind hard thus much of this vn∣sauory and vnpleasant message, and not ablelonger to for∣beare, lie first of all tooke the letters, and before his face that brought them, threw them into the fire; and then brief∣ly, but grauely, wisely, and zealously hee shaped him his answere by word of mouth: thinking so badde and base a message vnworthie the time and labour of writing. And first of all hee tolde him, that there could not haue come to him more heauie and vnwelcome newes of his sonne then these; that hee was so blind a Papist, that for the hope of this worldly aduancement he would venture the ruine and subuersion of his soule. And bad him tell his sonne that he would hinder him in that vngodly course by all meanes he could: and hee said, hee knew not whether it more grieued him to see the vanity of his sons proceeding, then it reioyced him that it lay in his power any waies to hinder him in the same: Yea, saith he, know thou, and let that my seduced sonne know, that you could haue vsed scarce any argument vnto me so forcible to make me persist in my Religion, and to detest Popery, as this; that in so doing I may hinder my sonne from the abominable dignities of the Popish Church: and therefore, saith he, re∣turne my son this answere; that in stead of helping him to these preferments, I will pray for euer to the Lord for him, who is the father of his soule and mine, that he would open his eyes to see the truth, and that he may haue grace after the example of me his father to see the horriblesuperstitious
idolatries & impieties of Popery, & seeing thē to abhor & de∣test them: & renouncing the vanities of al worldly pomp and honor, to direct his foote steps to the Lord, and embrace his holytruth, and yeeld his soule and conscience obedient to the heauenly calling, and so become the seruant and childe of the most high God: whereby he may aspire and attaine to the true and highest dignity; which is to enioy the fauour and comfortable presence of God, & his holy grace; to loue God, and to be loued of him; and so at last to be aduanced to that heauenly and eternalglory which is prepared for them who in this world do forsake themselues and their owne desires, that they may in true holines serue the Lord. With these and such like holy speeches he answered the disholy and disho∣nest demand of this carnall Papist. But for all that this im∣portunate and vnreasonable Iesuite (for he was of that sect) ceased not to be troublesome to this noble and holy Gentle∣man▪ still vrging him with fond and friuolous reasons, and pressing him with rediculous arguments: as this especially for one; he promised him a huge sum of money, if he would returne home: which, saith he, lies ready at Lions for you, and the Brokers and Exchangers there are prepared to pay it. And he further assured him, that if he would come againe in∣to Italy, they had procured him liberty of his conscience and Religion at Turing: and there also (he said) he should find a great summe of money ready for him. But when this impor∣tunatefellow presumed to presse the good conscience of this resolute Gentleman with such base arguments▪ and began to weigh Religion in a paire of gold weights; then the noble heart of this holy Christian could not but shew it selfe moo∣ued, and therefore in a holy zeale and an ardent loue of his Sauior Christ Iesus, he cryed out, Let their money perish with thē who esteeme al the gold in the worldworth one daies society with Iesus Christ, & his holy spirit: & cursed, saith he, be that religion for euer, which shal wed men to the world, & diuorce them from God. Go home therfore, saith noble Galeacius, take away thy siluer again, & make much of that drosse of the earth, together with your dregs of popery, lock thē vp together in the chest
And as for me, know it, that my Lord & Sauior Christ, hath made me enamored of far more precious iewels and durable riches. But the heauenly constancy of this holy man, droue this frantike papist from his bias, into an extreme choller, for he according to the nature of his Popes holy reli∣gion thought that when all arguments had failed, yet money would haue wonne him, and therfore seeing him so highly to scorne, and so disdainfully to contemne so great offers, hee thought it very strange; and therefore seeing all his labor lost, and his best hold proue so weake, he fell from mony to meere madnes; and forgetting himselfe, and his duty, brake out into ill words, and reproohfull termes: But when the Magistrate was informed of it, and saw that this arrogant papist durst so far abuse the patience of so honorable a man, therfore by their authority, they forbad him the Citie (as the manner of that place is in such cafes) and so this newes bringer had his pas∣port to be packing, and to go home and count his siluer; and there to bragge of his good successe; for he now could say by good experience, that so much money as was enough to lead an hundred popish friers to and fro whither a man would, like Beares by the nose, could not touch the conscience of one protestant, much lesse make him a papist. CHAP. XXIX. Being deliuered from the importunitie of the Iesuit: not long after, came a Monke, nimble witted and learned, a kinsman of his owne, who had a strong conceit that he could haue re∣claimed him: but he came too late, the Mar∣quesse being dead before he came. AND thus it pleased God to deliuer this sick gentleman from this troublesome tempter, and this messenger of Satan which came to haue buffeted him; but he buffeted, yea and vanquished him, & Satan in him; and he might report at home, that he found the Marquesse sicke in bodie, but whole in mind, yea that he neuer saw in all his life so resolute a con∣science, and so couragious a mind in so weake a body. And
thus the Lord doubtlesse did in mercy to him; that being from this disquiet companion▪ he might with more comfort and lesse griefe, beare the burden of his sickenes, which now grew vpon him more and more, and left him not till it made him leaue the world, and till it had translated him from this his pilgrimage, to his eternall rest; and till it had made him of a poore Marquesse vpon earth, a glorious King in heauen. Whose death as it was wonderfully lamented of the whole Church for the vnrecouerable losse they had of him: so it was a merciful blessing, and a welcome messenger of God to him: for it freed and deliuered him from many stormes of new temptations which the Diuell was raising a∣gainst him; for within a short time after his death, there came to Geneua a certaine Monke, a good scholar, a gentleman by birth▪ and neere a kin to Galeacius; who being puft vp with Monkish pride, and a conceit of his owne ability for such an enterprise, thought so farre to haue preuailed with Galeacius by his nimble wit and eloquent tongue, as to haue perswa∣ded him now at the last, either to haue relinquished his Reli∣gion, or at least to haue left Geneua and to haue returned into Italy (where his vncle had beene lately Pope) that so by his presence and countenance, and the helpe of his great friends (which he had both in the Popes and the Emperours Court) his children might be in more possibility of those high digni∣ties and great places in the world, which they and their other friends aimed at: and for the attainment whereof, nothing so much hindred them as their fathers Religion, and course of life. But he returned home a proud foole as he came, and a∣shamed of his proud and insolent spirit; which perswaded him by his vaine babling he could haue ouercome him whom he found when he came to Geneua to haue ouercome the world, and all spirituall enemies, and now to be triumphing in the glory of heauen. And so leauing him and all other his Popish carnall kinred, gnashing their teeth for anger to see his admirable constancy; let vs returne againe to our sicke gentleman, whose end now hasting on, will also hasten an end of this strange story.
CHAP. XXX. His long and languishing sickenes grew and increased vpon him in such measure, as his paine was most grie∣uous; but hee bare it all with an heroicall and heauenly cou∣rage: so that it might manifestly appeare that euen the Lord from heauen did lend him strength; and as the torments and pangs of the disease increased, so hisfaith and patience and all heauenly vertues shone in him more and more: so that it was most true of him which the Apostle saith, as the outward man perished so the inward man was renued daily. His body pi∣ned away, buthis minde and soule grew from strength to strength: and as a by-stander feeles not the paines of him that is tormented or racked before his eyes: so his soule and mind stood as it were a farre off, beholding the paines and vexati∣ons of the body; and being vntoucht it selfe, did as it were laugh at Satan, sinne, death, and damnation; who by all their ioynt power could doe no more, but onely to vex and racke this poore carcase with bodily disease, but were not able to touch the soule, to vexe the minde, or wound the conscience. If any man aske the reason why his mind and conseience were so quiet in this so great torment of the body: the reason was▪ for that his mind was imployed in holy meditations, as of the singular loue of God his father vnto him in Christ Ie∣sus; whereby he assured himselfe vndoubtedly of saluation, of the manifold holy graces, wherewith God had adorned him: by the force whereof, he said, he had borne off so many buffets of Satan, had passed so many pikes of troubles, and come away conquerer in so many fearefull fights, as had op∣posed themselues against him in his conuersion. These gifts and graces of God he weighed with the crosses of his sicknes, and found them far heauier; and he compared these momen∣tany and light afflictions, with that exceeding and eternall weight of glory, which, he said, he knew was laid vp for him in heauen. These and such like meditations cheered vp his spirit more then the force of his sickenes could appall him. But aboue al things he felt vnspeakable comfort and sweet∣nes
in his prayers to the Lord; which he  feruently, and with a zealous and faithfull heart.  often say, that in the midst of his prayers, his soule seemed to him to be euen rauished out of himself, and to taste of the bles∣sed ioyes of heauen. So that the saying of the blessed A∣postle was verified in him, As the suffrings of Christ abounded in us, so consolation by Christ abounded much more. In his sickenes he wanted no helpe of the Physitions, for they came to him out of all parts of the citie: and willingly did they all do their diligence about his body; whose soule they knew had Christ Iesus to be the Physition for it. His friends also continually visited him, who were of the chiefe men in the citie; and they were all welcome to him rich and poore: and it is hard to say whether he receiued more comfort by them, or they more spirituall edification by him; his speeches and behauiours were so full of patience, and so well seasoned with all grace. All his friends performed to him what duety soeuer was in their power, but especially his worthy wife did then shew her selfe most louing and loyall, for she was neuer from about him, and saw that he wanted nothing which the world could yeelde for the recouery of his health. But all was in vaine, for the time of his dissolution was at hand, and he had runne the royall race of a most holy Christian life; and now nothing remained but a blessed death. He might say as the Apostle did with much ioy of heart: I haue run my race, I haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith: from henceforth is laid vp for me a crown of righteousnes, which Christ the righteous Iudge will giue to me, and to all such as wait for his appearing. After few daies the violence of his sickenes was such, as it ouercame all power of physicke; so that it was manifest, that that blessed houre approched, wherin the Lord had appoin∣ted to accomplish his owne good worke in him; therefore he sequestred himself altogether from any more care of his body, and from al worldly cogitations; he renounced the world and all in it; he tooke his farewell of his wife, and all his Christian friends, and said, hee should lead them the way to heauen. Hee fixed all his thoughts vpon his soule, and
ixed on the Lord in heauen: and cried to hat as he had sought him al his life, so he would  him, and acknowledge him for his owne. And thus as all his friends sat about him, and as the Preachers and Ministers were occupied in holy praiers and reading of the Scriptures, and applying to him the heauenly consolations of God▪ word, in the performance of these exercises he ended his dales, wherein hee had taken▪ delight all his life long: and as hee reioyced to haue them in this life, so it pleased the Lord that he should haue them at his death. And so in the midst of all his friends, in the presence of the Ministers, euen in the fight of them all, he peaceablie and quietly yeeld∣ed vp his spirit, and rendred his soule into the hands of his mercifull God and faithfull Creator, of whom he had recei∣ued it; who immediatly by the ministery of his holy Angels receiuing it at his hands, and washing it pure in the blood of Iesus Christ, crowned it with the crown of eternal & heauen∣ly happines. And thus this holy man was translated from a noble man on earth, to be a noble Saint in heauen: and of a Marquesse on earth in bare name and title, he was aduanced to be a glorious & triumphing King in heauen: where he now raignes in glory with that God whom he so faithfully serued on earth. That God and mereifull father grant that all we that reade this admirable story, may be allured to take vpon vs the same most holy profession, that this thrice noble Mar∣quesse did; and may renounce and cast off what euer in this world we see doth hinder vs from the holy fellowshippe of Christ Iesus; and strengthen vs that we may be faithful to the end: that so we may obtaine the crowne of life in that glory, where this noble Galeacius and all the heauenly host of Gods Saints do wait for vs. Amen. This was his life, this was his end: let thy life be like his, and thy heart walke in the same way▪ then shall thy soule die his death, and thy latter end shall be like his. O Lord how glorious art thou in thy Saints! FINIS.
