15466 99845054 9930
The Innes of Court ANAGRAMMATIST: OR, The MASQVERS masqued in ANAGRAMMES. Expressed in Epigramique lines, upon their severall Names, set downe in the next Page. Composed by FRANCIS LENTON Gent. one of Her Majesties POETS. Plectra gerens Erato saltat pede, Carmine vultu. LONDON: Printed for William Lashe. 1634.
Sir THOMAS DAYRELL, Marshall. Grayes Inne. IOHN READE. IAMES AISKOVGHE. EDVVARD PAGE. IOHN CRAVVLEY. Inner Temple. EDMVND CAREVV. ARTHVR BAKER. IOHN FARVVELL. REGINALD FOSTER Middle Temple. ROBERT OVVEN. PHILIP MORGAN. MARTYN HARVEY. ROBERT COALE. Lincolnes Inne. IOHN NORTH. EDVVARD HERNE. HENRY MACSEY. STEPHEN IAY.
TO THE FOVRE HONOV∣RABLE SOCIETIES, AND famous Nurseries of Law, the Innes of COVRT. YOu Noble stockes of Gentry, Plants that higher Grow, till you unto the Cedars height aspire: You creame o'th kingdome, either in your wealth, Wit, learning, valour, or iust lawes lov'd health, Who, by your worthy breedings, births, and blood, Are chose for Guarders of your Countries good: And to that end are here trayn'd up by Fate, To be the glory of great Brittaines state: I here present you with the Masquers names Of your foure Houses, in quick Anagrams, Led by that then made Knight, who first I place In these conceits, as Captaine of that grace;
Which each of you deserv'd, and in high merits, Shew'd Englands Gallantry, and Noble spirits. Accept my Muse then, which shall make you merry, Like rich Nepenthe, Nectar, or old Sherry; And for your grace that way, my best endeavour By hand, head, heart, shall waite on you for ever: Let not rash anger then, blame my intent, To gaine your loves with mirth, I onely meant. The true honourer of your persons, pedigrees, and dignities, FRA. LENTON.
To my friend, Master Francis Lenton, upon his ANAGRAMS. HE that upon so many severall Names, Dares undertake to write true Anagrammes, Had need well know how dangerous a path His Muse doth tread; the narrow scope shee hath, Confines his Fancy to so strait a list, As not to be condemn'd, if she hath mist In some, his higher ayme; yet if in one Or two, or more, his happy Fate hath showne A Poets Art; the world may well excuse Other defects, if not applaud his Muse: For, knowing men will all conclude in this, Where one proves fortunate, a hundred misse: And if it chance some doe the rest excell, (Of which detractors cannot speake, but well) He stands indebted to that name affords An Anagramme significant; those words That doe sufficiently themselves expresse, Acquit his paines, and make his labour lesse: Others that more obscure Enigma's were, His lines licke into forme (like a Shee Beare)
Who newly hath produc't a shapelesse whelpe, Makes it a perfect creature by her helpe: Reade then, and laugh, and censure, if you be Impartiall Iudges, and from Envy free, But Monsieur Critique, I'de have you suspend Your mewes; and not cry downe, what you'l ne're mend. Thine ever, IOHN GOYSH.
In commendation of the Authors late ELEGIE, and present ANAGRAMS. WHo vayl'd in blackes, Melpomene's sad face, Trips now with Erato in a masquing pace: You that would reade a lamentable straine, His dying Swan, behold with Royall Chaine: Gentiles, if Here you laugh, it is enough, His Muse (he sweares) dispatcht it with a puffe. I. M.
Anagramme upon the Martiall Leader of the glorious Innes of Court Gallants, the noble minded Knight, Sir THOMAS DAYRELL. Anagr. LED AL TO HIE MARS. GReat Iove and Iuno, once desiring sport, To shew the glory of the Innes of Court, Cōmanded them a most renowned taske, Onely present them with some pleasant Maske; The Nurseries of Law, and best bred blood, Fulfill'd their pleasures, with one passing good; Whose rare performance, & whose every name, In forraine parts set forth their peerelesse fame: The brave Conductor of this Courtly traine, This worthy Knight was chosen, & did gaine Immortall Honour by his gracefull paine.
For, as he led them all to Mars his Court, To beauteous Amazons of every sort, Who like to Basiliskes, kill with their eyes, (If Cupids shafts doe once our soules surprise) So gratious Iove, viewing his Martial spright, Crown'd his deserts with Title of a Knight. And now that Worthy, who to Mars led all, Sir Thomas Dayrell, we delight to call: No Captaine in these latter times was seene, Trayning so rich a troupe to King and Queene: Miles, both Knight and souldier signifies, From which may He to higher honour rise.
Grayes Inne. Two Anagrammes upon the name of that proper and well proportioned piece of Nature, the courteous accomplisht, IOHN READE, Esq. Anagr. 1 DEARE HONY. 2 AYD HER ON. A Mother Lady (in familiar phrase) Ravisht with his rare presence, & his praise, Doth (not unaptly) by her language sweet, With lippes of honey, this young Gallant greet, Thou dearest life, o'th hive, thou sweetest hony, (Which cōmon markets yeeld not for our mony) VVhose looks are pure, & whose melting taste, Deserves to be in Ladies Closets plac't, Though furrow'd years upon my forehead's set, And little unto Nature am indebt, Though we are almost at our journeys end, Think not we dote, when we your form cōmend Nor judge amisse, when our weake pulses beat, VVhilst we are living, we retaine some heate,
Then though your activenesse refuse our taske, By dancing Revels at this glorious Masque; Yet here's a Daughter yong, pray ayd her on, For she may prove to be your Paragon; No doubt but she will please you every way, In the majestique Dance, the Song, the Play, On Lute, Theorbo, Voyall, Orphorion, Or any other musicke you shall try on; Assist her gently then, and (with a grace) After the action, aid her to her place: So shall the sweetnesse of your nature done, Merit her love, by ayding of her on: And if there ever was it'h Hive such hony, Give me this Gallant, for hee's for my mony.
Anagramme upon the name of that well compact proportion, most active body, and free minded Gentleman, Master IAMES AISKOVGHE. Anagr. SO GAVE HIM A KIS. COmming amidst th'heroick courtly Dames Of Brittaines orbe, whose faire & beauteous fames, Outstrip the universe, and by election Strike deep'st into each nations strong affection: I saw this sparke, a sparke which kindled fire On every side, & made flames mount the higher. The lovely Nymphs which did on Iuno wait, With his quick active strength, were taken strait, And save their modesties durst not advance Their meanings; yet each mind with him did dance: As well they might, and blame them not, for he Rose with such spirit and dexterity, Such nimble courage, and such active spright, Vp to each amorous Ladies Navels height,
That they were charm'd, and in Loves silency, Whisperd each other, Lord what a back hath he? And like retreat of a victorious Drumme, Or like the Vniversities grave Humme, Or like the clapping of the hands that day, In the applause of a well taking Play, So Majesties, Nobilities, and all, (For cutting high) gave him the golden Ball: And as his glory herein did abound, (VVhilst eccho still redoubled the sound) So each chaste Nymph (in her white souls desire) Gave him a kisse, and all did him admire.
Anagramme upon the name of the courte∣ous Gentleman, Master EDVVARD PAGE. Anagr. DRAVV DEEP AGE. HOwever youth may vault upō this stage, Yet know, all pleasures must resign to age, And age to dust, when our small houre glasse Is runne, and not a sand there left to passe: The long'st liv'd vegitive must lose it's sap, And fall by winds, or by some thunder clap, The sturdy Stag (after a hundred yeares) Dying, bedewes his cheeks with his own teares, Old Nestor, and more grave Methuselah, Have spun their threads, and gone the common way Of all fraile flesh, then thinke not to withstand Deaths cruell dart, and most impartiall hand; Though once a King cal'd age but paine and sorrow, Sicke here to day, & sodaine gone to morrow: Yet the same King did length of dayes uphold, Foe Royall honour, or rich Ophir gold:
Then may your blessed yeeres be multiplied, And of-spring like sweet Plants on every side, Long may you draw fresh ayr before you sleep, Or be as one gone downe into the deepe, And wheresoe're I leade my pilgrimage, My dirge shall be, that you may draw deep Age.
Two Anagrams upon the name of that hopefull Barrister, and proficient in the Law for his time, the courteous, and well spoken, IOHN CRAVVLEY, Esq. Anagr. 1 I VALV HER COYN▪ OR, 2 I VALV HER CONY. LAwyers (although they use not to purloyne Like Vsurers) yet by instinct, love coyn, And though distracted Clients doe him curse, If the cause crosse them, he's nere the worse, Valuing his or hers, if his due fee: Or else his tongue will very silent be, But if faire vertue in her soule doth shine, (Which makes a mortall creature halfe divine) If coyn hee values more then that, his Name Himselfe and Anagram, shall beare the blame, Nor dare I thinke it, cause I know his merit In that great Masque spoke his more noble spirit. No, no, brave Masquers, all marke your lov'd Brother, Values a little of the one, and other.
I heard some Lawyers, tho their fees be cōmon, Will take but small fees of a handsome woman: But tell you truely, he may value either, So that his valuation wrongeth neither, VVhich his mature iudgement can decide, And safe twixt Scylla and Caribdis ride. Thus you may value both, but (rul'd by me) Nor Coyn nor Cony should have masterie.
On the same. IOHN CRAVVLEY. Anagr. CON HIE LAVVYER. EXalt thy honour, Con, apply thy way In Law, that thou in Iustice seate may sway The righteous Cause, and make the quarrell even, By which faire vertue, you aspire to heaven. Goe on then worthy Barrister, and be Thy Fathers equall in sincerity: Nor may the fallacies of time, nor age, Ecclipse thy glory on this terrene Stage. Con then, and higher rise in the Lawes lore, Comfort the rich, timely relieve the poore; Then shall your vertuous parts, & honour live, Till I can lave the Ocean with a sieve.
Inner Temple. A converted Anagramme upon the name of that milde and sweet natur'd active Gentleman, Master EDMVNDE CAREVV. Anagr. 1 VVE CVRE DEMAND. OR, 2 VVE DEMAND CVRE. MIstake me not, We here doth signifie, A speaker for this whole societie, The vigorous Masquers all, whose every name, Triumphant rides upon the wings of fame. If any Lady then of Iunoes traine, Of chaste Dianaes (poore Acteons bane) Of Vesta's white sould Virgin sisterhood, Or any other Nymphs of Springs; or wood, VVhose sacred knots, chast thoughts, unspotted mindes, Each one of us unto allegiance bindes, Shall ought defending vertue, us command, Loe here we all with valour armed stand,
In their defence, and (like a rocke most sure) VVhatsoe're they demand, we vow to cure, If the expence of either life, or blood, Can make an honour'd vertuous conflict good, This onely wee (in loyall service) crave (Which a good minde would grant unto it's slave) If any of us be love strooke in heart, By Cupids secret arrowes, conquering dart, Which wounds us deep, & inwardly doth bleed; That then, oh then, even at the point of need, As you are lovely, modest, chast, and pure, So let the Balsome of your loves us cure, When we demand or beg in vertuous way, To claspe you in loves sacred armes for aye: Thus if your Noble soules keep touch, even then You shall be honour'd both by gods and men, Then both our sexes shall be known the truer, VVe fought your battailes, you our wounds did cure.
Two Anagrammes upon the name of the much loved Gentleman, Master ARTHVR BAYKER. Anagr. REBVKE HER ART. IF any Lady (ne're so highly borne,) Good natures ornaments doth seem to scorn, And in her pride by chance forgets her duty, By adding to her better formed beauty; Thinking thereby to mend the Makers fault, VVho first that tenement did make of nought; Forbear her not, though she thy soule doth keep, Nor let her in that sinne securely sleepe, But tell her plainely what that Iesabell Got, when she (painted) from her window fell; And say no more, if then shee'l not relent, Tho Grace her name was, she will nere repent; But in her vaine persist, till Deaths cold dart Hath made both dust of her, and her fraile art: For where good cōscience is not womans guide No marvaile if that sex doe backward slide, Then fear not noble Sir to speake your minde, Not in an angry, but a modest kinde:
For yet (I vow) I never saw bad face, But look't the worse by that vermilion grace; And good, the world may easily espie, Is quite deformed by such fond treachery; Then well bred spirit be shee nere so tart▪ Although she hates you for't, rebuke her art, For doth she mend her face, shee'l marre the rest, If art can finde out a more abler guest.
On the same Name, ARTHVR BAKER. Anagr. HVRT A BARKER. IF't be your happinesse a Nymph to shrive, Your Anagramme is here imperative, Or to your selfe, or others, when they boast Of dainty cates, and afterwards cry roast. A guest invited to a curious feast, Partakes some choycer dish amongst the rest, But therewith not content his bulke to fill, (His minde not fed) puts forth a question still, VVhen, where, and how that rarer piece came here, VVhich makes them wish him choak'd with his good cheere. Then Noble Sir, how ere you chance to speed, Let not the open streets proclaime your deed: The Dogge that barkes before he bites I ween, Forewarnes us of the mischiefe might have beene:
But he that robs, and after tels the shame With his rude tongue, trusse him up for the same; Therfore I wish all valiant sprites to hate And hurt him who fares well, yet needs must prate.
An Anagram upon the name of that apt and forward Gentleman, Master IOHN FARVVELL. Anagr. VVE FALL O HIR. WEE whose warm bloud & youthful fire Kindles quick flashes of desire, VVhen we beheld those amorous faces, Deckt with good nature, and the Graces, Cannot refraine, but being charm'd By the blinde naked childe unarm'd, VVe marching to the Martiall field, Meet with a dart which makes us yeeld, But not retire, for when that blow Hath wounded us, we forward goe, And neither fire, nor water flee, So our adored Saint we see, But (toucht) our ardent soules doe presse, Till we loves object doe possesse, To which if we attaine, our pleasure Valu'd with all the worlds rich trasure, Doth farre o'reprise it in the height Of loves transcendent true delght.
Then if my Mistrisse chance to slide, And (willing) trips downe on her side, I know not how to doe her honour, But imitate, and fall upon her: For ever 'twas a womans will, To have us doe as they doe still: If thus we opportunely watch, Young or old▪ Dotrils we may catch.
An Anagram upon that cautelous and courteous Gentleman, Master REGINALDE FOSTER. Anagr. TRI'D NO FALS GEERE. THough hastie youth by natures apt to trie, Ought that delights the fancie, or the eye, And still the minde of man is apt to range, To severall objects, and affecteth change; Yet view a Mirrour here, whose setled minde In his minority is not inclinde To such unstaidnesse, but doth quench that fire, Which youths loose bloud doth prompt to lewd desire, And by imployments of a vertuous way, The heat of such rude flames he doth allay, And if there be (as noys'd abroad) I heare, Ladies or Lasses that doe weare false geere, It may be so, but those hee'le not abide▪ No counterfeit by this yong blade is tri'd, He is too cautelous, ere to be caught, VVith an unnaturall, or thing of naught; But solely sets down wisedome for his guide, VVhich quickly doth the good frō bad decide.
Scarce any of his fellow Masquers here, Will sweare they neuer tride such fictive ware, Vnlesse faire Hymen then afford it you, Tis vertue if you try, nor false nor true.
Middle Temple. An Anagramme upon the Name of that valiant and martiall minded Gentle∣man, Master ROBART OVVEN. Anagr. BORNE TO VVAR. YOur Anagram brave Sir, revives the star, Shinde at your birth, from Mars the god of war; VVhich gives you of a stout, and valiant spirit, To equall Tudor, or Glendores high merit, Whose Christian was your surname, and whose fame Lives in your true and antient Brittish name, Aspire then by your Armes, worth to obtaine, And let not Venus pull Mars backe againe Into her lustfull lap? the Planet so May alter, and enthrall you to the Bow Of her blinde Boy, where his fell totring harms Are farre more cruell then the god of Armes: But if you must retreat, leaving that field, And (conquerd) unto Ladies lawes must yeeld,
Iumpe on a Nymph of spotlesse Vestas quire, Whose thoughts are pure, till Hymen gives desire, (Or one of chast Diana's daughters, who, Though they may think, no lustful actiō know, But take heed of a new made face or skin, That's not so faire without, as foule within, So shall you show your valiant temper, and By your coole life, the chastest Dame command: Thus if to Mars his brawles you are not borne, Fight with a wife, but with a wagtaile scorne.
An Anagram upon the name of the cour∣teous and affable Gentleman, Master PHILIP MORGAN. Anagr. GO LIP HIR MAN. IF sober kisses silent Prologues be, The further to endeare socieie, The faire salutes of this our formall Nation, Which first from holy Writ began that fashion: If those be signes and pledges of our love, VVhich inwardly a strong affection move, If by the tast of those sweet cherry hils, And interchanged breath, our love distils Into each others inward secret parts, And often times surpriseth both our hearts: If those blest meetings kindle such a flame, As coldest winds can never quench the same. Goe lip or kisse her Sir, for now I spie A spark new flown from her quicke lovely eye, Into your amorous bosome, which will heare The chillest frozen heart, and make it sweate Till it's assured, that she is it's friend, VVho did that bolt of Cupid to him send;
And so she is no doubt, else your exile Had beene decreed by frownes, but not a smile: Goe freely then, and kisse her once againe, For she is wounded too, and lives in paine, Till legally that pretious Iewel's lost, VVhich her fond Parents have so often crost, VVeare that thy kisse hath won, kinde natur'd man, And thanke not fortune, but Coelestiall Pan.
An Anagramme upon the name of the hopefull and prosperous sayling Gentle∣man, Master MARTIN HARVEY. Anagr. ARIVE AT HER MYNE. EAch Microcosme is like a ship at Sea, Tossed with storms & tempests every way, Now with a gentle gale and prosperous ale, Then blustring Eolus his mirth doth quale▪ I'th morning of his yeares with pleasant wing He cuts the Ocean, whilst the Mermaid sing On glistring sands, as if the sea Nymphs layes, Did eccho to the Rockes his early praise, In his meridian flags doe flourish still, Seeming to offer windes unto his will. And on he flies with his well ballast Barke, Chirping sweet Musicke like the lofty Larke, Till wasting downewards, after his full height VVearied with pleasure, on the earth doth light; Thus hoary age accurs, as mortals strive At some safe harbour, timely to arrive,
VVhilst one is shipwrackt, and another crost, This gaines the gold, and that the venture lost, Then worthy Sir, if you intend to wive, Strike sailes, and into her rich treasure dive: And doubt not (favour'd youth) but all is thine, If happy passe arives you, at her Mine: She values man more than her drossy treasure, Sight she loves well, but touch is her true plea∣sure.
An Anagram upon the name of the heroick and high spirited Gentleman, Master ROBERT COALE. Anagr. BEAR'T COOLER. THough heate of spirit, vigour of the soule, Loves masterhood, and hates the worlds controule, Making a pish at that which contradicts, And violently spurnes, if ought afflicts, Which birth and wealth assists, and by this way, Makes our rude passions, reason oversway; Yet certainly it hurts, and such hot moodes, Dry up the moisture of our vitall bloods, Nor doth it well become a gentile minde, By pedigree, to be so ill inclinde; They should be courteous, affable and milde, Which steales affection, seeming to beguile The totall world of its true love, and praise, Which crowns such vertu's with eternal Bayes, Yet where the iustice of the cause clayms merit, Be Tigers fierce, or of a Lyons spirit; But upon every trifle that doth thwart, Draw not each veyne o'th net unto your heart,
O beare it cooler; let wise Patience Tell you, rash acts produce but penitence, And he most valiant, is accounted still, Who conquers his affections, and his will; Should you by chance to choller then be given, Bear't cooler, & you'le sooner climb to heaven.
Lincolns Inne. An Anagramme upon the name of the Honourable and Noble minded Gentleman, IOHN NORTHE. Sonne to the Lord North. Anagr. THORNE HONY. HEre's sweet & sharp, here's hony on a thorn, Coucht in the name of him that's Nobly borne: His nature unto hony may allude, Sweet, milde, and healing, hating ought that's rude. Thorne may imply his better natures wrong, Hurts where it heald, if with ill language stung; And both united, may be thus applide, No vertue shines, but vice, that light would hide▪ But i'le explaine it a more merry way, A Nymph amongst the woods walking to play,
Seeing hony-combe on thorne, desir'd to licke, Save that her nature fear'd the pricke, Yet thinking that she never pluckt a Rose, But her faire hand to hurt she did expose; She ventur'd on, and as the Combe distils, (Holding the thorne) her thawing mouth shee fils, And herewith not content, she loves it so, Shee vowes to fill her belly ere shee'l goe: Saying, O Lord, in truth should I be sworne, Ne're did I taste such hony on a thorne: This is the fable, you the Morall are, And the sweet hony that she found so rare, Then if your Mistrisse in blinde love can see, She may take hony from your thorny tree, By whose most sweet concoction, amorous tast, She may grow fat, and burnish in the wast.
An Anagram upon the name of that at∣tractive Gentleman, Master EDVVARD HERNE. Anagr. DRAVV HER NED. IN drawing out your reall Anagramme, You may conceive that I abridge your name, In the word Ned; yet once the Poet spare, If with your name hee's too familiar, For in his service, and obsequious ends, You'l find his masking must make you amends: That word Equivocall, which bids you draw Her, is not meant by rigour of the Law, Nor to compell her love by force of Armes, (For Mars his shield fell down at Venus charms) And some (though few) if you go wayes uncivill To vertue, you as soone may draw the divell, But if you meane to win, and make her sure By your faire carriage, draw, attract, allure Her loving soule, then she halfe way will meet, And in Loves Coelique orbe your person greet: Nor thinke that if you prosecute, shee'l flye, Or if retire, shee'l be the contrary,
Like to the shadowes proverbe; but I weene That Adage fayles, when Phoebus is not seene, But where an able body she doth finde, Linckt with essentiall graces of the minde, A comely presence, and an active limbe, Which seemes by lofty Capers, ayre to climbe. Her amorous soule cānot those parts withstand, But (struck by Cupid) is at your command: All which you do possesse, thus draw her Ned, And you may dance away her maydenhead.
An Anagramme upon the name of the generous spirited Gentleman, Master HENRYE MAXEY. MACSEY. Anagr. I CAME NYE HERS. EAch lusty Masquer hath the liberty Of dancing, and may boldly then come nye, Or her, or hers; if in a fitting place Her gentle nature doth permit that grace: So I of that society being one, Sought to come nye her best affection, Which she accepted, and (without deferrs) Came just as nye to mine, as I to hers: And had our tender soules thought it no sin. As we came nie so one on's had gone in.
An Anagramme upon the name of the courteous Gentleman, Master STEPHEN IAY. Anagr. A HIE STEP IN. IT is the nature of the soule t'aspire, And upwards flie, like sparks or flames of fire, As not contented with this lower frame, But seeking still the place from whence it came, VVhich may the reason be as I suppose, VVhy higher spirits doe not here repose, And set their rest up with a competence, But strive for honour and magnificence. Thus by or wealth, or friends they favour win And to the height doe climbe, a hie step in; So this brave spirit by his resolv'd endeavour▪ Which in a vertuous path did still persever, By person, parts, and graces of the minde, The Fates to him a higher place assign'd, Frō Innes of Court (great'st Gentryes educatio Vnto the Royall Court in neare relation; And that I must account a step in Which doth approach such
step indeed, where I desire faire desrts may flourish, and grow higher, And that each Noble sparke of this brave train, May serve those Dieties without disdaine. Set on as this your Brother doth begin, From Innes of Court, to Court▪ a hie step in. FINIS.
