15683 99839896 4356
The Tragical death of Dauid Beatō Bishoppe of sainct Andrewes in Scotland. Wherunto is ioyned the martyrdom of maister George Wyseharte gentleman, for whose sake the aforesayed bishoppe was not longe after slayne. Wherein thou maist learne what a bur∣nynge charitie they shewed not only towardes him: but vnto al suche as come to their hā∣des for the ble∣ssed Gospels sake. ☞ ☜ ☜
❧ Roberte Burrant to the reader. ATtendauntly consyde∣ryng (most benigne rea∣der) the effecte of thys Tragicall wrytte, suche was the tendernes of myne affec∣tion, that I could do no lesse then the same, wyth suche knowledge as in me lyeth, make manifeste to all mennes vnderstandynges, to the good exemple, and no lesse pro∣fit of all creatures, & especially of those whō God hath of his secrete motion, frely called to the admi∣nistration of his spiritual gyftes. Wherein I do moste chiefly note the secrete iudgemente of God, The secret iudgement of God ex∣ecuted in all ages. whiche hath not onely bene nowe declared by the moste wretched slaughter of thys member of An∣tichriste, but also heretofore in all tymes and ages euen frō the first creation of mā, to this presēt time of our sensible vnderstandynge of
this exēple & many others chaūce∣inge to lyke effecte. For after that God had made God fyrste entred in∣to iudge∣ment with Adam. Adam in his perfection and asso∣ciated hym wt a cōpanion for his comforte: He gaue vnto him incō∣tinētly certeyne preceptes, which he commaunded moste diligently to be obserued, that is, to vse all his heauēly giftes cōteined with∣in Paradise to his most delectati∣on, sauynge one pore seely tree, which he had reserued to his god∣ly pleasure. But this obliuious minister A∣dam, hauynge more respecte to the flattering tonge of Eua, who had receyued a corrupt doctrine of the serpent, and wyth lyght persuasi∣on inkenled in his herte wyth the pestilent flame of vayne glorie, in that he thoughte to atteyne to the estimation to knowe boeth good and euyl, and so be made equal in
knoweledge wyth God, was by iust and secrete iudgemēt of God depriued of his administration, ex pulsed out of Paradise, and made a slaue and vile bondmā to death and synne. Notwithstandyng the wrath of God dyd not so farre en∣tre into iudgemente wyth Adam, that he dyd vtterly forsake hym, but yet once more made him a mi∣nistre vpon the earth, & gaue hym Ciuile po∣wer geue to Adam in earth. ciuile power to rule all his crea∣tures therin, & to constitute other rulers vnder hym. By the whiche authoritie Adam dyd substitute Cain his elder sonne & Abell his brother lyke ciuile officers vnto God. But Cain beinge a spiteful Cain an en∣uious and couetous minister. and enuious minister, wyllynge his owne prefermente, boastynge his hypocritical deedes, iudgynge euyll of his brothers conscience, misusyng his function, vnsaylled in his administration, vnderstan∣dynge
not his vocation: yea coue∣tyng hym selfe only to be in office, and his vnpure sacrifice to seme moste beste, beganne moste tyran∣nously to persecute his brother & at the laste slewe hym to the high displeasure of god: whereupon al∣mightie god procedynge into defi∣nite sentence of his moste secrete The iudge∣mēt of god agaynste Cain and al his issue. iudgement wyth Cain, gaue hym vp into lyke death, and all his po∣steritie linially descendynge from hym was consumed in the floude of Noe. In the whiche floude is in lyke case to be noted the greate Ire and wrath of god agaynste the vniuersall worlde, for that The iudge∣mēt of god agaynste the whole worlde, they contempned hym. For theyr adulterie and tyrannte, wherein they moste abhominably dyd vse all kynde of fylthie and viciouse lyuynge. For the texte sayeth. The sonnes of the godlie beganne
to wexe tyrannes vpon the earth. ❧ After thys stoude, the seede of man beinge multiplyed agayne, to some numbre, among the Chal∣deis The iustice of God a∣gaynst the Chaldeis. they beganne to buylde a ci∣tie, and a stronge towre, and cal∣led it Babylon, whereby they thoughte in theyr folyshe cogita∣tions to prostrate vnto theyr o∣beysaunce the vniuersall earth. But God of hys diuine power forseynge theyr folyshe though∣tes, and wycked Imaginations, preuented them, and ministred vnto them hys iustice, confoun∣dynge theyr speaches, whereby theyr workes were lefte vnper∣fected, theyr councelles broken, theyr Kyngdome in processe made desolate, and ledde awaye captyue by the Assiriās, and so came to an vtter destructiō. And not without iuste cause dyd God precede wyth
this wycked generation into iud∣gement, for by them arose the first The fyrste occasion of Idola∣trie. occasion of Idolatrie. For when the godly amonge them, made sa∣crifice vnto God, it so pleased God to kendle their sacrifice (whiche they had prepared) wyth fier from heauen. The vngodly folowinge theyr maner of sacrifice, brunte it in lyke fashion wyth fier, and so of their imaginations and dreames made a newe sacrifice vnto God, wythout expresse cōmaundement of the word of God, or els hauyng any truste in the promise of Chri∣stes commynge. The same venge∣aunce of God was not absent frō Kynge Pharao, who wyth obsti∣nate Pharao. wyll and purpose abusynge the myght of his ciuile power, did most cruelly persecute the chyldrē of God. God loked vpon the house of Israel, and among kinges there sate he in iudgemente, where he
found Abimelech giltie of his bro∣thers Abimelech death, and hym lefte not vn∣plaged for his offence. Into the same iudgement entred god wyth Saule, who for his malicious sto∣macke and stubburne hert against the electe of God, miserably peri∣shed, the ceptre and kyngly honor beinge taken awaye from his po∣steritie, yea, he laste of all rigned amonge his generation, and toge∣ther Saule. wyth hym vtterly dyed his generation. And the kyngdome was deliuered into the handes of Dauid the annoynted of god. Al∣though that Asa deserued muche cōmēdation, for that he abrogated Asa. the vayne & superstitious honou∣ring of god in so much yt he spared not to punishe his owne naturall mother in this behalfe, for she also vsed a certeyne superstition in hir religion: yet escaped not he thys strayght iudgemēt of god, for that
he had wroughte a certeyne con∣spiracie, & had set apart his truste and hope in god. Ioram comman̄∣ded the Elders of the realme & his Joram bretherne to be slayne, and he was the authour of a newe Idolatrie, wherfore god for his iniquitie pla∣ged hym, and gaue hym ouer into the handes of the Philistians, by whom he was slayne, his wife and chyldren ledde away prisoners, sa∣uing his yongest sonne Dchosias. Ochosias. who folowynge the steppes of his father renewed false religiō, wher∣fore god extēded his Ire agaynste hym, & gaue hym ouer into destru∣ction. Howbeit his mother Atha∣lia Athalia when she sawe hir sonne dead, dreadynge leste some of his kynred would take vpon him the crowne, she comaūded yt al, whiche remay∣ned of the kinges bloud shoulde be slayne. And so by thys meanes the Salomons bloude de∣stroyed. stocke & whole house of Salomon
was extinguished for ye only cause of disobeyinge goddes word, for the maintenaūce of Idolatry, & despi∣sing true religiō. And Athalia hir Athalia slayne. selfe for hir tiranny & vsurpation cōtrary the wil of god escaped not vnauenged. For the high priest cō∣maūded hir to be slaine as an ene∣mie to goddes trueth, and vnmete ministre in the house of the Lorde. Ioas was an holy mā, & loued wel to heare Ioiada preache the worde Ioas of god, as lōg as he lyued, but whē Ioiada was dead, he fel to Idola∣try, & kylled the prophete zachary Ioiada sōne before the tēple. And for this, gods wil was yt he should be punished among the Sirians, and at the laste he was strangled among his owne seruaūtes. A sto∣ry of like effecte we reade of kynge Amasias. This Amasias when he was fyrst chosen kynge, wholy di∣sposed Amasias hym selfe to godly lyuinge,
and elected to heare the prophetes preache, & for that cause god made hym fortunate agaynste the Idu∣mers. But incontinuaunce he be∣ganne to were proud against god, and beinge constrayned of no ne∣cessitie, to fulfyll his owne sensu∣al appetite, he woulde nedes haue warre, wherein he was taken pri∣soner, and so died wretchedly. And as Ozias, otherwyse called Asari∣as Ozias ali∣as Asarias succeded hym in administratiō of the kyngdom, so lyke wise he fo∣lowed hym in state and condition of lyuynge, for at the begynnynge he was vertuous and a fauourer of the worde of God, and had tho∣rowe the healpe of god, a notable victory against the Philistians. Afterwarde where as he woulde haue done sacrifice in the temple contrary the commaundement of god, he was striken wyth an hor∣rible leprosie. I maye not in thys
place forget Achas, who also ordei∣ned Achas. false religion, and of a peruers studie & affection conceiued in su∣perstitiō, he buylded chappels and aultares euery where thorowout al his realme, but god espied hym, and gaue hym and all his realme into the spoyle of straungers. No parcial iudge was god who spared not his anger from his onely cho∣sen people, and the posteritie and ofsprynge of Abraham, to whom he made so greate and fayethfull promises: but iustly punished thē in the sixt yere of Ezechias, when the kyng of the Assirians conque∣red the citie of Samaria, and led awaye captiue the. x. tribes of Is∣raell. For that they had instituted The. x. tri∣bes of Is∣raell. a peculiar and a straunge religion wythin thē selues, taught a newe doctrine, and made sacrifice con∣trary the decrees whiche god had geuen ouer them, abusynge them∣selues
vnder the pretence of God∣des worde and name, to mayn∣teyne and vpholde theyr priuate power and vsurped Kyngdome. What secrete iudgement God v∣sed wyth Manasse, howe ryghtu∣ously he deite wyth hym, let your Manasse consciences iudge. Wicked and ab horninable was his administrati∣on, for of a false & diabolicall zeale of holynes he burned his owne sō∣nes in steede of sacrifice vnto the lorde, he persecuted the prophetes, and sawed Esaias the holy one in sunder. Yet being takē of his ene∣mies, knowledgyng his detestable factes, god toke hym into fauour. Did not god abbreuiat and short∣ten the kyngdome of Amon, and gaue hym ouer into the handes of Amon his owne seruauntes to be slayne, for his wycked administration be∣fore the Lord: Who would thinke that God would haue ben displea∣sed
wyth Iosias, which suppressed all false religion, pulled downe, Iosias. the chapples and Idolles, and cō∣maunded the bones of the false preachers to be burned, whō they had tofore misused for reliques: Yea, he restored the bokes of Moy∣ses whiche had bene hydden away a longe tyme. That not wythstan∣dynge, where as he thoughte that all thynges woulde frame well and luckely wyth hym, because he was so holte a man, because he dyd so many good deedes of charitie, he woulde needes fyghie wyth the Kynge of Egypte, who woulde gladly haue lyued in peace and re∣quiryng the same at Iosias hand. But Iosias presumynge vpon his holynesse, and trustyng in his owne strengthe, was stroken to death in the same battayle. And althoughe these were sufficient to feare any christiās hert, willing to
subdue his stubberne & to muche swellynge stomacke againste the wyll of the Lorde, yet I wyl brief∣ly recite (so that ye shal not thinke it tedious) howe god dyd prostrate and vtterly destroye the persecu∣tours of his faythfull people, and the stoute rebellions agaynste his worde in the reste of the age of the world, as I hetherto haue begon. Dyd not the pertinacy and stoute stomacke of Sedechias despisynge the godly preachyng of Hieremias Sedechias make god angry wyth hym and suffre him to be taken prisoner, his owne sonnes to be kylled afore his face, his eyes to be plucked out of his head, the parētes to eate theyr owne chyldren for hunger, the ci∣tie of Hierusalem to be destroyed, the tēple (whō he had cōmaunded to be buylded) consumed wyth fy∣er, the most chosen part of the peo∣ple of Iuda brought into captiui∣tie
of the Babilonians. God of his moste secrete iudgemēt stirred vp the hertes of the Medtans and Persians agaynst Balthasar, who Balthasar blasphemed the name of God, and abused the vesselles of the Lordes house (dedicated to his holy admi∣nistration) in the Bankatyng his concubines. And so throught this blasphemynge and stoute re∣sistaunce of goddesholy wyll, the citie of Babilō was cōquired and the whole empire of the Chaldeis and Assirians made subiect to the rule of the Persians. I cannot o∣mitte the tyrannicall and bloudy persecution of Aman the vicege∣rent to hynge Assuerus who tho∣rowe Amos his power and subtil ingine had obteyned a commission of the kynge to destroye Goddes people vnder the name of Iewes, wherby he was sure to haue ye godly quene Hester put to death. But god be∣ing,
a present remedy to his electe rewarded Aman wyth the same gibbet or haulter, whiche he prepa∣red for goddes people. Howe longe dyd god defer his iudgemēt from Antiochus, the very figure of An∣tichrist, who commaunded goddes holy word to be burned, he sore pu∣nished those christiās that woulde Antiochus not beleue vpon his fayth▪ He also prophaned the temple of god, for he set vp there an Idoll of the gen∣tiles. Howbeit the anger of god fel vpō hym. For his stocke & ofspring dyd not onely perishe vtterly, but the whole Empyre also was ouer∣turned and subiected to the Siri ans. And nowe to perfourme my promise that I in the begynnynge dyd make, that is, in fewe wordes to notice the most notable hie sto∣ries cōcernying ye persecutiō of the christians executed in all ages, let vs come to the tyme of Christ. In
the which the fyrst and most cruel persecutiō was of Herode agaynst Iohn Baptist. For at the shame∣les requeste of Herodiades his bro∣thers Herode doughter, who had wel plea∣sed hym wyth hir friscalles & most lasciuious daunsing, he graunted hir by an othe, to fulfyl hir request what soeuer she would demaunde. where vpon she asked the heade of saincte Iohn Baptiste. But to the greate and miserable rueth of the boeth. For they were banished out of theyr countrey and depriued of their princely honoure by Caius Caligula. An other of the same bloud, called likewise Herode, neuy to the aforesayed Herode, slewe the Herode apostle S. Iames the elder, wher∣fore god shortned their kingdoms and roted them out as vnprofita∣ble ministers vnto hym, & brought their posteritie into vtter confusi∣on, and that wythin a shorte tyme.
And foras much as: it is oē to eue¦ry mans syghte, and easie to their vnderstandynges what persecuti∣on the apoostles and messengers of God dyd suffre, and vnder whose tyrannie: I thynke it therfore su∣fficient to admonishe you, that for their death lykewyse God alwaies entred into iudgemente, and spa∣red not to plage the world for their obstinate and wylful blindnesse in despisynge their doctrine, and kyl∣led them whiche preached the true Messias to haue redemed all men frely from sinne, and is a sufficient sacrifice to appease Gods wrath. ❧But nowe if ye wyll vouchsafe wyth diligēt eye to peruse these a∣foresayed storyes, and cōferre them (wyth indifferente iudgemente) wyth the lyke exemples chaun∣ced in oure tyme: ye shall fynde God to be no lesse myndefull of his seruauntes nowe adayes, no
slowar auenger agaynst them that iniuriously shed tye vioude of his electe, no vniuster in entrynge in∣to Iudgemente wyth them, that stoutly, & stubburnly refuse to ad∣mit his holy worde. Thys diligēt∣ly marcked, what neede I make a∣ny rehearsal of their names, places or tymes? And as yet dayly prac∣tise of the same commeth in vre. For fyrste consydre, howe iustlie God hath ouerthrowen that ba∣bilonious The Bi∣shoppe of Rome harlotte, and our great enemie the bishop of Rome, Chri∣stes onelie deceyuer in earth. Yea and not onelie hy. n, but also as manie (be they neuer so secrete in their wycked thoughtes) as maynteyne his superstitious tra∣ditions, and dampnable heresies. Amonge whome I founde none to appeare so notable, as thys Da∣uid Beaton, that obstinate Sede∣chias, Dauid Bea∣ton of Scotland yt harde herted Pharao, that
blasphemous Balthasar, yt bloude suckar Aman, that cruell mur∣therar of the nobles and elders of his realme Ioram, that detestable Idolater Achas, and the peruerse hinderar of gods worde Antioch. I know not who hath most cause to reioyse and prayse the Lorde of his deliueraunce, whether Scot∣lande for that they are deliuered frō his trayterous tyranny, or els England who founde hym an ob∣stinate and proude enemy. But well I knowe that the papistes of iust cause muche lamēt & mourne, for they loste a ryght trustie speare of their chiualry. Muche good re∣porte I hearde of hym, by his fa∣miliars that he vsed to sweare but in trifles, and in weighti matters to blaspheme stoutly. Whose othe was moste cōmunely gods bloude as most semely for his estate. Ma∣ny tymes & oftē curssed he Englād
for their doctrine. He rayled at their counselles as vayne, and con dempned the clergie as heritickes, Al coun∣treis loue winchester. and not one bishop to be good, but onely Winchester, and that was bounde wyth an holie daye othe. What neede I make farther re∣hersall of his abhominable factes & tragicall dedes, whē they be ma∣nifestly declared in thys litle trea∣tise folowing. But for asmuche as the cause of his death is not to eue∣ry mā apparāt: I thinke it necessa∣ry The cause of Beatons death therefore to put you in mynde, that the last day of Marche, in the yere of oure Lorde. M. D. xlvi. he moste cruelly put to death in his castle of sainct Andrewes, the mā of god maister George wysehart a man descendyng of a noble house, for that he truly and sincerely prea∣ched George Wysehart the word of god to the simple and ignoraūt people. But god (as it is manifestly afore declared) ne∣uer
leauing the bloude of his elece vnauenged, thorowe his secrete motion, he moued the hertes of cer teine gentlemen in Scotlande, to conspire the death of this tyranne & the oppressour of his people. So that ther by diuine policie intung the castle, & garded with the faith∣ful hope of a good intēt to acquite their countrey of an intollerable burthen of tyranny & trayterous Dauid Bea∣ton slayne rebellion, fynding al waies opē to their pretēsed purpose: slewe thys Antichrist lurkynge in his dungi∣on the last day of May in the yere aforesayed. So that it may be wel verified in hym. He that stryketh with the sworde, shal perishe with the sworde. Therefore I woulde wishe that al those whiche are cal∣led to the administration of com∣mune weales and also to the office and dignitie of Elders in the con∣gregation woulde wyth moste cir∣cumspecte
diligence marcke these forsayed stories and late exemples, and dayly sette them before theyr eyes as appoynted tokens by God, Lucifer. to auoyed lyke daungers, whyche assuredly are promised by the word of God to al them that striue so ob∣stinately and wilfully agaynst his holy wyll. And as Lucifer could no longar be permitted to occupy the estate of an angel in heauen, when that he fel into obstinate and arrogant contention with God: lyke∣wyse can no ministre of Christes here in earth (accordyng to his vn∣doubted promises longer obteyne a rule among his electe, then that the same ministre be subiected and obedient to Goddes ordinaunce, and wyllynglie doeth fulfyll the same, appliyng al his administrati∣on to the glorie of God, to the en∣crease of his faith amōg his people, & so necessaryly to the profit of the
commune weale. And to suche a minister the scriptures do vouch∣safe to attribute double honoure boeth for the worthinesse of his o∣ffice, and also for his spirituall and Godlie councel. And beside al this Christe hath faythfully promi∣sed to glorifie hym amonge his sainctes, for that he in earth glorified his father whiche is in heauen. Wyth whō the same Christ graunte all vs to reste in lyke glorie. Amen.
Here foloweth the Tragedy of the late moste reuerende father Dauid, by the mercie of God Cardinall and archbishoppe of sainct Andrewes. And of the whole realme of Scot∣land primate, Legate and Chaun∣celer, administrator of the bishop∣riche of Merapois in Fraunce, and cōmendator perpetuall of the Abbay of Aberbrothoke, compiled by sir Dauid Lyndsaye of the mounte knyghte. Alias Lione, kyng of armes. ❧ Anno. M. D. xlvi. Ultimo Maii. ¶ The wordes of Dauid Bea∣ton the Cardinall afore∣saied at his death. Alas alas, slaye me not, I am a Priest. ☞ * ☜ ☞
NOt lōg sence, after the houre of prime Secretely sittyng in myne Oratorie I to be a boke, to occupie the tyme where I foūd, many Tragedy & storie Which Iohn Bochas had put in me∣mory How many a prince, cōquerour & captaine Were dolfully deposed from their raigne Howe Alexander the potent conquerour In Babilon was poysonned petiously, And Iulius the mightie Emperour, Murthered at Rome causeles and truelly Prudent Pompey in Egypt shamefully, Murthered was, what nedeth processe more Whose Tragedies are petifull to deplore I sittynge so, vpon my boke readyng Ryght sodenly, afore me dyd appeare One wounded man, aboundauntly bledyng Wyth visage pale, and wyth a deadly cheate Seinyng a man of two and fyftie yeare. In rayment red, clothed ful curiously Wyth fyne veluet, and satten richely. Wyth feble voice, as man opprest with payne▪ Softly he made me supplication, Saiynge, my friende, reade, and reade agayne Yt thou can fynde by true narration Of one payne, lyke to my passion, Ryght sure I am, were Iohn Bochas alyue, My Tragedie at length he woulde discryue. Seinge he is gone, I pray the to endyte Of myne infortune, some remembraunce, Or at the lests my Tragedie wryte, As I to the, shall shewe the circumstaunce,
In termes briefe, of my vnhappy chaunce, Sence my begynnyng, vnto my fatall ende, Whiche I woulde to all creatures were kende. I woulde (sayed I) make suche memoriall Yt of thy name, I had intelligence I am Dauid that carefull Cardinall Whiche doth appeare (sayed he) to thy presence, That sometyme had so greate preeminence. Then he beganne his deedes to endyte, As ye shall heare, and I beganne to wryte. The Tragedie. ¶ I Dauid Beaton some tyme Cardinall Of noble bloude, by lyne I dyd descende Duryng my tyme, I had no peir equall, But nowe is come, alas, my fatall ende. Aye, gree by gree, vp warde I dyd ascende, So that in thys realme dyd neuer reigne So greate a man (as I) vnder my soueraigne. When I was a yonge ioyly gentleman Princes to serue, I set my whole entent. First to ascende, at Arbroth I began, An abbasie of greate ryches, and rent, Of that estate, yet was I not content, To get more ryches dignitie and glore, My herte was set, alas alas therfore. I made suche seruice, vntyll our Souereigne He dyd promote me, to more high estate, A Prince aboue all priestes, for to Reigne, Archbishoppe of sainct Andrewes consecrate, To that honour, when I was eleuate My prydefull herte, was not content at all Tyll that I was created a Cardinall.
Yet preste I, to haue more authoritie And finally was chosen Chauncelat And for vpholdynge, of my dignitie Was made Legate, then had I no compare, I purchest, for my profit singulare, My cofers, and my treasure to auaunce, The bishopriche of Merapois in Fraunce. Of al Scotlande, I had the gouernal But myne aduise concluded was not certeyne Abbot, bishoppe, archbishoppe, cardinal In thys realme no higher coulde I reigne But I had ben Pope, Emperour or souereigne For shortnes of tyme, I am not able At length to shewe myne actes honourable For my moste princely prodigalitie Amonge prelates in Fraunce, I toke the pryce I dyd shewe my lordly liberalitie In banketyng, playinge at cardes and dice In suche wysedome I was holden wyse And spared not, to playe wyth hynge or knyght Thre thousand crownes of gold vpō one nyght In Fraunce, sir, I made honest voyages Where I dyd artes, digne of remembraunce Thorowe me were made triumphant mariages To our souereigne both profit and pleasaunce Quene Magdalē, the fyrst doughter of Fraūce With great riches, was into Scotland brought That mariage thorow my wisdō was wrought After whose death into Fraunce I past agayne The seconde quene, homewarde I dyd conuoye, That lustie Princesse, Mary de Loraine Whiche was receiued wyth tryumph and Ioye
So serued I, our ryght redoubted Roye, Sone after that, Henrie of Englande kynge Of our soueraigne, desyred one communyng. Of that metyng, our kynge was wel content So that in Yorke, was set both tyme and place, But our prelates and I, woulde neuer consent, That he shoulde see, kynge Henry in the face. But we were wel content, so that his grace, Had sayled the sea, to speake wyth any other, Except ye king, which was his mothers brother Where thorowe, there arose, great war & mortal strife, Great heirships, hūgar, darth, & desolatiō On the other syde many dyd lose their lyfe. If I woulde make any true narration, I caused, all that tribulation, For to take peace I neuer woulde consent, Wythout the kynge of Fraunce, had ben cōtent Duryng these warres, were taken prisoners Of noble men, fyghtyng ful turiously Many a Lorde, baron, and bacchillers. Where thorowe our kynge, toke such melancoly Whiche draue him, to the deede ryght dolefully, Extreme dolour, ouerset dyd so his herte That from thys lyfe, alas he dyd departe But after yt, boeth strength & speach were losed, A paper blanke, I gatte his grace subscriue, Into whiche I wrought, al that me pleased. After his death, whiche longe were to discriue, Thorowe that wrytyng, I purposed belyue, Wyth support of some lordes beneuolence, In thys region, to haue preeminence.
As for our Lorde, our rightuous Gouernour. If I woulde shortly, shewe the veritie, To hym I had no maner of fauour. Durynge that tyme, I purposed that he Shoulde neuer come, to none authoritie, For his support, therfore he broughte among vs Forth of Englande, the noble Erle of Anguishe. Then was I put abacke from my purpose, And sodenly caste into captiuitie, My prideful herte, to breake, as I suppose, Deuised by the high diuinitie. Yet in my herte, sprange no humilitie, But nowe the worde of God ful wel I knowe, Who doth exalt hym selfe, God shal hym lowe. In the meane tyme, when I was so subiected, Ambassatours were sent into Englande, Where they both peace, and maryage cōtracted And more suerly for to obserue that bande Were promised diuerse pledges of Scotlande. Of that contracte, I was no waye content, Nor euer woulde therto, geue my consent. To captaines that kept me in warde Gyftes of golde, I gaue them greate plentie Rulars of courte, I rychely dyd rewarde, Wherby I escaped, from captiuitie, But when I was free, at my libertie, Then lyke a Lyon, losed of his caige, Out thorow this realme, I begā to raile & raige. Contrary the Gouernour, and his companie, Ofte tymes made I, insurrection. Purposyng for to haue hym hastely, Subdued vnto my correction,
Or put hym to extreme subiection, Duryng thys tyme, if it were wel dissided Thys realme, by me, was vtterly deuided, The Gouernour purposyng to subdue, I raysed an hoste of many a bolde baron, And made a rode, which Lyghgowe yet may rue For we destroyed, one myle aboute the towne For that I gate, many blacke malison, Yet contrary the Gouernours entent, Wyth our yong princesse, we to Steruiling wēt For high contemptation of the Gouernour, I brought the Erie of Lemox, forth of Fraunce That lustie Lorde, lyuyng in greate pleasure Dyd lose that laude, and honest ordinaunce, But he and I fell cone at variaunce, And thorowe my councell, was in short space Forfaited, and banished, he gate no other grace. Then thorowe my prudence, practice and ingine Our Gouernour I caused to consente, Ful quietly, to my councel incline, Wherof his nobles, were not wel content, For why, I gate, dissolued, in playne parliament The bande of peace, contarcted with Englande, Where thorow came harme, & heirship to Scot∣lande. That peace broken, arrose newe mortall warre, By sea and lande, suche theifte wythout releue, Whiche to reporte, it frayeth my herte farre. The veritie to shewe in termes breue I was the rote of al that greate mischeue The South countrey (may say) it had ben good, That my nourice, had smored me in my coud.
I was the cause of mykle more mischaunce For vpholde of my glore and dignitie, And pleasure of the potent kynge of Fraunce▪ Wyth Englande woulde I haue no vnitie, But who consider woulde, the veritie. We myght full wel, haue lyued in peace and rest Nyne or tenne yeres, and then played lose or fast Had we wyth Englande kept our contrackes Our noble men had lyued, in peace and rest Our marchauntes had not lost, so many packes. Our commune people, had not ben opprest, On thother syde, al wronges had ben redrest, But Endenburgh (sence that) Lyth & Kyngorne, The day and houre, maye ban that I was borne Our Gouernour to make hym to me sure Wyth swte and subtile wordes I did hym fyle Tyll I his sonne and heyre, gat in my cure To that effecte, I founde that craftie wyle, That he no maner of way myght me begyle. Then laughed I, when his liege dyd alleage Howe I his sonne had gotten into pleage. The Erle of Anguishe, ▪ his germaine brother I purposed, to ryd them out of thys lyfe, Ryght so to haue destroyed many other, Some wyth the fyre, some wt the sworde & knyfe Especially many gentlemen of Fyfe, And purposed, to haue put to torment Al fauourers of the olde and newe testament. Then euery man toke of me suche feare That tyme when I had, so greate gouernaunce Greate lordes dreading, I shoulde do them deare They dursie not come at courte, but assuraunce
Sence yt tyme, there hath not ben such variaūce Nowe to our princesse, barons obediently Wyth assuraunce, they come ful curteously My hope was moste, in the kynge of Fraunce, To gether, wyth the Popes holynes, More then in God, my worshippe to auaunce, I rested so into their gentlenesse, That no man durst presume me to oppresse, But when the daye came, of my fatal houre Farre was from me, their support and succour Then to preserue, my ryches, and my lyfe, One strength, of walles high and brode, I made Suche a fortresse was neuer founde in Fyfe, Beleuynge there durste, no man inuade. Now fynd I true, ye saiyng, which Dauid sayd Without God of an house, be maister of warke He worketh in vain, though it be neuer so starke For I was thorowe the high power deuine Right dolfully stroken downe, among the asshe, Which could not be thorow mortall mās ingine But as Dauid dyd slaye, the greate Golyasse, Or Olopharne, by Iudeth, kylled wasse. In mydde amonge, his triumphaunt armie So was I slayne, in my chiefe citie When I had greatest dominion As Lucifer had, in the heauenly Empire Came sodenly, my depriuation, By them whihe dyd my dolent conspire So cruell was, their furious burnynge Ire I gat, no tyme, leasure, nor libertie To saye, In manus tuas domine.
Beholde my fatal infelicitie, I beinge in my strength incomparable. That dreadful doungion, made me no saftie My greate ryches, nor rentes profitable, My syluer warke, Iewelles inestimable, My papall pompe, of golde, my riche treasure, My lyfe and al, I loste in halfe an houre. To the people, was made a spectacle Of my dead, and deformed carion, Some sayed it was a manifest miracle, Some sayed it was devine punition So to be stayne, in my stronge doungion, When euery man, had iudged as him list, They salted me, and then closed me in a chist, I laye vnburyed, seuen monethes and more Or I was borne to cloyster, churche, or quiar In a donghyll, whiche is payne to deplore, Wythout suffrage of chanon, monke, or friar, Al proud prelates, by me maye learne to be wisar Whiche reigned so longe, and so triumphantly, Sence in the dust, stroken downe, so dolefully. ¶ His exhortation. To the Prelates. O ye my bretherne, Princes of the priestes, I make you hertely, supplication, Both nyght and daye, reuolue in your breastes, The processe, of my depriuation, Consider, what is your vocation, To folowe me, I praye you, not pretende you, But read at length this shedul that I sende you
Ye knowe howe Iesu his disciples sent, Ambassatours, to euery nation, To shewe his lawe, and his commaundement, To al people, by predication. Therfore I make, to you narration Seeinge you to them, are very successours, You ought so to do, as dyd your predicessours. Howe dare ye be so bolde, to take in hande, To be heraldes, to so greate a Kynge, To beare his message, boeth to borough & lande. Ye beinge domme, and can pronounce nothynge, Lyke minstrels, that can not playe, nor synge, Or why shoulde men, geue suche heardes hyre, Whiche can not guide, their ship, out of the myre Shame ye not, to be christen seruitures, And for your fee, haue greate temporal landes, Seeinge of your office, ye can not take cures? As cōmune lawe, & scriptures you cōmaundes? Ye wyl not wāt, teathing sheaffe, nor offeringes, Tithing wol, teathing lābe, teathing calfe, & like thinges To do you true seruice, you make ma∣ny abusinges My deare bretherne do not as ye were wount Amēd your lyfe now, while your dayes indures, Truste wel, ye shalbe called to a count, Of euery thynge belongyng to your cures, Leaue Idolatrie, your harlotrie and whores, Remembryng on, my vnpromised dede, For after death, maye no man make remede, Ye prelates, which haue thousādes for to spend Ye sende one simple fryar, for you to preache It is your crafte, I make it to you kend, Your selues, in your temples for to teache
Therfore marueil not, at their flattering speach For and they playnely, shewe the veritie, Then will they want the bishoppes charitie Wherfore is geuen to you suche royal rent But for to fynde the people spiritual fode Preaching to them, the olde and newe testamēt? The lawe of God, doeth playnly so conclude Put not your hope in your worldly good, As I haue done, beholde my greate treasure made me no healpe, at myne vnhappy houre. That daye when I was bishoppe consecrate The greate Bible was bounde vpon my backe What was therin litle I knwe God woate More then a beast, bearynge a precious packe But hastely my couenaunt I brake. For I dyd forget, wyth myne owne consent The lawe of God, to preache wyth good entent Bretherne ryghte so, when ye were consecrate, Ye so got you all, in the same wyse. Ye maye be called, bishoppes counterfayte As gallandes busked, to make a gyse, Nowe thynke I princes, are nothynge wyse, To geue a famouse office to a fole to rule As, who woulde put a mytar, vpon a mule. Alas and ye, that sorowful sight had sene, Howe I laye blentheryng bathed in my bloude To amende your lyfe, it had occasion bene, And lefte your olde, corrupte consuetude, Blamynge the same, then shortly I conclude Wythout ye from your rybauldrie aryse, Ye shall be serued on the same wyse.
¶ His exhortation to the Princes. Imprudent princes wythout discretion, Hauing in earth power imperiall Ye be the cause of thys transgression I speake to you all in generall, Whiche do dispone, all office spirituall, Gyuyng the soules, whiche are Christes sheepe, To blynde postours, wythout cōscience to keepe When ye princes do lacke an officer A baker, a brewer, or any maister coke, A tryme taylour, a cunnyng cordiner Ouer al the lande, at length ye wyll sende to loke Moste able men suche office to broke▪ A brewer, whiche can brewe moste holsome ale, A cunnyng coke, whiche best can season cayle. A taylour, whiche fostered hath ben in Fraunce That can make garmentes of the gayest gyse, Ye princes, be the cause of thys mischaunce, That when there doth voyed any benefice Ye oughte to do, euen the same wyse. Go searche and seche, both borough and lande, The lawe of God, who beste can vnderstande, Make him bishippe, that prudently can preache, As doth perteyne, to his vocation. A person, whiche his parisheners can teache, Cause vicars, make, dewe ministration, Also I make you, supplication, Make your abbotes of ryghte religious men Whiche Christes lawe can to their couent ken, But not to rybauldes, newe come from the roste Nor to a lackey, stollen out of a stable,
Whiche into the scholes made neuer no coste Nr euer was to spirituall science able, Excepte the cardes, the dice, the chest and table To Rome rakars, nor to rude ruffianes, To quarell pykars, nor to prophanes. Nor to phantastatical, fantased flatterars, Moste mete to gether muscles in Maye, To lacke lattins, nor yet to flatterars, That in the churche, can neither synge nor saye, Though they be cloked vp, in clerkes araye Iyhe doughtie doctors, newe come out of Athēs And mumble ouer, a payre of mangled mattens. Not qualified, to broke any benefice, But thorowe sir Simons sollicitation I was promoted, in the same wyse, Alas thorowe Princes supplication, And made in Rome, thorowe false narration Bishoppe, Abbot, but no religious man, Who me promoted, I nowe their banes ban. Howbeit I was Legat, and Cardinall Litle I knewe, therin what shoulde be done I vnderstode no science, spirituall, No more then dyd, blynde Alane of the mone, I dread the kynge, that sitteth on heauēly throne On you Princes, he shall make sore punishment, Ryght so on ve, thorowe ryghtuous iudgement. On you Princes, for vndiscrite gyuyng To ignorauntes, suche offices to vse, And we, for our importune ashyng, Whiche shoulde haue done, suche dignitie refuse Our ignoraunce, hath done the worldly abuse, Thorowe couetice of ryches and of rent That euer I was a prelate, I repent.
O Kynges, make you no care to gyue in cure Uirgins profest into religion Into the keepyng of one commune whore To make, thynke ye not greate derision A woman, person, of a paryson Wherin are twentie thousande soules to guyde That from harlottes can not hir lyppes hyde? What, and Kynge Dauid, lyued in these dayes Or out of heauen, what and he loked downe The which dyd founde so many fayre Abbayes▪ Scinge the greate, abomination, In many Abbayes of thys nation? He would repēt, that narrowed so his boundes, Of yerely rent, three score thousande poundes. Wherefore I counsayle euery christened Soue∣reigne Wythin hys realme, make reformation And suffre no mo rybauldes for to reigne, Abusyng Christes true congregation, Faylyng therof, I make narration, That ye Princes and prelates al at ones. Shal buryed be, in hell, soule, body and bones. That euer I broked benefice, I rewe Or to suche height, so proudly dyd pretende, I muste departe, therfore my friende adewe, Where euer it pleaseth god, now must I wende, I praye the, to my friendes me recommende, And fayle not at length to put in wryte, My Tragedy, as I haue nowe endyte. FINIS.
¶ The accusa∣tion of maister George wysehart gentlemā, who suffered martyrdome for the faith of Christ Jesu, at S. Andrewes in Scotlād the first day of March. In the yere of our Lorde. M D. xlvi. wyth the articles, which he was accused of, and his sete answeres to the same, whereunto are ioy∣ned his godly ora∣tiōs & praiers. WYth most tendre affecti∣on and vnfeyned herte, considre (gentle reader) the vncharitable maner of accuation of maister George Wyseharte made by the bloudie enemies of Christes sayeth. Note also the articles wherof he was ac∣cused, by ordre digested, and his meke answeres so farre as he had
leaue and leasure to speake. Finally ponder wyth no dissem∣bling spirite the tyrānicall fury, & infernall crudelitie of the maling∣nant churche, in aponing the saied The loue of God ta∣keth a way al humane dreade. articles, and of the contrary the humble, pacient, & moste pleasaunt answeres of maister George, made to them sodenly wythout all feare, not hauyng respecte to their glori∣ous manassinges & bostious threa∣tes: but cheritably and wythout stoppe of tonge answered, not mo∣uyng his countenaūce, nor chaun∣ginge his visage, as in his accusa∣tion hereafter folowinge manifest∣ly shall appeare: to the sayed mai∣ster George beinge in captiuitie in the castle of saincte Andrewes, the Deane of the same towne was sēt by the cōmaundement of the Car∣dinal, & his wicked counsayle. And The deane of saincte Andrewes was sum¦monet there summoned the sayed maister George, that he shoulde vpon the
morne folowing appeare before the Iudge, then and there to geue ac∣compte of his seditious & hereticall doctrine. To whō maister George A pritie taunt answered, what needeth (sayed he) my lorde Cardinal to sūmon me to answer for my doctrine openly be∣fore hym, vnder whose power and dominion, I am thus strayghlie bounde in Irons? Maye not my lorde cōpell me to answer of his ex∣tort power? Or beleueth he that I am vnprouided to render accompt of my doctrine? To manifest your selues, what men ye are, it is well done that ye keepe your olde cere∣monies and constitutions made by menne. Upon the nexte morne my Lorde Cardinall caused his ser uauntes to adresse them selues in theyr moste warlyke arraye, wyth Iacke, Knapskall. Splente, Speare & Are, more seming for the war, then for the preachyng of the
true worde of God. And whē these armed chāpiōs marchyng in war∣like order had cōueyed the bishops into the abbaye churche: Inconti∣nētly thei sent for Maister George who was conueyed into the sayed churche, by the captayne of the ca∣stle, and the numbre of an hūdreth men adressed in maner aforesayed. Lyke a lambe ledde they hym to Maister George his aliues. sacrifice. As he entred in at the abbaye churche dore, there was a pore man liynge vexed wyth great infirmities, askinge of his almesse, to whom he slange his pursse. And when he came before the Cardi∣nal, by and by the suppriour of the abbaye, called Dane Iohn Wyn∣time stode vp in the pulpet & made Iohn Win∣tyme prea∣ched. a sermon to all the congregation there then assembled, takynge his matter out of the. xiii. Chapter of Mathew. Whose sermon was di∣uided into foure principall partes.
The fyrste parte was a shorte and briefe declaration of the Euangel. The seconde parte, of the inter∣pretation of the good sede. And be∣cause he called the worde of god the good side, and heresie the euyl sede, he declared what heresie was, and howe it shoulde be knowen, which he defined on thys maner. Heresie is a false opinion defended wyth Heresie. partinacie, clearely repugning the worde of god. The thirde parte of his sermon was the cause of heresy wythin that realme, and all other realmes. The cause of heresie (quod he) is the ignoraūce of them, which haue the cure of mennes soules, to The cause of heresie whom it necessarily belongeth to haue the true vnderstādinge of the worde of god, that they may be a∣ble to wynne agayne the false doc∣tours of heresies with the sword of the spirite, whiche is the worde of god. And not only to winne agayn
but also to ouercome, as sayeth l. ad Titū Paule. A bishop must be faultles, as becometh the minister of god, not stubburne, not angrie, no drū∣kard, no fighter, not geuē to filthy lucre, but herberous, one yt loueth goodnes, sobre minded, rightuous, holy, temperate, & such as cleaueth vnto ye true word of doctrine, that he may be able to exhorte wt whol∣some learninge, & to improue that which they saye against hym. The fourth part of his sermō was how heresies should be knowē. Heresies (quod he) be knowē on this maner. As the goldsmith knoweth the fine golde frō the vnperfit, by ye touch∣stone. So likewise may we knowe The maner to know  hereticks heresy by ye vndoubted touchstone that is the true sincere, & vndefiled word of god. At the last he added, yt heretickes should be put downe in this presēt life. To whiche proposi∣on the gospell apeared to repugne.
whiche he entreated of. Let them not growe vnto the harueste, the harueste is the ende of the worlde. Mat. xiii. Neuertheles he affirmed that thei should be put downe by the ciuile and maiestrate lawe. And when he ended his sermon: incontinentlie they caused maister George to as∣cend into the pulpet, there to heare his accusation and articles. For ryghte againste hym stode vp one Iohn Lan∣der accusar of the fedde flocke a monster, Iohn Lander, laden full of curssynges wrytten in paper. Of the whiche he toke out a rolle, voeth longe and also full of curssynges, threates, maledictions, and wordes of dy∣uylyshe spytte and malice: saiynge to the Innocēt maister George, so The way to feare the igno∣rant. many cruel & abhominable wordes and hit hym so spitefully wyth the Popes thunder, that the ignorant people dreaded, leste the earth then woulde haue swallowed hym vp
quicke. Notwythstanding he stode styll wyth great patience, hearyng their saiynges, not once mouynge or chaungyng his countenaunce. When that thys fed sowe, had red thorowout al his liyng manassyn∣ges, his face runnyng downe with swette, and frothing at his mouth The frui∣tes of that charitie. like a beare, spit at maister George his face, saiynge: what answereste thou to these saiynges, thou run∣na gate traytoute, thiefe, whithe we haue duely proued by suffici∣ent wytnesse against the? Maister George hearynge thys, sate downe vpon his knees in the pulpet, ma∣kynge his prayer to God. Whē he had ended his prayer, swetely and christianlike he answered to them all in thys maner. ¶ Maister George his oration.
MAnie & horrible saiynges vnto me, one christian mā, manie wordes ahhomina∣ble for to heare, ye haue spokē here this day. Which not only to teach, but also once to thinke, I thought The causes why mas∣ter George deserued to be hearde euer great abhomination. Wher∣fore I pray your discretions quiet∣ly to heare me, that ye may knowe what were my saiynges, & the ma∣ner of my doctrine. Thys my peti∣tiō (my lordes) I desire to be heard for three causes. The fyrste is, be∣cause thorowe preachynge of the worde of god, his glory is made ma∣nifest. It is reasonable therfore, for the auauncynge of the glorie of god, that ye heare me teachynge truly the pure worde of god with∣out any dissimulation. The secōd reason is, because that your health springeth of the word of god (for he worketh all thing by his worde) It were therefore an vnryghtuous
thinge, if ye should stoppe your ea∣res frō me, teaching truly the word of god. The third reason is, because your doctrine speaketh furth ma∣ny pestilētious, blasphemous & ab∣hominable wordes, not comyng by the inspiration of God, but of the deuyll, on no lesse peril thē my life. It is Iust therfore and reasonable your discretiōs to know, what my wordes & doctrine are, and what I haue euer taughte in my tyme in this realme, yt I perish not vniust∣ly to the great peril of your soules. Wherfore both for the glory & ho∣nor of god, your owne health, and sauegard of my life, I beseche your discretions, to heare me, and in the meane tyme I shall recite my doc∣trine wythout any colour. First & chiefly, sence the tyme I came into this reame, I taught nothing, but Maister George his doc∣trine. their cōmaundementes of god, the xii. articles of the fayeth, and the
prayer of the Lorde in the mother tonge. Moreouer in Dundie, I taughte the Epistles of Saincte Paule to the Romaynes. And I shal shewe your discretions faith∣fully what fashion and maner I vsed when I taughte, wythout a∣ny humane dreade. So that your discretions, giue me your eares be∣neuolente and attente. Sodenlie then wyth an high voice cryed, the accusar the fedde sowe) thou here∣ticke, runnagate, traytoure and thiefe. It was not lawefull for the to preache. Thou haste taken the power at thyne owne hande, with∣out any authoritie of the churche, we forthynke that thou haste bene a preacher so longe. Then all the whole cōgregation of the prelates wyth their complices, sayed these The crye of the scri∣bes and phariseis wordes. And if we giue him licence to preache, he is so craftie, and in the holy scripture so exercised, that
he wyll persuade the people to his opinion, and rayse them agaynste vs. Maister George seinge their malicious and wycked intent, ap∣pealed to an indifferent and equal Iudge. To whō the accusar Iohn Master George ap∣prateth to the Gouer∣ner. Lander aforesayed with hoggishe voice answered. Is not my Lorde Cardinal the second person wyth∣in thys Realme? Chaunceler of Scotland? Archbishoppe of sainct The style of an un∣worthye prelate. Andrewes? byshop of Meropois: Commendator of Aberbrothoke? Legatus natus? Legatus a late∣re? And so recitynge, as many ti∣tles of his vnworthy honours, as would haue loden a shippe, muche soner an asse. Is not he (quod Iohn Lander) an equall Iudge apparantly vnto the? Whō other desirest thou to be thy Iudge? To whome thys humble man answe∣red, saying. I refuse not my Lorde Cardinall, but I desire the worde
of god to be my iudge, and the tem∣poral estate wt some of pour Lorde∣shippes Beholde their trai∣terous hertes? myne auditours, because I am here my Lorde Gouernours prisoner. Wherupon the prydefull & skornful people yt stode bi, mocked hym, saiynge. Suche man, suche Iudge. Speakinge seditious & re∣prochefull wordes agaynst the Go∣uernour & other the nobles, mea∣nynge them also to be heretickes. And incontinente wythout all de∣laye they woulde haue geuen sen∣tence vpon maister George, & that wythout farther processe, had not certerne men there councelled my lorde Cardinal to read againe the articles, and to heare his answeres therupon, yt the people myght not cōplaine of his wrongfull cōdemp∣nation. And shortly for to declare, these were the articles folowinge wyth his answeres, as far as they woulde geue hym leaue, to speake.
For whē he entended to mittigate their leasynges, & shewe the maner of his doctrine, by & by thei stopped his mouth with an other article. ¶ The fyrst article. ☞ Thou false hereticke, rūnagate These be their accu∣stomed ter∣mes Curssin¦ges traitoure, & thiefe, disceiuer of the people, despiseste the holy churche curssinges, & in like case cōtēpneste my lorde Gouernours authoritie. And this we know for suertie that when thou preached est in Dūdy, & wast charged by my lord gouerner his authoritie to desist: neuerthe∣les yu wouldest not obei, but perseus redst in the same. And therfore the bishop of Brothē curssed the, & dell uered the into the deuils hādes, & gaue the in cōmaundemet yt thou shouldest preache no more. That not wt stāding yu diddest cōtinue ob∣stinately. ¶ The answer. ❧ My Lordes I haue red in the actes of the apostles, that it is not
lawefull for the threates and ma∣nassinges of men to desist from the preachynge of the Gospell. Ther∣fore it is wrytten, we shall rather obey God then men. I haue also redde in the prophete Malachie. I shall cursse your blessynges, and Mala. ii. blesse your curssynges. If my con∣sciēce had iudged me to haue done euyll, I shoulde haue desisted for your curssynges, or elles for your brotherlyke warnynges, but be∣cause I vsed no vngodly deede, I suffered paciently your curssinges beleuynge firmely, that the Lorde woulde turne your curssynges in∣to blessynges. ¶ The seconde article. ☞ Thou false hereticke didest say that a priest standynge at the aul∣tare The prist at masse saiyng Masse, was lyke a foxe waggyng his tayle in Iuly. ¶ The answer. ❧ True wor∣shippynge of God. My Lordes I said not so, these
were my saiynges. The mouynge of the bodie outwarde, wythout the inward mouing of the hert, is noughte els, but the plaiyng of an ape, & not the true seruyng of god. For God is a secrete sercher of mēs hertes. Therefore who wyll trulie adorne and honoure god, he muste in spirite and veritie honour him. . Then the accusar stopped his mouth wyth another article. ¶ The thirde article. ☞ Thou false hereticke preachedst Sacra∣mentes. agaynst the sacramentes, saiynge: that there were not seuen Sacra∣mentes. The answer. ❧ My lordes and it be your plea∣sures, Howe ma∣ny sacramē∣tes be allo∣wed. I taughte neuer of the nū∣ber of the Sacramentes, whether they were seuen or an eleuen. So many as are instituted by Christe, and are showen to vs by the Euā∣gell,
I professe openly. Excepte it be the worde of god I dare affirme nothynge. ¶ The iiii. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke hast open∣ly taught, that auricular confessi∣on Auricular confession is not a sacramente. And thou sayest, that we shoulde onely con∣fesse vs to god and to no priest. ¶ The answer. ❧ My Lordes, I say that auricu¦lar cōfession, seinge that it hath no promesse of the Euangell, therfore it cannot be a sacramēt Of the cō∣fession Ps. xxxii to be made to god, there are many testimonies in scripture, as when Dauid sayeth. I thoughte that I woulde knoweledge myne iniquitie against my selfe vnto the Lorde, and he forgaue the trespase of my synnes. Here confession sig∣nifieth the secrete knoweledge of oure synnes before God. When I exhorted the people in thys maner,
I reproued no maner of confessi∣on And farther sainct Iames say∣eth. Knowledge your sinnes one to Iac. v an other, and so let you haue peace amonge your selues. When that he had sayed these wordes, the bi∣shoppes and their complices cryed and girned wyth their teeth, sai∣ynge: Se ye not what colours he hath in his speakyng, that he may begile vs and seduce vs to his opi∣nion. ¶ The fifte article. ☞ Thou hereticke dyddest say o∣pēly, that it was necessary to eue∣ry Baptisme man, to knowe and vnderstand his baptisme, and what it was. Cōtrary or generall councels and the states of holy churche. ¶ The answer. ❧ My Lordes, I beleue there be none so vnwyse here, yt wyll make Baptisme necessarily to be kno∣wen of all men. marchaūdice wt a frēch mā, or any other vnknowen straūger, excepte
he knewe and vnderstode fyrst the Confir∣mation condition or promesse made by the frenche man or straunger. So like I would that we vnderstode what thynge we promesse in the name of the Infant vnto god in baptisme. For thys cause I beleue ye haue confirmation. Then saied maister Bleiter chap¦laine, that he had the Deuyl with∣in hym and the spirite of erroure. Maister Bleiter An∣swerth by a chylde. Then answered hym a chylde sai∣yng the Deuil cannot speake such wordes, as yonder mā doth speake. ¶ The. vi. article. ☞ Thou hereticke traytoure, and thiefe, thou saydest that the sacra∣mēt The sacra∣mente of the aultare of the aultare was but a piece of breade bakē vpon the ashes, and no other thynge elles, and all that is there done is but a superstiti∣ous rite agaynst the commaunde∣ment of God. ¶ The answer.
❧ Oh Lorde God so manifest lies & blasphemies the scripture doeth not teache you. As concerning the sacrament of the aultare (my Lor∣des) I neuer taught any thinge a∣gaynst the scripture, the whiche I shall (by Goddes grace) make ma∣nifeste thys daye, I beinge readye therfore to suffre death. The lawefull vse of thys sacra∣ment The lawe∣ful vse of the sacra∣ment of the aultare is most acceptable vnto god, but the greate abuse of it, is verie detestable vnto him. But what oc∣casion they haue to saye such wor∣des of me, I shall shortly shewe your Lordshippes. I once chaūced to mete with a Iewe when I was saylyng vpon the water of Rene. I dyd enquire of hym what was The tale of a Iewe the cause of his pertinacie, that he dyd not beleue that the true Me∣slias was come, considerynge that they had seene all the Prophesies (whiche were spoken of hym) to be
fulfilled. Moreouer the prophesies taken away and the ceptre of u∣da, by many other testimonies of the scripture, I vanquest him that Messias was come the whiche thei called Iesus of Nazareth. Thys Iewe answered agayne vnto me. When Messias cometh, he shal re∣store all thynges. And he shall not abrogate the lawe, whiche was ge∣uen to oure forefathers as ye do. For why? we see the pore almoste perishe thorowe hungar amonge The pore you: yet ye are not moued wyth pi∣etie towardes them. But amonge vs Iues (though we be pore) there are no beggers founde. Secōdarely, it is forbyddē by the lawe, to fame any kinde of Image∣ry, of thynges in heauen aboue, or in the earth beneth, or in the sea vnder the earth: but one God one∣ly to honoure. But your sanctua∣ries and churches are ful of Idols. Images.
Thyrdly a piece of breade baken The sacra¦ment of t aultare. vpō the ashes, ye adorne & worship & say, that it is your God. I haue rehearsed here: but the saiynges of the Iewe, which I neuer affirmed to be true. Thē the bishops shoke their heades and spitted into the erth. And what he mēt in this mat ter farther, thei would not heare. ¶ The. vii. article. Thou false heretike diddest say yt ex∣treme Extreme vnction vnctiō was not a sacramēt. The answer. ❧ My Lordes, forsoth I neuer taught any thyng of extreme vnc∣tion in my doctrine, whether it were a sacrament or no. The. viii. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke, saydest that holy water is not so good as Holy water washe, & suche lyke. Thou contem∣nest coniuryng and sayest that ho∣ly churches curssynges auaile not The answer.
¶ My Lordes as for holy water, what strength it is of, I taughte neuer in my doctrine. Cōiuringes & exorzismies, if ther were cōforma ble to the worde of god, I woulde commende them, but in so farre as they are not conformable to the cō maundement and worde of God, I reproue them. ¶ The. ix. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke and run∣nagate, haste sayed that euery ley ley man a priest The Po∣pes autho∣ritie mā is a priest, and suche like. Thou sayest that the Pope hath no more power, then any other man. ¶ The answer. ¶ My Lordes, I taught nothing but the worde of god. I remembre that I haue reade in some places po. . . v . Pet. ii in saincte Iohn and sainct Peter, of the whiche one sayeth, he hath made vs kynges and priestes. The other sayeth, he hath made vs the kingli priesthod. Wherfore I haue
affirmed any man beinge cunning in the worde of God and the true fayth of Iesu Christe, to haue his power geuen hym frō god, & not by the power or violence of men but by the vertue of the worde of god, the whiche worde is called the po wer of god, as witnesseth S. Paul Ro. i. euidently inough. And agayne I saye any vnlearned man, and not exercised in the worde of god, nor yet constant in his fayth, what soe∣uer estate or ordre he be of, I say he hath no power to bynde or lose, se∣inge he wanteth the instrumente, The instru∣mente to bynde and lose by the whiche he bindeth or loseth, that is to saye, the worde of God. After that he had sayed these wor∣des, all the bishoppes laughed and mocked hym. Whē that he behelde their laughinge. Laugh ye (sayeth he) my lordes. Though that these saiynges appeare scorneful & wor∣thy of derision to your Lordships.
Neuerthels they are very weigh∣tie to me, & of a greate valewe, be∣cause that they stande not onely vpon my lyfe, but also the honour and glorie of God. In the meane tyme many godly men beholdynge the wodnes, and greate crudelitie of the bishoppes and the inuinci∣ble paciencie of maister George did greatly morne and lament. The. x. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke saydest that a man hath no free wyll. But Free wil is like to the Stoykes, whiche say, that it is not in mans wyl to do a∣ny thynge, but that all concupis∣cence and desire cometh of God of what soeuer kynde it be of. The answer. ❧ My Lordes I sayed not so tru∣ly. I saye that as many as beleue in Christe firmly vnto them is ge∣uen libertie, cōformable to the say∣inge Iohn. viii of saincte Iohn. If the sonne
make you free, then shall ye verily be free. Of the contrary as many as beleue not in Christe Iesu, they are bonde seruauntes of synne. He that syndeth is bonde to synne. ¶ The. xi. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke saiest, it is as lawefull to eate fleshe vpon the Eating of meates friday as on sundaye. The answer. ❧ Pleaseth it your Lordships, I haue reade in the epistles of sainct Titū. i. Paule, yt who is cleane, vnto thē al thinges are cleane, of the contrary to the filthy mē all thinges are vn∣cleane. A faithful mā, cleane, & holy sāctifieth by the word the creature of God. But the creature maketh no man acceptable vnto God. So that a creature may not sāctify a∣ny impure & vnfaithful man. But The crea∣ture doeth not ancti∣fie wtout the word. to the faithful man, all thinges are sanctified, by the praier of the word of God. After these saiynges of
maister George, then sayed all the bishoppes wyth their complices: what needeth vs any wytnesse a∣gainst hym: hath he not opēly here spoken blasphemie? The. xi. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke doste saye that we shoulde not praye to sanc∣tes, Praying to sāctes but to God onely. Saye whe∣ther thou haste sayed this or no, say shortly. ¶ The answer. ❧ For the weaknes and the infir∣mitie To honor one God is certeyne of the hearers, he sayd wyth∣out doubte playnely that sainctes shoulde not be honoured. My lor∣des (sayed he) there are two thyn∣ges worthy of note. The one is cer∣teyne, the other vncerteyne. It is founde playnly & certeyne in scrip∣ture, that we shoulde worship and honour one God, accordyng to the saiyng of the fyrst cōmaundement. Thou shalte onely worshippe and Mat. iiii.
honoure thy Lorde God, wyth all thy herte. But as for prayinge to and honourynge of sainctes, there To pray to sainc∣tes is great doubt among many whe∣ther they heare, or no, inuocation made vnto thē. Therefore I exhor∣ted al men equally in my doctrine, that they should leaue the vnsure waye, and folowe that waye, which was taughte vs by oure maister Christ. He is our only Mediatour and maketh intercession for vs to God his father. He is the dore by the whiche we muste entre in. He that entreth not in by thys dors, The surest way is to be folowed but clymeth an other waye, is a thiefe & murtherar. He is the veri∣tie & life. He that goeth out of this way, there is no doubt but he shal fall into the myre: yea verily he is fallen into it already. Thys is the fashion of my doctrine, the whiche I haue euer folowed. Uerily that which I haue hearde and reade in
the worde of god I taughte open∣ly, and in no corners. And nowe ye shall witnes the same, if your lord∣ships wil heare me, but it be by the worde of god I dare not be so bold to affirme any thynge. These sai∣ynges he rehearsed diuerse tymes. The xiii. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke haste prea∣ched Purga∣torie plainly, satynge that there is no purgatorie. And that it is a fat∣ned thynge, any man after thys lyfe, to be punished in purgatorie. The answer. My lordes as I haue often tymes sayed heretofore, wythout expresse witnes and testimonie of the scrip∣ture Purgato∣ri ot once named in scripture I dare affirme nothynge. I haue ofte, and diuerse tymes reade ouer the Bible, & yet suche a terme founde I neuer, nor yet any place of scripture applicable thereunto. Therfore I was ashamed euer to teach of that thing, which I could
not fynde in the scripture. Then sayed he to maister Iohn Lauder his accusar. If you haue any testi∣mony of the scripture, by the which ye may proue any such place, shewe it nowe before this auditorie. But thys dolte had not a worde to saye for hym selfe, but was as domme as a bitle in that matter. The. xiiii. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke haste taught plainely against the vowes Uowes of monkes, friers, nones & priestes, saiyng: that who soeuer was boūde to suche lyke vowes, they vowed them selues to the estate of damp∣nation. Moreouer that it was lawful for priestes to mary wyues and not to lyue sole. ¶ The answer. ¶ Of soth (my Lordes) I haue reade in the Euangell, that there are three kyndes of chaste menne.
Some are gelded from their mo∣thers wombe. Some are gelded by Three kyn∣des of chast men Mat. xix. men. And some haue gelded them selues, for the kyngdome of heauen sake. Uerily, I saye, these men are blessed by ye scripture of God. But as many as haue not the gyfte of chastitie, nor yet for the Euangell, The dun∣ger of vn∣chastitie haue not ouercome the concupis∣cence of the sleshe, and haue vowed chastitie, ye haue experience, al∣though I shoulde holde my peace, to what inconuenience they haue vowed them selues. Whē he had sayed these wordes, they were al domme, thinking bet∣ter to haue tenne concubines, them one maryed wyfe. ¶ The. xv. article. ☞ Thou false hereticke and run∣nagate, sayest that thou wylte not obey oure generall nor prouinciall General councels councelles. ¶ The answer.
¶ My lordes, what your generall councelles are, I know not, I was neuer exercised in them: but to the pure worde of God I gaue my la∣bours. Reade here your generall councelles, or elles geue me a boke wherein they are conteyned, that I maye reade them. If that they agree wyth the worde of God, I wyll not disagree. Then the rauenyng wolues tur∣ned into woodnes & sayed, wherun Thei rūne a pase to shed bloud to let we hym speake any farther? Reade furth the rest of the articles and staye not vpon them. Amonge these cruell tygres, there was one false hypocrite, a seducer of the peo∣ple called Iohn Grayfynde Scot, standyng behinde Iohn Lauders Iohn Grayfynd Scotte an hastie buccher to his slaugh∣ter backe, hasting him to reade the rest of the articles, and not to tary v∣pon his wittie & godly answeres. For we may not abyde them, quod be, no more then the Deuyl maye
abide the signe of the crosse, when it is named. The. xvi. article. ☞ Thou hereticke sayest, that it is vayne to buylde to the honoure Building of chur∣ches of god costly churches. Seing that God remayneth not in the chur∣ches made by mennes handes, nor yet, god cā be in so litle space as be∣twixt the priestes handes. ¶ The answer. ¶ My Lordes, Salomon sayeth. If that the heauē of heauēs cā not ii. Re. viii comprehende the, howe muche lesse thys house, that I haue buylded? And Iob consenteth to the same sentence. Seing that he is higher then the heauens, therefore what Iob. xi can thou buylde vnto hym. He is deepar then hell, then howe shalte thou knowe him? He is lōgar then the earth, & broder thē the sea. So that god can not be comprehended into one place, because that he is
infinite. These saiynges notwith∣stādyng, I sayed neuer that chur∣ches Whereun∣to chur∣ches shuld serue shoulde be destroyed. But of the contrary I affirmed euer, that churches should be susteyned and vpholden, that the people should be cōgregated into thē, there to heare of god And moreouer, wher soeuer is the true preachynge of the word of God, and the lawefull vse of the sacramētes, vndoubtedly there is God presente hym selfe. So that boeth these saiynges are true to∣gether. Mat. xviii God cā not be comprehen∣ded into anie place. And where so euer there are two or three gathe∣red in his name, there is he present in the middest of them. Then saied he to his accusar. If thou thynkest any other wise, then I saye, shewe forth thi reasōs before this audito∣ry. Then he without al reasō was dom, & could not answer one word. The. xvii article.
☞ Thou false hereticke, contem∣nest Fastyng fasting, and sayest thou shoul∣dest not fast. The answer. ¶ My Lordes, I fynde that fa∣sting is cōmended in the scripture: The true fastyng he alloweth therefore I were a sclaunderer of the gospell, if I cōtemned fastyng. And not so onely, but I haue lear∣ned by experience, that fastynge is good for the health of the bodie. But god knoweth who fasteth the true fast. The. xviii. article. ☞ Thou false heresicke hast prea∣ched openly, saiynge that the soule Of the re∣seruing of the soule. of man shall sleepe to the later daye of iudgement, and shal not obteine lyfe immortall vntyl that daye. The answer. ❧ God ful of mercie and goodnes: forgeue them that sayth such thin∣ges of me: I wotte and know sure∣ly by the word of god: that he which
hath begonne to haue the fayth of Iesu Christ and beleueth firm∣ly in hym. I knowe suerly that the soule of that man shall neuer The faith∣ful soule shall neuer sleepe. sleepe but euer shall lyue an im∣mortal lyfe. The whiche lyfe from daye to daye is renewed in grace and augmēted: Nor yet shall euer perishe, or haue ane nde: but euer immortall shall lyue with Christ. To the whiche lyfe all that beleue in hym shall come and rest in eter∣nall glorie. Amen. ¶ When that the Bishoppes Maister George condem∣ned wyth theyr complices had accu∣sed thys innocente man in maner and forme afore said, incontinent∣ly they condempned hym to be burnte as an hereticke, not ha∣uynge respecte to his Godly an∣sweres and trewe reasons whiche he alledged: nor yet to theyr owne cōsciences. Thynkyng verily that
they shoulde do to God good sa∣crifice, cōformable to the sayinges of sainct Iohn. They shall excom∣municate you: yea, and the tyme shall come that he whiche kylleth Iohn. xvi. you shal thinke that he hath done to God good seruice. ¶ The prayer of maister George. O Immortal god howe long shalt thou suffre the wod∣nesse Maister George his prayer for the tō∣gregation of. God. and greate crudelitie of the vngodlie, to exercise their fury vpon thy seruauntes whiche do farther thy word in this world seeynge they desyre to be contra∣rie, that is to choke and destroye thy trewe doctrine and veritie, by the whiche thou haste shewed the vnto the worlde whiche was all drowned in blyndnesse and mis∣knowledge
of thy name. O Lorde we knowe suerly that thy trewe seruauntes must needes suffre for thy names sake persecution, aflic∣tion and troubles in thys present lyfe whiche is but a shadowe, as thou haste shewed to vs by thy Prophetes and Apostles. But yet we desyre the hertely, that thou conserue, defende, and healpe thy congregation, whiche thou haste chosen before the beginning of the worlde. And geue them thy grace to heare thy worde, and to be thy trewe seruauntes in thys present lyfe. ☞ Then by and by, they caused the commune people to remoue, whose desire was alwaies to heare that innocente speake. And the sonnes of darckenesse pronounced theyr sentence definitiue, not ha∣uynge respecte to the iudgemente
of God. When all thys was done and sayed, my Lorde Cardinall caused his tormentours to passe a∣gayne wyth the meeke lambe into the Castle, vntyll suche tyme the fyer was made readye. When he was come into the Castle, then there came two gray findes, Fry∣ar Scotte and his mate, saiynge: Sir ye muste make your confessi∣on vnto vs. He answered and say∣ed. I wyll make no confession vn∣to you. Go fetch me younder man Maister George confessed. that preached thys daye, and I wil make my confession vnto him. Then they sente for the Suppri∣or of the Abbaye, who came to him with all diligence. But what he sayed in his confession I can not shewe. When the fyre was made readye, and the gallouse at the weste parte of the Castle nere the Priorie, my Lorde Cardinall
dreadynge that maister George shoulde haue bene taken awaye by his friendes, therefore he com∣maunded to bende all the ordi∣naunce of the Castle forryghte a∣gaynste that parte. And com∣maūded all his gūners to be ready and stande besyde theyr gunnes vnto suche tyme he were burned. All thys beinge done, they bounde maister Georges handes behynde his backe, and ledde hym furth wyth theyr souldiars from the Ca∣stle to the place of theyr wycked execution. As he came furth of the Castle gate, there mette hym cer∣teyne beggars askynge of his al∣messe for God his sake. To whom Maister George prayeth for the reliefe of the pore he answered, I wante my handes▪ wherewyth I shoulde geue you almesse. But the mercifull Lorde of his benignitie and aboundaūce of grace, that feedeth all menne,
vouchsafe to geue you necessaries boeth vnto your bodies and sou∣les. Then afterwarde mette hym two false findes, I shoulde saye fryars, saiynge. Maister George Maister George answereth the fryers temptynge hym. praye to our Ladie, that she may be mediatrix for you to hir sonne. To whom he answered meekelie. Cease tempt me not my brethren. After thys he was ledde to the fyre wyth a Rope about his necke and a cheyne of Iron aboute his middle. When that he came to the fyre he sate downe thryse v∣pon His praier his kneees, and rose agayne, And thryse he sayed these wordes. O thou Sauiour of the worlde haue mercie on me. Father of hea∣uen I commende my spirite in∣to thy holie handes. When he had made thys prayer, he turned hym to the people and sayed these wordes.
❧ I beseche you christian bre∣thren and sisters, that ye be not offended in the worde of God, His sermō to the peo∣ple. for the aflictions and tormentes, whiche ye see alreadye prepared for me. But I exhorte you that ye loue the worde of God and su∣ffre patientlie and wyth a com∣fortable herte for the wordes sake, whiche is youre vndoubted sal∣uation and euerlastynge comfort. ❧ Moreouer I praye you shewe my brethren and sisters, whyche haue hearde me ofte before, that they cease not, nor leaue of the worde of God, whyche I taughte vnto them after the grace gyuen vnto me, for no persecutions, or troubles in thys worlde, whyche lasteth not. And shewe vnto them that my doctrine was no wyues favies after the cōstitutiōs made by men. And if I had taughte
mennes doctrine, I had gotten greate thankes by menne. But for the wordes sake and trewe E∣uangell, whiche was geuen to me, by the grace of God, I suffre His vp∣ryght con∣science felt no death thys daye by menne, not sorow∣fullie, but wyth a gladde herte and mynde. For thys cause I was sente, that I shoulde suffre thys fyer for Christes sake. Con∣sider and beholde my visage, ys shall not see me chaunge my co∣loure. Thys grimme fyer I feare not. And so I praye you for to doe, if that anie persecution come vnto you: for the wordes sake. And not to feare them that slaye the bodye, and afterwarde haue no power to slaye the soule. Some haue sayed of me that I taughte, that the soule of man shoulde sleepe vntyl the laste day. But I knowe suerlye and my
fayeth is suche, that my soule shal suppe wyth my Sauioure Christ thys nyghte or it be sixte houres, for whome I suffre thys. Then he prayed for them whyche accu∣sed His prayer for his ac∣cusars hym, saiynge: I beseche the (father of heauē) to forgeue them, that haue of anie ignoraunce, or elles of anye euyll mynde, for∣ged anie lyes vpon me. I forgeue them wyth all my herte, I beseche Christ to forgeue them that haue cōdempned me to death thys daye ignorauntly. ❧ And laste of all, he sayed to the people on thys maner. I be∣seche you brethren and sisters to exhorte youre Prelates to the learnynge of the worde of God, His exhor∣tation for the clergie to learne Goddes worde that they at the laste maye be a∣shamed to do euyll and learne to do good. And if they wyll not con¦uerte them selues from theyr wyc∣ked
erroure, there shall hastelye come vpon them, the wrath of god whyche they shall not eschewe. Many faythfull wordes sayed he in the meane tyme, takynge no hede or care of the cruell tormen∣tes whyche were then prepared for hym. And laste of all the hange man, that was his tormētor sate downe vpon his knees, and sayed. Sir I praye you forgeue me, for I am not giltie of your death. To whō he answered. Come hither to me. When that he was come to hym, he kissed his cheke, and sayed. Lo here is a token that I forgeue the, and I beseche Christe to forgeue the. My herte do thine office. And then by and by, he was put vpon His wor∣des to the hangman. the gibbet and hanged, and there burnt to pouder. When that the people behelde the greate tormen∣tynge,
they myghte not wyth∣holde from pitiouse mour∣nynge, and cōplayning of thys innocente lābes slaugh∣ter. ¶ Imprinted at London, by Iohn Day, and William Seres, dwellynge in Sepulchres parish, at the signe of the Resurrecti∣on, a litle aboue Hol∣bourne conduite. ❧ ❧ ☞ ❧ Cum gratia & priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
