17360 99840199 4675
HOBSONS Horse-load of Letters: OR A PRESIDENT FOR EPISTLES. The First BOOKE. Being a most exact Method for men, of what qualitie soeuer, how to indight, ac∣cording to the forme of these times, whether it be for serious Negotiations, priuate Businesses, amorous accomplyment, wanton merryment, or the defence of Honor and reputation. A worke different from all former publica∣tions, and not vnworthy the eyes of the most noblest spirits. Bra assai, poco spero, nulla chiggio. LONDON: Printed for Richard Hawkins, and are to sould at his shop in Chancery-lane, neere Sriants Inne. 1613.
TO THE HONO∣rable and vertuous Knight, Sir Thomas Bromley. SYR: If I haue a (hart which is the ves∣sell of loue) it must vndoubtedly be ei∣ther full of you, or empty of all goodnes: You taught me once how to goe, by your strength, and gaue me so sufficient a sup∣port from your fauour, that I might very well neglect those threatning gusts which spake any losse vnto mee. This, when my memory forsakes it must forsake the world, for whilst it is, it is but a Cabinet to keepe your vertues in me: And hence it comes I am bold to present vnto you this oblation of my Pen, which when you haue read, if you please to burne, they shall draw nearer to the nature of a Sacrifice: for I doe not present them to you as Pre∣sidents (your owne sleightest conceits lye millions of de∣grees beyond them) but as messengers, to tell you that the Author, wheresoeuer hee liues, doth dearely loue you. There be some of them that concerne Honour and hono∣rable passages, betwixt noble aduersaries: I know you will imbrace and alow them, and though your selfe in your particular haue done much better, yet he that shall walke in the path I haue limited, shall without doubt not erre in any gentlemanly course of well doing.
The motiues which vrged me to this, was the cruelty of those ignorant angry ones that loue to vent their ra∣ges in foule words, and spend their execution with the coldest action, whereas indeed true vertue should con∣tend for vertue, and like Alexanders dogges, with a noble dispisingnesse, not looke on the smaller beasts, but with an ouerflow of courage, ceaze vpon Lyons and E∣lephants. The matter being then so familiar both to your knowledge and experience, no man can correct me with better authoritie, or aproue me with a iudgement which shall better please mee. These EPSTLES I present but as imperfect offers of those larger essayes and tastes I meane to pursue in another Treatise seconding this: in which I intend (God being pleased) to omit the nature of no Epistle needfull, with a discourse of Combats, and the presidents both of our owne and other nations, euen from the first vse of the English Rapier to these times. In all which mine ambition shall be that you will be plea∣sed when you looke on the booke to remember mee, who will euer liue to obay you. G. M.
TO THE READER: Of what qualitie soeuer. KInde Syr: Which dish in this poore feast of Epistles, is for your tast, I know not, for they are as various as mens pallates, but which may most vn∣doubtedly giue you a surfait is all, Curiosity and my forme of writing, hauing euer beene at a perpetuall dissention, but since all mens vvritings haue a predestinate end, of good or euill, hanging vpon them, I must hazard amongst the multitude, and though the subiect I write of hath ben handled by many, and many of a great deale more merit, yet I haue runne so farre from the lisping af∣fectation of ill imbrodred speech, or from the rude plainnesse of too much dulnesse, that when my booke shall be paraleld with others, it will speake sufficiently to get it selfe a free passage, nothing being in it I hope vnworthy, nothing that may not very vvell authorize imitation. Neither doe I ascribe to my selfe the grounds of euery inuention, for there be many due to such excellencies as no man can controle, no man equall: nor is mine intent here to end, for it is but the beginning of a much better worke, as my
next booke shall witnesse, which with all diligence shall follow this, contayning those formes and ex∣amples, which neuer yet haue beene published in any Epistles, and vvhich I doubt not but shall giue to euery breast all the satisfaction that can be expected. And so vvishing vnto you what your heart can wish to it selfe, I leaue my loue and my booke with you. G. M.
A PRESIDENT FOR EPISTLES. I. An Epistle exhortatorie, which may come from any Ho∣nourable Enemie (being a man of eminence) for the pacifying a sedition between their Families of one kindred, or betweene two Kingdomes. COnsidering with Our selues the present state of things, and waying more déeply the manner and tearmes wherein you and we do stand, it maketh me to meruail what euill and fatall chance doth so diss∣uer your harts, and maketh them so blind and vnmindefull of your profit, and so still conciliat and heape to your selues most extream mischiefe: And also by all reason and order of necessitie it should be rather more conuenient for you to séeke and require moderate agrée∣ments of vs, whom God hath hitherto, according to our most iust, true and worthy intents prospered, and set for∣ward with your affliction and misery, then that wée ha∣uing the better hand should séeke vnto you: yet to the in∣tent that my charitable mind should not cease, by all meanes possible to prouok and call you to your owne be∣nefit, euen as the Father to the sonne, or the elder brother to the younger, and as the louing Phisitian would doe to the mistrustfull and ignorant Patient, I am content to call and cry vpon you to looke to your state, to auoyde
the great calamities your family is in, to haue vs rather kinsmen then , and rather kinde allyances from one ocke, then deuyded strangers full of enuye: And if your Ruffinseruants shall retayne and kéepe from you this mine  they haue done many things, in like nature, ing to the like effect, for their owne priuate wealth and commodity, not regarding though you be still in misery, and shall abuse you with fayned and forged tales, yet this shall be a witnesse before God and all Christian people, betwixt you and vs, that we professing the Gospell of Iesus Christ, according to the doctrine thereof, doe not cease to cal and prouoke you from the effusion of your owne blood, from the destruction of your family, from perpetuall enmity and hatred, and from the small ruine of your long setled prosperitye, to liberty, amity, and to equality with vs. Besides, who can possibly take into his consideration our néerenesse in affinitye, hauing one selfe name and selfe bréeding, but will thinke it a thing very vnméete, vnna∣turall, and vnchristian, that there should be betwixt vs such mortall hatred, who in respect of other houses, should be like two brothren of one wmb? If you call it Proui∣dnce or Chance, to be still afflicted and punished, may not the highest say, I of mine infinit mercy and loue to your house, had provided you many pacifications, but you re∣fused them, you loued better dissuention then vnity, discord then agréement, quarrell then peace, hatred then loue and charity  if you doe then therefore smart for it, whom can you blame but your ne ellection? But because of some of you, may say that we séeke not equallity, but dominion, not to be friends but Lords, although our protestations haue done inough to declare the  I protest, and declare vnto you, and all Christian people, that it is not our will to subdue, but to haue , not to  by force, but to conciliate by loue, not to  and kill, but to saue and kéepe, not to
disseuer and diuorce, but to knit and conioyne from the greatest to the least both the families, and to make of two houses one, in loue, amity, concord, peace and chari∣ty, which if you refuse, and driue vs to sedition, who is guilty of the bldshed? who is the  of disturbance? who maketh the braules and  which shall fol∣low? and what end can you looke for in these procéedings but such succe as héeretofore hath ben experimented and assayed? We offer loue, we offer equalitie, we are victor yet offer peace, wé winne and yet would giue away our conquest: what can be more offered then intercourse o loue, and comerce of societyes▪ the abolishing of all grud∣ges, and the memorie of all repetitions which might be impediments to a mutuall amity? Wée haue offered, not to leaue, the authoritye, name, title, right or chal∣lenge of the elder house, but to receiue, if possible, a degrée inferiour vnto you. But peraduenture your hope is in the ayde of some stranger friends or neighbours: but I tell you, whoso∣euer shall helpe you to nourish discord, euen they will be your oppressors, filling your houses, wasting your goods, spending and consuming your victuals, houlding you in subiection by your beholdingnesse, and in the end regard you but as their slaues, which without them could not liue. O remember what it is to haue a orraine power within you, and a strong enemy vpon you: you as it were the campe and plaine betwixt them to fight on, and to be troden on by both parties. If you looke but into the state of kingdomes, you shall sée how dangerous it is to draw in strangers: Did not  Britains call in the Saxons for help, and by them were put out? Did not France expell the Gaules, the Turke winne▪ Grecia, and now all Hun∣garie, onely vnder the collour of ayde? and did not the Goths by like meanes get all Italie, and the Lumbards one part thereof now called Lumbardy? What looke you for mor, but when strangers know you cannot liue with∣out
they commannd you to doe? what will they not  vpon you? what will they not  and what will they not thinke they  and what will they thinke that you  doe?  helpe is your confusion: so gt is is to be thought and acquit all and so end all span? There ; and you will not haue peace, you will not haue , you will not haue con∣cord▪ so that vncindenesse commeth vpon you whether you , I feare it will appeare that it were better for you to be vn∣ by vs,  by strangers, lesse losse to your good,  to your , and lesse dishonour to your reputations  neither your gouernors, haue wronged you in their  to prorogue all good times)  you with  words, and bring you into the snare, from whence they cannot deliuer you. Againe, i we and our houses being made one by ami∣tie, be most able to  vs against all oppositions, hauing our for a wall, our natural loue for a gari∣son, and God for defence, should  so noble and well agréeing a posteritie, that neither in peace we may be asha∣med, nor in  afraid of any worldly power, why should not  of the same, and haue as ? If  honour of o good  doe not moue you so sake and accept our and  the fore-named losses you  that  which shall displease God▪  in danger,
your reputations, vndoe your issue, wast your commodi∣ties, and lastly, bring to your seats a generall desolation. We require but your loues, and agréement in vnitie, which God of his infinit clemency and tender loue which he hath declared to beare to both our families, hath offe∣red vnto vs both, and in manner called vs both vnto it whose calling and prouocation we haue and will follow to the best of our powers, and in his name, and with his ayde, admonition, exhortation, requests and messengers, not being able to doe it, and to finde stablenes in pro∣mises, we shall not wittingly but constrained pursue your rancours, and chastize your wickednesse, by the angry Angels of God, our swords and mallices, whereof I require and exhort you all, who haue loue to your name; pittie to your houses, true hearts to your heyres, regard of your honours, and any  vnto peace, loue, vnity, and concord, to come and imbrace vs and declare your true and Godly hearts thereunto: in which incounter you shall finde so much loue sorted with the best vertue, that doubtlesse wée shall euer hereafter liue one anothers ad∣mirers. Thus leauing this to the best of your worthy∣est considerations, I bid you farewell. A. S. II. An Epistle vvhich may come from any King, or Councell of State, for the calling in of any su∣preame Officer, to answere to vvrongs which hee hath offered. H. By the grace of God, King of D. to our welbe∣loued cosen, C. Earle of E. gréeting: So it is that dirs Bishops and Pres, Barons, Knights, Uni∣uersities, Communalties and Colledg and about the prci  of your command, and the
dwellers, and  of other more remote places, besides other of  subiects, are resorted and come to our Court, to  right of certaine griefes, and vnlawfull troubles, which  by most vnaduied counsaile, and simple , haue pur tosed to doe vnto them, whef  meruaile: Thereore to withstand and re∣dresse , so much normous to our state, we are so conioyned to them, that we haue thought good by our royall power and authority, to command you to repayre to our City of R. in proper person, and there to shew and pre your slefe before vs in our Councell-chamber, that you may be constrained to doe right to our people, con∣cerning the griefes, which they alledge, that you are a∣bout to appresse them with, who claimeth to haue their resort into our court, as the onely place for redresse of their iniuries, and that you faile not hus to doe, in as spéedy manner as you can immediately vpon the receit and sight of these our present Letters, for true testimony whereof wée haue to the same fixed our royall Signet. Giuen at R. the seauentéenth day of A. H. III. A Counsell-giuing Epistle, sent from a man of wisdome, to a man of great authority, who vpon some dislike went about▪ not onely to giue ouer the world but all manner of promotions therein. IF as well it had pleased you, at your departure, as now, to haue vsed mine humble seruice, oth I should in bet∣ter season and to better  haue spoken, and you (if my spéech not preuailed) should haue béene at this time as no way  in danger, so much more in quietnesse: I would  sayd that wisedome, and vertue be the onely destinies appointed to man to follow, whence
we ought to séek al our knowledge, since they be such guide as cannot faile, which besides their in ward comfort, do lead so direct away of procéeding as either must ensue, or if the wickednesse of the world should oppresse it, it can neuer be sayd that euill hapneth to him, who falles accompanied with vertue: But since it is weakenesse too much to remember what should haue béene done, and that your commandement stretcheth to know what is to be done, I doe (most deare Sir) with humble boldnesse say, that your determination doth in no sort better please me then your actions. Many yéeres you haue liued, so that neither alie, nor homebred, could accuse you for the least blemish in your vertue; and those which haue enuied you, haue found you so urtlesly strong, that they thought it better to rest in your friendship, then make new triall of your enmity. If this then haue procéeded out of the good constitution of your state, and out of a wise proui∣dence, generally to preuent all those things which might encumber your happinesse, why should you now séeke new courses, since your owne example comforts you to continue, and that it is to me most certaine, that no de∣steny whatsoeuer, can bring mans wit to a higher point then wisedome and goodnesse? Why should you depriue your selfe of gouernment, for feare of loosing your gouern∣ment, like one that should kill himselfe for feare of death? nay; rather if this aduersity be to be accounted of, arm vp your courage the more against it, for who will sticke to him that abandons himselfe? Let your friends haue you in their eyes, let them sée the benefits of your vertue dayly more and more, and so must they needes rather like of present sureties then incertaine changes: Lastly whether your time call you to liue or dye, doe both like a man of goodnesse. Now for your second resolution, which is the abandning of your children: What shall I say, if the af∣fction of a father to his owne, cannot plead sufficiently against such ancies?  certaine it is the God which
is the God of nature, doth neuer teach vnnaturalnesse: certainly in your children nature promiseth nothing but goodnesse, and there education by your fatherly care, hath béene hetherto such as hath béene most fit to restraine all , giuing these mindes vertuou delights, and not greg them for want of  ruled liberty: now to fall to sodaine fortaking them, what can it doe but argue suspition; a thing no more vnpleasant then vnsure for the preseruing of vertue? But you will leaue them to the guard of seruants, which (besides that the thing in it selfe is stronge) doth surely come of an euill ground, that igno∣rance should be the mother of faithfulnesse, no, hée cannot be good that knowes not why hée is good, but stands so farre good as his fortune may kéepe him vnassayd: but comming once to that, his rude simplicity is either easily changed, or easily deceiued, and so growes that to be the last excuse of his fault, which séemed to haue béne the first foundation of his faith. Thus farre hath your com∣mand ment, and my zeale drawne mée, which I like a man in a valley, that may discerne hills, or like a poore pas∣senger that may spie a che, so humbly submit to your worthy consideration, besée hing you ageine to stand wholly vpon you owre vertue, as the surest way to maintaine you in that you are, and to auoyde any euill which may be imagined. Faithfully yours S. T. IIII. A letter, or Potent eyther from a Councell of Warre, or a Councell of State, for the lodging of a bnd of Souldiers. AFter our very harty  here as we haue oppointed the two hundred men vnder your
leading, to lye for a certaine time in the towne of T. and there to be furnished with lodging, fire, and candle-light, and likewise hauing taken order that they shall be well, and sufficiently, victuled from the generall store-house: These are therefore to will and command you immediat∣ly, vpon the sight hereof, to cause the sayd number to re∣payre thither accordingly, & there to lye vntill you receiue further direction to the contrary▪ whereof you may not faile: and for your doings this shall be your warrant. Giuen at D. th 20. of Sep. H. W. T. R. W. S. Superscribed; To our welbeloued N. D. Captaine of 200. foote. V. A Letter, or Potent either from Generall, or Councell of Warre, for the raising of a company to march into present seruice. AFter our very hearty commendations: Whereas for especiall waighty seruices, to vs best knowne, wée haue resolued that you, and the band of foote vnder your leading, shall without delay be at the towne of M. vpon wednesday next at night, being the third of this present month: These are therefore straitly to charge and com∣mand you, without delay accordingly, at the time afore∣sayd not to faile to be at the towne of M. and there, as likewise during the time of this seruice, to be at the com∣mand of Sir C. S. Knight, Colonell of one thousand foote; whereof faile not at your extreame perill:  for your so doing this letter shall be your warrant. Giuen at D. &c. H. W. T. R. W. S. Superscribed. To our welbeloued friend N. D. Captaine of 200▪ foote.
VI. A Letter, to countermand, or stay, the for∣mer proceeding. AFter our very hearty commendations: Understand∣ing that the affayres, and necessities of the forts and defencible places, doe not require such hasty and expedi∣tious seconds as our car was willing to haue admi∣nistred vnto them; and for diuers other especiall good causes, to vs best knowne, wée ha therefore thought good to deferre the iourney lately appointed to be made, for a time: Wherefore wée require you to take notice thereof, and to forbeare remouing from your Garison, vntill you shall receiue further order in that behalfe. And yet wée charge you, that the band of foote, vnder your leading, may be in a full readinesse against the time that shall be next appointed for the seruice, formerly intended, and so we bid you farewell: from D, &c. Your very louing friends, H. W. T. R. W. S. Superscribed; To our welbeloued friend N. D. Captaine of 200. foote, at his Garison in T. VII. A Letter from the Generall of an army, to the Muster-maer-Generall, for the entring of a Cap∣taine and his whole Bnd into pay. E. Whereas we haue made choyse of our wel-be-loued N. D. Esquyre, to command a Company of 200. foot, with Officers, and ntertainements belonging to the
same. These are therefore to giue you notice thereof, and withall, to will and require you to make entry of the said Captaine N D. in his Maiesties Checque-roles of the Musters, as Captaine of 200. foote, together with the al∣lowance for himselfe of viij. shil. ster. per diem: for his Lieutenant of iiij. shil. ster. per diem, one ensigne at ij. shil. ster. per diem: thrée Serieants, two Drums, a Fhy, and a Surgion, at xviij. d. ster. per diem, a péece, and 200. Souldiers at viij. d. ster. per diem, a péece: the sayd seue∣rall payes and entertainments to begin the first of March, 1613. and to continue during pleasure: And further, to make forth warrants of full pay vnto his Maiesties Trea∣surer of the warres, for payment hereof accordingly, and this shall be your sufficient discharge in that behalfe: from the Castell of D. &c. Superscribed To our welbeloued Syr R. I. Knight, Muster-master generall, and Clarke of the Checque. VIII. A Letter from a Counsell of State, to the Iustices of any County, for preferring a Gentleman either to the Muster-mastership, or any other Office in their ellection. AFter our very hearty commendations; Whereas you are to haue an especiall care to the trayning of your selected Bands, and to the election of a Muster-ma∣ster, sufficient for the discharge of the same place: Now, vnderstanding that such a place is voyd in your Countie, we thought good to recommend vnto you this Gentleman W P. who hauing of long time commanded in many of his Maiestis seruices, is, no doubt, euery way sufficient
for the same place, and the rather, in that he is no stranger nor ayen amongst you, but a Gentleman of qualitie borne, brought vp, and dwelling in your Countrie: where∣fore, hoping you will not faile herein, we bid you farewell: from the Court at S. &c. Your very louing friends, H W. T R. W S. N G. Superscribed, To our very louing friends, his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace within his Countie of R. IX. A Letter of consent from a man of the most eminent place in his Country, for confir∣ming the former petitioner in the place aforesayd. AFter my hearty commendations: whereas the bea∣rer hereof Master W. P. hauing béene of late a sutor vnto you, for the Offic of Muster-master, within the Countie of R. and is already assured of some of your consents, is now desirous that I amongst the rest, should passe my liking and allowance of him: these are to signi∣fie vnto you, that I holde him a Gentleman of so good a courage, temper and experience, so likely to doe seruice to his Country, and honour to the place, that as I thinke none more fit for it then he is, so wish I none but he may be admitted so it, and so I bid you hartely farewell: from, &c. Your very louing friend, C. O. Superscribed, To the right Worshipfull, Syr I B. Knight, Syr L M. Knight, and the rest my very good friends, the Commissioners for his Maiesties Musters, within the County of R.
Chartels and Challenges, with their Answeres. X. An honourable Chartell or Challenge, which may be sent from any Noble person, comming into a strange Country, onely to see the wars, hauing no Spurre but his owne reputation. A Of England. to B. of France, sendeth the gréeting of a hatelesse enemie: The liking of martyall mat∣ters without any mislike of your person, hath brought me rather to the company then to the mind of your besiegers, where, languishing in idlenesse, I desire to refresh my mi with some exercise of armes, which might make knowne the doers, with delight of the beholders: therefore, if there be any Gentleman in your Towne, that eyther for the loue of honour, or honour of his loue, well armed on horsebacke, will with Launce and Sword winne another or lose himselfe, to be a prisonner at discretion of the Con∣querour, I will to morrow morning by Sunne-rising with a Trumpet and a Squyer onely, attend him in like order furnished: the place I thinke fittest, is before the wals, so that the Ladyes may haue the pleasure of séeing the Combat; which, though it be within the command∣ment of your Towne, I desire no better security then the promise I make to my selfe of your vertue. I attend your answer, and wish you such successe  may bee to your honour, rather in yéelding to that which is iust, then in maintaining wrong by violence. A XI. An answere to the former Charll. B. Of France▪ to A. of England, wisheth all his own wishes sauing those which may be hurtfull to an∣other:
the matter of your Letter so fit for a worthy mind, and the manner so sutable to the noblenesse of the matter, giue me cause to thinke how happy I might account my selfe if I could gt such a friend, who estéeme it no small happinesse to haue met with so noble an enemy: your chal∣lenge shall be answered, and both time and place, and weapon accepted. For your security from my treachery (hauing no hostage worthy to counteruaile you) take my word, which I estéeme aboue all respects: prepare there∣fore your armes to fight, but not your heart to mallice, since true valour néedes no other whetstone then desire of honour. B. XII. Another honourable Chartell of the same na∣ture, and for the same purpose. RIght famous Syr, if my perswasion in reason, or prayer in good will, might preuaile with you, you should by better meanes be like to obtaine your desire, you should make many braue enemies become your faith∣full seruants, and make your honour flye vp to heauen, being carried vp by both the wings of valour and iustice, whereof now it wants the latter. But since my sie nor counsail can get place in you, disdaine not to receiue a mortall challenge from a man so arre inferiour vnto you in vertue, as that I doe not so much mislike the déed as I haue the doer in admiration: prepare therefore your selfe, according to the noble manner of a Souldier, and thinke not lightly of neuer so weake an arme, which strikes with  sword of Iustic. D.
XIII. An answere to this Chartell. MUch more famous D. I whom neuer threatnings could make afrayd, am now terrified by your no∣ble curtesie; for well I know from what height of vertue it doth procéed, and what cause I haue to doubt such vertue, bent to my ruine: but right, which iustifieth the iniustice you lay vnto me, doth also anymate me against all danger, since I am full of him by whom your selfe desires euer to be gouerned: I will therefore attend you before the walles, carrying this aduantage with mee that as it shall be a singular honour if I get the victory, so there can be no dishonour in being ouercome by D. XIIII. Another Chartell of the same nature, and to the same purpose, onely proceeding from an angry enemie vnknowne. TO thée H. of England, an vnknowne Knight wish∣eth health and courage, that by my hand thou mayst receyue punishment for thy treason, according to thine owne offer, which wickedly occasioned, thou hast proudly begun, and accursedly maintained; I will presently (if thy minde faint thée not for his owne guiltinesse) méet thée before the walles, or if the time, place and weapon like thée not, I am ready to take thine owne reasonable choise in any of them, so as thou doe performe the substance. Make me such answere, as may shew that thou hast some taste of honour: and so I leaue thée to liue till I méet thée. Anonimus.
XV. An answere to this Chartell. VNknowne Knight, though your namelesse challenge might carry in it selfe excue for  man of my birth and estate, yet her  your heart at rest, you shall bee satisfied, I will without stay answere you before the wals, and come both armed in your follish threatnings, and yet the more fearelesse, expecting weake blwes, where I finde so strong words: you shall not therefore long attend me, before proofe teach you that of my life you haue made your selfe too large a promise: in the meane time farewell. E. XVI. The forme of a Chartell or Challenge which may be sent from one King vnto another, wherein the ground, and occasion of the quarrell, is mentioned, for the auoyding of exceptions and delayes. VVEE H. by the Grace of God King of B. to you C. by the same grace King of S. Wée doe you to vnderstand, that in all the answeres that you haue made to our Embassadors and Heraulds sent to your for the establishing of peace, in excusing your selfe without reason: you haue accused vs, saying, that wee haue plight you our faith, and broken the ame. In defence of our Ho∣nour which hereby might be  too much, against all truth, we throught good to send you this writing by which we giue you to vnderstand, that for the satisfying of all men, and our sayd Honour, which wee minde to kéepe, if it please God, vnto the death: that if you haue charged, or will charge vs not only with our faith, but the
breach thereof, or that euer we did any thing that became not a Gentleman who had respect to his Honour, that you ie falsely in your threat, and as oft as you say it you doe lye: and we doe determine to defend our Honour to the vttermost drop of our blood; Wherefore, séeing you haue charged vs against all truth, write no more to vs héere∣after, but appoint vs the field, and we will bring you the weapons, protesting, that if after this declaration you write into any place or vse any words against our Ho∣nour, that the shame of the delay of the combate shall light on you, séeing that the offering of cambate is the end of writing: Dated at our Towne and Citie of P. the twentieth day of March, Anno Dom. 1613 H. XVII. A rough Chartell sent from a Commaunder in the warres, to a man of like place, hauing done publike iniurie to his Superiour. SYR, IF eyther your birth or bringing vp had wrought in your noble minde, or estimation of credit, hardly would you haue so much forgotten and stained your Honour, as in a Parlée of late with our Generall you did, at whom vildly and dishonourably shooting, you falsed that assu∣rance of warre which Souldiers submit themselues vnto, and trained him to your treason vnder trust: a thing here∣tofore not accusted, nor presently to be allowed of: he assuredly pretending your owne and your friends good, commoditie to your Country, and quietnesse to the state. But your pride ioyned with a harmeful meaning to those which you prosesse best vnto, and selfe wilfull vaine glory without cause why; refused that which reason and Ho∣nour commanded you to haue done: Therefore because his calling is presently with his charge better then yours, and mine not inferiour, I summon you reasonably to ex∣cuse
that fault supposed to be yours, or else maintaine that traiterous acte with your person against mine in fight, when, where, and how you dare, otherwise I will baffell your good name, sound with the Trumpet your dishonor, paynt your picture with the héeles vpward, and beat it in despight of your selfe, in the meane time I attend your answere: from the Campe. G. G. XVIII. A Chartell or challenge from an inferiour, hauing receiued grosse wrongs from a Superiour. SYR: THe greatnesse of your birth and place, is no priuiledge to doe iniurye to any that is frée-borne, & the wrongs you haue done me are vnabideable: the satisfaction wher∣of, your owne generous nature, I know, will both ac∣knowledge and proportion: wherefore, appoynt time, place and weapon, without aduantage, and you shall find me ready to maintaine the assertion of your euill doing. This if your greatnesse (which is nothing if it be not ac∣companied with goodnesse) shall make you eyther neglect or delay, you will force mee to publish that (which yet I am not apt to beléeue) you are not vertuous. T. H. XIX. A generall Challenge, which may passe betweene any Gentlemen, the quarrell being foule and not doubtfull. SYR: MY wrongs  in the worlds general knowledge, and  from you assignement of time, place and armes,  your vertue can instruct you in the proportins, the manner I refer to this Gen∣tleman my second. T. Q.
XX. A Chartell or Challenge-conditionall, hauing refe∣rence to some doubt. SYR: IT is a generall report in the Worlds-mouth, that you are both the author and reporter of these words; first, That I haue dishonourably broken my fayth in the warres, by abandoning my Colours in the time of best action, and lastly, laid imputations on my Captaine, both without desert or iudgement. These spéeches if you acknowledge (as vertue will not denie her actions for danger) you must be pleased to vnderstand from this Letter, that you haue little affinitie with truth, for you haue spoken grosse false∣hoods, which I wil euer maintaine  approue in any Gen∣tleman like posture of your owne election. Therfore I be∣séech you let me receiue from you such satisfaction as may vertuously agrée with an humalicious truth, eyther in af∣firmation or deniall, and you shall finde me prepared ho∣nestly for eythers entertainment. R. P. XXI. An answere to the former Chartell, giuing a suffici∣ent satisfaction to the doubt, and retorting the iniurie. SYR: YOu call me to so fayre an account that I cannot chuse but deliuer you an honest reckoning of my vertue: Therefore be pleased to beléeue, vnder this protectation, that these spéeches wherwith you burthen my reputation, did neuer procéed from me, nor haue my lips at any time deliuered from them word or matter to that purpose. And albe you make the world your Author, yet I know a Gentleman of your worthinesse and iudgement will neuer
enter into an opposition of this nature without a ground of greater value and certaintie, whence I must for mine owne satisfaction, demaund of you an author personall, without disparagement, against whom I will iustifie the contradiction of his slaunder. This right if any former ceremonie shall make you denye mee, besides the vnlaw∣fulnesse of such secrecie, you will giue me libertie to con∣iecture, that your selfe onely is to your selfe an euill instru∣ment, and that I haue no other accuser but malice. R. O. XXII. A Chartell or Challenge of an vnworthy nature, be∣ing such as all Gentlemen of vertue should for∣beare to imitate, though the aduersa∣rie were neuer so vnworthy. SYrrah, the basenesse of thy villainous nature, hauing prouoked thée to doe me iniurie, I entend to scourge with my sword, which shall deuide a wicked life from a more wicked body: therefore, vnderstand by this sedule, that neither drunkennesse (to which thou art naturally adicted▪) nor enzie (which thy pride hath put vpon thée) shall be any excuse for thy most slauish demeanour, but that with my sword I will thrust those lyes thou hast de∣liuered downe thy throat, and thorow thy heart into thy gots, therefore if thy cowardlinesse dare aduenture vpon such a businesse appoynt time, place, and weapon, and I will  thée, and appr vpon thée that thou art a . L. N.
XXIII. An answere as vnmannerly as the Challenge was vn∣worthy, both set downe, not for imitation, but scorne, though some men of good place in this Kingdome, haue vsed them ignorantly. SYrrha, I haue receyued thy base raising Letter, from which feminine humour I gather the colde cowardly grossenes of thy spirit, spending it selfe so much in words, that in action, I feare, it will not dare to encounte with a shaddow, the world hauing euer noted thée for a co∣ward, and al thy companions derided as a braggart of fil∣thy estimation. But in as much as your saucinesse is now growne vnto the height of impudency, set your heart at rest, for I will put you to the touch of your best strength, and from the bearer hereof, my friend, you shall receiue notice both of the time and place, and with your eyes behold the weapons of mine election, which I doubt not but with the expence of thy best blood shall naile the vil∣laine fast to thine owne bosome: and so farewell, till I come to plague and scourge thée. M. Q. XXIIII. A foolish Challenge, sent from one who neyther had wit nor courage, but a foolish prouocation. SYrrha T. the wrongs thou hast done me are so grosse and notorious, that I cannot with my reputation put them vp: and although thou deniest when thou gauest me the lye, that thou didst it in disgrace of me, yet vpon con∣sideration, I finde it must néeds be done with a disgrace∣full minde, though thou didst like a coward deny it. I haue learned not to hazard my Knight hood vpon mine in∣feriours,
Esquyres of low degree, but if thou make mée not some honest satisfaction, thou wilt vrge me to forget my place: farewell, I hope thou wilt be wife: yours as you vse him. A. C. XXV. An answere from a merry wit, sutable with the for∣mer follie. K. Arad, or arrand K: As the wrongs you pretend I haue done you, were yours by right, so I will doe you right and iustifie them, for I loue to giue euer the Di∣uell his due: I denied indéed that I meant your disgrace by giuing the lye, because I knew if a disgrace without all qution to haue the lye, and a sta ignorance to call it in∣to , I beléeue you would be very louth to hazard your, King , yet you must, if you will  satisfa∣ction, for what I intend to giue is at my méeting with you to morrow morning about sike of the clocke in the Uale betwéene the  and Riuer: I haue sent you my Ra∣pie paralll both it and my ernds by this Gentleman: farewell. R. T. Superscribed. To the Honorable Knight, Syr A. C. XXVI. An answere to a Challenge where the appealants as∣sertion is not doubtfull, and so the defen∣dant not tyed to the tryall of the sword. SYR: THE tryals of the sword are onely in case of doubts vndisruable, and not tyed to the indiscréet will of euery desperate opposition, for that were both to consd
iustice and reason: therefore I would haue you pleased to know, that the imputation which you would excuse by accusing mee of falsehood, is so cleare and manifestly knowne to the world, that the record thereof is registred in an honourable Court, whence all errour is depriued, so that the remembrance thereof cannot chuse but instruct you in your misconceit, and beare that falsehood backe to your selfe, which you would wrongfully impose on ano∣ther, for it were monstrous if a man should be bound to defend with his sword, whether it were day, when the Sunne shined, I or no, and such like is your quarrell; therefore, if the  of your courage must néeds be allyd by my Rappier, ellect a ground of more certaine doubt, and I will answere it with my best vertue: in the meane space be satisfied that all the best spirits of this nation will thinke I haue herein giuen your insufficient call a suffici∣ent satisfaction. T. W. XXVII. A reply by the former challenger, againe to vrge the field. SYR: YOur instructions are not to me vnknowne, neyther doe I disallow your euasion, yet thus arre you must giue mee leaue both to expond my selfe and my Letter, that I call you not to an account for the reports, whether they be true I or no, but for the malice you made appa∣rant in such tryuiall discourses, which, for-as-much as it is a passion wicked and dishonourable, I holde it the part of euery Gentleman of vertue, to defend himselfe from such a viia imputation. And here I doe accuse you to be a Gentleman full of ancour and hatred, and what you haue reported of mee hath béene onely to display your which I will maintaine with my sword, where my indifferency shall oppoynt me. R. O.
XXVIII. An answere to this second call, wherein the fielde is likewise auoyded. SYR. YOU trauell now from wayes vnreasonable into pathes impossible, wherein it séemes to me you display a disposition oth absurde and cruell: for it you allow my reports not to be in question, what a tyrannous boldnesse is it in you to become the searcher & vnderstander of my thoughts (which is a power onely in the power of the ) and yet not ther by circumstance, or suggestion, giue the world any inducements to proue me so inclined? But Syr, both for the auoyding of your further trouble is writing, and your more disgrace in insufficiently wri∣ting, I am content thus far to satisfie the world▪ and your selfe (which otherwise will be but vurpers of knowledge) that what I haue any wayes spoken of you, as it was true, so it was vtterly without touch of mallice or hatred; against which you cannot affirme, in that my thoughts are knowne to my selfe and to no other mortall creature. T. W. XXIX. An answere to any challenge which comes from any Seruant to a Free-man. SYR: I Haue retained your modest call, and would willingly doe you right therein, onely there is the difference vs, that I eale I shall double your iniurie: for in makes you at anothers and not at your  how can you be capable of the houses of your aduer saries appoyntment? Therefore you must be pleased; eyther  or your right in challenges, (a choise diststefull to your spirit) for till
you can become an equall, you may not lawfully enter in∣to matters of equaltie: yet because you shall not baptize mine aduantage with eyther feare, or cruelty, I am con∣tent to giue you my rights, assuring you I will attend the houres of your owne election. L. O. XXX. A generall answere to any honest and sufficient Chartell. SYR: YOur call is like your selfe, full of vertuous anger, to which with all willingnesse I will giue satisfaction: therefore I beseech you, giue credence to this Gentleman my seconds, who shall giue you the time and place, and make mine election for the weapon. Yours T. A. Amorous Epistles, containing matter of loue or accompliment. XXXI. An Epistle which may come from any woman of worth, eyther to her Father, chiefe friend, or guardian, who not affecting her choise in loue, seeke not only to diuorce it, but with all violence and aduantages pursue her friend, euen vnto death. SYR: VVHat you will determine of me it is to me vncer∣taine, but what I haue determined of my selfe I am most certaine, which is no longer to enioy my life then I may enioy him for my husband whom the heauens
for my highest glory haue bestowed vpon me: if you please to kill him, execute me, let any throat satisfie the hunger of ; for alas, what hath hee done that had not his originall in me: Looke vpon him, I beséech you, with in∣differency, and sée whether in those eyes all vertue shines not? sée whether that face can hide a blemish? Take leysure to know him, and then your selfe will say it hath béene too great an inhumanitie to suspect such excellency. Are the Gods thinke you, deceiued in their workemanship? Arti∣ficers will not vse Marble but to noble vses: should those powers be so ouer-shot as to frame so pretious an Image of their owne, but to honourable purposes? O speake with me, O heare me, O know him, and become not the putter out of the worlds light. Hope you to please heauen by hurting him it loueth about all the world? I beseech you let not his losse make you accursed of the whole earth, & of all posteritie, he is a Gentleman of eminence: why should you hinder mine aduauncement, who if I haue past my childe-hood, hurtlesse to any, if I haue refused no body to doe what good I could, if I haue often mitigated your anger, euer sought to maintaine your fauour; nay, if I haue helde you deerer then my life, robbe mee not of more then my life comes vnto? Teare not that which is insepa∣rably ioyned to my soule, but if hee rest misliked of you (which O God how can it be?) yet giue him to me, let me haue him, you know I pretend no right to your estate: therefore it is but a priuate petition I make vnto you: or if you bee hard heartedly bent to appoynt otherwise (which O sooner let me dye then know) then to end as I began, let me by you be ordered to my last end, with ou for more crueltie you meane to force me to vse mine owne hands  of your owne children. The saddest F.
XXXII. An Epistle neare of the same nature, but is to be sent from a Gentlewoman whose Parents being dead, is left to the tuition of friends, and they onely are aduerse and opposite to her choyse in Loue. IN such a state (Gentlemen) you haue placed me, as I can neither write nor be silent; for how can I be silent since you haue left mée nothing but my solitary words to testifie my misery, and how should I write, who neither can resolue what to write, nor to whom to write? What to write it is hard for me to say, as what I may not write, so little hope haue I of any successe, and so much hath no iniury béene left vndone to me wards. To whom to write where may I learne, since yet I wot not how to intitle you; shall I call you my Soueraignes, set downe your lawes that I may doe you homage? shall I fall lower, and name you my Kinsemen, shew mee your bloods in your loue? but shall I name my selfe the Mistresse of my selfe? alas, no; I am your prisoner: But whatsoeuer I be, or whatsoeuer you be, O all you beholders of these dolefull lines, this doe I signifie vnto you, and signifie it with a heart that shall euer remaine in that opinion, the good or euill you doe to him I loue, I will euer impute it as ey∣ther way done to mine owne person; he is a Gentleman, and worthy to be my husband, and so is he my husband, by me worthily chosen. Beléeue it, beléeue it, eyther you shall be murderers by killing me, or if you let me liue, the killers of him shall smart as murderers: for what doe you thinke I can thinke; am I so childith, as not to sée wherein you touch him you wound mee? can his shame be without my reproach? no, nor shall be, since nothing he hath done that I will not anow. Is this the comfort you bring me, to make me fuller of shame then sorrow? Would you doe this if it were not with full intention to
preuent my power with slaughter? and so doe I pray you, it is high time for mée to be weary of my life too long led, since you are weary of me before you haue power in me. I say againe, I say it instnitely vnto you, I will not liue without him, if it be not to reuenge him; eyther doe iustly in sauing both, or wiely in killing both: if I be your bet∣ter, I command his preseruation▪ if your inferiour, I beg it, for I take all truth to witnesse, he is worthy and bertu∣ous. Therefore to conclude, in wronging him you wrong me, neither conceive with your selues that your iniuries aspyze to the life of a stranger, but euen to the life of your vnfortunate kinsewoman, P. D. XXXIII. An answere vnto the two former Epistles. IF the loue to your person (Madam) and the great obli∣gation betwixt my soule and your noble deceased fa∣thers (to which the eye of the highest was tired for a wit∣nesse) haue sirred vp in you in you so many perturbations, both of spirit an body, that it hath taken from you all excel∣lent remembrances and cogitations worthy the medita∣tion of your vertue, so that forgetting your selfe, you bréed a neglect of your vnspotted reputation. I beséech you, be pleased to let me a waken your knowledge, and stirre vp your considerations with the incation of mine honest and sincere designes, which euer haue had eyes fixed onely vpon your vertuous aduancement. First, for the residence of your person, so much displeasing vnto you through the sollitude thereof; albe I must confesse it is barren of those confluences of time-seruing tongues, whose flattering musicke onely pleaseth the descréese eare, but for a little season; yet is it so sufficiently stored with honest and faith∣full plainnesse (the best comerce for vertue) that howeuer now swayed with the billow of your passion, hereafter
I hope your wisedome will neyther doubt of your spéech or silence, nor to whom to impart your bosomes directi∣ons, since my faith and seruice (euer versed in the preoc∣cupation and businesse of your good) shall neuer deserue to become such a stranger to your goodnesse. Touching the Gentleman, your election, I neither deny his wor∣thinesse of person or estate, but affirme his much vnfitnes both in respect of his already néerenes in affinitie, whereby your house shall be no more then formerly strongthened, as also his abode & comorance in a far remoued country, whereby your owne country being depriued of these com∣forts which their hopes haue tdiusly expected, there shall redund vnto it nothing but a depriuation of those bles∣sings, and a strong feare of the deuastation of those costly Buildings which your auncestors haue erected to couer their names, and giue reliefe to their neighbours, till the last day of the worlds continuance. But you feare his murther, as if my gainestanding his affection should com∣pell his griefe (being accompanied with dispayre) to styfle him: alas (Madam) such thoughts are but supererogating workes of your faith, which in a person of lesse merit would appeare too gaudily clothed in selfe loue; for neither doe I thinke his heat is so violent, nor his resolution so irreligiously constant for his owne destruction, especially since such actions doe depriue men of all worth and good titles whatsoeuer. neyther shall any outrge in him bréed imputation of guiltinesse in me; my hand of duty cal∣ling meets the preuention of  euill, into which you shal eyther imbarke your honour or hopest to come, which motiue when your excellent iudgement hath examined and poysed in the scale of vertue: you will thinke him vnworthy of threatnings; much lesse of reuenge, who will euer liue to bay all your modest commaunds. L. E.
XXXIIII. An amorous Epistle onely complementall, which may passe betweene any two persons, of what degree soeuer. IT is not the eye (my déerest and best respected Mistris) which taketh in the excellency of true loue, and by the vertue of its intelligence, maketh the heart onely capable of all loue, faith and constancy, as if, being depriued the best iudging sence, it could deserue nothing but by a her∣auld or instruction; making that maymed and disfigured which is the noblest, best accomplisht, and the most excel∣lent in the whole worke of nature: O no (my déerest) the heart is not the borrower of those lights, but hauing all his communication and frequency with the diuine soule, like the Sunne which is both the eye and spirit of Nature, lendeth from his owne cleare beames those excellencies of resolution and faithfulnesse which makes our loues re∣nowned for the vertue of truely and worthily louing, for it is most certaine, that the loue which taketh vp his lod∣ging onely in the eyes closet of admiration, and is but thence recommended to the hearts considerations; it is a loue as insubstanciall as a shaddow, and no longer to be retained then a sound, which the eare in his best liking looseth. This I write (swéet) that you may know (as long as trueth olds his place in your knowledge) that the affection which perpetally is made one with my heart, sprang from no delight or amazement of mine eyes, (into which onely the excellency of colours doe insinuate) but from iudgement, deliberation, and resolution, the hearts thrée faithfullest and best deseruing counsailors, so that your vertues and worthy parts, hauing inseparably fixed in me the remembrance & acknowledgement of your per∣fections, my hope is, that no customary coynesse, which is but the false title and motley-garment of discretion,
shall eyther discourage my proéedings (which haue onely vertue for their conduct) nor delay my hopes, which are onely perfect, in that they hope nothing but what is most suteable with an honourable reputation. It the infancy of your knowledge, yet too yong to iudge my merit, be∣cause time hath presented mee, but as a straunger to your sight, make you feare to imbarke the treasure of your loue into a vessell of whole soundnesse you are vncertaine (albe the outward face neuer so richly imbellished) know, that euen vnto rumour himselfe, who is most vnacquainted to speake well by the noblest perfection (slaunder and he be∣ing seldome or neuer vncoopled) I dare oldly prostitute both my good name and actions, assured that enuie is not so destitute of fit subiects to cast his malices vpon, as hée will attract the least drop of his poyson to deface that image of my vertue, which hath hitherto liued cléere, rée, and vndespighted: to which considerations when trueth shall fixe his vndoubted affirmation, then my hope is you will thinke him worthy, who will euer liue and dye, your admyrer, R. C. XXXV. A blunt Epistle from an honest true affection. MIstresse, I loue you honestly, and desire to enioy you faithfully: my birth is not hid, nor mine actions concealed, mine estate hath no couertre but the ayre, nor my priuate wealth any pursse but mens knowledges. If your eye can be satisfied with the one, and your minde with the other, without accomplements (the guilt of falsehood) you shall finde that faith, care, and frugall seri∣ousnesse, which shall expyre but with my breath onely: with vertue I séeke to win you, with vertue I will euer kéepe you, and till vertue shall be vtterly consumed, I will be euer faithfull. R. R.
XXXVI. An Epistle which may come from any man of good place, to any woman of worthinesse, on whom his loue doateth vvith so much violence, that hee is euen at the poynt of death vvith the extremity thereof. MO  Paper, which shal  that hand wher∣to all  is in nature a seruant, doe not dis∣ayne to eary with thée the  words of a myser now dispayring: weyhter be afrayd to appears before her the  of the nder, for  sooner shall that diuine hand  thée, but that thy basen esse shall be tur∣ned to most high preferment. Therefore mourne boldly nine Iuke, for  shée lookes vpon you, your blacke∣nesse will shine: cry out vodly my lamentations, for she reade you, your cryes will be musicke: say then (O happy  of a most vnhappy message) that the too soone  dying creature, which dares not speake, no not looke, no not scarcely thinke (as from his miserable self vnto her heauenly highnesse) onely pre∣sumes to desire thée (in the time that her eyes and voyce doe exalt thée) to say, and in this manner to say, not from him, O no, that were nott, but of him, thus much vn∣to her sacred iudgement. O you the onely honour to wo∣men; to men the onely admiration, you that being armed by loue defye him that armed you, in this high estate wherein you haue placed, yet let me remember him to whom▪ I am  for bringing me to your presence, and let me remember him who ( is yours, how meane soeuer ee ) it is reason you haue an account of him. The wretch (yet your wretch) though with languishing steps , and will you suffer a Temple ( yet a Temple of your diety) to be razed? but he dyeth, it is most true, he dyeth, and he in whom you liue, to obay you, dyeth, whereof though he
plaine, he doth not complaine, for it is a harme, but no wrong, which he hath receyued: he dyes, because in wo∣full language, all his sences tell him that such is your plea∣sure, for since you will not that he liue, alas, alas, what followeth of your ruined seruant but his end? End then most euill destyred man, end, and end thou wofull Let∣ter, end: for it sufficeth her wisedome to know that her heauenly will shall be accomplished, by her onely dispayre∣full catite, Anonimus. XXXVII. Another amorous Epistle of like nature, but not full so violent. TIme and knowledge, the onely forteers of the mind, in all worthy and vertuous opinions, haue with so constant a resolution (my onely dearest and best respected Mistresse) setled your perfections in my deuinest part, that neyther Alexander with his sword, nor the Diuell with any slanderous imputation, can deuide or vntwiste the least part of that knot which tyes me eternally to your ser∣uice, and albe the best of worthinesse, is euer (and proud it euer may so be) a continuall attendant on your vertues, and so out of the wealth of such merit may make my loy∣altie neglected, yet shall the contention of my fayth so vn∣resistably striue for the supreamest eminence (as not to be excéeded by any brest of greatnes) that when your iudge∣ment shall call all your creatures into a comparatiue ac∣count, none shall come néere me eyther for loue or conti∣nuance: many other protestations I could make, but none more able, more effectuall; and therefore, since all holde their alyance with truth, and truth so inseperably ioyned with my soule that death hath not authoritie to vrge di∣uorcement betwéene them, let me (O you all best of your sexe) humbly beséech you, to entertaine with beléefe into your memory the knowledge of my faithfull loue, that
thence I may gaine the hope of some noble pittie, and from your pitty the blest grace, which is the God of a lo∣uers Fortune. This if you will vouchsafe to a merit as strong in it one beléefe, as you are noble in the worlds opi∣nion, you shall not onely be the creator of all blisse, which shall accompany my dayes, but fill euery minute in them with a studious obseruation, how to be more and more thankefull in my seruice: the contrary whereof, when you shal administer to my misfortunes, so desperate a dispayre∣fulnesse will fixe it selfe with the easie beléefe of mine vn∣worthinesse, that a sodaine and abortiue death will be the best ende of my wretchednesse, how euer being your slaue it is your voice must bring me manumission, or binde me to continue eternally in the labour of affliction: to which I will submit with such patience, that your selfe shall not forbeare to proue against your selfe that I am onely your truest seruant, S. G. XXXVIII. A modest answere negatiue, which may come from any Gentlewoman of place to her Sutor. SYR: THE excesse of your protestations vrge in me a little iealousie of beléefe, both because I am assured that truth is so modast & temperate in euery faculty of its owne worthines, that it hteth Hyperboles, and superrerogating works of too much praise, as also, in that reason, (which is the soundest counsellor to a weake iudgement) instructs me, that the plainest loue hath euer the plainest garments, coueting rather to be transparent and view'd through, then with this armed shelter o accomplementall protestati∣ons, to disfigure much the countenance of true meaning. Neyther can you make mee so ambitious, to beléeue that such pythetus as you linke me, vnto, are eyther mine by inheritance, or yours any longer then shadow-like they attend, & follow the Sunne-shine of your Pen, custom
and imitation, hauing taught you in this dissembling age, the Art of gilding so perfectly, and with so little cost, that rather then you will neglect your art, you will imploy your paynes vpon earth, or the most despised images: for mine owne part, I am not vnacquainted that such la∣bours are euer aparrelled with scorne, neyther will I dye with wings which will melt to beholde the Sunnes countenance: therefore pardon me that I cannot thanke you for my prayse, nor beléeue the vanitie of your prote∣stations, Loue: with whom I haue vowed all strange∣nesse of affection, and vtter disknowledge for euer, ha∣uing no more power to worke vpon my soule, then you sence to féele the passions which gouerne mee. Hence I beséech you, Syr, let procéede a desistance of solicitation, for I neither can, will, nor may, assent to your desires: both my selfe and those greater powers which onely haue power to direct and gouerne mee, being so opposite to what you entreate, that impossibilitie is onely left to as∣sure you that what time you spend hereafter in this na∣ture is lost and fruitlesse. Your worth I acknowledge to be noble and vnspotted, and thence your merit to procéed what soeuer in mee you account excellent, giuing your fortunes vndoubtable resolutions, that you may enioy the best of those which walke in a ranke before mee: but for my selfe, there is neyther hope, neyther possibilitie, which assurance I doubt not, but will so fortifie your wisedome to alter the course of your loue, that I shall hereafter liue frée from this Pen-trouble: in requitall of which merit, none shall excéede me in good wishes for your aduancement, or with chaste thoughts better estéeme you then M. N.
XXXIX. An other amorous answere affirmatiue, with some doubt, which may be sent from any discreet Gentlewoman to her Sutor. SYR: I Could haue wisht your loue had come clothed in this Paper, with lesse circumstance and more plainenesse, for so should I haue béene more capable of your chaste intent, and my braine lesse troubled in the decision of your loue, which the garments of good words makes doubtfull and much subiect to censure: but I am charitable, and will beleeue (till your errour make mee more sound in iudge∣ment) that in the fayre field of your protestations, no temp∣ting Serpent lurketh to vndoe mine honour, being a com∣panion so beare to my soule, that when it shall receiue the least  my body shall perish for euer. But to auoyd that vanity of which I talke you, be pleased to vnderstand, that it eyther mine eye of eare might be the iudges of my fortunes, or their intelligence had power to giue satisfa∣ction to all which gouernes me, then I could put all doubts and scruples from your remembrance, because I neither sée in your person any thing to dislike me, nor haue heard of your estate to be otherwise then may well sort with your place and reputation. But Syr, you must know I haue not interest in the moytie of my selfe, being by mine owne gift so estranged from mine owne desires, that I cannot without vsurpation say any of my serious thoughts are at mine owne disposure, I haue, Syr, a Father, whose worthy iudgement is (and worthy euer to be) so potent o∣uer me, that not onely my person, but euen my thoughts are wholy to be desposed by him: him if you please to so∣licite, and make his wisedome commend your vertuous desires to my consideration, there is no doubt but my ea∣sie beliefe may soone be traduced to imagine that there is nothing in your loue but honour and goodnesse. The con∣traries whereof, if he shal please to annex with his opinion,
be then assured it is as impossible to wrest mee from the like thoughts, as for the Insant Hyla to take by force the Club from his Master Hercules. If the labour of this dou∣ble paynes bréed in you any discouragement, you cannot too earely desist, nor too soone giue mee ease of a néedlesse trouble, your worth will make you frequent with better choyse, & my contract with wisedome against passion, will euer fortesse me to liue without the knowledge of vnr∣lieuing repentance. Thus you haue both mine & your own resolution in your bosome, agrée them or seperate them, both are to mee indifferent, and charitie shall euer make me your chaste well-wisher. A. D. XL. Another answere affirmatiue, when friends and all parts are satisfied. SYR, THis action of marriage, which is the last date of a womans libertie, being for the dignitie fearefull, and for the seriousnesse worthy our carefullest considerations, is to me such a bug-beare full of Chymerean shapes, that I oft start and tremble at such shadowes: onely I am so much fortefied in your noble loue, & the true constancy of your well setled affection, to which your vowes and my friends satisfactions hang as seales, that I haue banisht all oppositions, and doe now boldly giue my loue and ho∣nour into your protection, hoping you will as carefully preserue them, as I haue dearely and with all stricktnesse of thought nourisht them, in which you shall shew a ver∣tue worthy your goodnesse, and make me contend in my fayth and seruiceablenesse to excéede the best example of my sexe, for being onely conquered by your vertue no tri∣bute, is sufficient but this, that I will euer liue and dye your faithfullest▪ M. N.
XLI. An Epistle of Loue from a playne Country-man, to any woman his equall. BOth report (Mary) and mine owne cyes haue assured mee of your sufficiency in all those good things which should appertaine to a woman of your place, and from thence my loue hath taken such sure roote that it can ney∣ther wither nor perish whiles my life lasts: what I am you know, or at least may from your neighbours intelli∣gence: as for my substance, I néed not in this Letter make the audite thereof, because when your friends shall call it in account, their owne eyes shall giue them the re∣ckoning, only it is your benest affection which I intreat, to which I will ioyne mine, with so good a meaning, that howsoeuer any man may enuy mee, yet you shall haue cause neuer to accuse my breach of promise: more words I would vtter, but more substance I cannot tender, there∣fore expecting your answere, I rest your euer most assured T. D. XLII. An answere of denyall to the former Epistle. THomas▪ I am not as you, eyther beholden to report, or mine▪ eyes, for any goodnesse that is contained in you, which makes mée doubt, if I should séeke to intelli∣gence, I should finde nothing to giue me contentment: therefore you must know, my loue hauing no root it is im∣possible for you to expect any fruit from my loue: as for my knowledge of you▪ it is so little, it is not worthy the examination: and for my friends, calling your liuing to account, I will saue them that labour, for it is most cer∣taine, I neyther can nor will giue you mine affection:
many circumstances binding me thereunto: therefore if you please hereafter both to spare your word and your wooing, you shall both giue mee pleasure, and your selfe ase, making me so much beholden to your little trouble, that I will euer liue your friend. M. B. XLIII. Another answere of graunting to the desire of the Sutor. YOU néede not (Thomas) appeale to these witnesses of your loue, séeing both your owne honesty and my beliefe will euer perswade you from mocking of a simple Mayden, whom you may sooner delude with dishonest practise, then any way abuance by your best affection. But the truth is, I know you to be discréete and good, which are bonds sufficient to kéepe you from euill doing, therefore as you haue wonne me with your loue and dis∣cretion, satisfied my friends with your meanes and honest behauiour: so I pray you couet to kéepe me with the like vertues, for though many haue moe words, yet none shall haue more loue, nor you finde your selfe more deerely estée∣med in any bosome, then in mine, that will euer faithfully loue you, and faithfully liue yours for euer. M. B. XLIIII. An amorous Epistle of an olde Man to a yong Mayd, of good parts and parentage. IT is but the enuy of youth (swéet heart) which layeth imputations vpon age, making it disable, apt to fren∣zie, vnfound, vnsauory, and vncleanely, which indéede are attributes, onely appropriate to themselues,
the first springing from their ungrowne ripenesse: the se∣cond from heate of blood: the third from their lusts: the fourth from vnwasted corruptions, & the last from negle∣tiue carelesnesse: all in generall eschewing the comerc with wisedome, in whom age is euer conuersant. Beléeue it, youth onely imagineth what they would haue vs, but we assuredly know what they are, who frameth fayre buildings with yong twygs, and not with olde Tymber, who adorneth himselfe with buds & not with full growne Flowers. What perfection is in imperfectnesse? or what pleasure in distaste? It is onely time which makes men wise, and yéeres which bringeth forth wisedomes childe, truest experience: knowledge is the end of our creation, for in it onely the highest is glorified, and who can rightly know which hath not time for his Tutor? These things drawne into your consideration (my déerest) why should I feare (for that which is my best vertue) to solicite you with a loue constant and spotlesse (two liuories which yet could neuer fit youths backe) séeing your wealthiest hopes are confined in such goodnes: neyther haue the resolutions of my loue procéeded from mine eyes, but iudgement, a setled counsaile of wisdome, and reason confirming my de∣sire, and imboldening my spirit to manifest the chast and honest loue which inflameth me with a noble ardency. O then be pleased to know, that discretion hath taught mée to loue you intirely, & that loue compels me to beg from your bosome a loue sutable to its goodnes; giuing you this assurance from a minde vnwauering, that as farre as ho∣nest industry, fayth and religions care haue power, so far I will euery way contend to make me worthy your en∣ioyment: but if all shall be (through imiginary feares) ne∣glected, know, you shall but preuent nature a little, and bring him to an earely graue, who estéemeth your good, and aduancement, equal with the glory of his owne soule; my heart hath taught mine eyes to delight but in one ob∣iect, and mine experience binds them hath to a setled con∣stancy
in their election, so that not being able to moue, they rest obedient to heare the doome of your will, which howsoeuer it be swayed, shall neuer alter mee from being your eternall admyrer. A. G. XLV. An answere to the former Epistle. SYR: TO defend ones selfe by anothers iniurie, appeares to me much vncharitable, especially where a néedlesse imputation is néedlesly raysed: for though the guiltinesse of age may bee stirred with feare, yet I can assure you youth is no actuall opposer against you, neither is my minds so much acquainted with eyther, that it studies vpon any of their perfections, onely you must giue mee leaue for mine owne yéeres sake, so farre to defend youth, that albe blood and violence binde it to some distempera∣tures, yet is it not subiect to such mortall sickenesses as your Pen would infect it with: for should such cold Pal∣sys so earely benumbe it, t' were doubtlesse it could not continue to come to the name of aged: it is blood consu∣ming, not increasing, which bréeds weakenesse, and cold∣nesse, not heat, which is the mother of mortall infection: in contraries, there is neuer friendship, and where there is dissimilitude of parts, there the figure hath an vnséeme∣ly proportion. But why doe I trouble my Pen with this argument? let it suffice you Sir, I haue considered your loue, and beléeue it to be as worthy as you would make it; onely when I would fixe mine vnto it; my blood stirs such a commotion in my bosome, that no reconcilement can bring them by many leagues together: your wisdom, mine indiscretion: your temperance, my rashnesse: your coldnesse, and my flame, appearing in such contrary co∣lours, that euen reason and religion agrées to make an e∣uerlasting diuorce between them. Therefore I beséech
you, be pleased to let wisedome ouer-rule your passion, and where there cannot be delight, doe not compell con∣sent, least what you purchase with constraint, perish with discomfort, and your selfe too late grieue to sée how farre remedie is exiled from you: more I cannot say, except more time had giuen me more testimonie, that the euils I feare, are much lesse dangerous; which when it shall, I will then compel my nature to agrée with my fortune, and repay fayth with duty, and true loue with all true obser∣uation, being assured that none can loue truer, then the truely louing. D. O. XLVI. An Epistle of accomplements, which may generally passe betweene two friends. YOur loue (my best respected friend) is so actiue in my bosome, that euery occasion of salutation stirres in my braine matter enough for my Pen to worke vpon, in∣somuch, that though the barrainesse of the time, and the dulnesse of the place in which I liue, deny to loade my Paper with any nouel seriousnesse, yet my respect to you, and wishes euer to be preserued in your best memory, (of which I am ambitious to giue the longest instance) shal amplifie my thoughts, and send them vnto you, suted in so true an affection that you shall take delight to reade the volumne of my friendship, which I know your owne noble nature wil instruct you both to imbrace and cherish▪ as well for the zeale of the ground from whence it springs, as loue to that fruite which shall fill your bosome with contentment. Our seperation is a continuall sickenesse, and without this Paper-spéech would be most iniurably mortall, meditation being so great an enemy to the breath, that it would quickly bring life to his last consumption: therefore I beséech you, both for my comfort, & your owne preseruation, square the  your Physicke by mine
imitation, and send me your words in writing, to which I will giue so much loued entertainement, that were they able to returne their owne messages, you should without suspect know that nothing is more glorious then a true friends accomplements. Make my minde happy to behold what mine eyes cannot, I meane your selfe in your Letters, for they are the liueliest Characters of that Fi∣gure which we adore with most earnestnesse, and though the words be blacke, yet is their sound so cléere and misti∣cal, that they staine the brightnesse which containes them, & make the eare couet no noyse but their repetition. Prote∣station is the mother of ielousie, and too much to fortefie knowledge is to bréede suspicion in knowing: therefore briefly, loue me still, for I will loue you euer, and when any malice of an enuious spirit shall insinuate betwixt vs, remember my vertue and my vowe, which is euer to liue faithfull. I. B. XLVII. A plaine friends Letter without accomplement. FRiend (for so much thy vertue hath made me) since cu∣stome hath made a conscience of writing, and that something must procéede from nothing, or else giue suspi∣cion leaue to play the Knaue, as honest Cicero sayd to his friend, so say I to thée, if thou béest well, all is well, and my health is better by such knowledge, if otherwise take comfort and counsell, for no griefe like thine is able to en∣ter my bosome. If I had more to say I would more weary thée, but matter hath euer béene with me more fluent then words, therefore liue as happy as I wish, and thou shalt dye as blessed as a Saint, for no mans prayers are more deout for thée then mine, whose loue thou holdest in a perpetuall sée-simple. G. W.
XLVIII. An Epistle from a Gentleman of good ranke, to his Kinseman in Court, for procuring him the Order of Knight-hood. SYR: THE neerenesse in blood betwixt vs in true descent, I néed not discouer, since I doe assure my selfe of your knowledge therein. But the friendship betwixt vs of long time since, I may well comemorate, for the one be∣ing onely a corruption is daily in sight, but the other pro∣céeding from vertue is soone forgotten. Speaking of vs, I meane our Ancestors, who in all true friendship conioy∣ned, whereby there were at one time liuing fiue Knights of your name, and in like manner at that instant, at one time, there were also fiue Knights of my House and Name. But to boast of the glory of mine Ancestors, who being honourable, dyed honourably; serued the Kings of this Realme both in the warres, in the Court, and in the Country, might séeme to procéede of childery. But to la∣ment mine owne estate, liuing vnder the times of gene∣rall aduancement, and yet onely bereaued of that degrée wherein mine Ancestors haue béene possessed this foure hundred yéeres in dessent, may séeme to procéede of iust sorrow: which to make greater, I daily sée those vnder my rancke, whom neither vertue nor riches are acquainted with, precéede me in honourable titles, finding that friend∣ship from strangers, which the vnion of blood miserably neglecteth. But I will no more vrge th enuy of others, onely awaken you to doe by me as if our fortunes were altered, I would assuredly doe for you, and if my name get any adition of honour by your words, beléeue it, nei∣ther shall my nature be vnthankefull, nor my loue sloath∣full to imploy it selfe in all the offices of your seruice, to whom I will euer liue a faithfull Kinseman, and a perfit friend. T. L.
XLIX. An Epistle complementory, to a man of eminence going into the warres, in which he prefer∣reth a Souldier vnto him. SYR: I Was determined (hearing of your returne to your lodging) to haue come to salute you, and amongst others your friends to giue you a hearty well-willing farewell, wishing you successe according to your good worth & long merit: I heartely pray for you all, and that is all I can doe, but lament my fortune to be tyed to so base a tra∣uell betwixt Court and Court, incountring with Parch∣ment, Inke and Paper, in the time of so noble enterpri∣ses. I am sodainly called away about great and comman∣ding businesse, wherein I pray you, excuse me, who will euer pray  you, and loue you. Syr, this bearer, whose vtmost ambition is to doe you seruice in this voyage, I beséech you, let mée entreat you to accept, and grace him with your fauour, as hee shall deserue it by his cariage: his personage you sée; I can further, by good knowledge of him, testifie to you that hee is a right honest man, of good courage, of good reckoning, and hath friends of like qualitie, and good worth: I doubt not, but he will veri∣fie that I haue said, by his behauiour, & then I shall not néede to desire you to loue him, for your owne disposition out of your iudgement makes choise of such for your loue, therefore I commend him to your honourable fauour, and my selfe heartely to your selfe, vowing euer to liue your faithfull at all times. E. D. L. A Letter from one in prison to his friend for reliefe. SYR: AMongst all the helpefull offices of vertuous and ge∣nerous men, none is more excellent then that ayde
which they afforde the distressed in time of their captiuity and affliction, and being perswaded there is as much will as power in you to doe good (my loue hauing neuer beene a stranger to your familiaritie) I am incouraged to pray your fauourable & friendly furtherance by such good course and meanes as you will be pleased to vouchsafe me con∣cerning my reléefe, the nature and quantity whereof, I wish, may onely be proportioned by your vertue & boun∣tie, whose loue will take up into your consideration my present dispayre of all comfort, being a man full of the dis∣asters of imprisonment, as pouertie, hunger, ill and most ifectious ayre, bad lodging, and to be briefe, idlenesse and sloth, my hands and industry shut vp from all kinde of courses that may giue reliefe, I am onely comforted with hope of your loue, which will with a charitable eye be∣hold my wants, wherein you shall not onely binde me to you as a resfresher of my deected body and minde, but as the meanes of mine inlargement and liberty, which a small summe of money will effect, for which great benefit besides my thankefull acknowledgement of your so speci∣all fauour and friendship, I will striue by my best indea∣uours to become some way actually deseruing. So wi∣shing you all happinesse and conentment, I take leaue, and rest to be commanded at your occasion. I. B. LI. A merry-mad Letter in Skeltons rime, sent from one Poet to another, who had brought baptisme on the Stage. Superscribed Aiaci meo, Flagellifer. O Thou my Muse Make no excuse But open thy To write of some nuse
In a vayne profuse, Ayde thou my Pen Thou wonder of men Wash thou my brayne With dewe Castalian And make my wits fine With onte Caballine. If true I doe write I am to indite Of sundry strange matters And diuers odde claters, Which chanced of late (Not touching the state) I like not such prate, But if I speake true Then this both ensue Belongs Syr to you: Know then for a truth Though to tell I am loath Of that must harme both Without stare or oath Take this for a The Summers of London Are comming to Horndon Sublimi flagello To scourge a bad fellow As close as King loure With two whips and no more, There to surpryse Your fugitiue carkise Without ayle or maineprize, There haue béene odde spyes From whom did arise You allowed to baptize Of late on the Stage. Know then by your Page
That this your soud age The Synode so sage Haue thought to asswage By no pryson nor cage But vnméet of your age Your loynes for to gage By letting you blood For that both most good, I sweare by the ood For him that is wood, There must you be stript And soundly whipt With horrible bashes And terrible clashes With horrible blowes And terrible throwes, As true as you are Sacerdos And as we suppose Heatantymeumenos, Diuers of the Cittie Say it is great pittie That so proper a man Doe what they can Will now and than Let his wit run at rann▪ But quid amplius vis Syr? As more of this Syr, But now extra Iocum With spéed change your locum Bring worke for the Cocum And same guests for the Focum. Fundimus haec sine Skeltoni, fine numine Pli. R. A.
LII. A merry Letter from an Officer of the twelue dayes, to a Lord of Christmas. PLeaseth your high Excellency to vnderstand: I haue receiued certaine intelligence touching the whole ocurrents of all your forraine businesses, as well by Land as by Sea, wherein albe Desteny in these latter designes hath béene lesse auspitious then in the precedent times of your former gouernement, yet to a Prince of your great spirit and wisedome. I know the crosses of Fortune are but onely alarmes to awaken and fortefie your hopes, a∣gainst the worst of chaunces: wherefore to procéede to those negotiations with which I haue béene acquainted: your great army by Land, sent into the high Empyre of of Terra Laetitiae, vnder the conduct of Don Regula Mo∣desta, ariued most happily, fortified most strongly, & con∣quered both Townes, Castles, and the hearts of the best disposed people, vntill the thrée Kings of the North parts, Hungar, Colde, and Want, vniting their forces together, with the ayde and seconds of the states of the base Coun∣tries, being led by Miserie, Vsury, and Formallitie, ad your highnesse generall battaile vpon Christmasse-eue, where the fight was excéeding terrible, but the vantguard of the enemy, being led by Fashion and Fasting, two mea∣ger enemies, were by your Excellencyes first squadrons, vnder the conduct of Don Abundantio, put to rout, and in their slight made the battaile reyre, which giuing the reare a dismay, your Souldiers ell Pell-mell into the execution, in which battaile the three Kings were taken prisoners, the whole Gallantry put to flight, and the most of the infantry slaine and vtterly disabled for seruice: your army onely remaining Masters of the field, gaue testi∣monie of their conquest both by their shouts, banquets, and bonesters of twelue dayes lasting. But sée the incon∣stancy of the best chances, the two Kings Custome & Regu∣ritie,
being the puissant Emperours of the large continent of Frugality, fearing your Highnesse might by this encou∣ragement entitle your greatnes to their Dominions, haue ioyned their forces together, and besieged your famous generall, within the great Citie of Laughter, where partly through the corruption of the ayre of that Citie, and partly with the drinke of that soyle, which is brw'd with the wéed Aliquid nimis, his souldiors fall continually to disabi∣litie of seruice, so that except your excellency immediately imbarke your selfe with new orces to giue him instant reliefe, there is no hope but of the vtter desolation both of your great army and Empyre. Your army by sea hath fought many all fights, attai∣ned infinite prize, and made themselues masters of the whole merry-Dcean. But the Admirall hearing of this dangerous besiegement, hoping to giue succours by sea, dismbagde, and hoysting saile came in twelue nights be∣fore the walles of the besieged: but the Nauy of the ene∣mie hauing by a speciall aduiso instant intelligence, thrust in betwixt them and the harbour, where began a dread∣full and sore fight, ll both of doubt and admiration: for Dona Vrselina, your Highnesse good Ship, hauing put vp her fights, and being made yare for the nimblest businesse, turned her broad side vpon the enemies Uice-admirall, and hauing the aduantage of the winde, shewing the whitenesse of her vnderlops, gaue him a volley of chaine∣shot, and throwing her rewores vpon his maine yarde, made him not onely glad to cut his Sayles, but also to spend both his Mastes & his Boresplyt. Dona Catherina, your most induring Pynnace, held the reare Admirall a fight full as terrible: but Dona Cognata, a ship for your owne sailing, she twice oorded the Admirall, but for want of good tackling, and the ship of a broken anchor, she was blowne off, and lost the hope of a braue conquest: but in conclusion, the Armadaes of the enemy wers so Infinite in number, that your Excellencies fléete were faine to re∣trayt
vnder the guard of the Cannon of the Citie, where they also abide most seuerely besieged, so that there is nei∣ther hope of their deliuerance, nor safetie in your owne gouernement, vnlesse personally with the ayde of your honourable Founders (being of great name and greater vertues) you repayre to the reliefe of your noblest (distres∣sed) subiects, and to the preseruation of your Crowne and Dignitie: the consideration whereof, leauing to your owne thoughts, I humbly kisse your hands. Don Bablioso de Wast-time. Superscribed To the most high and most mighty Monarch of Myrth, Masking and mis-rule. D. D. LIII. An Epistle of aduise to a friend. SYR: YOu write vnto me you are determined to leaue off the udy of the Lawes, and onely betake your selfe vnto the warres, and commaund my friendship to deliuer you mine aduice in the course you pretend, which motion séemes to mee to carry the face of a little crueltie, for ha∣uing fixed downe a resolution how your life shall be con∣tinually erssed, it will hardly come within the power of counsaile, to alter that of which our soules are inamored, and then my reasons and your thoughts méeting in oppo∣sition, may stirre fancy in you to be iealous both of my loue and discretion. But since I had rather vndergoe that feare of mistaking, then by silence or neglect, sée you runne into an errour vnauoydable, I will boldly giue you mine opinion, and afterward referre your owne will to your owne iudgement: first, for your abandoning the study of the Lawes, in my conceit you fortake a friend of your blood to enioy the familiaritie of a stranger, or in a worse sence, cut off a true féelling member, to haue the im∣ployment
of a wooden one: for if we deriue the actions of our liues to the ends of our advancements, what then this study can be more swift, more certaine? the corrup∣tions of time & the ambitions of men hauing made it in al Common wealth the mayne nerue and sinne of iustice. What greater peace can you haue then meditation? what wéeter warre then disputation, whose worst wound is the gaining of knowledge? What better accommodation then your Bookes, where the whole wisdome of the earth is daily talking vnto you? and what scale so easie and cer∣taine to rise by as that which is supported by iustice, ver∣tue, and the good of all Kingdomes? A profession as eter∣nall as the world, and as necessary as our recreations: an honour not bounded in any strait circumference, but so largely left to the vtmust lists of eminence, that it walkes one rancke before the greatest nobilitie, hauing no ac∣quaintance with danger, nor other beholdingnesse then its owne vertue. But you will say, the study is heauy and vnpleasant: why o is all things that draw vs to good∣nesse: Who can well rellish the potion though it bring health? or who will not murmure to  a limbe, though it giue cure to the whole body? Things which are got with industry are first to continuance, when those which issue from chance all off a vnish in their enioyment. To conclude, then this study of our common Lawes there is nothing more profitable for your estate, nor more cer∣taine for your aduancement. Now for the warres, it is the noblest a  of mankinde, and I must néeds confesse the most auncient of all vertues, being honours first be∣gotten, and with so equall a hand, diuiding right from iniurie that no resistance is able to rebate the edge of his execution, yet are his dangers great, and not more great in his execution then in his composition: For though his principall members may be flowers of much good∣nesse, yet for  most part his body or groer substance is  with  corruptions, fancy hauing so disgui∣sed
valour in pyde garments of supposed gallantry, that if obseruation were indigent of vices, he might store him∣selfe double and treble in an army: anger and boast be∣ing the parents of oathes, custome and fashion of drun∣kennesse, & irreligion of blasphemy. These (my best friend) will be your companions in an east, and with these of necessitie you must be familiar: how such comercement will worke vpon your soule, I may doubt, though not cer∣tainely feare, and how the auoyding will be without danger, I may wish, but not warrant, onely my hope is that the vertue you haue euer possessed will so gouerne you, that like the kingly prophet Dauid, who liued with an idolater yet was cleare from his sin, so you may accompa∣ny many vices, yet be no way your selfe blemisht with their euils, in which, Religion and Temperance must be such faithfull supporters that ouerawing and kéeping downe the heat of blood, all things must but shadow like appeare vnto you which beares not the true liuory of ver∣tue and goodnesse: Thus I haue giuen you a prospectiue figure of both their characters, the choyse whereof I leaue to your good Angell, whilest my selfe will with all faith∣fulnesse remaine a continuall well-wisher of your happy Fortune. D. M.
LIIII. A merrry-mad-Letter to a merry mad wench, chaste and ingenious. LAdy of beauty possitiue, Péerelesse beyond comparatiue, Shew your swéet selfe superlatiue, By séeming swéet indeatiue, Let your selfe (my déere) be actiue, And euer an Organ passiue, By lending me your con-iunctiue, To haue some vnséene genetiue. Lady of feature perfectiue, By a pleasure inuatiue, Be of gentle will datiue To me, your louer optatiue, Which by one breathing vocatiue Doe demaund the copulatiue, And con-iunctiue ans exatiue To haue some vnséene genetiue. (Most ayre) if true will affectiue, You haue to be suppostiue, My selfe will be oppositiue, To haue some vnséene geetiue. T. W.
LV. An answere to the former Letter in the same kinde. THE true forme desderatiue, Of your fayre spéech affirmatiue, Maketh me all meditatiue, How to propound a negatiue, For I feare the accusatiue Will be of force but ransetiue, Therefore Ile holde my primatiue And neuer be deriuatiue. For were I found frequentatiue, I should lose my nominatiue, And vsurpe an apellatiue, The substance of a putatiue, Wherefore Ile be indicatiue To remaine meditatiue, And holde still my primatiue, Without being deriuatiue. The con-iunctiue explaiue Comes after the copulatiue, And brings forth a preparatiue, To make one vse dissributiue, For where there's a nowne collectiue Of force comes a deminutiue, Therefore Ile holde my primatiue, And neuer be deriuatiue. Of this foolish ou turbatiue, My selfe am nothing optatiue: Therefore Ile hold my primatiue And neuer be deriuatiue, E. H.
A Table, contayning all the seue∣rall Epistles in this Booke. Of State and Seriousnesse. AN Epistle exhortary from one enemy to an∣other for pacifying of sedition. I. An Epistle for the calling in of any supreame Officer to answere wrongs done. II. An Epistle of counsayle to a man of place, being determi∣ned to giue ouer the world. III. A potent for the lodging of a band of Souldiers. IIII. A potent for raising a Company to march into present ser∣uice. V. A Letter to countermnd commandements. VI. A Letter of vvarrant to put a Captaine into pay. VII. A Letter to a Countie, for placing of a Muster-master or any other Officer. VIII. An Epistle of consent for confirming any Officer in his place. IX. Chartels or Challnges. An honourable Challenge from one that commeth to see the warres, and would trie his owne vallour. X. An answere to the same. XI. An other Challenge of the same nature. XII. An answere to the same. XIII. A Challenge of the same nature, but proceeding from an angry enemy. XIIII. An answere to the same. XV A challenge which may passe betweene Kings. XVI. A challenge from an inferiour to his equall, hauing done a superiour iniury. XVII.
A challenge from an Inferiour, hauing wrong of a Supe∣riour. XVIII. A generall Challenge where the wrong is not doubtfull. IX. A Challenge conditionall. XX. An answere thereunto, with a turning backe of the iniurie. XXI. A Challenge of an vnworthy nature, and such as Gentle∣men should not imitate. XXII. An answere like the Challenge, & both vnworthy. XXIII. A oolish Challenge without ground. XXIIII. An answere suteable to the Challenge. XXV. An answere to a Challenge where the lye is giuen to a ge∣nerall knowne truth, and so the defendant not tyed to the tryall of the sword. XXVI. A reply to the answere, and the field vrged vpon caell. XXVII. An answere to the call, and the field auoyded. XXVIII. An answere to a Challenge from a Seruant to a Freeman. XXIX. A generall answere to any sufficient Challenge. XXX. Loue-Letters, Accomplements, and Mrriments. An Epistle to a Father which hindereth his daughter of her choyse. XXXI. An Epistle from a Gentlewoman to her Guardian that vvithstands her choyse in loue. XXXII An answere to the two former Epistles. XXXIII. A generall Epistle for two louers. XXXIIII. A blunt Epistle from any honest affection. XXXV. An extreame amorou Epistle. XXXVI. Another of like nature, but not so violent. XXXVII. An answere negatiue to any amorous Letter. XXXVIII. An answere affirmatiue with some doubt. XXXIX. An answe affirmatiue when all parts are pleased. XL.
An Epistle of Loue from a plaine Country man to his e∣quall. XLI. An answere of deniall. XLII. An answere of consent. XLIII. An amorous Epistle of an old man to a yong maid. XLIIII An answere thereunto. XLV. A generall Epistle accomplementall betweene any two friends. XLVI. An Epistle without accomplement. XLVII. An Epistle for procuring the Order of Knight-hood. XLVIII. An Epistle complementory, to a man of eminence going into the warres, in which he preferreth a Souldier or ser∣uant vnto him. XLIX. A Letter from one in prison to his friend for reliefe▪ L. A merry-mad Letter in Skeltons rime, from one Poet to an∣other. LI. A merry Letter from an Officer of the twelue dayes, to a Lord of Christmas. LII. An Epistle of aduise to a freind. LIII. A merry mad Letter to a merry mad wench, chaste and in∣genious. LIIII. An answere to the same, in the same kinde. LV. FINIS.
