18020 99838093 2452
The foure wayes to Sion. I. The reward of Mercie. MATH. 5.7. Blessed are the mercifull: for they shall obtaine mercie. II. The praise of Purity. MATH 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see GOD. III. The Crowne of Peace and Concord. MATH 5.9. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the Children of God. IV. The honour of Obedience. 1. PET. 2.7. Feare God: and honour the King.
Quadrivium SIONIS OR The foure Wayes TO SION by John Monlas Mr. of Arts LONDON Printed by Augustine Mathewes. 1633.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, (AND HIS singular good Lord) EDVVARD, Earle of Dorset, Lord Chamberlaine to the Queene, Lord Lieutenant of his Majesties Counties, of Sussex and Middlesex: One of the Lords of his Ma∣jesties most Honourable Privie Councell, and Knight of the most Illustrious Order of the arter. RIGHT HONOVRABLE: THis Pilgrime of Sion, having beene beaten with the stormes and tempests of a long persecu∣tion beyond the Seas, after hee had learnt the sweetnesse, and tasted the goodnesse and Debonayritie, which makes your Nation and Nobility of England honourable, and recommendable to all the foure corners of the Vniverse, hee is at last arrived in your Ports and Harbours, to shelter him∣selfe from the waves and windes, which so
cruelly had beaten and assayled him, as they would not permit him, either to feede, or rest. But casting anchor here in your Harbours, I finde that Fame hath infinitely wronged her selfe, in not having sufficiently discoursed, and published the excellencie of your goodnesse and merits: Shee seemes to be sparing of your pray∣ses, which are so justly due to you; For Ex∣perience hath now made mee know a thousand times more therof, thē heretofore I heard or un∣derstood, because I find so much benignity and goodnesse among you, and especially your Ho∣nours house, that I should eteeme my selfe to be guilty of a base ingrtitude, if I consecrated not the remaynder of my dayes to the honour of your service and commands; For I confesse, that this small Present, which I now present and proffer you, cannot counter vaile or equa∣lize those sublime favours; whereby you have eternally made me your debter. Thse Philosophers, which entreat and dis∣course of naturall causes, doe affirme, That the Sunne which makes the Raynebowe in the firmament, by the darting and defusion of his rayes, in a watry clowd disposed to receive it;
doth there forme and ingender this diversity of colours so pleasing to our sight. Your Ho∣nour (my good Lord) is the Sunne of my hap∣pinesse, and I am this clowd covered with the rayes of your favours, which makes all the world admire in me, the greatnesse of your Ge∣nerosity, and the excellencie of your goodnes. But herein (notwithstanding) consists not my satisfaction, but rather your honour and glory, and as I desire to publish that, so I like∣wise desire to finde this; For I cannot live contented, if I made not a publique acknow∣ledgement of those many favours, whereby you have perfectly purchased and made me yours, and this Confession consisteth in the oath of fidelity and obedience, which I have sworne to the honour of your service, and to testifie the the immortality of my vowes, wherein with all possible humility I present you my selfe, and this small Booke to your Honours feete; A worke proportionable to my weakenesse, but meerely disproportionable to your Greatnesse. If I am any way guilty herein, your good∣nesse is the true cause thereof; in regard it makes me beleeve that you will rather excuse
my zeale, then accuse or condemne my pre∣sumption▪ and I doe promise my selfe this hope, and flatter my selfe with this confidence, that your Honour will partly excuse this worke of mine, if it be not accuratly or delicately po∣lished, and that the will remayning where the power wants, is free and current payment with great and generous spirits. Some perchance may affirme and say, that I have discoursed & treated those Matters with too much simplicity, which indeede is my onely intent and designe. Because my text and mat∣ter do necessarily oblige and tye me thereunto, as also in regard I ever finde the easiest way to be the best, for that the thornes of Studie and Schollership, doe but ingage and ingulph our Witts in the labyrinth of insupportable length and languishment, and the which most com∣monly when wee have all done and ranne tho∣rowe, wee in the end finde but a Minotaur of doubts, and a pensive melancholy anxietie which devoures them. My Lord, I have no other designe or ambition in this my Dedicati∣on, but to pay this tribute to your Honour, ho∣ping that your charities will cover my defects,
and your goodnesse over-vayle and pardon my weakenesse and imperfections. And my Lord, it is with all manner of right and reason, that I consecrate and inscribe this small Worke of mine to your Honour, and place your Honourable name in the Frontispice thereof, as a bright Phare and relucent torch, which shall communicate and lend its lustre and light, to make it see and salute the world. And so my good Lord, I will seeke my de∣lights in the honour of your service; my incli∣nations shall have no other centre, but the exe∣cution of your commaunds. My vowes and prayers shall bee incessantly powred forth for your prosperities; and my Ambition shall ne∣ver flye or soare higher, then to conserue the honour of your favours, and to be both to your Honour, and to the young Noblemen your Sonnes, Your most humble, and truly devoted Servant, IOHN MONLAS.
The first Way to Sion. THE REVVARD OF MERCIE. MATH. 5.7. Blssed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercie. THat which in men chan∣geth Reason, courtesie, and humanitie, into a wilde, fierce, and brutish nature, and which makes them lesse pittifull then Lyons, and more to be feared then Tygers, is crueltie; that terrible vice the mother of cowardize, the spring of disasters, and the death of innocencie. For after a Coward hath once tasted of blood, he delights in no other spectacle. It is the cause of mischiefes, and of so ma∣nie fatall and mournefull accidents; for there
being a naturall Antipathy betweene that vice, and reason, shee expells reason; and therefore will not hearken unto her, in her furious, vio∣lent, and suddaine counsels. In a word, it is the death of innocencie, for to satisfie her bloody appetite, shee spareth nei∣ther age, nor sexe, but upon the altar of her fu∣rious and brutish passion, sacrificeth as well the just, as the guilty, and would not spare her selfe, if shee feared not the selfe same paines and tor∣ments, which she inflicts on others. Now this vice is detested by noble spirits and generous soules, is abhorred by Angels, and in great abomination to God himselfe; so by the law of contraries, mercie must be the sub∣ject▪ and royall field, where we must abundantly reape the honour of men, the love of Angels, the graces and blessings of our heavenly Father, then must mercy be practised by men, admired by Angels, and bee delightfull to God, and therefore we see in our Text, that the beloved Sonne of eternity it selfe Iesus Christ our Savi∣our, to perfect his Apostles in the way of salva∣tion, saith to them in generall, Blessed are the mercifull, &c. As if hee had said, I doe much hate and ab∣horre cruelty, that I desire also that you that are my Disciples, should expell and banish it quite from your hearts, and thoughts, and in her roome to admit and entertaine mercy, that heavenly vertue, which I both esteeme deerely, and love, and respect perfectly.
You must therefore practise this eternally praise-worthy vertue, if you will be blessed; for it is impossible to get into my Fathers fa∣vour, if you be not furnished and armed with mercie. You cannot ascend to the top of felicity, be∣fore you have left sinne, this heave and intole∣rable burthen, I say, before you have received pardon, and absolution for your faults, which you can never obtaine, before you have for∣given your brethren their offences; before you have shewed your selves favourable and wil¦ling to assist them; In a word, before you have exended and practised on them all sorts of mildnesse, clemencie, and meekenesse, which they shall stand in neede of, for I say vnto you, . Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercie. We reade words like unto these, Luke 6.36. Be yee mercifull, as your Father is mercifull: And againe after, forgive and it shall be forgiven unto you; give and it shall be given unto you: And Eccl. 4. Be mercifull to the Orphans, be unto them a fa∣ther, and to their mothers a husband, and then yee shall be the obedient sonnes of the most high, who will yet more liberally distribute unto you his great mer∣cie: And Pro. 11. The soule that doth good, shall be exceedingly filled and replenished. It is a principle flowing from our nature, that we must not doe to another what we would not have done to our selves, from which principle is derived that golden sentence of Christ. Luk. 6.
With what measure you mete, it shall be againe mea∣sured unto you. And Iames 2. Condemnation with∣out mercie shall fall on them that have not used mer∣cie, and mercie is glorified against condemnation. Blessed then are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercie. In which words by Gods assistance, which wee to this end implore, wee will consider, 1. Who be these mercifull. And 2. The reason why they are termed blessed. And first, let us heare the sacred voyce of the eternall Sonne of God, the Redeemer of our soules, saying in the first part of our Text, Blessed are the mercifull, as if he had said, O how great and altogether incomparable, and incom∣prehensible are the favours, blessings, and gra∣ces laid up for them that shall practise the works of mercie, they shall be Citizens of heaven, the Angels companions, and shall eternally enjoy and ossesse in heaven, those batitudes which eye hath not seene, eare hath not heard, and that are not entred into the heart of man; and this is the recompence that God hath prepared for them which practise mercie. Now that we may the better know the defi∣nition of this word, Mercifull, which is the con∣crete, or conjoyned, we will firt consider it in its abstract, as the Philosophers speake, to wit, Mecie, which is commonly defined to be, A hearty griefe▪ or a sorrow, for anothers miserie, whom we assist and helpe with all our power. The object of it, is, the miserie and affliction
of other, which makes her produce these graci∣ous and pittifull effects, because shee is unable to behold the sore, without applying the re∣medie. God being one, cannot suffer any kinde of division, there be no qualities nor accidents in him, but all things are essentiall in him, the Scripture to represent him unto us, doth de∣scribe him all justice, and all mercie, so by rea∣son of the fore-going maxime, wee cannot say, that mercie is one of his parts, seeing that being one, hee is indivisible; but wee will more pro∣perly say, that he is Mercie it selfe, and therefore the faithfull that shall bee mercifull, that shall practise the works of charity, of clemencie, and meekenesse, may undoubtedly beleeve that they are the sonnes of the most high, who hath com∣municated unto them a ray or sparke of his insi∣nite grace, and mercie, that so they may there∣by resplend and shine with the same light with their heavenly Father, tread upon his steps, and be made like him as much as may be, Be merci∣full (saith Iesus Christ) as your heavenly Father is mercifull, Luke 6.36. Mercie, said an ancient Doctor, est fidei orna∣mentum, it is the ornament of faith, for faith sheweth her selfe by her fruits, which are pious and charitable works, and as trees are never so faire to behold, as when they are loaden and covered with fruits; so faith never appeareth so glorious, as when she is adorned and crow∣ned with the sweet and delightfull fruites of
mercie; Hee called it againe slutis domicilium, the retreate and lodging of salvation, bcause that when sinners shall be called to give account of their actions before God, when God shall aske them, the reason of their administration, as that Lord in the Gospell, then the shortest and safest remedie, is to flye to his mercie, and to aske him forgivenesse. Salomon that wise King, counselleth us to make a carcanet of mercie, to put it about our necke, and that in this habit and ornament wee shall make the accesse of heaven free to our selves, finding grace before God, and men: and indeed it is one of the most pretious stones, and that is fit to beautifie and adorne the crowne of perfection it selfe. Wee will therefore compare it to the Op∣pall stone Irius, which represents the same co∣lours that appeare in the Raine-bowe, so the mercifull makes all sorts of graces and blessings to shine upon his forehead, and to appeare in his actions; this Oppall stone Irius is greene, red, and white, the greene colour represents unto us that Hope which we have to finde grace before the soveraigne Iudge of our soules and bodies; The red colour represents unto us the pure blood of Christ, shed upon the Crosse, to obtaine this grace for us, she also denoteth unto us the rednesse of our sinnes, according to the Prophets phrase, Though our sinnes were as red as scarlet, they shall be made as white as snowe, Isa. 1.18. and the white colour figureth unto us the divine
justice, covered, nd overcome by the white∣nesse of his mercie, as it is noted in the Raine∣bow▪ that his white colour covereth, and ex∣ceedeth the red if faire weather to be follow; They marke besides that this Oppall easeth the paines and labours of women with childe, so mercie lighteneth much the miseie and griefe of the afflicted. We will here make no dificulty to ue in this place the fabulous inventions of the Poets, fol∣lowing the example of Salomon, who tooke of Hiram (though a Pagan) all the wood, and stones needfull for the building of the temple. They usually describe Mercury (the messen∣ger of the imaginary Gods) with a wand in his hand, composed of hornes of plenty, wreathed with serpents, they also give him wings, with which he with incredible celerity, flyes whe∣ther soever he is sent. In this fable wee see a remarkable morall, which is, that it is a symbole of the Mercifull, who quickly and without delay takes pitie of the miserie of others, according to this axiome, no lesse common then true, Bis dat, qui cito dat, he giveth twice, that giveth speedily. Secondly, he lives in all plnty and abundance, because, that God blesseth him in all his goods, as the Psalmist speaketh, Hee hath given largely to the poore, his righteousnesse remaineth for ever, his horne shall be exalted in glory, and he shall have whereof to lend, all the dayes o his life. Psal. 112.9. Th serpent useth once a yeare to cast off his
skinne, to assume another, that thereby he may be more healthfull and faire; so those who are mercifull leave, and cast off their wealth and substance, in favour of them that need it, that so they may appeare faire in the eye of the most high, give your almes, and all things shall bee cleane vnto you, putting off the old man. But that we may walke in the sacred pathes of the holy Scripture, let us compare Mercie to the Serpentine rod of Moses, that faithfull ser∣vant of God, for if this had done many miracles in Egypt, that hath done as many wonders in the world: If this was called the finger of God, that is an excellent vertue, that maketh us come neare to God; but contrarily if the rod hath turned the waters into blood, Mercie turneth the blood of wrath into the water of mildnesse, and mansuetude; If that hath caused darknesse, this bringeth light, if that wounds, this cures; In this they agree, that as the one divided the red Sea, to deliver the people from Pharaohs slavery, so the other maketh us passe the red waters of Gods divine justice, to shunne the devils seizing of us, and to come to the Sanctuarie of caelesti∣all goodnesse, according to the sense of the bea∣tiude described in our Text, Blessed are the mer∣cifull, for they shall obtain mercie. O happy and infinitely glorious (therefore) shll those be, that use mercie towards their af∣flicted brethren, who open the bosome of libe∣rality, and reach out the hands of goodnesse and compassion, to draw them to them, there and
thereby to shelter them, from the miseries and calamities that compasse them about; for when the soveraigne Iudge of our soules and bodies, shll come to keepe his Assises, when hee I say shall come accompanied with thousand milli∣ons of Angels, who are the Heraulds and great Officers of his divine Iustice, when heaven and earth shall shake before his face, when all the elements, and all the creatures together shall quake for feare in his presence, when hee shall judge by an eternall decree the living and the dead, among all the most grievous and notable reproaches whereuto the wicked shall be sub∣ject, that of cruelty shall be the most remark∣able, he will not then so much taxe them of ha∣ving beene theeves, drunkards, murtherers, for∣nicators, as of not having beene pitifull to the poore and needie; Math. 25.42. Goe (will he say) ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the deuill and his angels, for I was hungry, and ye gave me not to ate, I was thirstie, and ye gave m no drinke, I was naked, and you clothed me not, I was in prison, and ye visited me not. But contrariwise hee will alter his voyce, when speaking to his Elect, with a sweet, smi∣ling, and gracious contenance, hee will pro∣nounce this favourable sentence of congratula∣tion, Math. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, possesse the inheritance prepared for you before the foundation of the world, for I was ungrie, and ye gave mee to eate: I was thirstie, and you gave mee drinke: I was naked, and you have cloathed
mee: I was in prison, and you have visited mee. The end, and center of the law of God, in the second Table, is this, Thou shalt love thy neighbours as thy selfe: in these few words, wee see all the offices, all the duties, and all the ser∣vices which we owe to our neighbour, to wit, to love him as we love our selves, for as no man is so unnaturall (unlesse hee hath lost the use of reason, and be ready to precipitate himselfe in∣to despaire) that would in his neede, for his good, refuse himselfe any thing that shuld be in his power: so likewise, let us represent to our selues, that our neighbour is our other selfe, and that to refuse him any needfull thing, yea, not to prevent him in his wants and incommo∣diies, is a sinne in him that is infected with it, which makes him unworthy to be compared or placed among the Pagans and Infidels, for they helpe one anoher with all their might: but with a great deale of reason and justice we may say, hat he is farre worse then a brute beast, for we may obserue and marke, that those of th same kinde helpe, and succour one another; As we read in Plinie, that when a great and heavie Elephant is fallen, being for his heavinesse not able to rise, sing specially they have no joynts in their legges, his fellowes doe then assemble and raise him up with their snows. It is noted, that when Stagges intend to swimme over some swift River, they gather themslues together; and because their heads laden with such great hornes, would make them
sinke, they lay them on the hinder parts the one of the other, and because the foremost hath no place to leane his upon, every one in his turne supplieth that place, and what should wee not doe although we had no naturall affection; would not the very beasts accuse us of crelty, and barbarousnesse, if being all to passe toge∣ther the vast and deepe Ocean of this tempstu∣ous life, in hope once to arrive in the delightfull Haven of salvation; If, I say, feeling our heads laden with so many miseries, imperfections, and calamities, we did not mercifully assist and ease one another, and so wee should not accomplish the Apostles command, saying, Beare ye one anothers burthens, that you may fulfill the law of Christ. St. Chrysostome with his golden mouth as his name importeth) tells us in generall, that all men represent unto us but one body, whereof the greatest and most honourable are like th braine, the eyes, the mouth, and the eares, and that so orderly according to their dignities, they possesse and take their place; and neverthelese, there is so great an affinity betweene all thse different members, that they all helpe and suc∣cour one another; the eye helpeth the foot, and the foot serveth the eye; the mouth is service∣able to the hand, and the hand to the mouth; and besides, that experience teacheth us, that if there be the least ach in the head, the face be∣commeth pale, the eyes often times flow with teares, and all the other members participate of
her paines, according to the proverb, Quando caput dolet, caetera membra aolent. If the foot chance to tread upon a thorne, and to be pricked by it, the eye though farre distant seekes pre∣sently the place offended; the backe stoopes, the hands runne to the place, and all the mem∣bers in generall are attentive and carefull of the easing hereof: Alas! let us remember that wee are members of the same body, that wee owe our helpe and assistance one to another; when we see any in affliction among us, let us not stay so much to know the cause of his griefe, but that we may runne to apply the remedy to it, and to helpe him out of his wants and incommodities, and then by these actions w shall testifie, that we are the children of God, who saith, Math. 10.42. That if we give to the poore, a glasse of cold wa∣ter in his name, hee will hold it as done to himselfe, so much doth hee delight in the holy and pious workes of mercie: Blessed (saith hee) are the mercifull. Mercie is compared to a tree, planted in the fruitfull ground of the hearts of the faithfull, that is watered by the wholesome waters of blessing and grace, which the holy Ghost con∣tinually distilleth thereon, and upon which the Sunne of righteousnesse continually shineth, that so at all times he may beare abundantly the gra∣cious and delectable fruits of charity, compassi∣on, and meekenesse. This tree is divided into three branches, which we see is set forth unto us, Luke 6. where∣of
of the first sheweth us, that wee must not rashly judge of our neighbour, but that wee judge of him charitably. The second teacheth us, that we must libe∣rally distibute, and dispose of our faculties in favour of the needy, that thereby wee must par∣take of their miserie, and sigh with them in their afflictions. The third and last branch, is, to forgive our enemies, and cast away from us all desire of re∣venge. Saint Luke in the Chapter before cited, after hee had exhorted us to bee mercifull, as our heavenly Father is mercifull, divideth this mer∣cie into three kindes, as we have already shewed, saying, first, 1 Iudge not, and ye shall not be judged. 2 Give, and it shall be given unto you. 3 Love your enemies, and ye shall be the children of the most high, for he is kinde unto the unkinde, and to the wiked. Let us a while attentively consider the three offices and duties of the mercifull, but rather let us practise them heartily, that we may be re∣compensed with the felicity promised unto us. Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine merie. The corruption of this age is come to that height, that it seemeth that the best discourse that men can finde, is to speake ill of one, to de∣tract rom another, & to judge so hardly of the best actions, that one might think them voyd of
reason, and of the feare of God, and to be par∣takers with the devill, in vexing and slandering the life of those, who are good examples to all, and the subjct f thaksgiving to all them that feare the Lord; and therefore the holy Ghost admonisheth u in this first kinde of mercie not to be rash in our judgements, least we suffer the paines, and incure the rigours of Talions law. . Iudge not, that ye be not judged. Math. 7.1. Wee must then observe these maximes in judging the actions of others, that if they be manifestly good, wee praise and imitate them, that those that did them may be encouraged to continue, and that the wicked leaving their wic∣ked wayes, may follow them, for examples move more then rules or precepts. If in all likelihood they may bee thought evill, neverthelesse we must practise and con∣ferre on them the works of charity, and construe them favourably, seeing that it is God alone who searcheth the hearts, and who trieth the reynes and thoughts, and who is onely able to judge of our good, or bad intentions, for now Satan transformeth himselfe into an Angell of light, and hypocrites (his imitatours) doe so perfectly counterfeit the just, that it is altoge∣ther impossible to discerne truth from falshood, Satan hath made them so deceiptfully crafty. On the other side, the just doe sometimes commit actions, which seeme to be evill, and notwithstanding are in themselues very good,
though they doe not appeare to bee such, as when Christ was found alone speaking with the Samaritane, but it was to teach her the way of Salvation. When hee delighted in the kisses of Mary Magdalene, who was so impudent in her life, and mannes, in so much that the Pharisie that had invited him was offended at it, yet the end and the answer which Christ gave them made them thinke otherwise, when speaking to the Pharisie, he said, Ioh. 11.2.12.3. Simon, seest thou this wo∣man? I entered into thine house, and thou gavest mee no water to wash my feete, but shee hath washed my feete with teares, and wiped them with the haires of her head. Thou gavest me no kisse, but shee since the time I came in hath not ceased to kisse my feete. Thou diddest not annoint my head with oyle, but shee hath annointed my feete with pretious oyntment. Where∣fore I say unto the many sinnes are forgiven her, for shee loved much, to whom a little is forgiven, he doth love a little. And he said unto her, thy sinnes are for∣given thee, Luke 7.44, &c. Iesus Christ (take this example more) did of∣ten eat with Publicans and sinners, but it was purposely to convert them, and yet the Scribes and Pharisies that envied him, did not interpret it so, for they called him a glutton, a wine bib∣ber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, Math. 11.19. Behold how the best and wholesomest meates are converted into ill humors by ill dis∣posed stomacks, whence comes the proverb, Ictericis omnia videntur esse slavia, all things seeme
yellow to them that have the Iaundize, the wic∣ked measure other by themselues, and thinke that all imitate them in doing ill. The second branch of this divine tree, is, , Give, and it shall be given un∣to you, that is, that Iesus Christ by these words exhorteth us, to distribute freely, and liberally of our meanes to the poore, assuring us to hold it as done to himselfe, and that he will repay it a thousand fold unto us, by giving s eternall life. Make you friends, saith hee, Luke 16.9. with the riches of iniquity, that when ye shall want, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Iesus Christ Math. 19.21. speakes thus to a young man, that asked him what he should doe to inherite eternall life, after he had bidden him keepe the commandements, he saith moreover unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, goe sell all that thou hast, and give it to the poore, and then thou shalt have treasure in heaven. One of the chiefest lawes which God com∣manded and recommended to his people Israel, was to be mercifull to the poore, and needy, as we reade Deut. 15.7. If one of thy brethren with thee be poore, within any of the gates of thy land, thou shalt not harden thine heart against him, nor shut thy hand rom thy poore brother, but thou shalt open thine hand unto him, and shalt lend him sufficient to su∣staine his needs and wants, and let it not grieve thine heart to give it unto him, for because of this the Lord thy God shall blesse thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine hand to. And Prou. 28.27. Hee
that giveth unto the poore shall not lacke, but hee that hideth and shutteth his eyes from him, shall have ma∣ny cuses. It is a wonder to see and behold the admi∣rable effects, and workes of the Almighty, that which commonly makes those to abound in wealth, that bestowe largely upon the poore, like a good spring or fountaine, which the more it is emptied, the more it overflowes in the excellencie of her waters; so the more the fithfull gives to the poore, the more God sendeth his graces and blessings upon his wealth, so that the almes which hee gives are like seede fallen into good ground, which yeeldeth a hun∣dred for one. It is like a little piece of leaven among a great deale of dowe, which raiseth, and maketh it to encrease, and therefore the Wiseman exhorteth us, to give the first of our fruits to the poore, and that the rest will make our Barnes to overflow with plenty and abundance. The widdow of Sarephta, 1 Kings 17. making a Cake for the Prophet Elijah, with a little meale and some few drops of oyle, which onely were left unto her in that extreame famine, desiring rather to obey the Prophet, then to satisfie her owne hunger, and that of her owne sonne: but how can we produce this example without ad∣miring this her incomparable charity, to see the love of her selfe, the naturall affection shee bare to her deare, onely, and welbeloved child, give place to the pittie and compassion shee had a
Stranger, for the Prophet asking her some∣thing to eate, shee answered, I have but a little oyle, and a little meale, which my sonne and I will eate, and after wee shall die, shewing unto us, that the hopes of recovering any else-where would be vaie, and yet mercie passeth through all these difficulties, shee makes a Cake for the Prophet; but where is the ecompence? it fol∣loweth immediatly, as the shadow the body, that is, that during that extreame famine, shee wanted no meale, and her oyle was never dried up. Mercifull effects are commonly followed by those which are miraculous; as we have already shewed, and as we could yet more largely shew, if wee did not feare to be too tedious; but let us see how God delighteth so much in mercie, that besides that hee rewardeth it in this world with many temporall blessings, hee doth also showre downe on the mercifull, his ternall and spirituall graces. In the 29. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, Lay up thy treasure according to the commanement of the most high, and it shall be more profitable to thee then gold, shu up mercie in thy Cabinets, and it will draw thee out of all affliction, the bounty of every one bing shut up in him, a in a purse shall conserue his grace, as the apple of the eye, and at the end will give the reward unto very one. And Dan. 4. The Pro∣phet speaketh thus to Nabuchadonosor the King, Dan. 4.27▪ O King, take my counsell, breake off thy sinnes by iustice, and thy iniquities by being merci∣full
unto the poore. And Luke 11.41. Give almes of what you have, and behold all things shall be cleane unto you. But because many seeke precautions, going about to practise the workes of charity, I will give my opinion upon this matter, that is, that we must not be like Martha, curious to bee in∣formed of so many things, but as Iesus Christ, before whom there is no regard of persons, but maketh his Sun equally to shine both on the just, and on the unjust, and maketh his raine to fall upon the good and bad, the Sunne shineth as well upon mud and dirt as upon Roses on the valleyes, as on the mountaines; the raine fal∣leth as well upon the rocks and sands, as upon the good and fertile ground: so the mercifull wheresoever he seeth any calamity, he partaketh of it, and applieth the beft remedie to it that possibly he can. Intention is the levell and square wherewith all our actions are measured. It is the rule to measure them; the touchstone to know their value: Havens and Harbours receive as well the broken and torne pieces of a shipwrack, as a great and rich lading in a good vessell; the earth which is the mother and cradle of all mortall men, receiveth equally Lazarus, and Dives, Irus, and Cyrus, Diogenes, and Alexander. So the mercifull must alwayes propose this object to himselfe, to obey Gods Commande∣ment, in assisting the poore, and in comforting and consolating the afflicted, without searching
further if he be worthy or not of your compassi∣ons, if it be his lazinesse, or his folly that have made him miserable; these things are not to be examined by you, it belongeth to God to judge of it, and to you to obey Gods holy ordi∣nances. Iesus Christ being here on earth, exercised his charity on all those that asked it of him: He fed severall times great multitudes: Hee healed the sicke: He made the lame walke, the blinde see, and that at the first request, without further enquiring. Mercie is the banke and haven of miserie, if thou receive the unworthy, after thou shalt en∣tertaine the worthy: Abraham making an Hos∣pitall of his tent, received therein all Strangers indifferently that came to him; and in practising this courteous and bountifull hospitality, hee received Angels into his house: St. Paul, Heb. 13. biddeth us forget not hospitality, for some have lodged Angels, not knowing it. When thine ene∣mie is hungry, give him to eate, and to him that asketh give, saith Christ. Saint Math Chap. 4. The devill seeing that Christ was hungry, asked him if hee were the Sonne of God: you likewise when you see the poore languishing and starving at your doores, succour him quickly, and aske him not if he be the child of God, if he be an honest man and worthy of your almes, because that Christ saith, Math. 10.41. He that receiveth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward.
The good Tobias finding any ofhis brethren lying dead in the middest of the streetes, used to rise from his bed, and left his meales to come and burie him. Lot stayeth very late at the gates of Sodome, to receive and entertaine into his house poore Strangers, yea, defendeth them valiantly, and lovingly against the Sodomites rage and vio∣lence. From all these examples we must draw this wholesome doctrine, That there is no vertue that makes us so conformable and delightfull to our heavenly Father, as Mercie, and therefore that wee beare not wrongfully the title of the sonnes of God, let us extend our liberalities to the poore; Let us give them cheerefully, and without grudging or enquiring, the first and best of our almes deedes, let us not stay to bee troubled with their cries. The Israelitish women at the first asking of Aaron dispoiled themselues of their Rings, Car∣canets, and Iewels to make that Idoll, the gol∣den Calfe, Exod. 32. and should wee be abl to stop our eares, and not to heare those pittifull and lamentable cries of Christ, speaking by the mouthes of the poore, use charity, give and it shall be given unto you: those almes or benefits which are done either by importunity, or by force, or for shame, deserue not the name of ercie: thinke you that it was a great favour which the wicked and malicious Iewes did to Christ, to give him gall and vineger to drinke,
in the agony of his Passion, when hee pronoun∣ced these grievous words; I am dry, those that give almes for spight, to be rid of the poore, for griefe, or for shame, if they commit not an equll malice, they commit a like offence. What then is that Tyger, and Dragon-like couage, tempered in the water of eagernes, and cuelty, that is not penetrable to the shot of thse powerfull reasons, who is so unnaturall as to behold with dry eyes a poore Christian lan∣guishing for hunger, starved with cold, and full of wounds, and doth not give him bread to eat, calleth him not into his house to warme him; and that like the Samariane, powreth not oyle into his wounds, what Adamantine heart is so hardned, as not to open and cleave with griefe, at the object of such pittifull spctacles, and sights. There be some that take the Etymologie of Miscricordia, Mercie, from that it makes the hearts of men miserable, by beholding the mi∣serie of others, and that with as much tuth, as reason, for the truly mercifull feeleth in him∣selfe all the miseries of ohers, which was it that drew so many teares out of Heraclitus his eyes, being able to behold nothing on earth, but what was lamentably miserable. Saint Paul exhorteth us, Rom. 12.15. o weepe with them that weepe, and to be of like affection one towards another. Good Iob in his complaints, Chap. 30.25. said, Did not I weepe with him that was in trouble,
wa not my soule in heavinesse for the poore? It is one of the most pious and generous acti∣ons of the soule, to take upon her the afflictions of others, and to ease them of them: It is the sacrifice the most delightfull, with which the Lord is pleased, they are Iremiahs ragges, but they draw us from the Cave of sinne, from the pit of iniquity; it is the dry rock of the moun∣taine of Horeb, from whence flowes aboundantly the wholesome waters of grace, and blessing. In a word, it is a Iacobs ladder, by the which the Angels of consolations and divine favours descend upon us, by the which our faith, our love and affection ascend up to Christ, who stayeth for us on the top, to say unto us, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepa∣red for you, before the foundation of the world. And will not therefore our hope to heare those sweet and gracious words, oblige us to comfort and consolate the afflicted, and with our means to ease and refresh the poore and needie, since those are actions so pleasing & ac∣ceptable to God, that S. August. saith, That cha∣rity towards the poore, was a second Baptisme, bcause, that as the water of baptisme, is a sacred sige unto us, that the fire of originall sinne is exinguished in our soules: so pitie and com∣passion of the afflicted, is an undoubted marke that God hath powred out the sacred wates of his grace and forgivenesse, upon the burning coales of our transgressions to quench them. Saint Chrysostome calles it the friend of God,
that obtaineth of him all she asketh, shee setteth prisoners at liberty, recalls the banished, and implores and obtaines grace for the condem∣ned; the hand of the poore is the purse of God, it is the Altar whereon wee leave our gifts, to goe and reconcile our selues to our eldest bro∣ther Iesus Christ our Saviour, whom the wic∣kednesse of our sinnes, did cruelly fixe and naile to the Crosse. Having sufficiently confidered the two first branches of mercie, let us now behold the third branch of this divine plant which Saint Luke hath perfectly taught us, saying, . Love your enemies, and ye shall be the children of the most high, Math. 5.44. Luk. 6.27. Luk. 3.24. for hee is kinde unto the unkinde, and to the evill. And indeed this part of mercie doth greatly beautifie, and make glo∣rious her body; for her two sisters, Pitie in gi∣ving, and Compassion in condoling, are actions which humanity cannot refuse, to the lamentable cries of the languishing, to the sad and sorrow∣full objects of poore and miserable men, but must move your hearts were they of steele, and draw teares from your eyes, though they were of marble. But to forgive our enemies, is to vanquish and overcome our selues, it is a nearer approach∣ing to the divine nature, then to the humane. All Histories are full of charitable actions of men towards their neighbours, and without taking them out of Scripture, the examples are
(thankes be to God) usually to be seene, but to forgive our enemies, not to annoy them when it is in our power, is to be enlightned by the sa∣cred presence of the holy Ghost, to be regene∣rated by his grace, to bee fully possessed of mercy. Moses (that great servant of God) who had beheld him face to face, that had seene him practise this rare and excellent vertue, towards the people of Israel, falling into Idolatry; Hee that had mediated for them, speaking to God after this manner: O Lord what will thy ene∣mies say, that thou hast brought thy people out of Egypt, by a strong hand and stretched out arme, to kill them in the wildernesse, seeing that thou couldest not bring them into the land which thou diddest promise them, and himselfe notwithstanding is carried away by this passion of revenge, when hee made the earth open and swallow vp alive Core, Dathan, and Abiram, with their families, though it bee not mentio∣ned that they had participated in the murmu∣ring of their heads; yea, he did not spare Mary his owne sister, whom he covered with lepro∣sie. Neither is it to the purpose to say that it was in Gods cause that hee used this revenge, that is vallable in putting Nadab and Abihu to death, because they had violated the divine or∣dinance; God forbid that I should excuse their fault, but I desire onely to shew, that though Moses were so holy a man, yet hee had some touch of humane weakenesse.
But in this circumstance what shall wee say of David, a man after Gods owne heart, that so often curseth his enemies, that giveth charge to Saomon his sonne, to revenge him of the inju∣ries, and curses which Shimhi had spoken against him, as he fled from before Absalom. What greater Prophet then Elijah, never∣thelesse because two of Achazias Captaines were gone to seeke him to take him, and bring him to the King, as hee had commanded them, he made the fire fall downe from heaven, which consumed them with their fifties. And the Apostles themselues having not beene well received in a certaine place, said to Christ, Wilt thou that we make fire fall from heauen, upon that Citie? but Iesus diverted and hindered them. Wee produce all these examples not to imi∣tate, but to shunne them, and thereby to make it appeare that wee must not revenge our selues when wee can doe it, but rather to doe good to our enemies, when they have done us hurt, is to make our selues perfect in this excellent ver∣tue of Mercy. It is to becom conformable to the Saviour and Redeemer of our soules, who see∣ing and feeling the horrible cruelties of the Iewes againt him, hearing the blasphemies which they pronounced against his divine Ma∣jestie, notwithstanding in stead of revenging himselfe, he prayeth his Father, and crieth out thus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe.
That which made Saint Stephens martirdome the more honourable, is that in the middest of his torments, among a fearefull shower of haile of stones cast against him, hee desireth not God to punish his tormentours, but rather being pos∣sesed with the spirit of mercie, and meekenesse, he prayeth to God for them, herein imitating his good and blessed Master Iesus Christ, say∣ing, Lord impute not this sinne unto them, As wee read Acts 7.60. If Moses in the precedent examples hath bin seene something too much desirous of revenge, we may also reade, that many times he hath for given those that had offended him, yea and hath mediated and prayed to God for them, least hee should have revenged them. David having received innumerable offeces and wrongs of Saul, notwithstanding finding him wearie in the Cave, having him in his bed at his discretion, he forgave him all the injuries and harmes he had made him suffer, saying on∣ly, The Lord is a just Iudge, that will avenge mee o mine enemies, and will render unto me after the ine∣grity of my heart. The Apostles indeed suffered themselues to be carried away by this sweet desire and appe∣tite of revenge, when they would make fire fall from heaven upon that Towne, that had offen∣ded them, but it was because they were fraile and weake men, like us when they fell ito their faults and errours, but they wee soone rectified and raised up againe by the grace of the holy
Ghost; so that at length when any gave them injuries, they rendered none againe, they were whipped and stoned, they were cast into prison, and yet they blessed, and prayed for them that did it, and sought by all meanes to Preach the Gospell unto them, and to shew them the way of salvation: these second examples wee must follow, that we may appeare to be the children of God, Disciples of Christ, and imitatours of his Apostles. This noble and godly action of forgivig our enemies; we must practise, first if we desire that God shall acknowledge us for his children, we must strive to be like him who is the foun∣taine of forgivenesse, who is meekenesse and curtesie it selfe, and nothing but mercie: Se∣condly, wee must pardon others, if wee desire that God shall forgive us, since that is conditio∣nall, which wee aske him, Lord forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us; Now if we doe not forgive men their trespasses, no more will our heavenly Father forgive us. Math. 6.15. For with the same measure that we mete, it shall be also measured unto us againe. And that which must the more oblige us to put off the infected and poysonsome coate of cruelty and revenge, since it is an abomination to God, which he hath prohibited us in so ma∣ny places of Scripture; as Proverb. 20.22. Say not thou, I will recompence evill, but waite upon the Lord, and hee shall save thee. And Rom. 12.19. Dearely beloved avenge not your selues, but give
place unto wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord: if then thy ene∣mie be hungrie, give him to eate, if hee be thirstie, give him drinke, for in so doing, thou shalt heape burning coales upon his head. And Ecclus 28. The Lord will be avenged of him that revenget him∣selfe, and hee will keepe carefully his faults for him: forgive thy neighbour his misdeedes, and when thou shalt pray, thy sines shall be forgiven thee. Shall man keepe his wrath against man, and aske to be cured by the Lord, he will not take pitie of man like to himselfe, and will aske pardon of his sinnes; ince he that is but flesh keepeth his wrath, and asketh forgivenesse to God, who shall obliterate and blot out his sinnes? It is a common saying and proverb, There is nothing so sweet as revenge; but for my part I cannot perceive this sweetnesse, unlesse it bee compared to a well scowred blade of a sword, that pierceth and psseth through easily, but at the same time taketh away our lives, as the Bees that leave their sting where they strike, and with it their life, Animas{que} in vulnere ponunt, so when we revenge our selues, we leave the sting of our wrath in the wounds of our enemie; but wee doe not consider (so blinde are we) that withall we thereby wound our soules to death. Heliodorus tells us of one that said, That death would be sweet and welcome to him, if he knew that his enemie should also die, and of another iealous woman that cryed out, O how delightfull would death be to mee, if I could
fall dead upon the dead bodie of my rivall. Plutarch saith very well, That of all the wild beasts, there is none so savage and cruell, as a man that hath the liberty and power to execute his revenge. But if wee consider it diligently, we shall see, tht this impatience, and not to be able to beare an injurie, is a great infirmitie and weakenesse; but as noble hearts, and generous, ad magnanimous soules, doe scorne and de∣spise wrongs, so doe they also forgive, and for∣get all kindes of revenge. Pericles of all the actions of his life, esteemed this the most remarkable, that hee had never revenged himselfe, for any wrong done unto him. And Phocion being pu to death unjustly, feeling the effcts of that mortall Hemlock, to bring him neare to the last period of his life, re∣commended nothing so much to his sonne as this, that he should forget the memorie of this offence, and that he should never seeke to be re∣venged for it, that in medling with it, he would stay the gods from taking in hand the justice of his cause, who would questionlesse revenge him of this offence. Let us use the same Doctrine, though com∣ming from the prophane mouth of a Pagan, they are neverthelesse of infallible truth, as a Dia∣mond looseth nothing of his value, though it be in the dirt: let us then practise it, and let us remember, that whilest we desire to punish our enemies, wee doe them a great favour, and are
reveng'd of our selues, for the offence which they have done unto us, which would deserue a farre more rigorous labour if wee left it to God; but hee seeing that wee will neither re∣ferre it to his justic, nor to his commaunde∣ments, nor to his promises, being unwilling to endure a companion in any of his works, hee suffereth us to try our uttermost, which is most commonly the cause of our ruine. Let us then breake off this discourse, which would never end, if wee should punctually fol∣low it; and let us remember that revenge is our Masters owne dish, which none can touch with∣out incurring his indignation: And let us (imi∣tating our heavenly Father) forgive our ene∣mies, for if hee should take revenge of all the offences which wee at every moment commit against his sacred Majestie, hee would then re∣duce us to that nothing from whence we came, or would inflict upon us eternall paines and pu∣nishments, since the least offence committed against an infinite goodnesse, deserveth an infi∣nite paine and torment. Let us then follow Saint Lukes admonition, Be mercifull, as your heavenly Father is mercifull; and presently after wee shall heare that blessed recompence, which we shall receive for it, to wit, Blessed are the mer∣cifull, for they shall obtaine mercie. Wee have already shewed how God recom∣penseth the mercifull, yea in this life, with bles∣sings, favours, and graces, spirituall, and tem∣porall, giving unto them a hundred times more
then they have given to the poore, and giving them consolation in their distresse, as they also have suffered with their neighbour in his affli∣ction: But let us consider the third fruit of cha∣ritable workes, which is the highest degree of honour, unto which the mercifull shall ascend, to wit, eternall blessednesse, and withall we will also examine the cause, wherefore the faithfull receive graces spirituall, temporall, and eternall, which doeth clearely enough appeare in our Text, Blessed are the mecifull, for they shall obtaine mercie. The onely and perfect felicity of man both in this life and in that to come, consisteth sim∣ply and soly in the possession of the favour of God, which the wicked, cruell, and impious shall never be partakers of; but only the Saints, the bountifull, and mercifull shall pitch their tets there; the reason why the one are put backe from this infinite good, and that the others shall bee received and cherihed therein for ever is, because the first have lived in cruel∣tie, rigour, and tyrannie, and shall therefore be thus punished; but the second having beene gracious, bountiful, and meeke, they shall ob∣taine mercy, according to that saying of Christ, With what measure you mete, it shall bee measured unto you againe. In these words to obtaine mercie, wee have many very remarkable circumstances, for God will shew himselfe such unto us, as wee shall shew our selues to our neighbours, if wee give
a crumme of bread to the poore languishing at our doores, hee will call us into his royall Pal∣lace; hee will make us sit downe at his Table, he will fill us with the dainties of his house, and will make us drinke abundantly in the rivr of his delights, if wee beare with griefe our neigh∣bours affliction, if wee dresse his wounds, and powre oyle on them; hee will comfort u in our sorrowes, hee will wipe off the teares from our eyes, and will fill our hearts with joy and gladnesse, if wee forgive our brethren their of∣fences, when either maliciously, or through infirmity they have offended us, hee promiseth and assureth us, to be so bountifull and merci∣full to us, that he will drive our sinnes away from before his face; hee will scatter our mis∣deedes like a cloud dispersed by the parching beames of the Sunne, and in this part shall wee finde the center where the fulnesse of our felici∣tie resteth and resideth. This forgivenesse of our sinnes is, that which covereth us from the divine justice, that giveth into our hands the shield of assurance, which is impenetrable by the revenging shot of his just judgements, that maketh us walke voyd of feare towards the throne of grace, and that without the least doubting, for since God is with us, who shall be against us? shall the world, why it is vanquished? shall hell, why it is fettered and shackled? Shall death, why it is dead? shall sinne, why it is prevented and pardoned▪ Fi∣nally, shall the flesh, why it is crucified? Wee
may therefore say and conclude with the Apo∣stle Saint Paul, O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory? now thanks be to God that hath given us victory through his Sonne Iesus Christ. From this word obtaine, wee will also derive and draw this remarkable doctrine, for he pre∣supposeth asking, seeing wee cannot obtaine a thing before wee have demaunded it, which teacheth us our duties towards God, acknow∣ledging our selues poore, weake, and miserable, both in body and soule, subject in body to thou∣sands of sicknesses, weaknesses, and necessities, troubled in minde with a world of businesse, crosses, and afflictions, and so laden in soule with sinnes, misdeedes, and iniquities, that they are more in number then the sand that is on the Sea shore; But the onely remedy to these sick∣nesses is, to have our recourse to Gods mercie, which is the saced anchor of our hopes, the haven of our salvation, and the eternall residence of our incomparable, and incomprehensible fe∣licities. And let us hold for certaine and infallible, that wee shall never bee refused by his sacred goodnesse, which calleth out aloud unto us, Math. 11.8. come unto me all ye that are troubled, nd evie laden, and I will ease you: take my yoake upon you, for it is ight, and ye shall finde rest to your soules; his yoake is nothing else, but the afflicti∣on, weakenesse, and necessity of the poore, that is the yoake he commandeth us to beare, that is to , we ust take off the loade of misery and
calamity from the poore, to lade it upon our owne shoulders, and wee shall finde that his yoake is easie, and his burthen light, because he will then augment our strength, and will make us so able to beare it, that we should be sorrow∣full ever to cast it off againe. As a King findeth the waight of a crowne but small, when it is upon his head, by reason of the wealth, honour, and power that follow the heavinesse of this burthen, as hee would ne¦ver leave his Kingdome, his power, and his Empire, for the waight of a Septer, seeing they make him honourable to his Subjects, and fea∣red of Strangers, so that faithfull man which hath compassed and environed his forehead with the crowne of love to his neighbour, that hath adorned his hand with the Scepter of cha∣rity, to the needy, and miserable, hee without doubt shall finde rest in his soule, which is the fulnesse of all felicity. Now since such great and admirable effects, since so excellent profits and advantages, pro∣ceede from our mercie, charity, and bounty to our neighbour, since in the practise of it, wee finde our felicity, which consisteth in the love which God beareth unto us, in the confirmati∣on of the pardon for our offences; since againe God assureth us, that the charity which we give and exercise to our neighbours, hee will accept as done to himselfe: alas, who would be so sa∣vage, and hardened with rigour; who would be so defiled with ingratitude, that having re∣ceived
favours from a King, would yet refuse to obey him, and to serue him with all his pow∣er, should not hee be worthy of the greatest torments, of the most cruell punishments, that have ever beene imagined; would not the hea∣ven, the elements, and all the creatures together rise up in judgement, to aske punishment for so grievous a crime; since it is most true, that in∣gratitude is the basest and damnablest vice, that can infect the soule of man. Let us remember that we have nothing but what we haue received of our heavenly Father; and if wee have received it from his favourable and fatherly hand, why should wee be so un∣gratefull, as to refuse him a small portion of it, when ee asketh for it: Now, and at all times when we heare and see the poore praying, and crying unto us in the streetes, or at our doores, it is the voyce of God himselfe, tha calleth us to acknowledge his benefits, as often as wee see one afflicted that asketh us helpe, and consola∣tion; let us rne to him, and give him occa∣sion of joy, and gladnesse, for it is Christ him∣selfe which was comforted by an Angell, in the Garden, when praying to God his Father, hee sweated drops of blood, which made him pro∣nounce these lamentable words, so full of griefe; My soule is full of sorrow even unto death. When we have bin offended by our neigh∣bour, and that he will cast himselfe at our feete, to aske us forgivenesse, let us not be such ty∣gers, and so unnaturall, as to refuse him his re∣quest,
remembring that it is a condition need∣full to obtaine the pardon for our owne sinnes, which wee shall never obtaine, untill wee have first forgiven our brethren their offences: but let us follow the example of our heavenly Fa∣ther, who saith, That at what time so ever a sinner repeneth him of hi sinnes he will put away his wic∣kednesse out of his remembrance. And when wee must appeare before the ter∣rible and dreadfull Throne of the Soveraigne Iudge, when wee shall be called to a strict ac∣count for the talents and administration which hath beene committed to our charge by our heavenly Master: let us then I say follow the example of that wise Steward, let us make our selues friends with the riches of iniquity; let us fill the hand of the poore, which is the Alar of God, upon the which hee affectionatly re∣civeth the Incense of our prayers, as a delight∣full and pleasing Sacrifice, to the glory of his holy name. Then I say, shall wee heare that sweet and heavenly voyce of the Saviour of our soules, speaking graciously to us after this manner: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you, before the foundation of the world. Amen. Amen.
The Prayer. O Lord God, full of mercy and compassion, O favourable Father, that art the foun∣taine of pardon and remission, and the refuge of them that truely repent, who desirest not the death of a sinner, but rather that hee may turne from his wickednesse and live; wee thy poore and miserable creatures, who by the weaknes of our flsh, by the malice of our mindes, & by our owne vitious inclination to follow ill examples, have provoked thee to make thy wrath and in∣dignation fall upon our sinfull heads; we have many wayes and times by our transgressions incited thee, to cast upon our sinfull soules the thunderbolts of thy judgements, we have made sinne our delight, and iniquity the height of our happinesse. Thy jutice did cry and runne af∣ter us, like a roaring and ravening Lyon seeking to devoure us, thy judgements were ready to cast our bodies and soules into hell, but that the excellent greatnesse of thy mercie, (O bounti∣full and gracious Father) hath interposed her selfe, and hath not permitted that we should be cast downe into the depth of eternall death, and condemnation; thy hand (O sweet Saviour) hath upheld us, and thy clemencie (O our Re∣deemer) hath perfectly delivered us: therefore (O gracious Father) seeing thou hast preserued us from evill, conserue us still in good things, receive (if such b thy good pleasure) the incense
of our prayers, or sacriice of thankesgiving, which wee most humbly offer upon the sacred Alar of thy divine compassions. Put up our teares into thy bottels, accept our contrite hearts broken with griefe, to have offended thee, for a pleasing Sacrifice: receive our griefes and displeasures for thy satisfaction, and behold thy Sonne, thy onely, thy welbeloved Sonne, his head pricked with thornes, for our sinnes, his hands, his sides, and his feete pierced with Lances, and nayles for our iniquities, for his torments sake, for his paines, and for his deaths sake, restore us unto life, forgive us our sinnes, (O great God) blot out our iniquities, that so following thy example, wee may doe the like to them that have offended us; change in us our hard hearts, and make them gentle and easie to pardon and forgive; and suffer not our soules to be defiled, and infected with the venome of revenge: but that leaving it unto thee, we may thinke of nothing else but to be obedient unto thee, blessing those that curse us, speaking well of those that slaunder us, and praying for those that persecute us. O good God, kindle in our soules an holy love towards our afflicted brethren, that wee may partake with them in their afflictions, and so ease them that they may the better beare that burthon, which thou hast imposed upon them. We most humbly beseech thee also (O good Saviour) to give us charitable hearts, and full of compassion to helpe the poore in their neede,
remembring that they are or brethren, that thou art the Father of us all, and that we are the children of the same mother, that a glasse of cold water onely given unto them, is of an in∣estimable price before thee, because thou ac∣ceptest of it as willingly, and recompensest it as largely, as if it had beene given to thy selfe; make us understand and know that thou art the King and great Master of the world, that all that is therein justly belongeth unto thee, that wee are but thy Stewards, to dispose of thy goods, to them of thy houshold, to wit, the poore, who as well as we have that honour to belog to thy house, to be thy servants, ya to beare the name of thy children, that when it shall please thee to call us to account, wee may bee found to have used with profit the talent committed unto us: and that it may please thine infinite goodnesse, not for our sakes, but through thy mercy, for thy welbeloved Sonne sake, to call us good and faithfull servants, and to make us enter into our Masters joy, which is the heavenly Ieru∣salem. Amen.
The second Way to Sion THE PRAISE OF PVRITIE. MATH. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. IN the holy and sacred Temple of wise King Sa∣lomon, there were three things chiefely conside∣rable, that is, 1. The bo∣dy of the temple whereto the people came. 2. The holy place appointed for the Levites, and those that ministred at the Sa∣crifices. And 3. the Sanctum Sanctorum, or the most holy place, consecrated for the Arke of the Lord, who had appointed it for his ordinarie dwelling and residence, wherein he commonly appeared, in the forme of a darke clowd, out of
whic were heard, the divine Oracles, and the irrevocable sentences of his sacred judgements. It was a place whereinto none (upon paine of death) could come, except the high Priest, and that but onely once every yeare, and yet with many precautions, and circumstances, for hee was first to purifie himselfe, to wash his body, and to change his cloathes, before he appeared in the terrible and fearefull presence of the li∣ving God. By this faire and meruailous Temple of King Salomon, is lively represented unto us the world, adorned, and diversified with so many faire and admirable creatures. By the Body of the Temple, where the chil∣dren of Israel heard the reading of the law of God, his Spouse the Church is naturally deno∣ted and figured unto us. By the holy place, whereunto came onely the Levites, and those which ministred at the Sa∣crifices, are signified unto us, the Ministers of the word of God, who are chosen and put a part in his Church, to be Heraulds, and Embassadours of his holy will, offering the ordinary Sacrifices of payer and thanksgiving, which are his dlecta∣ble and well accepted service. By the Sanctum Sanctorum, or the most holy place, is truly figured unto us Heaven; for, as the high Priest entred not into that place, before he had first purified, & washed himselfe according to the Divine ordinance: so the faithfull cannot enter into heaven, untill hee hath first divested
sinne, and be covered with the cloake of Iustice, holinesse, and innocencie; therfore Iesus Christ himselfe declareth the same thing unto us with his owne sacred mouth, saying, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see GOD. The Prophet David expresseth exceeding well the same words, in the 15. Psalme, saying, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? he that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousnesse, and speaketh the truth in his heart. And in the 24. Psalme, Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? hee that hath cleane hands, and a pure ear; who hath not lifted up his soule unto vanity, nor sworne deceitfully. Hee shall rceive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousnesse from the God of his sal∣vation. And in the 33. Chap. of Isaiah ver. 14. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with verlasting burnings▪ He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly: he that despiseth the gaine of oppressions, that shakeh his hands from receiving of bribes; that stoppeth his eares from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evill. He shall dwell on high: his place of de∣fence shall be the munitions of rockes, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. His eyes shall see the King in his beauty; they shall behold the land that is very farre off. O what admirable places, how many faire
and rare promises, doe all these Prophets make to the faithfull, who shall keepe his heart from sinne▪ and his hands from iniquity; and Iesus Christ himselfe commeth after to confirme their testimonie, and to ratifie their words, say∣ing in this place, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see GOD. Words very energeticall, and significant, as if hee had said, Dearely beloved, the onely and perfect way to possesse all happinesse, all plea∣sures, and all the advantages that you can wish; and in a word, to enjoy eternall felicity, to con∣template face to face Gods divine Majestie, wherein consisteth the fulnesse of happinesse, and all contentment, following the serpents ex∣ample, to cast off the olde skinne, that is, to pull off the olde coate of sinne, infected with the le∣prosie of iniquity, to fly and eschew evill, to embrace good, to hate vice, and perfectly to love vertue, which is the true way to heaven, to the posession of heavenly graces; and in a word, to the fulnesse and perfection of all true happinesse. Blessed are then the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Now to enter into a more particular expli∣cation of these words, we will divide them in∣to two principall parts, and will consider, 1. who are the pure in heart. And secondly, the cause why they are blessed. The royall Prophet David in the 15. Psalme,
describeth perfectly unto us those that are pure in heart, They are those, saith hee, that lye not, and who live prightly; they who bakbite not with their tongues, nor doe evill to their neighbours, and in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but they ho∣nour them that feare the Lord: they that sweare to their owne hurt, and change not: they that put not out their money to usurie, nor take bribes or reward against the innocent. This is a very faire, true, and ample descrip∣tion of the Righteous man, who hath a pure heart, that is, who hath his conscience pure and just, and who lives in integrity, justice, and in∣nocencie. For this word heart, is not here to be under∣stood or taken for the materiall & carnall heart, placed in our breasts, which is the fountaine and beginning of life, the first living, the last dying i man, but for the soule that keepeth there her ordinary Sessions, as we commonly say that is corne, by showing onely the sacks that hold it; there is the Kings Treasure, by shewing onely the Exchequer Chamber where it is kept, the place containing being called and taken by the name of the thing contained: so must we under∣stand a pure heart to bee taken for the consci∣ence, which therein makes her residence. Where at the first sigh we finde a thing ve∣ry remarkable, and worthy our consideration, that to wit, that sinne being as it were a black and venomous Inke, or an infected and corrup∣ted poyson, as soone as it comes neare our
hearts, the seate of our soules, it defileh, infe∣cteth, and makes them so stinking, that God cannot endure them before his face, so much ab∣horreth he the very sent and smell of sin, and so much the very object of iniquity is noysome and troublesome to him. Now Iesus Christ knowing that man brought into the world from his mothers wombe with life, the cause of death, that is, originall sinne, cursed sinne, a disastrous blade or stalke, which like the wilde and evill plants casteth continu∣ally orth so many young sprigges, which doth so people and store the field of our soules, that in the ed in stead of a Garden of Eden, where God tooke pleasure to walke, in stead of a de∣lightfull River, where the Angels bathed, it be∣comes a hideous and dreadfull wildernesse, where the devils and wicked spirits keepe their Sabaths, and criminall Assises and Sessions, a filthy sinke, where wicked and impious men like Hogges continually wallowe: And there∣fore Iesus Christ (I say) to bring his Apostles to perfection, and to put them and all the faithfull in the way to heaven, he exhorts them to keepe their hearts pure, cleane, and naked from all sinne, filthinesse, and iniquity, to extirpate the thistles, & bryers from the fields of their soules, to plow and till it carefully, with the share and harrow of contrition and repentance for their sinnes: In a word, to make it a ground fit, and fruitfull to receive the holy seed of the word of life, and to make it beare fruites to immortality and eternall life.
As men would bee curious to sweepe and cleanse a house, wherein a King resolues for a while to be resident, and may justly accue him of impudence and impudence, who having ad∣vice and notice of his comming, would not make hast to perfume it, to adorne, and enrich it with the fairest furniture, to embellish it with all the rarities and most pretious jewels they could recover: So, alas! the hearts of the faith∣full are nothing else but the house of God, the glorious throne of his beloved Sonne, and the tabernacle which the holy Ghost hath chosen for his habitation; where is then that heart of stone, that soule so base, and obstinately resol∣ved to bee lost, that knowing the happy and most honourable arrivall of the great King of Kings, of the three divine persons, of the in∣effable and incomprehensible Trinity, and trine∣unity, doth not sweepe and cleanse the house of his heart, and doth not purifie it from all dirt and filthinesse, who I say will not adorne it with the riches treasures, and with the rich or∣naments that holinesse, justice, and innocencie abundantly affords; purposely to receive with honour and reverence so magnificent a King, who promiseth us to come unto us, when hee saith in the 14. Chap. of Saint Iohn, If a man love me, he will keepe my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come in unto him, and make our abode with him. Our good Master Iesus Christ (the Saviour of our soules) teacheth us in the 22. Chap of
Saint Mathew, how much and how dearely purenesse is acceptale before him, saying, That the Kingdome of heaven is like a certaine King which made a marriage for his sonne, and having invitd many, the banquetting roome was filled, and the King himselfe being come in to see the guests, hee there sawe a man which had not a wedding garment, and said unto him, Friend how camest thou in hi∣thr, not having a wedding garment? And hee was speechlsse. Then said the King to the servants, bind him hand and foote, and cast him into utter dark∣nesse, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: for many are called, but fewe are chosen. Can we desire a more lively representation, or an example more formall, to shew us that God delighteth in the sincerity and purenesse of our soules; and contrariwise, that he abhor∣reth, and detesteth the filthinesse of sinne, the inke and coales of iniquity, which blacks and defiles our consciences, for it is impossible ever to tast of the dainty and delicious Viands ser∣ved at the Lambs wedding, at the sumptuous and magnificent feast of the onely Sonne of the great King of Kings, before we have left off our working dayes cloathes, the infected and stink∣ing coate of our naturall corruption, to put on the white roabe of holinesse, purity, and amend∣ment of life, and to use the very words of Scrip∣ture, Colos. 3. Wee must cast off the old man with his deedes, and put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him. And Ephes. 4. concerning the former conversa∣tion,
Cast off the old man, which is corrupted ac∣cording to the deceitfull lusts of his heart, and be re∣newed in the spirit of your minde: and put on the new man, which like unto God is created in righte∣ousnesse, and true holinesse. And in Rom. 6.6. Our old man is crucified with Christ, that the body of sinne might be destroyed, that henceforth wee should serue sinne no more, but walke before him in renova∣tion and newnesse of life. The clearest waters are alwayes the best, and therefore commonly see that the excellentest springs are derived from the rockes, and fetch'd from the highest hills, because that the water distilling through many narrow passages, and strait places, the farther it goes the more it is purified, & the most subtill and clearest springs seeke the highest places, as approaching nea∣rer to the nature of the ayre, whose nature and propriety is still to ascend. And contrariwise, you may observe and marke, that the thick and heavie waters are alwayes filthy and stinking, and are conserved in pitts and deepe sinkes, as participating of the nature of the earth, and therefore are fit for nothing but to breed ser∣pents. and Frogges, whereof some kill us by their mortall venome, and the other trouble us with their unsufferable croaking. These cleare and pure waters doe lively prefigure and set forth unto us, the faithfull ser∣vant of the Lord, who hath purified, and as it were distilled himselfe at the fire of the love of God, thereby to leave off what was earthly
ponderous, and troublesome in him, as hatred, ambition, sensuality, and vaine glory purposely to soare aloft, and to elevate himselfe to the holy mountaine of Syon towards heaven, which is the center whither the circumference of his desires, designes, and thoughts tendeth. These black and muddy waters may expresse and set forth hell unto us, where there is no∣thing but horrible darknesse and fearefull ob∣scurity, where that old serpent is iustly banished for his deserts, and where the damned, gastly, and frightfull soules doe nothing else but vexe themselves and curse. But to apply it to the subject of our text, these stinking and corrupted waters, may very fitly be compared to the wicked, and to the men of this world, who have Woolfes or Lyons hearts un∣der the shape and forme of men, who wallowe like Hogges in the mire, and dirt of carnall se∣curity, who runne not after pietie and vertue, but remaine fast chained and bound to sensuali∣tie, and vice; casting all their affections on the earth, whereof their body is made and compo∣sed, never ayming nor levelling their thoughts at heaven, whence their soule had their origi∣nall; True serpents in malice, hatred, and en∣vie, that with mortall venome infect the Lil∣lies and Roses of the best consciences, Frogges in prating and slandering, that never open their mouthes, but to utter unsufferable blasphemies, oathes, lyes, and detractions. Take yet this farther conceit upon the purity
of the heart, to wit, that as the eyes ore-vayled with clowds, or with carracts and webbs, can∣not clearely discerne the objects, or colours, which are exposed before them, because their faculty is prevented and hindered, by the inter∣position of these obstacles, which are placed be∣tweene the object and the sight; whereas contrariwise good sound and well disposed eyes as are these of Eagles, who though soaring in the highest clowds, doe neverthelesse see very plainely in the thickest bushes, in the remotest furrowes of the farre distant field, and which is most admirable, is, that her sight is so strong and powerfull, that contrary to the nature and practise of other living creatures, she can steddily behold and contemplate the Sunne, without winking at all; yea, when shee is nearest him, and standing on the highest branch of a tree, planted on the top of the loftiest mountaine. Now to appropriate this to our matter, wee say, That hee whose heart is incombred with the things of this world, whose soule is ore-vayled with ambition, with the clowds of va∣nity, and vaine glory, whose conscience is ob∣scured, and darkned with hatred, envie, and ma∣lice, can never contemplate God, nor see his face, which is all the consolation, all the joy, and in a word, the true center of our happinesse, the fulnesse of all our felicity, and the greatest delights which the faithfull can wish or desire. But those that shall be carefull and diligent to keepe their soules pure and cleane from the fil∣thinesse
of sinne, those like Eagles indeede al∣wayes soaring in heavenly and godly actions, shall be perched and placed in the highest place of mount Syon, from thence-forth ever to view the heavenly Sinne rising, that beareth health in his rayes and wings, to behold steddily, and without winking, the glistering, and bright shi∣ning beames of the Sunne of righteousnesse, without any feare of hurt, being assured of his wonderfull favour, manifested by his inviolable promises, for he saith in our Text, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see GOD. By this purity of heart, we may understand the simplicity of our lives and actions, and so this sentence, Blessed are the pure in heart, may be thus interpreted, Blessed are those that walke simple in their actions, whose heart is voyd of fraud, and of any thoughts of iniquity, whose tongue speakes nothing but the hears meaning, that shunnes vanity, and the glory of this world, that so they may be perfectly glorious in that which is to come. St Augustine lib. 1. de Serm Dom. is of this opinion, because that as St Iohn saith, 1. Epist. chap. 5. ver. 19. The whole worldly∣eth in wickedness, and that the Apostles were to take men, and to bring them to the way of salvation, nei∣her by craft, no by force, but by meekenesse and sim∣plicitie. And therefore Christ sending through all the world, to publish the Gospell of the King∣dome of heaven, the redemption of captive sin∣ners,
from the chaines and torments of hell, and to preach openly the acceptable yeare of the Lord, saith unto them; Behold I send you forth as sheepe in the midst of Woolves, be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmelesse and innocent as Doves; as we read in the 10. Chap. of S. Math. ver, 16. And in the same Gospell, Chap. 6. ver. 22. The light of the body is the ye, if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. This so excellent vertue of meekenesse and simplicity, hath alwayes beene hated of the world, as being contrary to the vanity and fol∣ly of it, and the high way to mount Sinai, there to see God face to face as Moses, who preferred the simplicity of a Shepheards crooke, to the honours, riches, and preferments which hee might justly have expected in Pharaohs Court, as being reputed his daughters sonne. This vertue cannot but be very pleasing to God, since he himselfe hath put it in practise, in appearing to Moses in a bush, which is a base and abject plant, despising the lofty Pine trees, and Cdars of Libanus, which in height and bauty exceed all other trees of the earth. The Angels also have practised it, when ha∣ving left the heavens to appeare unto men, they have not taken the forme and majestie of Kings, to be respected of all, but rather the habit of Pilgrimes, and men of base quality, to teach us to shunne pride and vaine glory, and to shew us by their cloathes that we are Strangers and Pil∣grimes in this world, that our houses are but
Innes, where we should stay onely as posts doe under a tree till the storme be past, and so to continue our way as long as the day of our life shineth, that the night envelloping and wrap∣ping us up in her darke cloake, wee may arrive at the heavenly Canaan, which is our native Country from whence we first departed. We read in the 18. Chap. of Genes. That Abra∣ham sitting at his tent doore, saw three men pas∣sing that way, whom he called, and desired to come and sit under a tree with him, to eate a morsell of bread, to comfort their hearts. Now if it were god himselfe in the forme of three men, to represent the three persons of the bles∣sed Trinity, or if they were Angels sent by him, is a question out of the subject of our Text; but because many Fathers of the Church are of the second opinion, we also will hold it, ground∣ed on the 13. Chap. to the Heb. Be not forgetfull to entertaine Strangers, for thereby some have enter∣tained Angels unawares, which is commonly refer∣red to this action of the Father of the faithfull, and of Lot his brothers sonne, who also entertained in So∣dome two Angels, in the shape of Strangers, and of men that were travelling further. In the 5. Chap. of Tobit wee reade, that the Angell Raphael appeared to the young Tobit, and offered to bring him into Media, which hee did afterwards performe. But leaving many other examples, which we could alledge of the humility, and simplicity of Angels; let us briefly runne over the lives of the
Patriarks & Prophets, where the simplicity and innocent purity of their actions doe most lively appeare. Abraham at Gods command, without any further information, goeth to the place ap∣pointed him, to sacrifice on an Altar his onely sonne. Isaack following the steps of his Fathers obe∣dience to God, runnes to his death, never fearing the great torment that he was ready to endure, layeth the wood on his shoulders, and carrieth in his hand that fire that was appointed to burne him to ashes; yea, hee encourageth his poore old Father to execute Gods divine command, restores unto him by his exhortation, his strength already lost, by reason of the extreame griefe which he endured, to be the executioner of his owne sonne, and to kill him to whome hee had lately given life. But least we should be too tedious, this ex∣ample of simplicity shall serve us for all the Pro∣phes, as being the most remarkable that can be ever rehearsed by man; and indeed was it not a great and lofty myserie, that God should give so resolute a courage, so great a constancie, to the Father of the faithfull, and so admirable boldnesse to this obedient sonne; for Abraham representeth unto us God the Father, who to execute the irrevocable decree of his divine ju∣stice, hath seised the sword of his terrible judge∣ments, to dip it in the blood of the spotlesse Lambe, that bare the sinnes of the world on the Altar of the Crosse.
This sweet Iesus, whose simplicity, and meekenesse are both peerelesse & inexplicable, this good Saviour, following the example of Isaack, by whom during the shadowes of the law hee was figured, goeth freely to his death, bearing the wood, which was to bereave him of lfe upon him, and within him the burning fie of love, that inflamed him with an infinite affection to save the Elect: Hee was brought saith the Prophet Isaiah as a Lamb to the slaugh∣ter; so opened he not his mouth to complain: he is conducted as a dumbe Sheepe before her Shearer; but in that we see nothing but part of his simplicity, appearing in the catastrophe of his actions, when he was neare his death; but if we should curiously view the acts of his life, beginning from his birth, we should be ravished in admiration of these infinite wonders; but let us consider only in generall, that he is borne of a pure virgin, espoused to a Carpenter: was that befitting his excellent Majestie, who was the King of the world? Hee was borne in a Stable amongst beasts, judge if that were the Royall Pallaces, and ho∣nourable company, which hee had in heaven among the Angels. He was swadled in clowts, and laid in a Man∣ger, for want of a Cradle to keepe him from the injuries of the weather: were those the de∣lights of his Paradise? He was fugitive here and there, to shunne the envie and furious rage of Herod, who fought to kill him.
In a word, considering diligently all the course of his life, from the moment of his birth, to the last period of his death, wee shall finde all his actions framed in humility, and gui∣ded by meekenesse and simplicity. This example and no more, he did not goe chuse within the Pallaces of Kings, the good∣liest and gallantest Courtiers; hee did not elect the sonnes of Princes to be his Apostles, but went to the receipt of custome, to the Cottages and Boats of Fishermen, to call that honourable company of his twelue Apostles, who like well instructed Disciples followed the steps of their loving Lord and Master; so well did they imi∣tate and follow his examples and especially that of his simplicity, that they may be patterns of it themselues, as the History of their life suf∣ficiently sheweth, and as the duty of their place required, for men and being deepely plunged in ma∣lice, preumption, and arrogancie, there was no way to vanquish them, but wholy by contrary weapons to them unknowne, that they might the more easily be subdued and vanquished. To their arrogancie, they opposed meeke∣nesse, to their pompe and vaine glory, humility, and simplicity, ever remembring the command of their good Master, Be ye simple as Doves. Now it is remarkable, that the faithfull, and such as walke uprightly before God, are called by the wicked, and by the children of the God of this world, Poore and simple people, because they addict not themselves to frad and deceit,
so spake Iobs wife to her husband, being yet in affliction upon his dunghill, Doest thou still re∣taine thine integrity? But Iesus Chris to shew us that hee approo∣veth those whom the world rejecteth, speakes as if he had said, See you those simple and base people, they shall see God: So Christ gives them hopes of the blessed vision of God, as if hee had pro∣mised light to the blinde, knowledge to the ig∣norant, and wisedome to fooles, for so this wic∣ked world calleth those that will not drinke the cup of his malice, nor tread in his pathes full of sinne and iniquity. Blessed then are the pure in heart, &c. He doeth not onely say, they shall be blessed, but he speaketh in the present tense, saying, they are already blessed: for God having given them that holinesse which they possesse, and upon all occasions practise, hath also given them two strong and well feathered wings, to soare and flie aloft to heaven: whereof she one is faith, by the which the just trusting and reposing him∣selfe wholy in the promises of Christ, takes his flight towards Paradise, to have a tast of them; for it is the nature of faith (as appeareth by her definition) to know how to assure it slfe, how to aske the grace of God promised in his word, how to embrace salvation offered by Iesus Christ, and during this life, how to possesse in part that eternall and blessed life. And because faith beginneth here to tast the delights of the vision of God, she is yet upheld
and fortified by Hope, which is the second wing, that makes her expect heaven, and promiseth her absolutely to fill her abundantly with those swee pleasures whereof the hath, shee yet had but a tast, and to make her perfectly know, that which now she seeth but obscurely, and like a shadow. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see GOD. Vpon these words there is an objection to be resolved, why Christ saith here the pure in heart, seeing the Scripture in many places is di∣rectly opposite to this justice, to this purity, to this cleanenesse, as we read Prou. 20.9. Who can say I have made my heart cleane, I am pure from my sinne? And in the first booke of Kings, the 8. Chap. There is no man that sinneth not. And in the 1. Epist. of Saint Iohn, 1. Chap. If we say that we have no sinne, we deceive our selues, and the truth is not in us. And in the 25. Chap. of Iob, How can man be justified with God: or how can he be cleane that is borne of a woman? Although these places, and many more (that we purposely leave to avoyd prolixity) seeme to be opposite to our Text, notwithstanding we will reconcile them together. For when the Spirit of God calleth heere those that live justly and holily pure in heart, we must not understand it so, as if they were to∣tally and absolutely cleane from the filthinesse of sinne: for in that sence the royall Prophet David saith, There is none just, no not one.
But we must understand here those that strive to walke in the sacred pathes of Gods com∣mandements, that live holily before God, and without reproach before men, that have beene purified, like gold tried seaven times in the fire, and that fire is the word of God, that enters and penetrates to the most secret thoughts, there to consume the wood and chaffe of our wicked in∣clinations. This cleansing and purification is clearely set forth unto us in the 15. Chap. of Saint Iohn in these words of Christ, Now ye are cleane through the word which I have spoken. And in the 13. Chap. ver. 10. of the same Gospell, Hee that is washed, needeth not save to wash his feete, but is cleane every whit: and ye are cleane, but not all. In a word, the faithfull that live holily, may be called just, and pure in heart, Secundum quid, non-simpliciter, Iust in that degree of Iustice that may fall on man whilest he is here below figh∣ting against flesh and blood his domesticall ene∣mies, that often overcome him, and would quite keepe him downe if hee were not upheld and fortified by the spirit of grace, and by he Almighty hand of God that raiseth and deli∣vereth him. The faithfull servant of the Lord is againe called pure in heart, because ee is such in part already, and that besides the great disposition that is in him to tend to his perfection, hee al∣ready here begins to tast the excellent sweetnes of that delicate fruit whereof he shall hereafter
be fully and perfectly satisfied and satiated in Gods Paradise. Blessed then are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Wee have another circumstance here very pregnant and remarkable, to wit, that Christ exhorteth us here to be pure in heart, and not of our head, or hands, because that the heat being the seate of the soule, sinne is most busie to viti∣ate and infect it with his foule and filty cor∣ruption, which it doth not in the other parts of the body, and therefore you see that God doth so strictly command us to keepe our hearts for his part and behoofe, saying, My sonne give mee thy heart. Now to omit or let passe nothing worthy consideration like the inhabitants of Nilus, wee will draw water in running. We say then that this word heart, is diversly taken in the Scripture, First, it is taken for faith, as Rom. 10. For with the heart man beleeveth unto rightousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. 2. It is taken for the thoughts, and for the gift of regeneration, as 1. Epist. of Saint Peter, Chap. 3. ver. 4. The hidden man of the heart in that which is not corrupible, even the ornament of a meeke and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price and estimation. 3. For the understanding, as Rom. 2. They shew the worke of the law written in their hearts. 4. It is taken for the conscience, as in the 1.
of Sam. the 24. chap. 5. ver. Davids heart smote him, because he had cut off Sauls skirt. And in the 1. to the Thessal. chap. 3. To establish your hearts un∣blameable in holinesse before God. Here is yet ano∣ther very cleare passage in the 1. Epist. of Saint Iohn chap. 3. ver. 2. If our heart condemne us, God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things, and if our heart condemne us not, wee have confidence to∣wards God. And in this last signification it is taken in our Text, to wit, for the Conscience, as if Christ had said, Blessed are those that possesse a holy, pure, and just soule, a good, cleane, and spotlesse conscience. David desirous to raise himselfe from his fall, and to restore the temple of his body pol∣luted by wicked adultery, desired of God a new Altar, praying him to create in him a cleane heart, and to renew a right spirit within him. Psal. 51.12. Iudas Maccabeus having seene the Temple of Ierusalem prophaned by Antiochus his sacrilegi∣ous hands, he purifieth it, destroyes all the Al∣tars where that Pagan had sacrificed to his Idols, and called that the renewing of the Temple: Our bodies are the living temples of the holy Ghost, our hearts the Altars, on the which ha∣ving wickedly sacrificed to the Idols of our pas∣sions, we must breake them and destroy them, by our true repentance and conversion to God, who despiseth not a broken and a contrite heart: And af∣terward we must build new ones pure and clean, on the which wee must offer to God Heca∣tombes of Iustice, and solemne burnt offe∣rings
and sacrifices wherein hee delighteth. The Etymologists hold, that this word Cor is derived of Cura, that is, care, because that part communicateth, sendeth, and doth distri∣bute blood and life to the rest of the body: Even so all our study, all our exercise, and occupation should be to seeke the meanes fit for the con∣servation of our soules: for what will it profit a man if hee gaine the whole world, and loose his soule. Math. 16.26. As soone as the Embrion is conceived, the first part which is formed in the heart, being as it were the center whence the severall lines are drawne to the circumference of our bodies, it is also the first member living, and when the paines of death have compassed a man, the blood from all parts retires to the heart, as to a citadell, so that it is also the last part that dieth in us, ac∣cording to that common saying, Cor est primum vivens, & ultimum moriens. So when the faithfull of the Lord resolveth to live piously, he must cast for a sure and unmove∣able foundation, the righteousnesse of a pure and cleane conscience, which must be the Ocean where all the rivers of hisaffections must runne and tend, the corner and fundamentall stone, on the which must be edified this his Pilgrimage: All the building of this mortall and transitorie life, must begin with the just mans beginning, and never end till his death, when it shall bee augmented and perfected in heaven. It was Gods commandement under the law,
that all Israelites, all the seed of Abraham should offer and consecrate to him the first borne, both of man and beast; now if wee unvayle the let∣ter, and consider what it therein figured unto us, we may note among other things, that God desired by this Decree, whose letter and figure is abrogated, though the truth and sence of it be eternall, that wee should offer and consecrate unto him our hearts, which are the first borne of our selues. The greatest part of Physitians hold, that the soule being generally all over the body, hath her principall seat in the heart, as the King hath in his Court, although his power reach tho∣row all his Kingdome; so that the soule being that very man which God requireth, it is then not without reason, that God demandeth our heart, which is her throne: My sonne give me thy heart. The heart is knowne to bee the originall of naturall heat; now God being a burning fire of love, and affection towards his children, wee ought to consecrate that part to him for his Ta∣bernacle. The heart is red and bloody, to shew us the fervencie and zeale that should be in us to Gods service and glory, and that our thoughts should alwayes burne with love to him, and with cha∣rity to our neighbours. It is little; whence wee may learne not to puffe, or swell it with pride, but to keepe it al∣wayes humble and modest. Vertues that seeke
not afer large and spacious Pallaces, but are contented in the narrowest and remorest places. His beating and panting is upwards; so all our desires and thoughts should tend towards the end of our supernaturall vocation, accor∣ding to the Apostles advice, Seek the things that are above. The heart is agitated by a continuall motion, by reason of his vitall spirits, that animate and nourish it: So our thoughts should beare and conduct us to the actions of Iustice, innocencie, and godlinesse, and to follow the steps of the Scripture, Charity alwayes worketh, and is ne∣ver idle, by reason of the spirit of grace dwel∣ling in our soules, who inspires continually in us holy and religious thoughts. There is but one heart in man, and yet his shape and forme is triangular, a figure bearing proportion to his object, that is God, one in Essence, and three in persons: So our soules should be adorned with these three beautiful vertues, Faith, hope and Charity. He is open at the top, and that way he recei∣veth his nourishment: Which teacheth us, that our soules should alwayes be open, to proclaime the praises of our Creator and Redeemer, that nourisheth them with the holy and wholsoe meat of his sacred word, sent dow from heaven. The least angle or core is turned downe∣wards, to shew us that  least care should bee for earthly things.
It is againe not hayrie, to teach us that our soule which is hi hostesse, must be voyd of the foolish and light imaginations, of the weake and unconstant considerations of this world, that so she may hope and ayme at nothing but heaven, her blessed Countrey, wherein it is impossible to enter, before our heart (after Moses his ex∣ample) have pulled off the Shooes of our cor∣ruption and worldly affection, that so wee may come neare this burning bush, this fearefull fire, Gods divine justice. The Oracle of Apollo, being once enquired, what was the most pleasingst thing of God; af∣ter his ordinary manner hee answered ambigu∣ously, and obscurely: Dimidium sphaerae, sphaeram cum principe Romae. An answer most true, though it came from the father of lies, for a C is the halfe of a Sphere, and O is a Sphere, and the beginning of the word Rome is an R, which letters put together make COR, that is, the heart, and questionlesse it is the most pleasingst gift that can bee offered unto God, and which no man can justly refuse him. The poore may say, I cannot give almes; the sicke, I cannot goe to Church, I can neither watch nor pray; but none can say, I cannot loe God, for thy others defects may be excu∣sed by hy poverty, or sicknesse, but to refuse God with  heart it cannot be excused but by malice, as S. Augusine very learnedly saith. Let us remember th how charitable so ever our actions be, if our hear doe not goe before
to enlighten them, all of them will tumble downe together into the obscure darkness of the deepe. Our actions are of no value without the heart, but the heart may bee good without the actions; God had respect to Abel, and afterwards to his offering; the good Thiefe to obtaine mercy gave nothing but his heart; Marie Mag∣dalene but her teares, and Saint Peter but sighes and lamentations, proceeding from the depth of his soule. Now that this heart may be pleasing and ac∣ceptable to God, it must be cleare, bright, and shining, to the end that as in a glasse God may see his owne image and likenesse after which he at the first created it, and when it is once cleane and pure, then right so, and in that manner, we must keepe it in the same glorious estate, for Non minor est virtu quam quaerere, parta tueri. And to that end we must imitate the Bees, which to hinder the drones and spiders from comming into their Hives, to corrupt or devoure their ho∣ney stop the entries of them with bitter and stinging hearbs, as good Husbandmen who en∣close their grounds, lest passengers or the wild beasts should spoile them. Even so should wee alwayes keepe the passages of our senses, of our hearts, and of our thoughts, fenced with the feare of God, which is a bitter Rue, and Worm-wood, that the devill cannot endure to tast or relish. Marke and observe with me the care and di∣ligence
which is used to conserve Christall, and China Dishes, what paines are taken to keepe them cleane, bright, and shining, because they are deare and rare. And what can wee finde in this world more precious and rare then our heart, then let us with a diligent care, and care∣full sollicitude, seeke the clenenesse and purity thereof, following the Apostles counsell, Let every one possesse his vessell with sanctifiation, and ho∣nour, 1. Thess. 4.4. When a vessell is cleft or crackt, it is unfit to containe any liquid thing; Now the wicked heart is a crackt vessell, saith Eccles. chap. 21. A broken heart threatneth death to a living creature, as a Ship split and torne with the vio∣lence of the waves, threatneth undoubted death, ruine and shipwrack; so that heart that is not well united to God, that is broken and shattered by the force of worldly affections, threatneth and fore-telleth an infallible ruine and destru∣ction. To fill a vessell in a Well or in a Fountaine, we must needs bend it downwards; so must we humble our heart, to fill it with heavenly gra∣ces, I have inclined my care, and I have received wisedome, saith the wise man, Sap. 61. Againe, we know, that none ca fill a vessell with any good and wholesome liquor, wherein there is some corrupted, before he first empty it, and make it very cleane: If we defire to fill our hearts with the love and other graces of God, wee must first expell and exempt the love and
delights of this world, that have beene so long resident there, and then when wee have done those things, we shall be sure fully to enjoy the inestimable effects of this divine promise. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see GOD. In this second part wee have demonstrated unto us the reason, why Christ calleth the pure in heart Blessed, it is saith he, because they shall see GOD. This conjunction, for, joyning those two sen∣tences, sheweth and marketh out unto us the reason of this felicity, and happinesse, that can∣not receive a name enough emphaticall, and sig∣nificant to represent to our senses, and to our understandings, the least beame, the least spark, the least drop of that inexhaustible Ocean of that devouring fire, of that Sunne of righteous∣nesse, whose brightnesse if we should undertake to contemplate, it would strike us blinde, whose immense depth if wee should search, it would swallow us up, whose burning heat if wee ap∣proach, it would convert us to ashes, and would make us pay deere for our curiosity. The Poets faine, that the Giants attempting to clime up to heaven, were thunder-stricken, as they were heaping Olympus, and Pelion upon Ossa, one mountaine upon another: A fable de∣rived from that truth taught us in the Scripture, touching the building of the Tower of Babell, whose Builders were shamefully confounded; the Allegorie of this truth, the morality of this
fable sets forth unto us the curiosity of them, who thinking to pierce too farre into Gods se∣crets, are cast downe into a deepe Abisse of con∣fusion, by their audacious presumption. Empedocles desiring to know the cause why mount AEtna did cast forth such flames, was swallowed and devoured by them. od indeed depresseth, and dejecteth the proud designs of those that are so rash, as to discourse of that which is altogether ineffable, and incomprehensible, but yet is so gracious and favourable, that he enlightneth and fortifi∣eth those, that with feare & humility approach the greatnesse of his mysteries, as David teach∣eth us, Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord in feare, and re∣ioyce with trembling: And Solomon his sonne, Those that trust in the Lord, shall understand the truth: and the faithfull shall know his love. Then with the spirit of feare, and humility, we are to seeke after this hidden glory, and un∣der the vayle of faith, which teacheth us to be∣leeve the things which wee see no, nor cannot be the object of our senses, Hope will make us desire them, Charity to love them, and the gra∣cious goodnesse of God will helpe us to attaine them. O blessed then shall be the pure in heart: for they shall see God. St. Iohn Chap. 17. saith, This is life eternall, to knw thee the onely true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent. And in the 1. Epist. of Saint Iohn, chap. 3. Beloved, now we are the sonnes of God, and it
doth not yet appeare what we shall be: but we know that when he shall appeare, wee shall be like him, for wee shall soe him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himselfe, even as hee is pure. And in the 22. chap. of the Revel. His servants shall serue him, and they shall see his face. The infinite greatnesse of this divine pro∣mise, whose performance is infallible, makes us skip and leape for joy, charmeth our senses, and ravishth our mindes, for it seemeth altogether impossible, that living tombes, mortall carcasses, the prey of death, and the foode of wormes, should ever aspire so high, as to pretend to see and view that felicity which is better described by silence, and admiration, then by any other description, for they are things which eye hath not seene, eare hath not heard, and that are not entred in∣to the heart of man, which God hath prepared for them that love him, 1. Cor. 2.9. But the children of Israel did not pitch the Tabernacle in Ierusalem, before they had cleansed the mountaine of Sion, of those enemies that were opposite to their rest: So wee must not settle our selues in the contemplation of the divine Tabernacle, before we have cleared some places of Scripture, that seeme to forbid us en∣trance. In the 33. Chap. of Exod. ver. 20. God saith to Moses, Thou canst not see my face, for there shall no man see me and lve. And in the 1. chap. of Saint Iohn, No man hath seene God at any time. And in the 1. Epist. of the Cor. chap. 13. ver. 12. Now we see
through a glasse darkely. And in the 28. chap. of Iob, God is hidden from all living eyes. In a word, there are many other paces to confirme this, which will be too long to rehearse. Wee with one consent said, That God is in∣visible; which seemeth to be opposite, and con∣trary to the promise made unto us in our Text, Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Nverthelesse, to reconcile them together, for the holy Ghost is never contrary to him∣selfe; wee say that the places before alledged ae so to bee understood, that whilest man is in this mortall prison, in this valley of teares so obscure, and darke, whilest like an Owle he de∣lighteth in the night of sinne, his eyes can no way endure the least beames of the Sunne of righteousnesse, for God being an infinite Spirit, cannot be seene by a finite body; but when we shall leave off this mortall prison of our bodies, our soules then perfectly enlightened by the heavenly grace, shall be endued with that know∣ledge, and faculty, that they shall openly con∣template their Creator, and their God, as Saint Paul saith, 1. Cor. 13. Chap. Now wee see through a glasse darkely, but then wee shall see hi face to face. This word See God, is much controverted among Divines, which be of two severall opi∣ions; whereof the oe holdeth, That soules delivered of this corporall vayle, cannot see Gods face, for two reasons; the first is, that God being a spirituall Essence, infinite, incom∣prehensible, canot bee seee by a finite crea∣ture,
without implying contradiction, for then the containing, to wit, the blessed soule should bee greater then the contained, that is, God, which is absurd, by this axiome, that the object is contained by the visuall faculty: As if a man placed in the midst of the earth, or of the sea, looking round about a great distance off, as farre as his sight could reach, could not for all that say, That hee saw all the earth, or all the sea. Those of the second opinion answere to this first reason, saying, That the Creator may not be compared with the creatures, that God is all in all, and all, and whole in every part, that hee is one, and consequently indivisible; that all things in him are Essentiall, and is not subject to division, that whosoever seeth him, seeth him totally. The second reason of the first, is, that wee measure our soules by our bodies, imagining that they shall have eyes, with the which they shall be able to discerne and distinguish the pre∣sent objects. To which the others answere, that indeede the soules in heaven shall have no corporall eyes like ours; but that notwithstanding God will give them a seeing faculty, by the which they shall perceive the present objects: 2. When these soules shall be rejoyned, and revnited to their bodies, God having purified them from all vncleanenesse, will make them like unto the glorious body of his Sonne Iesus Christ our
Lord, who saith, Math. 22. That our bodies shall be as the Angels of God in heaven, who alwayes be∣hold the face of God, Math. 18. that is, that are al∣wayes in his presence, and that see him perfectly, in respect of themselues, as much as it pleased God to permit, but not perfectly in respect of God, as he that seeth the Sunne, may say, that hee seeth it perfectly, in respect of himselfe, if his faculty be good, and notwithstanding he canot see him as he is, because of the weakenesse of his eyes. The second opinion which is more generally received, holdeth, that this word See, is taken simply, and absolutely, for to Know, and those that hold it, say, That Iesus Christ in our Text promiseth to the pure in heart, a perfect know∣ledge of the divine goodnese; wherein consist∣eth the fulnesse of our felicity, of our delights, and content, which they doe well proove by the 14. Chap. of Saint Iohn, ver. 7. If ye had knowne me, ye should have knowne my Father also, and from henceforth ye know him, and have seene him; where Christ sheweth to his Disciples, that they have seene his Father, because they have knowne him by so many miracles done before their eyes. And in the 17. Chap. of the same Gospell, This is life eternall, that they might know thee the onely true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent: where it plainely appeareth, that this word to know God, is as much as to possesse life eternall. And so from those two places joyned to our Text, this conclusion followeth, that, To see God, know God, and have etenall life, are the same thing.
As the Angels then see the face of God, even so shall we also see it, for that blessed sight is re∣served for a recompence of our faith, as Saint Iohn in his 1. Epist. 3. Chap. When he shall appeare we shall be like him, for we shall see him face to face. Not that we must imagine, that God hath any members, although it be said, that man is made in the image of God, for that is thus to be understood, that man hath beene created in per∣fect justice, and innocencie, after the example of God. But by this face of God, we must vnderstand with the Scripture, the Church, and the Fa∣thers, and namely Saint Augustine in his booke Decivit. Dei, the manifestation of his glory, and a perfect knowledge of his wonderfull mercie, which he will communicate unto vs. It is a hard question, and difficult to handle, Whether the Saints after the Resurrction shall see God with their corporall eyes, after they be glorified; so Iob saith, In my flesh shall I see God: there Iob prophesieth the Resurrection of his body: but hee doth not say, I will see him by my flesh; and if he had, it might have beene understood of Christ, that shall come at the last judgement in the sight of all; but his meaning was, that when hee should see God, hee should be in his flesh, though the wormes and corrup∣tion had devoured it. Saint Augustine is excellent upon this sub∣ject, saying, We shall see God with our corpo∣rall glorified eyes, as we see the life of a man by
his living actions, not seeing life it selfe; so is it likely, that being enlightened by a heavenly and divine light, we shall be able to see the Creator of all things both in them, and himselfe, so doubtfully the learnedst speak of it. In the 5. Chap. of the 2. booke of Kings, we reade, that Elisha after that he had healed Naa∣man the Syrian, saw Gehazi his servant take Pre∣sents from him, although hee were beyond the common reach of the sight; and when Gehazi was returned, he said unto him, Went not my heart with thee, when the man turned againe from his Chare to meet thee. Now if this Prophet hath bin able to see the actions of his servant, although absent from him, how much more shall our glo∣rified bodies see all, when God shall be all in all. Now Elisha saw this action of his servant, ei∣ther by a speciall revelation from God, or by the sight of a spirituall imagination of the Pro∣phet, that shewed him the thing, after which manner he knew the most secret counsells of the King of Syria. We speake of these things, as blind men doe of colours, wee finde no certainty of them any where, the Fathers themselues speake so ob∣scurely of them, they goe as softly on, in the handling of this question, as if they trod on thornes, they grope along, as if they went in the obscure darknes of the blackest night, hard∣ly can you finde two agreeing together, and which is more strange, not one that is agreed with himselfe; and indeed how should a worme
of the earth, the dwelling of errours, the subject of ignorance, know or comprehend that great God, which is the fountaine of all knowledge, and the bottomlesse and shorelesse Ocean of wisedome, and prudence. It is true, that when our soules shall be bles∣sed with that eternall happines, & that they shal enjoy the divine vision, in which consisteth our chiefest felicity, we shall then see God as he is, but to conceive and comprehend the infinity of his being, it will be altogether impossible to us. Those that sayle in the maine Sea, which way soever they looke, finde no other object but the heaven, or the waves, their sight being too weake to penetrate to the bottome, or to view the shores; Even so shall we see God, and know him as farre as it shall please him to en∣able us, but so farre shall wee be from compre∣heding him, that he doth comprehend us, and wee should then be no more seene there then a drop of wine in the Ocean. Saint Baile handling this question in the E∣pistle to Emoniu, hath an excellent compari∣son, from the least to the greatest, If we cannot comprehend the composition of a Pismire, for the smalnesse of it, how shall wee comprehend the infinite greatnesse of God. We shall comprehend it indeede, but it shall be as spunge cast into the Ocen, which is fil∣led quite with water, but is overcome, and com∣passed round about by it. I should want time rather then matter, to
speake on a subject so high, and excellent, wee should never have done if we should propound, and resolue the infinite number of arguments, and opinions moved upon this question of our sight of God. But for us, let us hold as the Mathematicians doe, linea recta est brevssima, that the straite line is the shortest, and in this the shortest way is the surest: let us turne neither to the right hand, nor to the lef, from the certaine way of truth, taught unto us by the truth it selfe, to wit, by Ie∣sus Christ, in our Text, saying, Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Let us then purifie our hearts, and cleanse our soules, from the filthinesse of sinne, and from the spots of iniquity; let our consciences bee white as snow, and cleane as washed wooll; let us take the firme and inviolable oath of Allea∣geance to our God, and let us not suffer Satan our mortall enemie to take possession of the fort of our soules, of the hill of Syo, that is of our consciences: let us not suffer him to make a breach in that vow, that we vowed to his obe∣dience at our first reception into the Church by Baptisme, and so wee shall be washed seaven times in the Iordan of repentance, and of con∣trition for our faults; when we have put on the white roabes of holinesse, justice, and inocen∣cie, we shall be invited to the Lambs wedding, we shall sit downe at table with the Kings sonne, wee shall be abundanly filled with the dainties
of his house, and shall drinke in the river of his delights. In a word, when like the high Priest we have left off the habits of our naturall corruption, and put on the white and cleane garment of san∣ctification for our selues, of love for our God, of charity for our neighbour; then, even then, the gate of the most holy place, which is heaven shall be opened unto u, wee shall see Gods Ma∣jestie, not darkly, and as in a clowd, as it hath long appeared to our fore fathers, but rather as a bright shining Sunne, whose vertue shall en∣lighten us, whose love shall warme us, and hose compassions shall animate us, at whose sight wee shall be vivified, consolated, and glo∣rified. For hee will enrowle us among his Angels, will make us Citizens of heaven, and impatriate us to be absolute possessors of the rich treasures of eternall life, where it is farre easier to know what is not there, then to discourse what is. There, there is no death, no wearinesse, no infirmity, no hunger, no thirst, no hea, no cold, no corruption, no want, no mourning, nor sorrow. Wee have told you what there is not there, but what there is there, eye hath not sene, are hath not heard, neither is it entred into the heart of man, what God hath prepared for them that love him: now becase these joyes and felicities have not entred into the heart of man, therefore man must strive to enter into them.
God speakes thus by his Prophet Isaiah, chap. 32. My people shall dwell in a peaceable habitatoin, and in sure wllings, and in quiet resting places. In this blessed life there is a certaine assurance, a sure tranquillity, a happy eternity, an eternall happinesse, a perfect charit, a perpetuall day,  quick motion; in a word, all shall be there led, and governed by the same Spirit. Here let us burne with zeale to ascend to those faire places; let us be enflamed with ex∣treame desire of possessing so goodly an inheri∣tance, and if our bodies cannot as yet goe thi∣ther, yet let our hearts ascend up, if our soule be as yet bound and fastned within this mortall prison; at the least, let our faith flie up to those delicious places, and there rest and stay untill our soules be perfectly pure, cleane, and white, that one day both in body and soule, wee may contemplate Gods divine Majestie, and sing eternally with the holy Angels, Holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts for evermore. AMEN. O Most bountifull God, and most mercifull King, wee thy servants and children here prostrate and humbled before the high and ho∣ly tribunall of thy sacred and soveraigne Ma∣jestie, doe ingenuously confesse, that we are not worthy to lift up our eyes, or our hands to∣wards heaven, to call upon thee in our necessi∣ties, for our sinnes are raised over our heads like terrible mountaines, which seeme to threaten and defie thy judgements, from the top of their
presumptuous impudencie: Iniquity hath made our soules as black as firebrands, and the trans∣gression of thy divine commaundements hath made our consciences more red then scarlet; in a word, forgetting thee, we haue forgotten our selues, and remember but as a dreame our be∣ginning derived from heaven: Wherefore, O good Iesus, O sweet Saviour of our bodies and soules, kindle in our hearts the fire of thy di∣vine love, and let it be a candle to our feete, and a light unto our pathes, that wee may safely escape out of these terrible downefalls, which threaten unto us death and condemnation: wash our soules in the precious blood issuing from thy wounds, make them by thy favour whiter then snow, and then washed wooll; we cannot ente into thy Tabernacle, before wee be clean∣sed of our faults: graunt then unto us by thy mercy one onely drop of this large, and vast ocean of thy great compassions; wash our roabes in the blood of the Lambe, that wee may be made worthy to follow him, whither soever he goeth. Change our eyes into two lively fountaines of penitent teares, which may become a Iordane of griefe, and displeasure, for having beene so wicked before thy face, within the which wee may dip our selues seaven times, yea seaventy times seaven times, that we may be delivered of the spirituall leprosie of sinne, which makes us so oule and ugly in thy sight and presence. And after thou hast pulled off from us the old
man, and cloathed us with the new, which is with justice and holinesse, when thou hast given us the wedding garmet, then we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, at the delicate feast which thou hast prepared for us; and the which must be kept upon the mountaine of the heavenly Sion, where wee shall see thee face to face, where we shall be ravished in this con∣templation, and shall bee quite ex∣changed and transformed in∣to the extasie of this ravishment. Amen.
The third way to Sion. THE CROVVNE OF PEACE AND CONCORD. MATH. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. WHen two Kings to decide some quarrell, are ready to take Armes, they first of all nkindle the fire of warre in their subjects hearts, through all their Dominions, then all is in rouble, combustion, and disorder, and all newes are sorrowfull and la∣metable; on the one side you may see deso∣late Parents, poore olde men, leaning on the brim of their graves, considering, with eyes overflowing with teares, their deare children, whom for the greatnes and multiplicity of their
cruell wounds they can scarcely know. On the other side, you are frighted by the lamentable complaints, by the loude cries, and pitifull la∣menttions, of the bewayling widowes, over the dead bodies of their dearely beloved hus∣bands: In a word, there is nothing but fire, blood, and slaughter to be seene, so that one may properly say, That Warre (the mother of all mischiefe) is as it were a feast celebrated to the honour of death, to whom are continually offered up many pitifull and bloody sacrifices, which she exactly keepes in the grave. But when some great Prince or earthly Mo∣narch undertaketh to agree them, his Embassa∣dors are every where received with open armes, bone-fires, and triumphall arches, erected in token of that joy and contentment which they receive, by their mediation for peace, according to that saying of the Lord, Blessed are the fete of those that bring tidings of peace, Rom. 10.16. Iesus Christ here continueth his Sermon to his Disciples, where in a continued order hee sheweth them the perfetion of blessednesse, he maketh them scale the heavens by eight de∣grees, which they must ascend here on earth. And having spoken formerly of six, hee com∣meth now to the seaventh, saying, Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Which words by Gods assistance, wee will divide into two principall parts; 1. the propo∣sition: 2. the reason of it; the proposition con∣cerneth
the Peacemakers, and their felicity: the reason of this beatitude, is, to be called the children of God. Now for our better understanding of these words, let us handle them all severally, and let us for a while leave this concrete word Peace∣maker, and so come to his abstract, to wit, peace, the which is diversly defined according to the severall sorts and degrees of it. For there is the peace of the body, which is a just temperature of the parts. There is a peace of the irreasonable soule, which is an inordinate rest of the appetite. There is a peace of the reasonable soule, which is a moderated consent of the action, and understanding. There is a peace of the soule and body, which is a well governed life▪ and the health of the li∣ving creature. There is a peace of mortall man, which is a well ordered obedience in faith, under the go∣vernment of the eternall, and divine law. There is a peace of the house, which con∣isteth in a just concord of the dometicall, both in commanding, and obeying. Thee is a peace of the Citie, which is a concord among the Citizens. There is a peace of the heavenly Citie, which is a well governed Societie, wholly and eter∣nally to enjoy God. There is a peace of men, which is a mutuall concord. And againe, there is a peace of all
things, which is a perfect tranquillity of order: now order is nothing else but a true disposition, giving to every thing his true ranke and place. The Hebrew word  shalom, representeth unto us exceeding well her Essence; for it sig∣nifieth a happy successe of all things in God. Where we may note that every word hath his weight, and inestimable value. For first it is a successe, and not a hazard, which is happy and not unlucky, of all, and not of something onely, in God, and not in the world. The Grecians call it , quiet, sweet, gracious, as deserving that name , by excellencie, because there is nothing in the world to bee compared to the excellencie of a publick and particular rest, and tranquillity. The Latines call it , quasi paecata, because it is peaceable, and no way mooved by the windes of seditions, nor of desperate passions; Shee is like the Sea when it is calme and quiet, there is nothing fairer to behold, then the hu∣mid and serene plaines of it, all seeming to be an entire piece of Christall. And to prove that peace is nothing else but gentlenesse, and courtesie, let us heare the Apo∣stle St. Paul, Heb. 11.31. . By faith Rahab the harlot perished not, with them that beleeved not, when she had received the spies with peace, which is gently, and cour∣teously,
so that she did them no harme, nor suf∣fered any to be done unto them, any way at all. So we read that Christ after his resurrection came among his Disciples, saying unto them, Peace be unto you. We reade also in the 2. Chap. of Saint Luke, ver. 29. . Lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, that is, thou sufferest him to depart with happinesse, and felicity, since he hath seene thy face. And in the 10. Chap. of Saint Math. ver. 13. If the house be worthy to receive you, let your peace come upon it: but if the house be not worthy, let your peace returne to you. Where all interpreters agree, that by this word peace, christ understandeth all things good and favourable, all blessings, and all graces. Now that wee may the more delight in the description of this garden of peace, let us there∣in imitate these Painters, who intending to re∣present unto us some very excellent beauty, use to draw and place close by it some black, and ghastly picture, that by the opposition of that deformity, our eyes may take the more plea∣sure and delight, in beholding that faire and beautifull face opposite to it, according to the truth of the Latine Proverb, Contraria contrarijs opposita magis elucescunt. One contrary appeareth better by the opposition of his contrary: so the darknesse of the night makes us find the Sunnes light more pleasant, the thornes embellish the
Roses, and the roughnesse of the black briers seeme to adde excellencie to the soft whitenesse of the Lillies: Even so if wee speake a little of the mischiefes of warre, we shall find the sweet∣nesse of peace farre the more excellent, and with∣out staying, let us here say with Plutarch in the life of Fabius Maximus, That warre is a time when neither right nor reason can finde place: Caesar said, that the time of warre, and that of lawes were two; It is a time when Iustice is trodden under feete, when the time of ill doing is in season, when unfaithfulnesse is taken for vertue: O time pitifully miserable, since force trampleth Iustice under foote, when nothing is to be seene but fire, slaughters, treasons, rob∣beries, cruelties, tortures; in a word, all that fearefulnesse which hell can afford, there you may see virgins ravished, children hanging on their mothers breast slaine, honest women moc∣ked and abused by the insolent souldier, Chur∣ches robbed, houses pillaged; there is nothing to be seene but burning, but slaughtered bodies, but blood; nothing is to be heard but lamen∣table sighes, cries, and groanes; in a word, all humanity is banished from thence, so that wee say, that warre est bonorum mors, omnium vero malorum fons & scaturigo: Warre is the death of goodnesse, and the life and beginning of all evill. Now is not this face at the first sight capable to make us abhorre it, even before we perceive the least lineament, or the least draught or sha∣dow
of beauty, which appeares in the face of his contrary, that is of peace. But let us see the effects of warre in the hearts where it is praedominant, certainly ex malo cor∣uo, malum ovum, ex malo ovo, malum omen, Of an ill Raven, an ill egge, of an ill egge, an ill pre∣sage; for as the Philosophers say, Qualis ca sa talis effectus, as is the cause, so is the effect, Eagles doe not bring forth Doves, nor warre this hor∣rible and fearefull monster, any thing else bu cruelty, rigour, and fiercenesse. When man is possessed by any of these foo∣lish passions, (daughters of disaster, an mo∣thers of misfortune) then his reason is all dis∣figured by it, the use of it is lost, Denigrata est super carbones facis ejus, The functions of his minde are turned upside downe, they are like a broken clock, wherein all is in disorder, and to which there is no trusting: The royall Prophet David sheweth us the effects of it, in few words, In mine anger (saith he) mine eye was troubled, my soule, and my belly were moved. and indeed in that case man is quite perver∣ted, his functions depraved, hee foames at the mouth, his eyes glister, he shaketh, and sweateth all over his body, Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sanguine venae, Lumina gorgoneo saevius ignemicant. As in the clowds are formed all the meteors, all the stormes, thunders, hayles, mists, raines, fogges, that trouble the ayre, make the earth dirty, and cause a thousand incommodities to
the world, even so in the microcosme, or little world, wrath confoundeth all, and overthrow∣eth all order. But when that powerfull planet, the sunne of reason hath dispell'd and scattered the mists of those confusions, the clowds of so many disor∣ders, then his light pierceth and passeth through all those obscure darknesses, to shine on the acti∣ons, and to put the minde in her first station and temper. A cholerick man maketh me remember the Bee, that being troubled, stingeth him that an∣gereth her, but in stinging, leaveth her sting in the wound, and with it her life, Animas{que} in vul∣nere onunt: So the cholerick man thinking to wound others, killeth his owne soule, and mur∣thereth it with his owne weapons, patitur teli vlnera facta suis. Salomon that wie King saith, That the Kings wrath is like the roaring of a Lyon, and against which who can subsist, and that his mildnesse is like the mor∣ning dewe. When the Sunne passeth through the Zodi∣ack, and is entered into the signe of Leo, we en∣dure unsufferable heat, so when wrath is joyned with power, and some likelihood of reason, it produceth strange effects. The Lyon is a beast of an exceeding hot complexion, which causeth in his mouth so strong an infection, and stinke, that when hee hath devoured the halfe of his prey, that which he leaveth is suddenly putrified, and corrupted,
this eternall fire is so violent in this beast, that it is commonly the cause of his death, happe∣ning by the corruption of his bowels. Is not this a lively Embleme and representa∣tion of the cholerick man, whose slandering tongue is so venomous, and stinking, that it cor∣rupteth, and infecteth his neighbours good name, if he touch it never so little, in a word, wrath is a black and burned humour, that not onely corrupteth the body, but also killeth the soule. In the law of Moses▪ those birds that had crooked clawes, an lived by prey, were not to be eaten, nor sacrificed; under the shadow of this figure let us light this torch of truth, that all that suffer themselues to be carried away by wrath, that gape after revenge and hatred, are uncleane before god, and unworthy to be offe∣red to him in sacrifice: If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy bro∣ther hath ought against thee: Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and goe thy way, be reconciled to thy brother, saith our Saviour, Math. 5.23. And the royall Prophet sayes, Bloodie men are abomination to the Lord, Psal. 5.7. Hitherto wee have seene the horrour, and mischiefes of warre, with some of the fruits she commonly beareth, to wit, cruelty, eldest daugh∣ter of this terrible monster: now let us con∣template a while the picture of peace her con∣trary, and let us tast with delectation the sweet∣nesse, and excellencie of the inestimable fruites
which she beareth, & propagates in the hearts of peacemakers, which are so great, that St.August. saith, Tantum est pacis bonū, ut in rebus terrenis nihil gratius soleat audiri, nihil desiderabilius concupisci, nihil postremo possit melius inveniri. Peace is so great a good upon the earth, that no pleasanter thing can be heard, nothing more delightfull desired, and nothing better found. Saint Bernard in the 9. Serm. on the Lords Supper speaketh thus of it, The peace of this world is in the which whilest we dwell, we van∣quish our enemies, wee love one another, and judge not of those things that are hidden from us, that peace which shall bee in the world to come, shall be when wee shall raigne without enemies, where one shall not be of contrary ad∣uice to the other; in a word, where all things shall bee knowne, and open to every one, and endeth thus, Iesus Christ is this true peace, be∣cause hee hath reconciled us to God his Father, by the inestimable price of his blood. Saint Augustine in the Sermon of the word of the Lord speaketh thus of it, Pax est serenitas mentis, tranquillitas animi, simplicitas cordis, vincu∣lum amoris, consortium charitatis, baec est quae simul∣tates tollit, bella compesit, iras comprimit, superbos calcat, humiles amat, discordes cedat, inimicos con∣cordat, cunctis est placida, nescit extolli, nescit in∣flari, hanc qui acceperit teneat, qui perdiderit repe∣tat, qui amiserit exquirat, quoniam qui in cadem non rit inventus, a patre abdicatur, a Filio exhaerdatur, à Spiritu Sancto alienus efficitur, necad haereditatem.
Domini poterit venire, qui testimonium pacis noluerit observare. These be golden words deserving well to be knowne, and to be exactly obserued. Peace, saith hee, is a calmenesse of the under∣standing, a tranquillity of the minde, simpli∣city of the heart, the bond of peace, the practise of charity; it is peace that taketh away qua∣rels, endeth warres, appeaseth wrath, treadeth the proud under foote, loves the humble, paci fieth the quarelsome, agreeth the enemies, which is gracious to all, which is not high minded, nor proud, which whosoever hath received, let him conserue it, who so hath lost it, let him seeke and recover it, for hee that shall not be found in it, is disclaimed by the Father, disinherited by the Sonne, alienated from the Holy Ghost, nor shall hee ever attaine to the Lords inheritance, that would not obserue the bonds and testimo∣nie of peace. Now we haue heard these two pillars of the Church of God; let us hearken to himself, speaking by the mouth of his chosen vessell, Co∣loss. 3.15. Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called, in one body, and be ye thankfull. And Philip. 4.7. The peace of God which passeth all understanding, keepe your hearts and mindes, through Iesus Christ. And that which should most bind us to love this Peace, is the soring or head founaine from whence it sloweth; for as the warre of sinne proceedeth from the wicked one, so the peace of our consciences commeth from the Father of
eternity, from the King of mercy, as wee read 1. Thessal. 5.23. The very God of peac, sanctiie you wholly. This peace of conscience is a marke, and an effect of our iustification by faith, as wee reade Rom. 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through r Lord Iesus Christ. All these places should induce and incite us to the practise of peace, since the recompence promised to it is so excellent; In a word▪ let us shut the gate of peace, with that saying of Xeno∣phon, . Peace is the greatest good can hap∣pen to men, and warre the greatest hurt. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. This word peacemaker is diversly interpreted by Author, for some hold that those are they which live justly, and who by their actions ne∣ver provoke the divine Iustice. Others as August. hold, that those are meant, which possesse a very peaceable conscience, that is, that are not agitated by the troubles of sinne. Others beleeve, that those are they that are not Authors of quarrels, and dissentions. Others understand it of those that forgive freely the injuries, and wrongs done unto them, as Hilarius. The last, and most likely to be the best opi∣nion, of the which number are Chrysostome, Eu∣thymius, and Theophylacte, is, that the true peace∣makers
are those that are themselues, and in themselues peaceable, and pacified, and that be∣sides, that try their uttermost endevours and po∣wer, to compound differences, and to intro∣duce peace where dessention & disorder raigne: And this interpretation commeth nearer to the Greeke word of our Text, , Quasi pa∣cemfacientes, aut conciliantes, Those that com∣pound quarrels; and this interpretation is also very convenient to the charge and duty which was enjoyned the Apostles, to whom Iesus Christ spake these words, who were to keepe maximes altogether contrary to those which the world practiseth, who doth esteeme farre more those that fight valiantly, and that con∣tinue obstinately in cobat, then those that make peace, and pacifie all things; now this maxime was to be practised by the Apostles, as being to fight and overcome the world, not by force of Armes, but by gentlensse and mild∣nesse, as we read Saint Luke 10. chap. ver. 5. Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. Besides, the Apostles were to imitate the Prince of the Apostles, Iesus Christ▪ the true and perfect representation of meekenesse, humility, and mildnesse, as we may understand and know, if we runne over all the actions of his life, untill his ascension up to heaven: now this meeke∣nesse proceeded from him, both by inclination, for he was the Lamb of God, and by imitation, for he was like his Father, that is not a God of
confusion, but a God of peace, as the Apostle saith, in the 1. to the Cor. 14.33. And Rom. 16.20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feete shortly. And 2. Cor. 11. Brethren live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you: It was needfull, I say, that these good Disciples should bee like their Master, whose duty and charge it was to reconcile men unto God, as we read Rom. 5.10. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, wee shall be saved by hi life. And 2. Cor. 5.18.20. God hath reconciled us to him∣slfe by Iesus Chrit, and hath given us the ministery of reconciliation. For God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himselfe, and not imputing their tres∣passes unto them. And Coloss. 1.20. It pleased the Father to recon∣cile all things to himselfe, through the blood of his crosse. O what praise deserue those soules, that see∣ing so many dissentions and quarrells kindled, runne presently, and make hast, to bring the wholesome water of peace and quietnesse, least the continuation should cause a totall ruine, or some irreparable hurt; those, I say, are doubt∣lesse, and without comparison to be preferred to the valiantest Champions; that come into the field, for those overcome the bodies, these vanquish and tame the mindes, those fight for a crowne that will wither, these eternally carrie away a greene crowne of benedictions and bles∣sings; those teare and breake their bodies, these
beautifie and strengthen their soules; In a word, the issue of the combat of those is recompen∣sed, but by a little weake renowne, in the uncon∣stant & different minds of men, but the end o these is an exceeding excellent glory, an eternall triumph, and trophees that never die, in the blessed remembrance of God and the Angels. God commanded Noah to build an Arke of polished wood, covered with pitch, so must all faithfull▪ Christians bee inseparably united the one to the other, by chaines of love, and bonds of concord and amity, that so they may escape from the deluge of unreconcileable hared, and quarrells. A ship split, and that takes in water every where, giveh feare of an infallible shipwrack, for every Kingdome divided shall fall into de∣solation, saith Iesus Christ, right so rough and unsociable spirits, that will never consent to an agreement, are thereby nearer their grave. In the Arke of Noah, the Lyon was with the Hart, the Woolfe with the Lamb, the Eagle with he Pigeon, the Hawk with the Partridge; so the peacemaker must procure peace, not one∣ly among his neighbours, when they are fal∣len out, but he must also receive into the Are of his heart friends and foes, without distinction or difference of perons, Thou shalt love thy neigh∣bour as thy selfe, saith the law of Moses; but the law of grace goes farther, and sayeth, Love your enemies, pray for them that persecute you, Ma∣thew 5.
and blessing which he gave, was, Peace be to this house, shewing unto us by that, that the greatest good and blessing that can happen to man, confist in peace. When hee was ready to depart out of this world, hee said to his Apostles, I give you my peace, I leave you my peace, as being the rarest gift after saluation, which he could give unto them, Gen. 14.27. Saint Augustine is very witty in these points, Sicut spiritus humanus nunquam vivisicat membra nisi fuerint unita: sic spiritus sanctus nunquam nos vivificat nisi paece unitos. As (saith hee) the soule of man doth not quicken or vivifie our mem∣bers unlesse they be joyned together: so the holy Ghost doth never vivifie or quicken us, but when we are united by the bond of peace. Ignatius saith, . 'There is nothing better then peace. And Saint Basil . There is nothing more proper and natu∣all to a Christian, then to reconcile and pa∣cifie. Let us say with an ancient Author, that peace is the salt of this life, without which it is unsa∣vorie, and without relish. When salt is put into the water, it melteth, and insensibly becomes liquid, but when it is howne into the fire, it cracketh, untill it bee quite consumed; Even so is the peacemaker, for he conformeth and fashioneth himselfe so qui∣etly to peace and tranquilliy, that hee liveth
therein as in his owne element, out of the which hee cannot subsist, but when either by chance, or misfortune, he findes himselfe in the midst of noyse, in the fire of disorder, and among the flames of contentions & riots, then he crieth, runneth, and tormenteth himselfe, untill by his agitation and diligence, hee have quenched and repressed all, holdig this indubi∣table maxime, that Candida pax homines, trux decet ira seras. In a word, to end this discourse of politique peace, we say, that if warre be a thorne, pace is a Rose; if that be bitternesse, this is sweet∣nesse; if that be a storme, this is a calme wea∣ther; if that be full of mifchiefes, this is full of goodnesse; if that causeth poverty, this brings and gives riches; In a word, if that killeth, this giveth life; and to end with the Poet, let us say, Nulla salus bello, pacem te poscimus omnes. But let us after the example of the high Priest, enter into the most holy place of the Temple of Salomon, and there visite that saced arke of our consciences, within the which God will keepe his sessions: let us contemplate that inestimable peace, immediatly proceeding from the remission of our sinnes, and most particular and perfect assistance of the holy Ghost, dwel∣ling in our soules; for it is impossible that any other, but the just should possesse that peace of conscience, seeing that betweene sinne (the de∣vils child, and the father of trouble) and peace, and quietnesse, there is so great an antipathy,
that if sinne can set the least footing in any place, hee driveth away presently from thence peace and rest, and in their roome introduceth and breedeth therein quarrells and contentions, which like tormentors, doe miserably torture, and cruelly handle the miserable hearts where they lodge; and therefore the ancient Fathers of the Church openly pronounce, that the grea∣test felicity wherein Adam the first modell of mankinde was created, was peace of the heart, that rest of conscience, which hee possessed ab∣solutely within Paradise, having no other care or thought, but to love his Creator, to honour his Conseruator, and to adore his God. But after that hee was fallen from that state of innocencie, by the greatnesse of his fault, af∣ter that sinne by disobedience had driven away pece from his heart, then you see him in trou∣ble, he flieth, he hideth himselfe, he is afraid of himselfe, he covereth his nakednesse with figge leaves, he trembleth, and dareth not answere to that terrible and fearefull voyce, which hee heard walking in the Garden, behold the first effects which his sinne brought forth. The Royall Prophet David, Psalm. 85.10. saith, Righteousnesse and peace have kissed each other, vpon which Saint Augustine discourseth thus; Duae sunt amicae, justitia & pax, tu forte unam vis, & alteram nonfacis, nemo enim est qui non ve∣lit pacem, sed non omnes volunt operari justitiam, si amicam pacis non amaveris, neque te amabit pax ipsa.
Righteousnesse and Peace bee two friends, thou it may bee desirest the one, and wilt not practise the other; there bee none but wish for peace, but all will not doe righteousnesse; if thou love not the friend of peace, peace also will not loue thee. Iustice with reason is called the mother of peace, because it goeth alwayes before, and is immediatly followed by it, Peace is the worke of justice, saith the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 32.17 And the Psalmist in the 72. Psalm. ver. 7. In those dayes righteousnesse shall flourish, and abundance of peace. And Psalm. 119. ver. 165. Great peac have they which love thy law. From which propositions, wee draw this conclusion, that to have this peace of consci∣ence it is needfull for us to be just, to feare God, and to walke exactly in the obseruation of his sacred commandements. So contrarily the wicked can have no peace, because of the worme of sinne, that gnaweth continually their soules, as we read Psalm. 28.3. Ill lucke and unhappinesse is in their wayes, and the way of peace have they not knowne. There is no peace for the wicked, saith the Lord; they thinke ne∣verthelesse that they have this peace, when they enjoy their pleasures; but this peace lasteth but a moment, and like their pleasure is presently followed by an extreame griefe, it is lethargick sleepe, very dangerous; it is a security, but it is carnall, it is a sleepe, but that representeth unto them a thousand apparitions, and a thousand
strange visions. The wicked mans peace is like those fires which by night appeare burning in hills and medowes, the which if a man follow, they will insensibly leade him into terrible downefalls, but the true peace of a good con∣science, as saith an ancient Author, is the title of Religion, he Temple of Salomon, the field of blessing, the garden of delights, the Angels joy, the Arke of the covenant, the treasure of the great King, the Court of God, the Tabernacle of his Sonne, the tent of his Spirit, the tower of Sion, the booke with seaven seales, which is to be opened upon that great and fearefull day of judgement. Saint Augustine (in his Citie of God) speaketh thus of it, Pax nostra propria, hic est, cum Deo per fidem, & in aeternum erit cum illo per speciem, talis est paxut solatium miseriae sit potius quam beatitudi∣nis gaudium. Our owne peace (that is the peace of our hearts) is here with God by faith, and in eternall life shall it be with him by vision: that peace which now we enjoy, is but a sparke in respect of that great fire, here it susisteth but by faith, then it shall be effected. In a word let us say, that the peace of con∣science is a particular feeling and knowledge that God is pacified with us, that he hath blot∣ted out our misdeedes, that hee hath cast away our iniquities from before his face, like a clowd, that wee are no longer under the Kingdome of Satan, nor of the flesh, but are received in our heavenly Fathers favour, like the prodigall
child, that wee shall dwell in his house all the dayes of our life, and there receive those goods, joyes, and delights which he hath reserud for his children. Hitherto wee have spoken of peace in gene∣rall, and in particular of politique peace, and of the care must bee used to bring it to passe, of peace of conscience, or with God, of the worlds, or wicked mans peace, that troubleth all them that live not like him: now let us speake of that peace which is in our selues, and of the vertue of it. Among all the perfections wherewith our first Father Adam was adorned, during the state of his innocencie, mildnesse was one, at the sent whereof all living creatures ranne to him, to doe him homage, and yeeld him obedience. Moses in the booke of Numbers, is called the debonnaire, or gracious, for which quality, God loved him dearely, and for a testimoniall of his love, called him to that honourable charge of deliverer, Prince and law giver of his people. The King and Pophet David had this ver∣tue in great measure in him, for which cause God changing his Sheepheards crooke into a Royall Scepter, gave him victory over a world of enemies, that rose up continually against him, which maketh him to cry out in one of his Psalmes, Lord remember David and his mansuetude or clemencie. I the booke of Leviticus, God commandeth the Priests to offer him a Lame without blemish for a peace offering; a Lambe
is the symbole of mildnesse, then according to that command, hee that will receive the peace∣makers recompence from God, must offer him his soule full of gentlenesse and mildnesse. The Lambe in the Revelation of all living creatures, was onely found worthy to open the booke sealed with seaven seales; so among all men the faithfull onely, and among the faithfull the meeke, shall bee able to open the booke of life, there to behold his name written before the foundation of the world. The Bridegroome in the Canticles, calleth thu his beloved, Come my Dove, that at in the clefs of the rocke, thy eyes are like Doves eyes, and thy cheekes like Turles, my Dove is alone, and perect. Now it is familiar and common enough, that of all creatures Doves ar the symbols of mild∣nesse, and meekenesse, for it is noted that they have no gall. And here to apply these places to our design, let us know that the Bridegroome in this epithalamium or marriage song, is Iesus Christ himselfe, speaking to his Church, setting her forth by her lively colours, by the pensill of his love, shewing us in this comparison of the Dove, the perfections wherewith shee is adorned, where if wee waigh and consider dili∣gently the force of every word, wee shall finde them all emphaticall, and deseruing a more par∣icular search and obseruation. He saith first Veni Columba mea, come my Dove, hee doth not call her my Eagle, or my
Hawke, for those are creatures too cruell, lo∣ving nothing but blood, and slaughter, and their humour is incompatible with the Bride∣groomes bounty, who desireth that the Church (his well beloved Spouse) bee altogether like him, and therefore he calleth her my Dove, as having no gall, nor bitternesse in her soule. When that sweet IESVS was baptized by Iohn in Iordane, the three divine persons of the glorious Trinity were clearely manifested, for the majestuous voyce of the Father was heard speaking from heaven thus, This is my well be∣loved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased. Mathew 3.17. Iesus Christ was in Iordane, and the holy Ghost descended from heaven like a Dove, and lighted upon him, from which place wee may draw this instruction, that if wee desire to bee called the children of God, if we wish to heare from heaven that gracious voyce, speaking to our soules, Thou art my well beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased. If wee aspire to that great happinesse to re∣ceive the spirit of grace, mildnesse, and meeke∣nesse in our consciences. Let us remember that wee must be like unto sweet IESVS our example, hee was naked, so must we put off cruelty, malice, and hatred: he was in the water, even so to enjoy so great a fa∣vour, we must plunge our selues in the rivrs of our teares, in the Iordane of a holy and true re∣pentance, which may open our hearts, and con∣tinually
touch them with griefe, for our fore∣past offnces. It was Gods ordinance under the law of Mo∣ses, that when a man was uncleane, hee should for his purification resort to the Temple, and there offer two Turtle Doves. That we may light the toch of truth with∣in the shadow of Moses law, let us say, that there is nothing that more infecteth and soyleth the soule, then cruely, debates, and hatred; It is a Gangrene that gnaweth and undermineth her, untill it seeth her absolutely possessed by wic∣ked spirits; but the onely remedy to this obsti∣nate disease, is, to rune to the sacred Temple of Gods divine mecy, there to offer him the gift of a mild, meeke, and peaceable conscience. When Noah would know if the waters were withdrawne from upon the face of the earth, he sent forth a Dove, which came to him in the evening with an Olive branch in her mouth; also he sent forth a Raven, which returned not, because hee stayd on the dead bodies, and stinking carcasses of those which died in this inundation. God (in this example) is represented unto us by Noah, our soule by the Dove, peace by the Olive branch, it is God that staying in the Arke of heaven, sndth our soules to visite the in∣undations of this world, which messge faith∣fully to performe, they do not sit on the highest and loftiest tops of Cedars, and Pinetrees, for they love not vanity, nor the glory of this
world, they doe not pearch upon the Iuniper, nor thornes of quarrels and contentions, but upon the Olive tree of mildnesse, and meeke∣nesse, wherewith they adorne themselues, and so prepare themselues to returne into their hea∣venly Country, there to give a true account of their journey. But the Ravens that stayed upon the carcasses drowned by the flood, are those blacke and in∣fected soules, that delight in nothing but quar∣rels and contentions, and who so excessively love the corruptons of this world, that they never returne to heaven, from whence they tooke their first light. The excellencie of this particular peace can∣not be sufficiently knowne, without we consider the privation of it, that is contemplte her con∣trary; let us judge it by our selues, for there is no man that sinneth not, there is nothing more extrauagant in the world then a seared consci∣ence, nothing more tossed up and downe then a soule troubled and vexed by the unquietnesse of sinne, for example doe wee seke the meanes to revenge some injurie? presently our minde runneth and rangeth all about, to obtaine a suf∣ficient satisfaction, Our eyes dart and cast forth burning flames of wrath, and rage; our mouth proffereth nothing by injuries, and blasphe∣mies; our feete cannot stand still; our hands itch; our hearts vomit revenge, and our braines are so preoccupated by this damnable passion, that there is nothing but confusion to be seene,
as in a clocke out of order, whose wheeles are dismounted; these be the effects of sinne, that never gives rest to a soule, never so little touched by the venome of his passion. Consider  pray, a malefactor how bold and secret soever his crime be, hee thinks neverthe∣lesse that all know it, the least looke altereth his face, and for his contenance, If hee thinke that to keepe off be good for him, when he is in the fields, he thinketh every bush a Sergeant, to lay hold on him, every tee a Hangman, that stayes for him, and every leafe that stirreth, a witnesse to testifie his wickednesse. Now contraiwise, let us see the sweet rest and tranquillity of a soule that hath made her peace with her God, whom shee loves with all her strength, and that cherisheth her neighbour as much as her selfe, who is not puffed up with the winde of ambition, and that is not infected with covetousnesse, who laugheth at wrongs, and careth not for revenge, who goeth boldly every where, and feareth nothing, for he that is deepely in Gods favour, should be afraid of no∣thing; in a word, a quiet and peaceable soule studieth and busieth her selfe about nothing, but to love, serue, and honour her God, shee is al∣wayes betweene love and feare, love to please him, feare of offending him, a feare, I say filiall, but not seruile. When I thinke upon this peace and tran∣quillity of the minde and soule, I am like the needle of a Compasse, that alwayes turnes to∣wards
the North of my desires, towards my Ie∣sus, my Saviour, and my God; which is the excelletest and perfectest patterne of peace and mildnesse that I am able to chuse, or propose in this behalfe and matter: I am (saith he by the mouth of the Prophet Isaih) the meeke Lambe, he is brought as a Lambe to the slaughter, and as a dumbe Sheepe before her shearers, and hee opened not his mouth, Isaiah 53.7. It is a thing very frequently, and commonly knowne, that the Panther smlleth so sweet, that all other beasts come to smell to her: Our sweet Iesus is represented by her, both by her name and effects, for in Greke  signifieth all, as God was defined by Plato. Iesus Christ breathes forth so sweet and fra∣grant a smell, that it embalmeth the faithfulls soules, so speaketh the Spouse in the Canticles, The name of my beloved is like oyle shed, therefore have the young maydens lovd thee so dearely: by these maydens wee must understand the virgins of finne, those that have not knowne iniquity, that love peace, and seeke after it; after hee go∣eth on, Chap 4.11. Thy lips, O my Spouse! drop as the hony combe: hony and milke are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon. Wee should passe oo often over the same steps and path, if we should here againe speake of the admirable and inimitable mildnesse, and tranquillity of our good Master and Saviour Iesus Christ, whose birth preacheth unto us
humility, his life peace, and his death com∣passion. Let us then strive to imitate him as much as wee can possible, in our youth, being very humble: in our viril age, peaceable, and in our old age pitifull; and in all the course of our life milde, bountifull, and loving, following Davids counsell, Love peace and seeke it, for God with a fa∣vourable and gracious eye, beholds him that is stu∣dious of peace, and he heareth his most humble pray∣ers, in the tie of his affliction, Psalm. 34.16. Be∣hold great and divine profits, faire ad admira∣ble rewards and recompences, that the faithfull get, by seeking after peace with God, and by having procured all the meanes of agreement with their neighbours, both in things that con∣cerne them, and in things needfull to the union and concord of all our brethren. Let us now heare that gracious and favou∣rable voyce, shewing unto us the profit and re∣compence which wee must without doubt ex∣pect, for having beene peacemakers, it is Iesus Christ himselfe, who is not a man, that hee should lye, nor the Sonne of man, that he should repent, when he saith in our text, Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be cal∣led h children of God. He doth not onely say they shall be blessed, after their death, but they are so already▪ because that he makes them know in their soules, the de∣light he takes in it, and the goods which they shall receive, which is eternall peace, Blessed then
are the seete of those that bring tidings of peace, Isaiah 52.7. This particle, For, sheweth the reason of their blessednese, and not the cause, for if all the peacemakers wer the children of God, by conequence many Turkes and Pagans should be such, because they are peacemakers. But the tree must be first good, before it can beare good fruit, so wee must first be the chil∣dren of God, before wee can be true peacema∣kers, for those that are peacemakers not being the children of God, have already received their reward, that is, they have received the praise and applause of the world, which they were peacemakers o obtaine, but all that is no∣thing but a maske and false apparition of that true peace, which God recommendeth unto us. In this reason of Christs, why the peacema∣kers shall be called the children of God, wee must note and obserue a double Hebraisme, the one in the word Children, the other in the verbe, they shall be called, vocabuntur. The first Hebraisme is in the word Filij, Children, which in the holy tongue signifieth comforme, and like, as Math. 5.44.45. Love your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you, that ye may e the chil∣dren that is like to your Father which is in heaven. The other Hebraisme is in the word , in Hebrew  Kara, that is erunt, or vocabun∣tur, they shall be called, which is turned erunt,
they hall be, where of wee have an example, Genes. 21.12. God speaking to Abraham, saith, I Isaac shall thy sede be called, that is shall thy seede be. Of which words Saint aul is an irrepre∣hensible interprer, Rom. 9.7.8. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise ar counted for the seed. The Prophet Isaiah 36.7. useth the same phrase, My house shall be called an house of rayer for all people. And Saint Luke interpreting these words, chap. 19.46. saith, It is written, My house is the hous of prayer, but ye have made it a denne of theeves; and indeede this word shall be called, seemeth to me much more emphaticall, and comprehndig mor then the word to be one∣ly, becaus this to be called, est in rerum natura, is in the nature of the things, and besides, that it is knowne and published of every man: there∣fore Blessed re the peaemakers, or they shall not onely be the children of God, but also shall be knowne, ad acknowledged for such, even by their greatest enemies, who beore thought them to be foolish and pusllanimous, but then they shll be forcd to confesse that they are the true children of God, and to speake like the wicked, Wisedome he 5. Chap. Then saith she, shall the just appeare in safey before the face of them that have ormented him, and that shall have rejected
his labour, who seing him hall be seased with hor∣rible feare, and shall ee frighted to see him beyond their xpectation saved; then changing their opini∣ons, & sighing for griefe shall be in their hearts, they will say among themselues, Behold this is he of whom sometimes we laughed, and made proverbs of dishonour; We fooles thought his life madnesse, and his death infamie, and how is hee counted among the children of God, and hath his portion among the Saints? Blessed then are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. This word childe of God, is diversly taken in Scripture, and according to the Hebrew phrase, this word Sonne signifieth him that is vowed and ordained to any thing: so we reade Saint Math. 9.15. The children of the Bridechamber, that is, those that are ordained for the wedding, can∣not mourne as long as the Bridegroome is with them. And Saint Iohn 17.1. While I wa with them in the world, I kept them in thy name, those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the Sonne of perdition, that is, he that was or dai∣ned to destruction: but this kind of speech touch∣eth not our text. But let us say that this word Sonne of God, is commonly atributed in Scripture either to Ie∣sus Christ, as being the naturall Sonne of God, , consubstantiall, and coeternall with his Father, of the same will, , and same power with him, being both true God, and true man, the divine nature neither confound∣ing
nor destroying the humane, and the humani∣ty not being mingled and changed into the Godhead, both natures remaining entire and perfect, make but one person; He I say is cal∣led the Sonne of God, by the acknowledge∣ment and confession of the Father himselfe, Math. 17.5. When Iesus Christ tooke with him Pe∣ter, Iames, and Iohn, and brought them up into an high mountaine, and being transfigured before them, they heard a voyce from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased, heare him. We read also the same words in the 3. Chap. 17. ver. of the same Evangelist. The Father and the Sonne sunt relata, say the Philosophers, are relatives, that is, are referred the one to the other; for there is no Father, but there must likewise be a Sonne, whence I draw this conclusion, That God the Father being such, that is, having that title and quality be∣fore the Creation of the world, consequently Iesus Christ was before it, also his generation then is immediatly from the Father, as being begotten of him from all eternity, by a way in∣comprehensible to us; for, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word as God, th same was in the beginning with God, Iohn 1.1. And in the 1. Chap. to the Heb. ver. 5. unto which of the Angels saith he at any time, Thou art my Sonne, tis day have I begotten thee: And againe, I will be to him a Father, and hee shall be to me a Sonne, .
Hee is not then called Sonne by adoption, or for respects of love, or for any consideration, but onely because hee is begotten of he Father before the Creation of all things, as wee reade Coloss. 1.15. He is the Image of the inuisible God, the first borne of every creature: which is prooved againe out of the 1. Chap. of Saint Iohn, ver. 18. No man ath seene God at any time, the onely begt∣ten Sonne which is in the bosome of the Father, hee hath declared him. Vpon this place Hilarius li. 6. saith, that Hoc no∣mine vnigeiti adoptio de trinitate excluditur, & na∣tura magis asseritur. By this word onely begt∣ten, adoption is excluded from the Trinitie, and nature the more confirmed. And Saint Chrysostome very subtilly, Christm non eodem modo quo caeteri homines unigenitum dici, nam caeteros quidem quod soli ex parentibus nati sint unigenitos dici, Christum non solum quod solus ex patre, sed etiam quod singulari & ineffabili modo na∣tus est unigenitum appellari. Christ is not called the onely Sonne after the sort of other men, who are called such, because they are borne alone to their Parents; now Christ is no cal∣led the onely Sonne in that respect alone, that he is the onely naturall Sonne of his Father, but also beause he hath beene begotten by a speci∣all and ineffable way. But whither doth the winde of our discourse carrie us, why doe we touch this divine subject, more worthy of admiration then capable of de∣scription; wee shall more lively describe it by
our silence, then by our obscure representations. Neverthelesse for satisfaction to our curiosity, which is never contented with reason, and that will not be contained within the limits of civi∣lity, and modesty; let us bring one onely com∣parison, to give us some sparke of knowledge of this ineffable generation of the Sonne of God. When a man seeth himselfe in a well polished glasse, he presently seeth his image, and the fi∣gure of himselfe, having the same markes, and motions with his, which is caused by the re∣flection of the species within the eye, and there is so great a relation betweene the species, and the image, that one cannot be taken away with∣out annihilating the other; and although both the sight and reason make us ee, that they are severll things, truth also and experience makes us know that those two things subsist by one onely Essence, and that both have but one and the same subsistance, to wit, that of the species opposite to the glasse. So God from all Eternity, contemplating his divine Essence, made such a reflection upon his person, that of this reflection hee produced and begot that eternall Wisedome, which is the Saviour and Redeemer of our soules; the soo∣ner we can goe from this matter is our best, for wee should be like them that will paint and re∣present the Sunne with a coale. And indeede how should it be possible, that we that are poore Owles and Batts, should b∣hold so great a light; how should wee that are
poore Pismires stirre so great mountaines? We shall sooner put the whole sea in the palme of our hands, then wee can any way comprehend this large and spatious ocean of the divine ge∣neration, within the little compasse of our un∣derstanding. Since then that we cannot ascend so high, let us stop and stay our contemplation upon our selues, where we shall have a more free accesse; and continuing our first discourse, let us remem∣ber, that we may be called the children of God three wayes, 1. First, the Scripture maketh men∣tion of the naturall generation of Christ, indi∣viduall, and incommunicable to any other, but to him onely. There is a filiation, or (not to speake barba∣rously with the Shooleme) the Scripture gi∣veth this title of Sonne of God, to the Angels and Princes of the earth, which is a title of honour and affection, as wee read Iob 1.6. Now there was a day when the sonnes of God (that is the Angels) came to present themselues before the Lord; and Satan came also among them. And Genes. 6.4. When the sonnes of God came in unto the daughers of men; The seaventy Interpreters by the sonnes of God here understand the Angels: but Saints Augustine in the Citie of God by the sonnes of God, un∣derstandeth the children of Seth, which was a blessed family, which came in unto the daugh∣ters of Cain. Among the children of God, in affection and honour are first placed, the Princes and Poten∣tates
of the earth, as we read Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the most high. And Ierem. 31.9. I will cause them to walke by the rivers of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble, for I am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first borne. The third sort of the children of God, is of them that are such by adoption and by grace, as we reade Ephes. 1.5. God hath predestinated us unto the adoption of children, by Iesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will. And Galath. 4.5. God sent forth his Sonne made of a woman, that wee might receive the adoption of sonnes. And Iames 1.18. Of his owne will begate hee us, with the word of trueth, that we should be a kinde of first fruits of his creatures. And 1. Epist. of Saint Iohn, Chap. 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sonnes of God: beloved, now are we the sonnes of God, and it doth not yet ap∣peare what we shall be. Athanasius rat. 2. that which is naturally be∣gotten of another, must bee esteemed his true progeniture: but those that receive the title of Sonne onely by grace, and by vertue, receive not the right of Sonnes by nature, but onely by grace: Quod secundum naturam ex aliquo gignitur, id vera ejus progenies censendum es, qui vero ex vir∣tute, & gratia nomen filiorum solum modo obtinent, non natura, sed gratia jus filiorum obtinent.
Ambros. lib. 1. de fide cap. 9. Wee are called Sonnes by adoption, but he (speaking of Christ) is such by the truth of his nature, per adoptionem nos filij dicimur, ille per veritatem naturae est. Augustin. Epist. 120. cap. 4. Wee were some∣thing before we were Sonnes, and wee have re∣ceived that benefit to be made what wee were not, as hee that is adopted was not the sonne of him that adopteth him; neverthelesse hee was, since he hath beene adopted, and from that gra∣cious generation is distinguished; he that being the Sonne of God, came downe to be made the Sonne of man, that he might make us that were the sonnes of men, the children of God, Eramus aliquid antequam essemus filij, & accepimus benefi∣cium, ut fieremus quod non eramus, sicut qui adop∣tatur, antequam adoptaretur nondum erat ejus filius à quo adoptatur, erat jam tamen, qui adoptaretur, & ab hac generatione gratiae discernitur ille filius, qui cum esset filius Dei, venit ut fieret filius hominis, donare{que} nobis qui eramus filij hominum, filios Dei fieri. Many of the Fathers doe daintily describe this free adoption & filiation, for so the Greekes interpret this word Adoption, having no other to expresse his signification, but this word  filiation or adoption, but that wee may remem∣ber, that when our first Father Adam fell from the state of grace in which he was created, hee became the enemie of God, for sinne by his gluttonie having seased the dungeon of his soule, inciteth and provoketh him continu∣ally
to warre against God by disobedience to his divine commaundements, and by the same sinne he made God his enemie, so that his re∣venging justice instantly tooke from him that faire Robe of Iustice, holinesse, and innocencie, in which he was created. But his mercie being not able to suffer that man, that maister-piece of his hands, should be for ever banished & confined within the aines and torments of hell, to satisfi his Iustice, hath left some in their Reprobation, to endure and suffer the punishment due to their faults, and hath chosen and elected some to testifie in them the effect of his compassions, braking the chaines wherewith Satan kept them bound, and that by sending into the world his onely and well beloved Sonne, who hath paid their ran∣some by the inestimable price of his pretious blood; and moreover, having given them li∣berty, hee hath besides bestowed on them the gift to be made the children of God, and co∣heires with his Sonne of eternall and most bles∣sed life: And thus it is, that wee are called the children of God in our text, children by adop∣tion, by favour and by grace. This custome of adopting is common and familiar among men, for we see many that having cast their affection upon strange children, receive them into their houses, love them dearely, bring them up with great care, and at their lifes end appoint unto hem either all, or part of their best iheri∣tance.
Let us now draw some intrutions from all this discourse, and let us say, That since God hath so much honoured us, as to adopt us for his children, that we mut not beare unworthi∣ly that title, to the end that we may eceive the effect of his invariable promises, to wit, the in∣heriance of heaven, and life eterall. Good children strive to tread upon the holy steps of their Parents, imiating in all things their good and laudable actions; so must wee with all our power follow the steps, ad imitate the actions of our heavenly Father, whose name is the great God of peace. Let us also imitate or eldest brother Iesus Christ our Saviour, who is the true image of the Father, who exhorteth us by the mouth of the vessell of his election, to fly quarrels and contentions, saying, 2. Cor. 13.11. Brethren live in peace, and the GOD of love and peace shall be with you. Let us live a blamelesse and innocent life both before God and before men, before God in holinesse, before men in justice, that so God may be appeased with us, and that our soules may be voyd of those feares which sinne con∣ceiveth in the hearts of the wicked, who conti∣nually representeth, and setteth before his eyes the deposition of the witnesses, the mortall sen∣tence of the Iudges, and the intollerable cruelty of the hangman, although oftentimes no man have any knowledge of his crime. This peace is for our selues, for the rest and
tranquillity of our consciences, and for the sal∣vation of our soules. Let us also seeke to have peace with all the world, as much as in us lieth, let us hate noyse, and fly from ryots and contentions, that so our conversation may be pleasing to all the world, and this is the true politick or civill peace. Let us be like Lamps and Torches lighted in the middest of darknesse; let vs be that wa∣ter of pacification and rest, to quench the fire of quarrels and contentions, that are among our brethren, least that fire consume them to ashes: And in so doing, wee shall be true imitatours of our heavenly Father, who justly stiles and calls himselfe the God of peace, and then with a great deale of right and equity, wee shall bare the blessed and glorious title of his children. And after we have quenched and put out the trouble of our hearts, & vexation of our soules, caused by the fire of sinne, when wee shall have scattered those flames that destroy and devoure that union and concord, which God hath so strictly commanded us to keepe, then shall wee be called to that heavenly Ierusalem, which is he Citie of peace, and there shall wee enter into the possession of the inheritance promised to adopted children in Iesus Christ our Lord, wee shall partake with him eternall blessednesse, hee shall be our head, in those divine sessions, and we shall be his members, wee shall shine as the Sun, the holy Ghost shall enlighten us, and the God of peace shall be for ever with us. Amen.
O Soveraigne Monarch of heaven and earth, that governest all things by thy provi∣dence, which to us is altogether incomprehen∣sible, we thy most humble Subjects, calling un∣to thee from the bottome of our soules, beseech thee by the greatnesse of thy compassions, that it may please thee to plant in our hearts a holy and perfect justice, which taking deepe rootes therein, may bring forth fruites of peace, and concord, which thou straightly recommendest unto us in thy holy word. Make us perfectly just, that we may love peace perfectly, as being the daughter of justice; enkindle (O good God) the fire of thy love in our hearts and soules, that we may love our brethren even as thou hast lo∣ved us: give us a spirit of gntlenes & meekenes, that we may fly & eschew quarrels & contenti∣ons, not only in our slues, but also when we shal see them kindled among our brehren; make us knowe (O good Saviour) that those enmities and dissentions are the devils daughters, who loves nothing but noyse and disorder, and that peace and mildnesse are the daughters of divine justice, which thou lovest dearely, which wee must embrace and practise, if we will be honou∣red with the title of thy children; and not one∣ly be called so, but also to be indeed children of God, and heires of eternall and blessed life, to the which, the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost bring us. Amen.
The fourth way to Sion. 1. PETER. 2.17. Feare God, and honour the King. AS rayes (or Sunne-beames) follow and beare obser∣vace to the Sunne; As all rivers runne to the Sea, and as many lines end and ter∣minate in their center; so there are many wayes to bring us to the Paradise of God, to Ieruslem above, which is our heavenly and happy Country; Neverthlesse, wee must herein ue the Maxime of the Mathematicians, who hold, that the shortest line s still the righ∣test; also in all thse different wayes of new Si∣on, the shortest is the best and surest. When God gave his Law to Moses upon the Mountaine of Sinay, he divided it into en com∣mandements, which are so many perfct wayes to conduct and bring us to heaven; for IESVS CHRIST (the sweet Saviour of our soules) be∣ing
himselfe descended from Heaven, to shew and point us out this way; hee drew a short Compendium and Abridgement of all these Ten Commandements of the Law, and reduced them to two, as wee shall finde it written in the 22. Chapter of St. Mathew, where wee see him disputing against a Doctor of the Law, who de∣manded of him which was the first and greatest Commaundement; and Iesus answered him, Thou shalt love God with all thy heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy minde, which is the first and greatest commandement; and the second is like unto it; which is, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe; and of these two Commaundements depend the whole Law and the Prophets, as our Apostle Saint Peter (in the imitation of his bles∣sed Master Christ) after hee had instructed and admonished his faithfull flocke, in all their du∣ties, in the precedent verses of our Text; hee drawes an abridgement of all which concerned their saluation, when he said, Feare God, and honour the King. . In these words, we have all the instructions which we must practise in our soules and bodies concerning those divine and humane duties; which wee must convert, and reduce into practise; which wordes (naturally divide them∣selues) into two severall branches, or heads, (to wit) 1. the feare which wee ought to beare unto God: and 2. The honour which wee must obserue and give to the King.
The sweetest, and most pleasingst sacrifice which we can offer up unto the Lord Almigh∣ty, is a heart replenished and fraughted with the feare of his holy name, a minde trembling be∣fore his sacred Majestie, and a soule terrified with the sublimity and greatnesse of his feare∣full judgements, as the royall Prophet affirmeth in Psal. 2.11. Serue the Lord with feare, and reioyce with trembling; And againe Psal. 2.7. I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy feare will I worship towards thy holy Temple. We can offer up no sacrifice so pleasing, nor performe no action or duty so acceptable to God, as when wee adore him in all feare, and reverence him in all astonishment & trembling, which lively depaynteth and prefigureth his Greatnesse and Magnificence, perfectly demon∣strateth us our Duties, and witnesseth our humi∣lity and obedience, which is exceeding delight∣full, and pleasing to him. That Romane Emperour perspicuously ex∣pressed and deciphered the excellent power and effects of this feare, when he caried for his Motto and Devise, Oderint dum metuant, Let those hate me that will, so they feare me; shew∣ing thereby what small account and esteeme hee made of the hatred, and how dearely he prised and respected the feare which hee would have given and borne to him. Morall Philosophers affirme and say, That Love and feare are two sister germanes, because the one is conjoyned to the other, and both
linked together produce one & the same effects; for still the Lover is in care and feare of the thing beloved; whereas wee never feare to lose that which wee hate, but that which wee love dearely, and cherish tenderly, and both of these together produce the conseruation of their ob∣ject. But this distinction takes no place, but here on earth among creaures, and doth nei∣ther regard nor looke up towards Heaven to God the Creator; For God is all Love, but he can never be capable of alteration or defect, as is that feare which he hath left and given un∣to man for his portion and inheritance. So he which is possessed with a perfect feare, to offend his God, or to lose his favour, he is linked and joyned to God with the Gordian knots of his love, which are then wholly made indivi∣sible and inseparable; and the Love of God conjoyned with the feare of man, caue the con∣servation of the soule; and this it is, where the Apostle Saint Peter tells us in our text, Feare God, By which word feare wee must not understand, a cowardize, a pusillanimity, or any irregular passion, which freezeth our blood in our veines, which causeth our hearts to pant and beat with an incessant motion, which calls and attract our blood from all parts of our bodies; to come to assist and succour our heart, which shutts and hood winkes our eyes against reason, and ima∣gineth, that all objects whatsoever presented to us, have all together conjured and conspired our ruine; as those who fly from a battaile, feare
every bush which they see or meete with to be their enemies, who purposely pursue them, and runne every where to kill them: Or else as those who are led to their executions and deathes, whom feare doth so powerfully seize and sur∣prise, that by these passions and effects, it in a manner deprives them of life, before they think thereof, the which wee can testifie and approve by many irrevocable precedents and examples. No, no: It is not of this defect of judgement, or of this cowardly apprehension and feare, which our Apostle tells us of; but it a holy, just, and commendable feare, which we ought to have and retaine, in bearing a admirable re∣spect, and honour to the Creator and conseruer of our bodies and soules; As to feare and trem∣ble before the terrible throne of his divine Iu∣stice, and by not rashly abusing of his favours and mercies, so liberally, so bountifully exten∣ded to us, because his presence is a consuming fire, which devoures and consumes to ashes, all those who unreveretly approach his sacred Throne, his most holy hill; as heretofore hee forbad the children of Israel, not to approach mouth Sinay, because hee was there purposly to spake with his srvant Moses: But not to stay any longer on this point, let us say with the Philosophers and Theologians, that there is ge∣nerally two sorts of fare (that is to say) Divine and Humane, which againe subdivide them∣selues every one into three severall parts nd branches;
The Humane feare compriseth and com∣prehendeth: 1. The Naturall, which hath wholly buried in her, the senses, all Philosophy, and the strong∣est and most assured courage cannot hinder him from shutting his eyes at the suddaine surprise of a flash of lightning, or at the feignednesse of a hand, which unexpectedly approacheth our face; or that we withdraw not, or turne not our head from the sight of a fearefull precipice; or that a suddaine crack or noyse doe not at first hearing terrifie or astonish us: Primi illi motus non sunt hominis, The first motions (or terrours) are not in our power. 2. Corporall, whereby wee naturally ab∣horre Death, and feare to expose and cast our selues into danger. 3. Mundane, (or worldly) whereby we feare to lose our wealth, honours, and dignities, but it is of neither of these sorts of feares, which our Apostles speakes unto us, but onely of Di∣vine feare, which likewise streames foorth in three rivolets: 1. Servile; whereby we feare God, for the apprehension we have of the infernall tortures and torments of Hell, and this degree and sort of feare is not good of it selfe, because it hath no good object, nor is made or formed to a good end; neverthelesse, it is held and termed good, because it conduceth to good. 2. Initiant, which lookes two wayes: 1. to∣wards
the torments wee feare: 2. towards the glory we desire, and it is also termed, enter∣woven, or mixt, because it is composed both of a good and bad feare. 3. Filiall, which is the last and best sort of divine feare, whereby we love God not only for our owne glory, or for the apprehension of tor∣mens, but for his goodnes, excellncy, prfecti∣on, and in a word, for and in regard of himselfe. Saint Bernard lively describes, and pertinent∣ly represents those three sorts of feare: 1. Ne cruciemur à gehenna: 2. Ne exclusi à visione tam inestimabili gloria privemr: 3. Replet animum sol∣licitudine ne deseratur à gratia. Which is to say: The first feare apprehends torments; The second, the privation of glory; and the third wholly possesseth our hearts and indes with care and anxiety, as fearing not to lose Gods grace and favour. The servile feare is attributed to the wicked. The filiall, to the good, I meane to those who are the children of God. The Initiant (or intermixed) is proper as well to the good, as the bad, and also it is the most frequent and generall. Those three sorts of feare are so many wing, which conduct, elevate, & soare us up to heaven; The Servile begins first, which denounceth to sinners eternall death and damnation, and that sharpe and sensible apprehension to be devou∣red with the flames of hell fire. It opens him the gate to be sorrowfull for his offences, which
threaten to precipitate him in that unquench∣able fire, and afterwards entering into a firme and lively epentance for his former sinnes, hee begins to conceive the future felicity and glory of Heaven, for the love whereof hee partly re∣soles to forsake and abandon sinne: as Salomon saith, By the feare of the Lord men depart from evill, Prov. 16.6. Although neverthelesse that he doe it, partly for feare of punishment which will in∣fallibly follow him; and afer that, it againe leades him into this perfect filiall feare, where∣by he so infinitely loves God, that hee had ra∣ther dye, then offend him in the least thing of the world; so neerely he loves him, so deerely he honoureth and adores him. St. Augustine makes onely two sorts of feare, (to wit) Filiall, and Servile, and makes them dif∣ferent in this, That the Servile hath for object malum poenae, the evill of punishment, and the filiall malum culpae, the evill of guiltinesse; Illo timetr ne incidtur in tormentum spplicij, isto ne amittatur gratia beneficij: By the first, wee feare the torments of hell fire; By the second, wee feare to lose the grace and favour of God. It is this faire, this sweet spirituall vertue, which gives us admittance and entrance into the closet of God; which openeth unto us the treasures of his favour and mercy, and which makes us enter into the possession f life eternall; For those who feare the Lord shall behold his face, shall have prosperity, and see good dayes, saith the royall Prophet King David, Psalm. 34.11. It is
this feare of the Lord, which makes men pro∣sper on earth, as saith Salomon the Prince of wise men, and the wisest of Princes, The feare of the Lord prolongeth dayes, but the yeares of the wicked sha be shortned, Prov. 10.27. This wise King, in all his afflictions and troubles, had still his re∣course to the fare of the Lord, which was his fortresse, his Sanctuary, his comfort and con∣solation, as wee shall read in the 14. Chap. of Proverbs, In the fere of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children shall have a place of refuge, The feare of the Lord is a fountaine of life to depart from the snares of death: He againe teacheth us, that wealth is unprofitable, yea prejudiciall to us without this salubrious, this sacred feare of God, & that poverty is to be preferred before fading and pe∣rishable riches: Better is a little with the feare of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble therewith. This feare of the Lord, is (as it were) Iacobs Ladder, whereby the Angels (of divine conso∣lations) descend upon us on earth, and our ho∣ly prayers, and religious thoughts and medita∣tions ascend unto Heaven. This Ladder hath three principall steps; As the feare of the Lord makes us ascend unto Iesus Christ, which is our wise∣dome: for through and by God he hath made us wise∣dome, 1. Cor. 1.30. Iess Christ leades us to God his Father, and God receives and lodgeth us in Heaven, and therefore we first feare him, if ever we hope or thinke to enter into his favour. This feare of God, is the head spring and fountaine, from whence we draw and exhaust
the sacred mysteries of our salvation; and D∣vid tells us in formall and expresse termes, That the feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome, Psal. III. 10. Thereby to teach us, hat all this knowledge and learning whereof men vaunt and glory, is nothing else but pure folly, if it derive not his Origen, or beginning from the feare of the Lord. This feare is here taken for the prin∣ciple of wisedome, and Ieus Christ himselfe (in many places of Scripture) hath assumed and ta∣ken the title of Wisedome, because he is the wis∣dome of the Father, as wee reade in the former alledged Chapter of 1. Cor. 1.30. But in the book of Genes. Chap. 31.42. He himselfe is by Moses cal∣led the feare of Isaac; Except th God of my Father, the God of Abraham, and the feare of Isaa had beene with me, thou hadst sent me away empty. But here the best Interpreters, by this feare of Isaac, doe undestand the second person of the Trinity, Iesus Christ our Saviour, who had not yet assumed and cloathed our humane naure, and of whom Isaac was the true type and figure, t is an excellent quetion of Saint Augustine (in his Citie of God) that is, If this filiall feare af∣ter the death of the faithfull Children of the Lord remaine with them in Heaven yea or no: Those who maintaine the contrary, fortiie themselues from the Apostle Saint Iohn, Chap. 4. ver. 18. There is no feare in love, but perfect love casth o feare, because feare hath tormen, and ee that feareth is not made perfect in love, from whence they argue,
Where there is perfect Love, there is no feare. But among the Saints in Heaven there is per∣fect Love. Therefore among the Saints in Heaven there is no feare. And from the same lace and passage of Saint Iohn, they derive and draw another Argument thu: All feare is accompanied with torment. But in Heaven there is no torment. Therefore in Heaven there i no feare. They say (moreover) That this feare should then deprive them of their rest and re∣pose, and consequently that they could not en∣joy a perfect felicity, whiles they were troubled and tormented with any apprehension or feare. Others answere, That the Apotle Saint Iohn understands not to speake there of a chast and filiall, but of a servile feare, and to fortifie and support their opinion they alledge, the Psal. 19▪ 9. The feare of the Lord is cleane, enduring for evr. And Saint Augutine expounding this sort of feare, saith, Non enim est timor exterrens à malo quod accidere potst, sed tenens in bno, quod amitti non potest; This kinde of feare makes us not ap∣prehend any evill which can befall us, but makes us so to keepe fast good, that wee may not lose it; And afterwards he againe addeth, Timori Casti nomine, ea volntas, significat est, quo nos ne∣cesse erit nolle Peccare, non solicitudine necessittis, sed tranquillitate caritatis, He sayes, that by this
name of chast feare, is signified, the will where∣by it is necessary, that we will not sinne, not for the care of necessity, but for the tranquillity of Charity. Hee then concludes, that indeed Ser∣vile feare cannot enter into Heaven but onely the filiall, and yet (notwithstanding) it must be after it hath lost the effects which it produceth in this present life, (to wit) this naturall appre∣hension, whereby shee feares that the soule falls from the State of Grace: No, no, this feare in Heaven shall be but a perfect reverence, honour, and piety, and a full and absolute devotion, which wee shall beare to the service of GOD; whereby every one seeing the divine Majestie, shall profoundly and perfectly study to serue and honour him in all reverence: And for this cause it is why the 70. Interpreters have turned Timorem Dei, the feare of God, into this Greek word  (to wit) Dei pietatem, the piety which we beare to God, and so it remaines true, which the Prophet David had said long before, The feare of the Lord is cleane enduring for ever. In this Elementary world, the feare of God is the most assured way to goe to celestiall Hie∣rusalem; Those who have not beene to a place, if they foolishly & rashly runne athwart fields, they then runne a great hazard to goe astray, and to lose themselues among woods or bryars, or peradventure to fall into the hands of cruell and mercilesse theeves: So those who will as∣cend to the top of the holy Mountaine of sacred Sion; If they ar not curbed and retained by the
golden bridle of the feare of God; If without wisedome or judgemet they runne over crag∣gie rockes full of thornes and bryars (for such are the wayes to Sin & Heave) without doubt they will fall into the errour of precipies, or else they will serve for prey, or fewell to eter∣nall flames. The feare of God, is the pledge and seale of his love and favour, the which he placeth and planteth in the midst of our hearts, when he will call us to him, and cnserue us to his service; For he hath united and tyed us to hi with the linkes and chaynes of his love in his owne house; Hee for ever makes us his dome∣sticall servants, yea, his heires and adoptive chil∣dren, and in this quality hee makes vs to enter into the inheritance of eternall life above in Heaven with Iesus Christ his only welbeloved Sonne, who is our eldest Broher; Neither are they phantastick imaginations, or light pre∣sumptions, which must make us bleeve these things, for it is God himselfe which hath pro∣nounced hem by his Prophet Ieremy, Chap. 22.39.40. I will give them on hear and one way, that they may feare e for ever, and I will make an ever∣lasting covnant with them, that I will not turne away from them to doe them good, but I will put my feare into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. The feare of the Lord takes place among the rarest presents, and richest Iewels which the Holy Ghost discovereth to his Elect, and it is the entry to the greatest, which is wisedome it
selfe; for as Salamon saih truth, The beginning of wisedome is the feare of God: For when the Holy Ghost will operate in the heart of any man, hee then stampes and makes him with his seale, which is the feare of God, and then conducts him by degrees nto the very last point of per∣fection which is wisdome, or the perfect know∣ledge of sacred mysteries, as wee read in the Prophet Ierey, Chap. 11.2. The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisedoe and under∣staning, the spirit of counsell and might, the spirit of knowledge, and the feare of the Lord. The old proverbe aith truly, That feare and diffidence is the mother of security, for when we feare our enemie, and are vigilant over his actions, then we prevent his ambushes, & avoyd his power. Let us remember that Sathan (the deadly enemie of our soules) watcheth still at the doore of our hearts, as a roaring Lyon at∣tending to devoure his prey, so that if wee have not still the feare of God before our eyes, to avoyd the nets and ginnes which he layes in the way for us, we shall become his prey and food. But if we stand upon our guards, and no way feare his assaults or threatnigs; then hee will inallibly fy from us both with hast and shae; For God commonly bestoweth his graces and favours, to those who feare to offend him, and hee distributeth and imparteth his richest trea∣sures to those that serve him with reverence, feare, and trembling: Wee reade Acts 2. That when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were
prey to that olde Serpent the devill. The auncient Pagans have perfectly and truly depaynted feare, when they said it was all environed with fire and flames, as Love; and so they understood of corporall and Mundane (or worldly feare) and likewise of divine feare, concerning their false imaginary Gods. Here we will doe as Nh did; Wee will make use of sinners to build the Arke of our salvation, or as Salomn did of the timber & stones of King Hi∣ram, to build the temple of the Eternall, 1. Reg. 5. That which Pagans have spoken without know∣ledge, wee will speake with reason and know∣ledge, That all sorts of feare, is a fire in our soules, which scorcheth and consumes us as long as it remaines there: Bt let us hre ende∣vour particularly, to consider the Analogies and resemblances, that there is betweene fire, and the feare of God▪ which is the subject of our text. Fire is a furious, hastie, and active Element, and o likewise are the points of apprehension and feare; Fire is the cleanest, the purest, the wholsomest of all Elements; I cleanseth, it pu∣rifieth, it drives out all filthinesse and corrupti∣on; as being neither able no apable to suffer in it selfe any impurity, for it either consumes, or expells it; And all this agrees well with the feare of God, which is the most wholsomest Physick that we can take to purge our selues of sinne, and to purifie our heart of all vncleane∣nesse; for there is no vie but it will purge and
reject; Fire is an Element which consumes and devoures all that is presented to it, and the feare of God is a coale and flame, which devoureth all our concupiscences. To make straight a crooked peece of wood or timber, wee use fire, thereby to make it be∣come more soft and flexible. So to replace soules in the way of life, when they are either crooked, or gone astray, in the by pathes of vice, then the feare of God, of all other reme∣dies i he best and most soveraigne. Fire (by Antiperistase) as it heate those who are cold, so it refresheth and comforteth those who are ot; The feare of God heates and en∣flames those soules to doe well, who are most frozen in piety; and contrariwise, it cooleth those who are most enflamed with their bur∣ning sensualities and concupiscences. To venemous Apostumes, mortal Gangreens and desperate diseases, wee for the last remedy apply Irons and fire to cure it. To sinners inveterated in their wickednesse, and as it were despairing of their salvation, wee must apply the Iron and fire of the feare of God, to make them apprehend and know his divine judgements if they remaine impenitent, and vn∣repentant. Historians report, that the Arabian Phonix (the onely bird of his race) is accustomed every five hundred yeares, to build an Artificiall nest, whereunto the rayes of the Sunne reflecting and darting, it at one time reduceth to ashes both
the worke and the workman: So if wee desire to revive to the love of immortall beatitude and celestiall felicity, wee must set fire to our vices, by the art and flame of a true and lively repen∣tance, and burne them all together in the feare of God. All the world is a field richly strewed and diapred with the miracles and wonders of God, whereof man is the principall Master-peece, and the chiefest workmanship of his hands; and the sacred Scriptures are as it were the Eitomie and Compendium thereof, wherein I every way see nothing but Gods love (of his side) to∣wards man; and read nothing but subjects of honour, and causes feare of man towards God; But among divers other places, I finde one ex∣ceedingly agreeable and concurring with our text, which is Daniel Cap. 2.32. concerning the Statue which Nabuchadnozer saw in his dreame, The head of this Iag was of fine gold, his brest and armes of silver, his belly and thighes of brasse, his legges of iron; his feete part of iron and part of clay, a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the Image upon his feete that were of iron, and brake them to peeces, and having brken the, the Statue fell backwards, and was reduced to Summer dust. This Statue doth lively represent unto us a sinner; By his golden head, I understand Pride, Vani∣ty, and Ambition, which fumes and swims in the Head of a sinner, who esteemes himselfe as pretious as gold, and as rare as Pearles; His brest and armes of silver, markes unto us his af∣fection
to covetousnesse, as having all his de∣sires every way bent and levelled to rapine and extortion; His belly and thiges of brasse, re∣presents unto us his voluptuousnesse and insa∣tiety; His legges of iron shew us his cruelty; His feete of earth depaynts us his weakenesse and fragility; and this stone cut without hand from the mountaine of Sion, is the feare of God, which God casts and rolles at our feete, to beat us to dust, and to make us consider the nothing from whence we came. The world, the flesh and the devill (the pro∣fessed mortall enemies of our soule, who will never want subtilty or malice to make us stum∣ble in the way to life) seeing that this feare of God is a soveraigne Antidote against all the diseases of the soule, not being able to diminish its vertue, by their artifice and deceipts, at least they will make us lose the rellish thereof, by their insinuations and perswasions, figuring us out this feare of God to be so hard, sharpe, and bitter, that it is impossible for us to enjoy any rest, or tranquillity of minde, as long as wee are possessed of that passion; That the wayes to heavenly Sion, are not so craggie and difficult, but that they are all paved with silke, with de∣lights, and contentments; But the faithfull man fearing God, ought to be as wise as a Serpent; Hee must stop his eares to this false Imposter, and Inchanter, who would surprise him to strangle him; Hee must remember the words which Christ Iesus spake and dictated to him
by Saint Luke, Acts 14.22. We must thorow much tribulation enter into the Kingdome of God. And againe by Saint Mathe 7.13. Enter yee in at the srat gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction. No, no, let us not flatter our selues, there ae no Roses without prickles; we shall never obtaine and carie away the incorruptible Crowne of glory before wee have first fought the good fight, wee shall never put our foote in celestiall Canaan, before wee have first past the red sea of the afflictions of this life, and departed forth of the wildernesse of our sinnes; and in a word, be∣fore we have fought with the infernall Gyants and Devils, who strive and endevour to prevent and hinder our entry thereinto. For it is absoluely impossible, ever to pos∣sesse or enjoy the love of God, here belowe in Earth, or much lesse above in Heaven, befoe we have first sworne to him, a perfect feare, ho∣nour, and obedience, Amoris Ianua timor est; The feare of God, is the entry and gate to his love, as also Love is a feare entermix'd with care and anxiety, Res est solliciti plena timoris amor. In the 19. Chap. verse 4. of the 1. Booke of Kings, the Prophet Elijah flying the persecution of Queene Iezabel, being weary of his way, hee sate downe & slept under a Iuniper Tree, where an Angell came and found him ou, and caried him a Cake baked upon coales, which hee plea∣singly eate and relished, and so satisfied his heart and stomacke for forty dayes and forty nights,
after which they came to the mountaine of Oreb, the plce of his refuge and security. This Ieza∣bel is the devill, and this Prophet may lively represent unto us our soule, which of all sides is persecuted by this cruell and implacable ene∣mie, who flying his assaults, if shee come to re∣pose her selfe under the sharpe Iuniper of a truly holy and filiall feare; Then without doubt the Angell of Divine consolations, will bring him the bread of Love, favour, and mercy, baked upon the coales of his affection, and the good will and clemency of God, which will then re∣fresh and replenish our hearts and soules during all the pilgrimage of this our mortall life, un∣till wee are arrived to the mountaine of Sion, which is the centre of our desires, the residence of our delights, and the impregnable Fort and Castle of our felicities. I finde Saint Augustines comparison to be ve∣ry excellent and pretty, upon Feare and Love, and that we must passe thorow that, before wee can arrive to this; Hee sayes, that feare is as a Needle, and Love as the silke which it drawes after it; The Needle is sharpe, hard, and pier∣cing, but the silke is soft, faire, and pleasing; Feare is indeede a sharpe and distastfll passion, but that which doth sweeten, lenifie, and cure his prickings; it is love whch immediately fol∣lowes it, being fraughted with courtesie, good∣nesse, and favour; Wee must not therefore ap∣prehend the small stings of Bees, bcause they afterwards promise to delight & satiate us with
their honey, which distills and flowes from the rocke of our salvation; And it is the Enigme of Sampson to the Philistims; from the bitter came sweet; from the rage and gall of the Lion, issued sweet honey to delight and refresh Sampson; If Iesus Christ (the true Lyon of the tribe of Iuda) had not endured for us the bitter and cruell death of the Crosse, then wee had never tasted the excellent vertue of the honey of his resur∣rection: Indeed to flesh and blood the Feare of God, is as it were a kinde of gall and bitternesse, because it daunts, and out-braves his passion, and it still keepes him waking, as we doe to wild birds, thereby to tame him, and to make him quiet and docible; and so to instruct and civi∣lise him to the service of God. It still shewes him the eminent dangers wherein shee will in∣gulph & precipitate him, in offending his God, but still with an indulgent intent to prevent and hinder him from it, Pondus timoris est anchora crdis; The burthen which feare caries with it, is the hearts anchor; to prevent that it ee not reversed, and overblowne by the waves, nor of all sides split and shipwrack'd by the violence and impetuosity of tempestuous passions, which without intermission assayle and beat upon it; But the mercy of the Lord (saith David) is from ge∣neration to generation upon all those who feare him. In a word, (and so to draw to the conclu¦sion) of this part of the Text, the two prin∣cipall pillars of Christian Doctrine, and the two firme and vnremoveable foundations there∣of,
is Feare and Love, which are the two proper meanes to containe the godly, and to retaine the wicked in the observation of Gods Com∣mandements; The wicked by Feare, the godly by Love, as the Poet speakes, but morally, in a Christian sense and language: Oderunt pecare mali formidine Poenae. Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore. The wicked abhorre to offend for feare of punishment, and the Godly will not be drawne to sinne, because of their love of vertue. But here fearing least I should runne astray, and so lose and ingulph my selfe in this great and vast Ocean o the feare of God, it makes mee rowe abord, thereby to gaine the desired shore, and so to treat and discourse of the second part of the Text, which is , Honour the King. The two noblest and most excellent offices, which the Angels, and blessed soules enjoy above in the triumphant Church, are the vision of God, and the ordinary action of glorifying and honouring God, about the which they are eternally imployed, and therefore the holy Ghost to fashion and dispose us here belowe in the militant Church, to glorifie in time his sa∣cred Majestie in heaven, commandeth us in our text likewise, to Honour the King, as being the true Image and lively representation of that great King of glory, of the Father of Eterni∣tie, of the mighty God of Hoasts, Feare God,
saith hee, ad Honour the King. Divine, and altogether admirable words, as beng the summe and abridgement of all the duties which we ought to practise in this world, both in body and soule, both for the morall and spirituall life, the performance whereof brings us to absolute perfection; for if we feare God, wee serve him, and never offend him; and in honouring the King, besides the performace of our duty, wee obey the Commaundement of God. So these 2. commandements are so straight∣ly link'd and joyned together, that the breach of the one, is the violation of he other; for we canot displase the King, without offending God, nor offend God, without violating the Kings lawes. Let us see what that chosen vessell saith, in very earnest and pressing words, Rom. 13.1. Let every soule be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but from God, and all authority is given from the Lord; which is the reason of the com∣mandement, followed presently with a threat∣ning; wherefore who so resistth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and therefore incurres condemnation, for the Prince beares not the sword in vaine, seeing he is the servant and minister of God, to punish evill doers, ther∣fore must ye be subject not onely for feare, but also for conscience ske; and therefore pay ye tribute, because they are the ministers of God ordaind to that end, Give then unto every one
his due, tribute to whom tribute, custome to whom custome, feare to whom feare, and honour to whom honour. Before we entr into an exact and particular exposition of the words of our Text, wee will examine the consequence of this commaunde∣ment, and as those who desire to know the sweetnesse and goodnesse of water, ascend to fetch it from the spring, that wee may esteeme the more the excellencie and greatnesse of this commandement; we must observe, that this or∣dinance is not made by men, either to flatter King, for feare of their soveraigne authority, but that it is Gods owne ordinance, dictated unto our Apostle by the holy Ghost. Which brings great matter of consolation, to those who with zeale undertake the execu∣tion of it, knowing that God loves those that feare him, and blesseth those that are obedient to him. And contrarily, it must greatly terrifie the disobedient, when they remember the infalli∣ble threatnings, and the irrevocable sentence, pronounced by Gods owne sacred mouth, say¦ing, Cursed is hee that breaks the least of thse com∣mandements, Math. 5.19. Cursed is hee that shall not be permannt in all the things written in the book of the Law, to doe them, Deut. 27.26. We must againe note, that the Commande∣ment of God, are like the Sciences which are more or lesse esteemed, according to the no∣bility and excellencie of their object, for as
that affection and charity which we owe to our neighbour, without comparison gives place to that extreame and infinite love which wee owe to our God, and heavenly Father; so the ho∣nour we are to beare to all men in generall, is so much inferiour to that we owe the King, as his dignity is elevated above that of other men; and therefore you see, that as soone as our Apostle commandeth us to feare God, he addeth pre∣sently, Honour the King. Shewing by that order, that the honour and service due to the King, immediatly followes that which wee owe to God, and therefore a great servant of God of our times, expounding these words, saith after Tertullian, That in the performance of these two precepts, the Chri∣stian makes himselfe perfect, both for the reli∣gious and moall life, for in fearing God, hee walkes through the pathes of justice, holinesse, and innocencie, which leades in the end to eter∣nall felicity. And in honouring the King, he observes his lawes, and by those meanes buildeth up for himselfe a delightfull rest, and an incomparable felicity. But because it is to undertake to sayle over a boundlesse and bottomlesse Ocean, if we should goe about to alledge here all the places which we might cite out of the Fathers, and many others; let us hearken to the holy Ghost, in the most common places of Scripture, and imita∣ting the sraelites, we will onely take some few
drops of water out of the land of Edo, and shew onely the springs afarre off; we will passe over quickly, like the dogge of the river Nilus, least some Crocodile, thirsting after our inno∣cencie, should open his stinking mouth to accuse us, a though our intention were othr, then tending to the service and glory of God, which is the onely centre, unto the which all the lines of our intentions immediatly tend and ayme. Wee very easily learne the definition, or de∣scription of this word to Honour, in the 6. Chap of Esther, when Ahashuerosh asked Haman what should be done unto the man whom the King would honour; Haman thinking the King spake so for him, invented all the wayes and meanes hee could, to enjoy and encrease this honour; therefore he answered the King thus, As for the man whom the King will honour, let them bring for him royall apparell, which the King seth to weare, and the horse that the King ri∣deth upon, and that the crowne royall may be set upon his head, and that one of the greatest Princes should goe before him, and proclaime, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the King will honour. In this ample description of Honour, we note the definition of it; to wit, to give glory, to doe homage to any one, to seeke all the meanes that may be to advance his credit, and encrease his reputation through all the world, and thus that cursed Haman thought to be honoured. But this word to Honour the King, in that
sense that our Apostle takes it, is like to that honour mentioned in the first Commandement of the second table, Honour thy Father and thy mother, which signifieth in generall, to serve, re∣verence, obey, assist those whom wee honour, and of that reverence, obedience, and assistance, Saint Paul speaketh expresly, 1. im. 5.17. The Elders that rule well, are worthy of a double honour, where observe and note, that by the first ho∣nour, hee understandeth a civill and common honour, like that which is due to other honou∣rable men; but by the second honour hee un∣derstandeth a subvention, and reward of his la∣bours, as it appeareth by the following words, Thou shalt not musle the mouth of the Oxe that tread∣th out the cone, and the labourer i worthy of his wages, Luk. 10.7. And of all these foure duties which wee are to pratise, to honour the King, is spoken at large, 1. Sam. Chap. 8. When the Israelites did so ear∣nestly desire him to give them a King, hee doth lively set forth uno them, how perfectly they must be subject to him, how they must reve∣rence him, how they must obey him. But because commonly among good corne there be tares, or some other bad ed, we will shew by expresse words of Scripture, and by invincible reasons, That hee that obeyeth not to the higher powers, offendeth directly God himselfe, who will destroy him. Saint Paul, Tit. 3.1. Put them in remembrance that they be subject to principalities, and powers, and
that they be obedient, and ready to every good worke. And Rom. 13.4. The Prince is the Minister of of God for thy good, but if thou doe evill, then feare, for he beareh not the sword for nought, for he is the Minister of God, to execute justice on him that doth evill; therefore ye must bee subject, not for feare onely, but also for conscience sake▪ wherefore those that resit the power, resist the ordinance of God, and those that resist this or∣dinance, drawes on themselues condemnation. But if these rules bee not strong enough to convert those perverse men; at least let them be frighted by the fearefull judgements which fell on so many wicked men, which aunciently re¦belled against Moses their Prince & Soveraigne, who by Gods commaund had deliuered them from the hands of Pharao, the cruellest of men, and had led and conducted them with a won∣derfull wisedome into the wildernesse; let o them before heir eyes the example of Core, Dathan, and Abram, who with two hundred and fifty Princes of the Israelites, Numb. 16.2. rebelled against their Prince; but God avenger of their folly, caused the earth to open her mouth, and to swallow them up alive with their families, Nad, and Abihu, his owne Nephewes, because they had not obeyed him, were consu∣med with their fllowes by fire, that went out from the Altar, Levit. 10.2. and his owne sister Marie, for speaking undisreetly of him, was by the Lord infectd wih leposie, what shall wee say of Abisha, and Absalom, against King David,
the History of whose destruction and confusion is so well knowne, that wee neede not insist upon it. But here are yet very expresse words. Exod. 22.28. Thou shalt not rayle upon the Iudges, neither speake evill of the ruler of thy people. And Acts 23. Thou shalt not speake ill of thy Prince, of him that go∣verneth thee. But because these lawes and examples like waves of the Sea follow one another, wee will insist on the consideration of the horror of this crime, which cannot take place in a soule never so little endued with heavenly graces; for that heart must be desperately wicked, and that soule possessed with a thousand furies, that suf∣fereth the least thought of it to harbour in his will; that soule, I say, must not onely be voyd of reason, but worse then bruit beasts, who without contradiction follow and obey their Kings: The birds yeeld to the Eagle, the fishes follow the Dolphin, and the beasts are pliant and humble before the Lyon; and should man that is made after Gos image, be worse then all other living creatures? This is to be neither man nor beast, but the off-spring of those abo∣minable spirits, which rebelled in heaven against God, and therefore received the punishment due to their foolish ambition in hell; but wee will no longer stay our contemplation about these deestable men, hoping that our age is not so unhappy as to be corrpted by them. But we will now speake of the reward, profit,
and recompence, which those shall certainely receive that obey this commandement of God, in honouring the King. All the Interpreters of the law of God, with one consent agree, that the first commandement of the second table, to wit, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, is to be understood of all them that have any power or dominion over us, and chiefely of Kings, and Princes, to whom wee are subject, and to whom wee owe both our lives and goods; and besides, that all the Fa∣thers are of that opinion, yet we also see it pro∣ved in the 13. Chap. to the Romanes, where the Apostle teaching the faithfull all the lawes which they must observe; hee runnes over all the Commandements of God, and yet speakes not of this word Father, because hee compre∣hendeth it sufficiently under that of King, be∣cause the Father is King in his Family, and the King is the Father of his people. As for that objection, that thre is no men∣tion made of a King in the Decalogue, the rea∣son is cleare and manifest; first, the Israelites had no neede of it, because God did every day appeare visibly unto them, spake to them at all times, and wrought cotinually so many mira∣cles among them, that they could not be doubt∣full of his presence: secondly, there is no men∣tion made neither of Governour, nor of Prince, and yet it is unlikely that God had forgotten Moses, who had delivered them, before God wrote the Law with his owne finger on the
mountaine of Sinai; but the reason is, that by the word Father, God understandeth, as well Kings and Princes, as those that have begotten us; all the curses made against the rebellious, and disobedient to this commandement, are common both to the rebellious to their Prince, and to the disobedient to their Father; as on the contrary, those that are obedient to both, shall bee equally rewarded with the same bles∣sing, and the promise made to them by God, who doe honour their parents, is also to be ex∣tended to those who honour their Kings, and Princes, which promise is happinesse, and length of dayes upon the land. Which promise (though it often seeme other∣wise) is alwayes fulfilled, for when an obedient sonne to his father, or a faithfull subject to his Prince dieth young, and in the flower of his age, God neverthelesse accomplisheth his word, and fulfilleth truely his promise; for if it bee good for the faithfull to remaine in the land, GOD will make him abundantly to prosper therein; but if his admirable and incomprehen∣sible providence, see that hee should be sundry wayes grievously afflicted, he ofen times put∣teth him in safety, and calleth him unto him in his mercy, and yet hee is still as good as his word, as if a man promised mee a hundred pounds, and should give me three hundred, hee thereby breakes not his promise; so God ha∣ving promised us here belowe the possession of this world, and seeing that our dwelling in it is
not for our profit, bereaving us of this, hee ad∣mitteth us into the incorruptible Kingdome of glory, more excellent without comparison then the first, and so whether hee let us dwell here belowe, or whether hee call us above to him∣selfe, we shall alwayes be in a most happy con∣dition, if we obey his commandement, in Ho∣nouring the King. This word, and dignity of a King is so knowne, and familiar to all kinde of nations, that we should seeme to light a candle at noone day▪ to see the light of the Sunne, if wee should exactly seeke out the definitions, and Ethymolo∣gies of it. We will onely say with Saint Augustine in the Citie of God, that the name of King is the auncientest title, given to the Governours, and Rulrs of peoples, yea, when the earth devoyd of all ambition, enjoyed the sweetnesse and fe∣licity of an inestimable peace. For as Non minor est virtus, quàm quaerere, par∣ta teri, There is no lesse vertue in conserving then in purchasing; so you see that the peace∣ablest of the Auncients, have provided for their conservation in chusing Kings and Princes, un∣der whose shadowe they enjoyed quiet rest, for the Kingdome being as a body, the King must alwayes be the head, which being seated on the top, and elevated over the rest of the mem∣bers, hee fore-seeth the dangers to avoyd them, and conidereth the advantages to embrace them.
Now as in the head is seene the glory, and beauty of man, according to these auncient verses. Prona{que} cum spectent animalia caetera erram, Os homini sublime dedit, coeluque tueri Iussit, & erectos ad sydera tollere vultus. All living creatures alwayes behold the earth, but God hath made and erected mans face, that he might behold the heaven, and the starres; even so must we consider the beauty of the sub∣jects, in the Kings face and Majestie, as being the head thereof. As you see that all the senses both internall and externall are seated, and take their begin∣ning from the head; so all the counsells, all the resolutions, justice, the lawes, in a word, all that is necessary for the Kingdomes conservation, is all to be found in the King, as in his center, and in the place whence they take their beginning. Let us then examine particularly, since wee have a Royall subject in hand, all the circum∣stances, by which the King in comparison of his subjects, is just as the head is over the rest of the members, wherein reason holdeth her Assizes and Sessions, the better to governe this Microcosme, or little world. The two chiefest and noblest faculties of the soule, are the Vnderstanding, and the Will▪ the same which we note in the soule, wee may also marke to be in the King, which is as it were the soule of the people, for as from the under∣standing proceede the counsels, resolutions, and
enterprises, needfull for the conservation of mans body; even so from the King proceedes the meanes, and inventions for the right, and just government of his Realme▪ As by the Will, wee see that man accepteth those things which are good, and rejecteth those that are hurtull; even so the King by his wonderfull prudence, and wisedome seeketh what is good, profitable to his subjects, & contrarily rejecteth and preventeth whatsoever is hurtfull and dan∣gerous to them. In a word, as all the parts of the body, and all the appetites of the soule, stirre according to the motion of the will; so the people should never have any other desire, thought or inten∣tion, but the desire, thought, and designe of their King, who is the Lords anointed, sent by God to administer Iustice, and so governe his people in Equity, as the Psalmist speaketh. Psalm. 46.10. The hands of Kings are like that divine ri∣ver, which compassed about the Garden of Edn, and being▪ divided into foure branches, communicated to the hearbs, and plants of that inclosure, a continuall moysture, and which was altogether most wonderfull and miracu∣lous, in that those foure brookes, besides the excellent sweetnesse of their water, were well stored, some with fine gold, and others with precious stones. With infinite right and reason, may we there∣fore compare the hands and actions of Kings,
to this undraynable spring and river of the earthly Paradise, sinc they are imployed about nothing else, but lovingly to cherish and ten∣der their Subjects by liberally distributing, and communicating to them th meanes of their subsistance and prosperity. But least wee should be carried away, by the swift streame of the many severall cogitations, which arise from so royall a subject, let us re∣turne to our fomer discouse, o wit, that the King being to his people, as the head is to the rest of the body, all the rare and admirable parts contayned therein, as the internall and externall senses, ought justly to bee compared to him. And irst, that Sense by precedencie and ex∣cellence, which the Philosophers call Common, tha is, that which receives all the objects of the externall snses, to bring the species of them to the phantasie, and what is the King ele but this common sense, since he is profitable to all, he receiveth the objcts, that is the wishes, and petitions of all, to convy them to the phantaie, that is, to his imaginative and maure delibera∣tion, there to conult and resolve, what is good, sefull, honest, needfull, and profitable for his ppliants and people. Le us now behold that golden head, as  expounding Nbuchdnezas dream calleth him; Let us I say see how all the fiue externall senses are very fitly and properly appliable to him.
First, the Kig, the head of the people, hath  in himselfe the Prince of the senses, the sight, he possesseth it in the highest degree of perfection; he is like the Lyon that never sutteth his eye lids; he seeth all his kingdome, he beholdeth all his subjects; in a word, hee hath eyes, Eagles eyes, which though soaring and flying in the highest clouds, yet seeth clearely in the lowest places of the earth. His eares are alwayes open, to heare the  cries and complaints of his subjects, he deligh∣teth in that pleasant harmony, in that sweet consort, and in those delightfull tones and Dia∣pasons, caused by the sweet union, an concord of all his Provinces and Subjects. Hee smelleth with an incredible content, the  delectable odours, which embalme his spirits, hee senteth with delight the perfumes, pro∣ceeding from the vowes, prayers, and obedi∣ence, which his faithfull subjects sweare to his service. Hee tasteth what is good or evill, what is  sweet or bitter, for the good and ease of his people. He himselfe feeleth, hee sets his hand to the  worke, hee considereth what is hard and offen∣sive, to cut it off, hee chooeth what is soft and easie, to conserue it. In a word, the time would faile us sooner then our conceptions upon so royall a subject, full of admirable coniderations, notwithstand∣ing we will be contented onely with this.
As we see that all the members of the body take their nourishment, and receive their suste∣nance by the mouth, which sendeth the foode into the stomack, as into a common storehouse, thence to bee distributed according to every members need, from whence are first sent to the head, by a very remarkable gratitude and acknowledgement, the best and most subtill, for the nourishment of the braine, the seate of the understanding, the spring of the senses, and the cause of his subsistance, so must the best and fairest of the Kingdome be reserved, and dedi∣cated to the Prince, which is the head and first mover thereof. The examples of it are ye now a dayes fa∣miliar, that Kings and Princes give their parti∣cular possessions to their Subjects, on condition of some yeerely acknowledgement, which they are obliged to, according to their agreement and conventions. Againe, there is no Kingdome in the world but hath beene sometimes conquered, and con∣sequently all the lands thereof are absolutely in the Conquerours hand, to dispose of at his pleasure; now i is the custome of a new and victorious Prince, to bestowe them on whom he pleaseth, alwayes reserving to himselfe some tribute, or homage for it, that the remembrance of his liberall favour may never be forgotten. Againe, we reade not that those which went to seeke new habitations, did goe confusedly, and disorderly, and in equall authority, but they
went all under the colours and conduct of some chiefe, which afterwards became the King and Prince of that land, the which hee distributed according to the deserts or affection which hee bare to his souldiers. So we reade Numb. 34▪ Chapter, that Eleazar and Ioshuah divided among the Israelites the land of Canaan, which they had conquered by the sword, and yet no mention is made that that valiant Captaine Ioshuah, which had brought them into that land flowing with milk and honey, reserved any portion thereof for his share, for the which he had beene questionlesse blamed by the Israelites, had they not suffici∣ently knowne, that seeing hee had put them in possession of so large a territory, they were at his command. The Apostles had nothing, and yet posessed all the riches of the faithfull, of whom they were as Kings and Princes, and therfore in signe of acknowledgement, all the new Christians brought their goods to their feet, Acts Chap. 5. for who would not despise all his wealth for love; if a man should give all the substance of his house for love, they would greatly contemne it, saith Salomon, Cantic. 8.7. But what horrible ingratitude would that be in him that should doe otherwise, seeing that paines, care, and unquietnesse follow common∣ly the Scepter, and that there is no burthen so heavie as a Crowne, and the reason hereof is manifest; to wit, that a private and particular
man aymeth no further then to his houshold buinesse, but the King must embrace all the affaires of his Kingdome, hee must care for all, and provide for all, which maketh Salust say, That a great Empire is alwayes accompanied with great cares, and troublesome labours, and with much anxiety, and vexation of minde. Selcucus in Plutarke said, That if men knew how troublesom a thing it is to governe a King∣dome, they would scorne to reach and take up a Diadem from the ground; this was the cause why Numa at the first refued the Kingdome of∣fered unto him by the Romanes, but in the end overcome by their importunity, he accepted it with griefe, saying, That to raigne was greatly to serue the gods, thinking to deserue much from them, by taking upon him so heavie a burthen. In a word, let us say with Cassiodorus, that, Sub imperio boni principis, omnium fortunae mores{que} proficiunt. Vnder a good Princes government, the goods of all encrease, and their manners are augmented and enriched in civility. Now as in a faire meadowe enamelled, and beautified with a thousand different kindes of flowers, one may finde Serpents, Vipers, and Toades, which defile, and infect by their mor∣tall venome, the rich and naturall Tapistry, the beauty, goodnesse and vertue of an infinite number of Simples, and wholesome hearbs, wherewith it is richly diapred; So wee see to our griefe, that in the bosome and middest of
the fairest, richest, and most illustrious King∣domes, the corruption of the age, and the infe∣ction of vices, are produced and propagated. Some Ravens, which goe about presaging and fore-telling their sinister and lamentable predi∣ctions, who by their odious voyce, (to them at least that have good soules, and generous heats and affections) cry out aloud, That it is the fa∣cility & weaknesse of men, which hath brought in this ambition of mastering and governing the nations; That it is more by usurption, then by election, or by divine ordinance, that they have take the rule and Empire over King∣domes, and they alledge for proofe of their saying, that the first King that ever was in the world, to wit, Nimrod, cme to the Crowne by force and violence, and not by the ordinance of God. That all Empires (for the most part) were gotten by the sword, by force of Armes, by de∣ceit, by ijutice, by a foolish and desperate ambition, that hath often covered the fields with slaughtered bodies, and made them over∣flowe with blood, when one Prince offended and angry with another, sought to revenge himselfe with the lives of his miserable sub∣jects. That the establishing of Monarchs is simply humane, alledging that of Saint Peter, 1. Epistle 2. Chap ver. 13. Submit your selues uno all man∣ner of ordiance of man, for the Lords sake, whe∣ther it e unto the King as unto the Superior, or
unto Governours, as unto them that are sent of him. But these both ignorant & malicious Loyo∣lites and Anabaptists, stop for the nonce their eares, that they may not heare this lowd re∣sounding voyce from heaven, which convinceth them of malice, and would recall them from their ignorance. Let us see if Salomon (like them) beleeved that Kingdomes fall by chance into the hands of men, and that Kings are not expresly called and ordained of God to governe his people; Now then (saith he) O yee Kings, hearken, learne ye that are Iudges of the earth, heare yee that governe the nations, for power is given unto you by the Lord, and principality by the most high. And as we have already observed, Rom. 13. the Apostle resolveth so perfectly this question, that it is impossible to say or adde any thing after him, unlesse one bee resolved to sinne against the holy Ghost, in resisting the knowne truth, There is (saith he) no power but from God, and those powers that ar, be ordained of God, therefore who so resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, ye must be subject to the Prince, not for wrath onely, but also for conscience sake, Rom. 13.5. And as God sent such blindnesse on the Philistims, thiking to overcome and destroy the Armies of Israel, that every one turned his sword against his fellow, and so flewe one ano∣ther, the people of God being a the most but beholders of their deliverance; Even so our adversaries having marshalled a squadron of
reasons against us, before we thought upon our owne defence, to enter into combat with them, have cut one anothers throat, and have left us their Armes to make trophees for this our victo∣rie; for hinking to make a buckler for their de∣fence of that place of S. Peter, wher he exhorteth us to beare the yoake, and to submit our selves unto all manner of ordiance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King or Supreame, 1. Pet. 2.13. This reason killeth them, for if it be for the Lords sake, that we must be subject, it argueth that God liketh it, delighteth in it; and this or∣der is by his command and speciall ordinance. Although Nabuchadnezzer King of Babylon, were one of the most wicked and impious men of the earth, yet let us heare how the Prophet Daniel speaketh to him, in the second Chapter of his Prophesies, O Kig, thou art the King of Kings, for the God of heaven hath given thee a King∣dome, power, strength, and glory. But I would have these disturbers of the publique tranquillity; these Adders swelled and suffocated with the venome of sedition, and dis∣order, tell me, whether Moses the first Prince and Law giver of Israel (the names change not the things, for he was their King and Monarch, since hee ruled them with an absolute power, depending onely from God) whether, I say, he entered by foce, by craft, or by art into the government of the people; and if it was not God himselfe that spake to him out of the middest of the burning bush, and commanded
him to goe deliver his people from the hands of Pharaoh, Exod. 3.2. If Saul thought to adorne his head with a Crowne, when hee sought about the fields the Asses of is his father, if he made suit to Samuel to anoint him King over all Israel; If David when he fed his flocke, meditated how hee might change his Shepheards crooke into a regall Scepter; If Solomon his sonne, the King of wise men, and the wisest of Kings, hath deceived or cor∣rupted the people, to enter by the windowes, or back gate into the kingly Pallace. But rather is it not God himselfe, who by his sacred mouth commanded Samuel in the 9. Chapter of his booke, as soone as he had seene Saul that went to enquire of him about his Fa∣thers Asses, at the same time God said unto him, This is the man of whom I spake unto thee, he shall rule over my people. And in the 16. Chapter of the same booke, God commaunded him to goe to Bethlehem, to anoint David, whom hee chose among all his brethren, the Lord saying unto him, Arise and anoint him, for this is h. In the same booke, God promiseth Davi to confirme his sonne upon his Throne. And in the 1. of Kings, Chap. 3. God appea∣red to Salomon in a dreame in Gabaon, presently after his Coronation, and said unto him, Aske what thou wilt, that I give thee; A sufficient testi∣monie, that God was well pleased with his as∣cending
to the Royall throne, and Salomon ask∣ing of him onely wisedome to governe his peo∣ple, God said, Because thou hast not asked of mee riches, glory, nor power, I will give thee what thou askest me, and other things besides. Wee reade 2. Kings, Chapter 9. that Heli∣seus sendeth one of the children of the Prophets to Iehu, one of Ahabs Captaines, to anoint him from the Lord King over Israel And Psal. 75.7. To come to preferment is neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but God is the Iudge, he it is that humbleth and exalteth. And salm. 113.7 The Lord raiseth the needie out of the dust, and lifteth up the poore out of the dung, that hee may set him with the Princes, even with the Princes of his people: Wee might alledge many other examples, and proofes out of Scrip∣ture; but these are sufficient to proove our as∣sertion. It is an erronious and damnable opinion to hold, that Kings come to the Crowne by fraud, force, or succession, without the Divine provi∣dence and sacred decree,Luk. 12.74. for one haire of our head falleth not, without the providence of God, much more a thing of so great a conse∣quence, as the establishing of a King over the Provinces of a Kingdome, and over so many millions of men, that are bound to sweare o∣bedience to him. I say not onely, that his comming to the Crowne is ordered by Gods generall providence; but moreover, that it is his speciall intention and designe, that
made him ascend the Throne. Let vs hearken to the wisedome of GOD, Prov. Chapter 8. &c. after wee shall see if it be fraud, force, or succession, which are the cau∣ses, and wayes, by the which they ascend unto that dignity; By me (saith Christ, true God, co∣essentiall with his Father, under the name of that wisedome) Kings raigne, and Princes decree justice, By me Princes rule, and the Nobles, and all the Iudges of the earth. The Prophet Isaiah speaketh very pertinent∣ly and manifestly upon this subject, Chap. 45.1. Thus saith the Lord unto Cyrus his anointed, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him, therefore will I weaken the loynes of Kings, and open the doores before him, and the gates shall not be shut; I will goe before thee, and make the croked wayes streight, I will breake the brasen doores, and burst the iron barres; I girded thee, though thou hast not knowne me. The Prophet Ieremiah, Chap. 27. speaketh so openly, that hee alone is sufficient to stop those prophane and seditious mouthes. Thus saith the Lord of Hostes, I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the King of Babel, my servant, and all nations shall serue him, and his sonne, and his sonnes sonne, and the nation▪ and Kingdome which will not serue the same Nebu∣chadnezzar King of Babel, and that put not their necke under the yake of the King of Babel, the same nation will I visite (saith the Lord) with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, there∣fore
heare not your Prophets, nor your Southsayers, nor your dreamers, nor your inchanters, nor your Sorce∣rers, which say unto you thus, Ye shall not serue the King of Babel, for they prophesie a lye unto you, to cause you to goe farre from your land, and that I should cast you out, and you should perish, but the na∣tion that put their necks under the yoake of the King of Babel, and serue him; those will I let remaine still in their owne land, saith the Lord, and they shall oc∣cupie it, and dwell therein. Words worthy of a great and profound con∣sideration, and which totally desides, and cuts off that question, which we now have in hand, for it is God himselfe that speaketh to his peo∣ple, that strictly chargeth them to obey the King of Babylon, into whose hands he had deli∣vered them; and although hee was an Idola∣trous and unfaithfull King, yet they will obey him, on paine of his curse and malediction; what judgements, what punishments should we much more cause to fall upon us, if the least thought of rebellion, or disobedience to the Lords anointed should enter into our mindes, if we were not perfectly obedient to Kings, who are good, faithfull, and zealous to further the glory of God, if our hearts and our mouthes be not alwayes filled with prayers, and vowes ddicated to their service. But to the end that imitating Hercules, wee may clense & sweepe cleane this Augean stable, wee will answere to that objection propounded touching Nimrod, who hath been the first King
of the earth, who (say they) hath attained to the crowne by force, and by violence, words which we finde not in the Scripture; but con∣trarily we read, Genes. 10.8. that Csh begat Nim∣rod, who began to be mighty in the earth, hee was a mighty Hunter before the Lord. These words will never oblige us to conclude, that hee hath raised himselfe violently; but wee may more truely expound the wordes, Hee was mighty before the Lord, that is, he was lifted up to greatnesse by the most High, hee walked in his wayes, and followed his ordinances; and when Moses saith, that he began to be mighty in the earth, he meaneth, that hee was more feared then his predecessours, who were also Kings, Priests, and soveraigne Princes of their families: For after the generall deluge, which overflowed the whole earth, men lived commonly five or sixe hundred yeares, and so one of his posterity might see aboue a hundred thousand persons, over whom he was Prince, and soveraigne Mo∣narch, because there was then no other forme of government in the earth; so we reade Genes. 23. Chap. that the Hittites, of whom Abraham asked a Sepulchre to bury Sara, these I say cal∣led him a Prince of God, or a most excellent Prince, which hee clearely manifested at the overthrow of the five Kings, which had beaten the King of Sodome, had pillaged the Towne, and carried away his Nephew Lot prisoner, for at the rumour of these sorrowfull newes, he ar∣med three hundred and eighteene of his ser∣vants
borne in his house, and yet had no chil∣dren, Gen. 14. It is then in vaine to alledge, that violence, craft, and hereditary succession, are the onely meanes to attaine to Crownes; for although some attaine to it by humane meanes, and some∣times by dangerous wayes, as Absalom, who caused himselfe to be anointed King by expel∣ling his Father, as Abimelech by the death of 70 of his brethren upon the same stone; yet for all these wayes to come to raigne, are never brought to passe, without a manifest fore-sight, and providence of God, permitting it some∣times to punish those peoples, and sometimes for a punishment to the Kings that raigne over them; yet whatsoever they be, God comman∣deth us to obey, and perfectly to honour them: now cursed, cursed be he that shall resist the will of God, and that shall not obey his commaun∣dements. After we haue heard both Scripture, and rea∣son, manifestly evincing the truth, Let us now heare Saint Augustines opinion in this matter, in his booke De civit. Dei. The cause (saith he) of the greatnesse of Empires, is neither casuall, nor fatall, it commeth neither by chance, nor by destinie; By chance I understand (saith he) the things that happen; we not being able to know the causes of them, or that happen without any premeditated order of reason, assisting their conception and birth: By fatall things I under∣stand (as Pagans esteeme) what happeneth with∣out
the will of God, and men, by the necessity of some particular order; which opinion is greatly injurious to Gods divine providence, but rather wee must certainely beleeve, that Kingdomes are constituted, and established simply, and absolutely by the divine provi∣dence of God. And in another place, Let us not attribute the power of giving, or disposing of an Empire, but onely to the true God, that giveth eternall happinesse in heaven to his children onely; but for earthly Kingdomes, he giveth them to good and bad, as it seemeth good to him, as it plea∣seth him, who is delighted in no unjust thing; therefore this true and onely God, that alwayes provideth mankinde, both with ayde and coun∣sell, when he would, and as long as he pleased, hath given the governement, and Empire to the people of Rome; hee is the giver of all felicity, that giveth earthly Kingdomes to whom hee pleaseth, and yet alwayes with justice and rea∣son, though the meanes seeme to us oftentimes manifestly contrary to both. I thinke we have employed too much time, and too many good weapons, to fight against this horrible monster, and monstrous Hydra, and therefore the shortest and surest way, is to follow the example of that valiant Hercules, and so to cut off this monster, for hee that will not heare the Scripture, so manifestly shewing unto us our duty to our Kings, that so expresly com∣mandeth us to yeeld unto them all obedience,
hee that stoppeth his eares to those sweet and most gracious invitations of reason, and natu∣rall inclination, to honour and serue him, whom the bounty and will of GOD hath established over us; He who watcheth in labour, to make us sleepe in rest; Hee who sits on the throne to doe us right, that to ease us, beareth the burthen of all ou affaires; and in a word, Hee whose minde is alwayes in trouble and anxiety, to pre∣serve the quietnesse of his people, and to keepe off the invasion and tyrannie of Strangers; those Subjects, I say, are worthy of all the misfor∣tunes, disasters, and calamities which can hap∣pen, through the privation of so good things. But wee, who by the grace of GOD are brought up in his Schoole, that together with our mothers milke have sucked the honour, ser∣vice, and obedience which wee owe to our Kings and Princes; Let us not suffer those wic∣ked and dangerous plagues, to infect the purity of our hearts, and let not the whitenesse of our soules be spotted and defiled, by so blacke and venomous a crime, assuring our selves, that the least thought of disobedience and rebellion, which possesseth the minde; besides, that it is an evident token of an ungodly minde, is wor∣thy of the most severe punishments that can be imagined. But let us shew, that we are begotten among the children of GOD, and regenerated by the Spirit of his grace, let our ambition never flye higher then to the execution of his sacred com∣mandements,
wherein lyeth the fulnesse and centre of all delights, and of all felicity both spirituall and temporall, and since particularly he desireth, that we should feare him, and honour the King, which he hath established over us, see∣ing that in the accomplishment, and fulfilling of these two commandements, we have as it were the summe of all his law; let us be carefull to honour & serve him, and to yeeld unto him all sorts of duties, for he is the Lords anointed, as∣suring our selves, that whilest we shall studie to yeeld unto him due obdience, whilest we pray fervently for his long life, and prosperity, as we are in duty bound, God for his part will make good unto us his promises; to wit, to make us enjoy a delightfull rest, and an admirable con∣tentment, to blesse the land wherein we dwell, to multiply our dayes upon it, in joy and feli∣city, and after we shall have served, obeyed, and and honoured the King, hee will call us unto eternall felicity, to crowne us with the incor∣ruptible Crowne of glory, that seated with the 24 Elders, in the Revelation, we may with them cast downe our crownes before him, who is set on the Throne, to sing before him altogether: O Lord, thou art worthy to receive honour, blessing, and glory; to thee therefore, O eter∣nall, immortall, admirable, to thee onely wise God, Creator of all things, be ascribed all ho∣nour, glory, and magnificence, now and for evermore. Amen, Amen.
O Almighty God, and soveraigne Monarch of the whole world, who hast by thy in∣comprehensible vertue created all things, both in heaven and earth, that by thy fore-sight and wonderfull providence, doest conduct and go∣verne with so great wisedome, and with so beautifull, good, and just order, all thy crea∣tures, that the contemplation thereof ravisheth us in admiration, and forceth the wicked and Atheists to confesse, that the disposition so ad∣mirable of the starres, the swift motions of the heavens, the constant diversity of the seasons, happen not by chance, nor hazard, but that there must be some first and Soveraigne mover, to turne those great Spheres, some great Cap∣taine, to set in order the whole hoast of heaven, and to make the seasons march in their order; this order I say so exactly observed, openeth thy childrens mouthes, and maketh them say with the Royall Prophet David, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy worke. Of God of peace, that hatest confusion, and disorder, graunt us (if such be thy good plea∣sure) the grace to obey thy lawes, and to follow in all things thy holy and divine ordinances, and since thou shewest here unto us one of the wayes, leading to the mountaine of thy holi∣nesse, to the spirituall Ierusalem, to wit, this com∣mandement which thou makest here unto us, to Honour our King: give us the grace, O loving
and gracious Father, that we may perfectly per∣forme it, that our eyes may be alwayes turned towards the Lords anointed, that our eares may be alwayes open, to receive and obey his com∣mandements, that our mouthes may be alwayes filled with his praises, that our hearts may be alwayes enflamed with zeale, to his service, to testifie unto him on all occasions our most humble obedience, that after we have here belowe beene faithfull subjects, wee may bee crowned above in heaven, with the incor∣ruptible crowne of glorie. Amen. FINIS.
