18507.100 24561 S103029 99838788 3177
March 7, 1623. Numb. 21. A PROCLAMATION BY THE STATES of the Prouince of Ʋtrecht, against certaine others of the Conspirators. Together with a new and full Re∣lation of the Apprehension, Examination, Torturing, and Confession of diuers of the principall Conspirators, of the late intended Treason against the Prince of Orange, and the State of the Vnited Prouinces. Both by Letters, and other direction from the States themselues. As they were Printed at Amsterdam, for Martin Ian∣sen Brandt Bookeseller, dwelling by the new Church at the signe of the reformed Ca∣techisme. Anno 1623. LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Nicholas Bourne, and Thomas Archer. 1623.
THE PROCLAMATION OF THE STATES OF the Prouince of Vtrecht, against the Conspirators. MAuritius by the Grace of God, Prince of Orange, Count of Nassaw, Meurs, Buren, &c. Marquis of Camp-veere, and Flushing, Lord and Baron of Breda Diest, &c. Gouernour or Deputie of Holland, Zea∣land, and Vtrecht, with the States of the Land of Vtrecht, send to all them which shall see or heare these presentes read, greeting. Seeing there is of Late discouered an abomi∣nable, and most wicked Conspiracie, against the State, and well-fare of the Land, and that amongst
others the Instigators and Conductors or princi∣pall Instrumentes haue beene these following, namely Hendrick Danielsson Slatius in former time Preacher at Bleyswick: Adriaen Adriaensson van Dyck, which was here before Secretary of the said place: Cornelius Gesteranus in former time Prea∣cher at Gorchum, and Cornelius Velsius, lately Prea∣cher at Rackangie, which is a village lying in the Iland of the Briel. The Sonnes of the late Barne∣uelt, and Adriaen Vander Dussen of Rotterdam, are likewise accused of the crime afore sayd, besides many more, which are all fled intending to saue themselues in Brabant, or other Countries of our Enemies, so that they are not easily to be mett withall, although their apprehension is much re∣quired, and greatly necessary for the good of these vnited Prouinces. So it is, that there is notice giuen by these presents that whosoeuer can reveale any one of them, or any of their complices, and assistantes which haue had a hand in this abominable con∣spiracy, and cause them a liue to be deliuered to the Iustice, that he shall be rewarded with the sum of 4000. Gilders, which amounte to 400. pound sterling for each one of the persons which are here aboue named and described, and for any other they shall be recompensed with a summe of 600. Gilders, which amounte to 60. poundes starling: And here besides shall the reuealers or Informers be pardoned of this crime if they be guiltie of it: and their owne persons and names
shall not be made knowne to any. We interdicte and prohibite likewise by these all manner of Persons to lodge any of the afore∣mentioned (which hide themselues) or their complices, and assistantes which are culpable of this damnable and detestable Conspiracy, in their houses, or keepe, or suffer them in their Gardens, Ships, Boates, Haye Reekes, Barnes, or permit them to goe away with their Wag∣gons, Horses, Carts, Sleds, or any such like ser∣uing to get away, either by Water, or by Land, vpon paine of life and goodes, and there shall not any fauour be shewed to any, although it were first knowne many yeares after. Furthermore seeing it hath appeared mani∣festly by diuers informations, which the Com∣missioners authorised and appointed thereunto haue receiued, that the Arminians, or the Societie of the Remonstrants (as they instile them) haue in these Landes, a formall Court, or Colledge, wherein they meete, being also prouided of diuers Commissioners, or chiefe vndertakers and a Superintendent: likewise it is confessed, that they haue diuers Commissioners in euerie Towne, and Citie, to gather the moneys a∣mongst them of their owne Faction, of which they must make accompt to their Court where the Superintendent sittes with the other Commissio∣ners. Moreouer that some of their societie had written to some of their Preachers in these Landes, that they maruailed mightily that some
of them mayntained that their societie might not right their cause by the way of violence: And they had therefore consulted vpon this point at their meeting, or Court, where they iudged that the sayd way could not be tryed without indangering the Country to her vtter destruction and ruine, neuerthelesse considering that they could not mend themselues (as they thought) in any other manner of wayes, and suspecting their Confraters, or Brothers to smell of Anabaptisme, or Memnonisme, (knowing that their opinion was hurtfull to their dessignes) they reiected them: Whereby, as likewise by that which is alreadie discouered of the aforesayd abomi∣nable and most detestable Conspiracy, as also, by the Enterprises, and Machinations of the hidden Preachers, aboue mentioned, and diuers o∣thers of their Societie, it appeareth euidently, that they haue vsed all kind of sinister practises and deuises, to disturbe againe not onely the Church and State, but likewise to cause in these Countries an ineuitable or vnauoydable bath of blood, and to destroy these Prouinces afterwards by Incendiaries, or firers which should set seuerall places on fire, whereupon (when the Countrey should haue beene in this confusion and perplex∣itie) would our Enemie, haue assaulted vs, and inuaded the Country to make himselfe Master of it, which he hath not beene able to doe (God be praised within the space of these last 50. yeeres and more, although hee imployed to the sayd
purpose great Armies, and charges, as it ap∣peared likewise of late within these last two yeares. Seeing also that a great while since it is perceiued, that diuers Arminian preachers which were here tofore banished, and led out of these Vnited Prouinces, haue emboldened themselues to returne hither againe (in such manner that there hath beene foure and twentie of them at once at Vtrecht) against the Proclamations of the High and Mighty Lords, the States Generall of the Vnited Prouinces, and goe disguised with strange habits in the Vnited Prouinces, and prin∣cipally in this Prouince of Vtrecht, as well in the Citie, as the other Townes and Villages thereof, conuersing and walking there both day and night: Keeping also secret meetings, and con∣uenticles, in which they make euen their Ser∣mons, (which are prohibited by the State) and prouoke there, and instigate the good Inhabi∣tants of the Vnited Prouinces, and especially them of the Citie, the Townes, and the Lands of Vtrecht, to factions and commotions, and dissen∣tions: as likewise to the disobedience of their Superiours and Magistrates: In such manner, that (which is great pitty) there are found some of their faction and Society, that haue lost the one which they did beare in former time to the Almighty, their Countrey, and Countri-men, (before this Arminian Faction or Sect (rather) arose, liuing then Peaceably with their neigh∣bours)
and haue forgotten themselues so farre, that they haue beene plotters and chiefe worke∣masters of this most wicked and abominable Con∣spiracy, and made it ready to the execution, which had happened assuredly, if the mercifull God had not stopt their proceedings, through his infinite wisedome, and caused it to be reuea∣led in good time. So it is that wee insisting vpon that which is aforesayd, prohibite moreouer (according to the tenour of the two former Proclamations of the generall States, one of them was dated the third of Iuly, 1619. the other the first of Febru∣ary, Anno 1620. and the resolutions, and inter∣pretations made since vpon them) expressely, any manner of persons whatsoeuer, to appeare (vnder what pretext or colour soeuer) at any of those meetings, and conuenticles aforesayd, neither in the Citie, nor Townes, nor Lands of this Prouince, or to doe or say any thing which might in any manner of wayes preiudice the Land, or the Gouernment: vpon the paines ap∣pointed by the Proclamations aforesayd, besides they shall bee accounted as perturbators of the State, and shall be punished according to their of∣fence, and as the case shall require. Likewise wee charge that none shall presume to lodge any of the banished Preachers afore mentioned, which are also led out of the Country, nor any of their young propounders, or other which doe not stick to cause prohibited meetings, to preach, reade, or exhort in the same without permission.
As likewise to administer the Sacraments, and o∣ther Ecclesiasticall functions, nor cause or suffer them to come in their houses, gardens, hay-reekes, barnes, ships, boats, wagons, carts, or sleds: nor to hide them any where, be it by water or by land, vpon paine of banishment, or otherwise (as the fault shall deserue) to be punished, without that any long time shall excuse them although it were many yeares since discouered. And because such persons may be the better re∣uealed and taken, they which shall discouer them, (which are here last of all mentioned) shall be re∣warded with the summe of 300. Gilders, which are 30 pounds sterling, and shall receiue them of the Country or State: and if they be guilty themselues they shall be pardoned, promising moreouer, that their persons or names shall not be discouered. For wee haue iudged with a generall voyce this to be conuenient, and a fit remedy to preuent all fur∣ther Conspiracies and wicked Machinations, and to aduance the welfare and preseruation of these Lands, and their inhabitants. And because the contents hereof may well be obserued and kept, and that none might pretent ignorance, We haue giuen order that this present Proclamation shall be published in all vsuall pla∣ces as the custome is, and command hereby the President, and the Councell of Vtrecht, as like∣wise all Officers, Iustices, and ministers of Iu∣stice, whom this may concerne, to proceede a∣gainst the offenders, and cause likewise to bee
proceeded against them without any connivency, sauour, or dissimulation to the contrary. Giuen at Vtrecht, the 14. day of February, accor∣ding to the new style. Anno 1623. Vpon the margine was written, Dirick van Eck. Ʋt. Lower stood, By the order of the aforesaid Lords the States. And was subscribed, Ant: van Hilten. Vpon the Margine was the Seale of the said States in red waxe.
From the Hage,  Febr. 8. 1623. LOuing Friend: knowing that there are disper∣sed amongst you strange speeches of the Priso∣ners here lately taken, I would not forbeare to ad∣uise you the truth of the matter. The Prince of Orange being two dayes agoe a∣bout the afternoone, at Ryswyck, there came three or foure Saylers which desired to speake with his Excellency, and hauing gotten accesse to his per∣son, they related, that they were asked at Rotter∣dam, whether they would be imployed in a seruice for the good of these Countries, and were also pro∣mised great reward therefore. They confessed moreouer, that they had accep∣ted the said seruice, and had receiued certaine mo∣ney thereupon, and that they were sent afterwards to the Hage, where they deliuered two dayes agoe their fire-workes and other things, at a house (vnto which they were directed) called the little foole in the Achterom, which is a street. And that they had spoken there with the party vnto whom they were directed to receiue further instruction: but he had not told thē at the same time, what they should doe, wishing them onely to goe on to the businesse with a good courage, and promising that the next day the matter should be laid open vnto them.
They told moreouer, that they got of them at that instant certaine Duch Riders of 21. shillings sterling a peece, which they shewed also to the Prince of Orange, and said that their great liberali∣ty made them to mistrust the goodnesse of this ser∣uice, and caused them to suspect some treason or Conspiracy. Hereupon the Prince commanded them to re∣turne to the Hage, and to come towards euening to him at his Palace. Which they did, and infor∣med his Excellency fully of all the businesse. Whereupon he sent presently for the President, and the Councell of State, who forthwith (after some deliberation) sent the Atturney or Fiscall of the Court, with the Prouost Marshall, to the house or Inne aforesaid, where they found the persons by them described, and the man which paid them the money aforesaid, whom they carried instantly to the Court, and examined them. The Townesmen and the Souldiers within were presently commanded to keepe strong watches euery where, and to stop all passages that no body should come away without leaue. But it was not possible for them to preuent it, seeing there are no walls about the Hage. They searched also after∣wards the Helmet (an Inne) about the Waggons which goe to Harlem, and when they asked for the man with his Trunks, the owner thereof went spee∣dily vp into a chamber where it stood, and opening it, he tooke some things thereour, and leauing it open, came downe in great haste, and got out of the house, seeing that there was a Serjeant which
told to the rest, that he was an honest man, and that he had knowne him many yeares agoe. When the Fiscall asked the Hoste whether there was not a man with a trunke in his house: he answered, no: But seeing they found afterwards the trunke, (open with diuers pistols and other things, as it was left by the owner) when they sear∣ched the house, the Hoste was taken prisoner, though the owner, the former Secretary of Bleys∣wicke had made an escape, as is aforesaid, the o∣ther were examined the same night, and he which payed the money to the Mariners confessed that there was one dwelling at Rotterdam which had set him on work, and hauing told his name and de∣scribed his person, there went, about foure of the clocke in the morning, two Councellors of State with diuers others to find him out, but he was de∣parted thence, & it is thought that the late Secreta∣ry of Bleyswick who was escaped had giuen him notice of the discouering of their conspiracy. The examinations of the prisoners haue lasted yesterday, and this night and day, but their confes∣sions are kept as yet very secret: there are found in the meane time many pistols, swords and daggers in the truncke aforesaid, and in the other Inne, and I haue seene some of them at the Court. To day had the Preachers order to giue God thankes in their prayers for the discouering of this abhominable conspiracy of the enemies of the State. The Mariners which haue reuealed this Trea∣son, are glad that they haue cleared their consci∣ence,
and cast this burthen off their necks, making good cheare at the Castelayn of the Court his house. I heare at this instant that there is now to bee made another search: of the successe I will aduise you with the next, if God giue me leaue. Farewell. From Amsterdam,  Febr. 28. 1623. Yesterday were 4. of the conspiracy executed at the Hage, one of them was beheaded and quarte∣red, the other three were onely beheaded: to mor∣row we hope to get here the Copies of their sen∣tences. The principall and the richer sort are as yet kept in prison, but it is generally reported that they shall follow the other very speedily. They haue confessed that they would haue mur∣thered first of all the Prince of Orange: secondly, changed the gouernment and Religion: thirdly, that they had correspondency and intelligence with the enemies: fourthly, that they would haue set on fire seuerall houses and townes. Last Sunday, past through this City certaine Souldiers of Emden, which brought thence these following prisoners; Abraham and Ian Blancert, and one William Pertii, carrying them by the way of Harlem towards the Hage.
A RELATION, OR The Light of February: Wherein is to be seene, The strange and abominable Conspiracy which was intended against the vnited Prouinces, and the Inhabitants therein: Reuealed by these foure ho∣nest men: Iohn Engelen, Iohn Faes, Ieroen Ewoutszon, Pieter Ianssen Broeck. IT seemeth that the Almigh∣ty hath beene pleased many times to defend or preserue his Church not onely by meanes of the simple, but euen also by the actions of her owne enemies, as you may perceiue by this pre∣sent Relation. And it is very well knowne to the Inhabitants of this Coun∣try, what kind of fellowes our Mariners are for the most part, and principally these 4, which discoue∣red the treason, here before mentioned, to be very stout and resolute, and stained moreouer with the Arminian doctrine, as all the rest of the conspira∣cy, but I will not say that they are all stained which haue conuersed with them, with such a foule spot, as shall appeare by these and other good Patriots or well-willers of their Country. But to come to the matter: It is to be obserued
that the eldest of these foure Mariners was called (by a nicke name) Light, amongst the common people, which seemed to presage some thing, if the Prognostication had beene made before the effect appeared: but to leaue all friuolous things behind, and to relate shortly that which is past in these parts of the Low Countries, concerning the con∣spiracy aforementioned. The 4. of February, in the yeere 1623. came to Rotterdam a strange Monster, in the shape of the former Secretary of Bleyswyck, hauing his belly fil∣led with ranke poyfon, as shall be published after∣ward by authority of the State to all the world: This wicked fellow who (as he thought) could al∣ter his mouth & face into such countenance as he pleased, and change his voice as he listed, was ac∣quainted with one of the Mariners aforesaid, but the Mariner could not feele presently with his woollen gloues what he carried vnder his cloak, as he did afterwards (by the grace of God) when his hands were naked. He told in the beginning to the Mariner, that it was a braue enterprise, & tending to the good of the Common-wealth, but (as hee said) it must be kept secret, and the reward would asswage or sweeten the labour and pains, and desi∣red him therefore to find out three other lusty and resolute Saylers as he was himselfe, which he did at an instant, (seeing they know one another, and can certifie whom they dare trust with their liues, and will stand for a man when occasion shall serue) and brought them to him; where after some spee∣ches betwixt them, the foure Mariners yeelded to
their employment in the sayd seruice. About the same time there came another (whom they neuer saw before) which after some conference gaue them 300. Gilders (which amount to 30. Pound sterling) a piece aforehand, onely vpon hope of good successe, which pleased the Mariners excee∣ding well, and made them grow hot to the busi∣nesse: Hee added moreouer that after the enter∣prise was performed they should want neither goods nor money, and should each one of them besides be honoured with an office. After these faire promises made vnto the Mariners, the other two told them where they should receiue diuers Pistols, besides gunpowder, and Lead, or Bullets, with great store of Stillettos or murdering Dag∣gers, and other such like things to pierce a harnesse of proofe withall, and desired them to bring them in seuerall trunkes to a certaine Inne at the Hage, which they performed with all possible speed, and diligence, for they packt these things secretly vp in trunkes, and caused them in their company the 5. of February to bee carried from Rotterdam to Delft, and thence towards the Hage, where they brought them to the appointed Inne called the Helmet, and found there at the same instant their Master (which set them on work at the beginning) who bade them welcome, and made them good cheare. In the meane time had he (who payed them the money) hired likewise foure other couragious and lusty Mariners, and had sent them with the like in∣struments and commodities put in trunkes as the
other, through the same passage towards the Hage, & charged thē to meet at an Inne called the little Foole, (which they did) and were there well recei∣ued and entertained with drinke and meat. The sixt of this Moneth (O happy day) beganne the Mariners aforesaid to suspect the businesse, (without question through the inspiration of the Almighty) and to confer one with another about it, and concluded amongst themselues, that they would not enter any further into the said busi∣nesse, beleeuing it to be a foule peece of worke: And resolued thereupon that two of them should goe instantly to the Prince of Orange, to certifie his Excellency of the case, and to learne whether they were employed in the seruice of the Country or not. Comming with all possible speed to the Court in the Hage, they vnderstood that the Prince of Orange was gone to Ryswyck, (where some of his Horse are kept) they went thither presently with their tarred apparell, & sheaths of horne for their kniues, and other things, as the Saylers vse to weare in the Low Countries, and talking amongst themselues along the way, the time seemed very short vnto them at their arriuall: And amongst the rest, they conferred together in what manner, and with what countenance they should speake to the Prince his Excellency. When they were at the Stable of the Prince, they saw there diuers Lacquies and Yeomen of the Prince his Guard, and told them that they would faine speake a word or two with his Excellency; but no body seemed to giue greatly eare vnto
them, neuerthelesse there was one of the Lacquies, who laughing, accepted to tell the Prince of them and their desire, suspecting that they had some strange toy or thing to shew to his Excellency; who sent them word backe againe by the Lacquy, that he would heare them as soone as he came out of his stable: whereupon they answered, that they would speak with his Excellency about a businesse that concerned mightily his own person, and that there was perhaps danger in delay, (as the Ciuill Lawyers say) Periculum in mora: The Prince (who hath loued continually the Mariners) vnderstan∣ding this, caused them instantly to come to him, where they made the best reuerence they could af∣ter their owne manner, and reuealed all the mat∣ter vnto him. Now you may guesse what the Prince thought of it, hearing of an enterprise of which he knew not himselfe: he commanded the Mariners to returne to the Court, by the way of Vorburg, which is a village about the Hage, and rode himselfe with all speed to the Court, where he communicated instantly this matter with the States. Hereupon was presently giuen order that the two Innes here before mentioned, should be searched instantly, and that all them which were within the two Innes should be ceased vpon, vntill such time as the heads and complices of this wic∣ked onterprise should be found out. They got the money master or Purser, (who payed the Mari∣ners) at the Inne called the little Foole, the rest which were in the house are likewise apprehended, and I cannot heare as yet that any one of them is
set at liberty. At the other Inne (where the Secre∣tary of Bleyswick escaped) were euen also diuers apprehended, but they are all dismist, seeing they were found innocent and cleare of this businesse. All the instruments aforesaid which were found in the two Innes, were likewise carried away by the Officers of the Court. Concerning the Mariners, they were 9. dayes kept in the house of the Keeper or Castelain of the Court, vntil the States knew by examination that they were not guilty, and had behaued themselues as true Patriots and well-willers of the Country ought to doe, and discharged their consciences. This night and the next day commanded the States strong watches to be kept, as well of the Townsmen, as of the Souldiers about the Hage, and the passages to goe thence: And they caused likewise a Proclamation to be published and prin∣ted as we haue heard before. The next day being Wednesday, vpon the 8. of this Moneth, was the fasting and prayer day kept, whereof the States had warned the Country fourteen dayes before. This alteration seemed to cause a new zeale amongst the inhabitants, that all the Churches were packt vp so full, as the like was not seene by any man liuing. About the euening came the Hangman into the Hage, to put some of the apprehended to the tor∣ture. The same day were likewise three of Barne∣velts seruants taken prisoners, and the house of the widow of Iohn of Oldenbarnevelt as likewise that of Renier of Oldenbarnevelt his sonne guarded by
certaine officers of the Court. The 9. day of this Moneth were yet some at the Hage apprehended, and there came newes that two were taken at Rotterdam, and that some were fled thence, whereupon the Country was much per∣plexed. The same day there came also tidings from Harlem, that there was made a great hole in the walls of the prison by some which were without, with a great augre, iust vpon the roome in which two Arminian Preachers were put about three weekes agoe, because they were come into the Dominion of the States, out of which they were banished. The 10. and 11. day of this Moneth, were in all the Cities and Townes of the Vnited Prouinces the Proclamations of the States concerning this Conspiracy published, & euery where great paines were taken to apprehend the Authors and Com∣plices thereof. In those dayes was the Lord van∣der Mylen sent for to come into the Hage, where he came freely, and is lodged now at the house of the Keeper of the Court, whereby it seemeth that hee is not suspected. The 12. day of this Moneth when it was night, there were two poore Boers which saw Adriaen Adriaensson van Dyck, the former Secretary of Bleyswyck, wherevpon they went purposely to the Mayor of the place, who tooke him afterwards: whereupon the Boers got within few dayes the moneyes promised by the Proclamation of the States, for the discouering of him, namely 4000.
Gilders, which amount to 400. pounds sterling. The 14. of this Moneth, the fore-mentioned A∣driaen Adriaensson van Dyck sent for some of his Children and Kindred (a little before the Officers came to him out of the Hage) and confessed vnto them that he had deserued death, and cursed migh∣tily the Arminian Preachers which seduced him, hee was yet the same day brought to the prison of the Hage by the Officers which came for him from the Court. This day were the Sailers (which had vntill that time made good cheare at the house of the keeper of the Court) set at liberty, and each one of them was honoured of his Excellency with a peece of gold whereon was the Picture and Armes of the Prince with his Deuice, worth about 80. Gilders, which amount to 8. pounds sterling, as likewise with a siluerd Sword for each of them. The States moreouer caused to each of them to be giuen 600. Gilders which amount to 60. pounds sterling, be∣sides a monethly pension of 16. Gilders, or 32. shil∣lings sterling, during their liues: granting them moreouer their Letters of recommendation to the Court of Admiralty, for the first offices (of which they be capable) that shall fall. Whereupon they returned with great contentment to Rotterdam, and told their friends their fortune, and cloathed them∣selues there in gray sutes of cloath, and bought there for their own wearing gray hats, with golden bands, as if they had bin Sea-Captains already. The same day were the bels of the Town house of the Hage rung, whereupon the two sonnes of
Barnevelt were warned to appeare within the space of 14. daies; and to answer for themselues vpon paine of their banishment, & confiscation of their goods, according to the Lawes and custome of the Country. The 15. day foure Citizens were apprehended at Leyden about this Conspiracy, and it was per∣ceiued that some of their consorts were fled. The 16. of this Moneth was at the Hage a ru∣mour that both the sonnes of Barneuelt were seene at Scheuelingen about the Sea-coast, with a skipper of their acquaintance who dwelt there, wherupon his Wife was apprehended in the absence of her husband and carryed to the Hage, where she con∣fessed vpon examination that her husband depar∣ted the night before from his house with them: & search being made, it was found out presently that they went from Scheuelingen to Berckerhey, Cat∣wyck, Noortwyck, Santvoort, Wyck op Zee, along a ditch towards the Sea, which is called the Honds∣bosh, and came thence into the Island of Texel. The 17. day of this Moneth was the town-house of Rotterdam fired very earely in the morning, at which time the Cutler afore mentioned got away among the people which came to quench the fire, he was taken, because hee had sold diuers Instru∣ments and armes to the Conspirators. The other, namely the Tinker was dismist by the Lords, seeing there was at that time yet nothing found out wher∣with they could charge him. The Cutler went to diuers of his acquaintance, but no man would receiue him, and seeing hee is
still absent there is promised a summe of mone to them that shall cause him to be apprehended. The 18. of this Moneth was the eldest sonne of Barnevelt taken in the Island of Texel, with the skipper aforesaid, and one of his men. The 19. being the next day, he was brought to the Hage and put in prison, where he was examined since, but we cannot heare as yet any thing of his confession. The 20. of this Moneth were all the prisoners which were taken about this Conspiracy exami∣ned by the Iustices of the Court. The 21. were at Ouwerschic, a village, yet two o∣ther taken of this Conspiracy, namely Dauid Co∣renwinder Secretary in former time of Berckel, and the Boer which lodged him. They were carried likewise the same day to the prison which is in the Hage, where there are (masters and seruants) at least twenty, apprehended for this Conspiracy. FINIS.
