18627 99848554 13655
A PENSIVE soules delight. The Contents whereof, is shewen in these Verses following. 1. The Pensiue soule recounteth in this place, Elizaes troubles, and Elizaes grace. 2. Here are expressed the stratagems of foes, Elizaes conquests, and their falls that rose. 3. Here is set forth Elizaes lenitie, And Locust-Catholickes superbitie. By Iohn Norden. LONDON Printed by T.C. for William Lugger, and are to be sold at the signe of the blinde Knight, ouer against S. Andrewes Church in Holborne. 1603.
TO THE RIGHT Honourable and vertuous Ladie the Countesse of Warwicke. IF I were demanded (Right Ho∣nourable) I could yeeld a reason why I giue your Lady-ship this little plaine Poeme, vnder the ty∣tle of a Pensiue Soules delight, but that your Ladiship is not altoge∣ther vnacquainted with some causes that may right well worke me pensiue. The cause is no∣ted and obserued of many, but felt of my selfe and mine only. The cause of my delight is pub∣lique, common, and knowne to all, but felt (with effect) of the faithfull and loyall onely. Can any faithfull soule but sigh (my good La∣die,) to see and consider, the sundry daungers, that haue bene, and are daily plotted and prac∣tised, against her highnesse most innocent per∣son, and Royall state? And againe, can any, but reioyce and delight to see her still blessed & de∣fended,
and the practizers still found out, cen∣sured and condemned? And who seeth with∣out pensiuenesse and sorrow, her Maiesties na∣tiue subiects, our owne country-men, brethren and kindred, to become Traytors, to their, and our most gratious Queene, & treacherous to vs their country-men & allyes? And againe, reioy∣ceth not to see & obserue, how all their deuises come to nought, her Maiestie preserued, & our selues deliuered? And again, who greeueth not to consider from whom these practises and the grounds of these treasons proceed? From a man pretending to be the high and sole Vicar of Christ in earth, who cannot erre in his purposes and proceedings, because they are all couered, (euen murthers of innocent men, yea Princes, raising warre within, and between kingdomes,) with the pretence of religion and glorifying God, the highest point of blasphemy. But who reioy∣ceth not to see him discouered Antichrist, the man of sinne? and his vndermining and treasonable messengers, Locustes? And who reioyceth not to see them in some measure abandoned, sith they will not be reclaimed? But more, who reioy∣ceth not to see and consider her Maiesties im∣moueable constancie, in louing, in imbracing,
and in maintaining the infallable trueth? and our selues vnder her, and by her, to enioy the same? A subiect worthie of a more serious la∣bour. But because many worthie workes are extāt of their discouery, some too great of price for poore men, and some too learned for the simple. And such serious Treatises oftē neglec∣ted, because they delight not all humours, I thought it not vnfit to put the inferiour multi∣tude in minde, in this kinde of writing, what causes they haue to sighe and to sing, to grieue and reioyce: And that with mee they may haue all will, as they haue cause, to pray for the continuance of the true causes of our re∣ioycing, the maintenance of Religion, and pre∣seruation of her highnesse. The length of dayes, vouchsafe her length of dayes: the Lyon of Iudah rent her enemies in peeces: And high Iehouah, graunt that vnder her we may all liue in true loue, towards her, that loueth him, who in his loue gaue her to vs. That we in her might ra∣ther sorrow to see the falles of traytors in chari∣tie, then traytors to tryumph in the successe of their attempts in insolencie. Your Ladiships in all seruice, Iohn Norden.
A Pensiue Soules delight, 1. The Pensiue Soule recounteth in this place, Elizaes troubles, and Elizaes grace. MY Pensiue Soule recounting heauenly loue, which did bestow that sacred hidden treasure, Truthes light to shine, to vs here, from aboue: Cannot but ioy, to see Ioues mercies measure, Passing in greatnes all this earthly frame, It fills our hearts with science of his name, Which is we loue, we liue as he requires: He sends his word, to worke in vs inspires of his true light. Looke vp from whence it came. Came it from man? came it from wisedomes skill? Came it by art? came it from multitude? No, no: it came from his all sacred will, That will'd our wealth and true beatitude. Long, long shut vp in darke obliuions den, And fetter'd long, through ignorance of men. Darke Ignorance, syre of Deuotion, Blinde zeale, blinde loue, both malediction, As is discouer'd by Truthes sacred pen.
How so the pennes of men not lightned write, Bewitcht with false inspires, inspirde in those That follow fancie, all depriu'd of light: Despightfull hearts, that kill and seeme no foes, Like friends, in fawnes, foes vnder faithlesse smiles, Whose gracelesse guise seemes gracefull, yet but wiles That win affection to perdition, And seeme yet sacred, and of fowle condition, Without all-haile: within mortall reuiles. I wayle these wightes that wander in the darke, Led by the beast, that traynes great troupes to hell, And seekes to sinke sacred Religions Barke, By his inchantes, charmed in his hidious cell: But he fowle feend, and faithlesse to great Ioue, Hath long breathd bannings gainst Messiahs loue, Eliza Queene, the prop of verity, That still stands vp, a Queene of victory, Whome all his wiles and curses cannot moue. They cannot moue the mountaynes of our Peace, Elizaes truth, whose sacred hearts desire, Desirde and wrought, that heau'nly Truthes release, That lay forlorne, long languishing in briers: She brought to light the load starre of our light, And loosde the bands of Enuy by her might, Her might made mightie, by Ioues mighty hand, That heau'd her vp triumphant in this land: Fearefull to foes, reioycing to the right.
Reioyce ye righteous and resound her prayse, Prayse great Iehouah for her Maiestie, He, he receiu'd her, in her pensiue dayes, Not farre from death, held in captiuity: A captiue Lady of a free-full minde Free, and in fauour nought can true loue binde. Her Loue was Truth, her truth and loue were right, Ioue rightly saw her, and her loues delight. Truth and Loues light were sacredly combinde. All sacred Vertues, did combine in one, One Grace diuine was guide vnto them all: In her all working when she was alone, (Alone in company Angelicall) Heauens Angels spred their still protecting tent, And guard her sacred person innocent. Graces diuine administred true ioy In her deemd ioylesse state, nought could annoy Her blessed patience in imprisonment. But oh true Lady, how could griefes retire? When she recounted why she was restraind? And eke by whome? by her sole sisters ire: What heart could hold (so innocent) disdaynd? Disdaynd to liue, her life obscurde in hate: Was hatefull to vnhappy hearts where Enuy sate. But sacred Loue gaue life and light to her, And brought her life to light, and did transferre Deaths dreadfull sting vnto the obstinate.
And on their Queene, whome our Eliza lou'd Her life as loue, her loue assurance set On high Iehouah's loue: he her approu'd, And gaue her light to misse fowle enuies net, That was displaid to catch Eliza in. Suggests were, as if she pretended sinne Against annoynted Mary and her crowne: From which Eliza would bring Mary downe, And set her selfe by force vsurp'd therein. Fie on this glosse, that paynts this false suggest, A forg'd surmise, that fell before her eyes, That still attended high Iehouah's hest: She saw it fall, none saw it yet arise. It might arise, but could not erst preuayle, Though Enuies hearts and hands gaue oft assaile: In hope to see her sacred life dissolu'd, She not dismaid, assured stood resolu'd High Ioue would free her, and would be her bayle. He bayld her in the action of their hate, Where they suggest, her hate vnto the Queene, And that she couertly enuide the state, Her foes made show, as if this had beene seene: And daz'd the eyes of silly peoples mindes With false reportes: like errour often blindes The vulgar multitude, who thinke all true That States-men speake, as if it were in view. High pollicie of purpose blowes such windes.
Such windes, as blowe content, or bring dismay, Sometimes are raisde, and do dispearse a thing Throughout a kingdome: So they made their way To cause Elizaes ill's suggested ring: Yet she true Lady, sate and smilde to see Despight displaide, and axe laide to the tree To cut her downe for prouidence diuine, Who swayes the axe, reuerted spites repine From her to them, and set her Lady free. Her foes repinde at her, not for her crime, But sawe her light that would bewray their sinne: The sire of sinne then egg'd them on, in time To cut her off, if they the game would winne. But sire and sonnes, sonnes of perdition, Wrought not Elizaes, but their owne perdition. And shee not seeking found the way, and rose Vnto the Crowne, a gall vnto her foes, She bound, Ioue gaue her manumission. And seal'd it with the death and quicke confusion Of greatest foes within Realme and without: Poole Cardinall, sent from Romish Babylon, Arch-Atheist Gardener, and an vgly rout Of bloudy Tyrants that had sword in hand, And cut truths throat, with their foule Enuies band, Where soone cut off, with their owne bloudy knife Which they had whet to reue Elizaes life, As they did all religious in the land.
Oh deepest wisedome of the powres diuine! Oh highest powre, of high Iehouah seene In so preseruing powrefull Henries line, Well neere vntwisted in the Mary Queene: By whom some sought as much as in them lay, Elizaes ruine, had not God said nay, And yea to her preseruing, when authoritie Consented to dispatch her Maiestie Of Truth and true Religion, counter-stay. Her famous Father to the worldes admire, First foyled Romish Pharoh in the feelde: When Pharohs troupes were neere him, and in Ire A miracle to make proud Pharoh yeelde. Yet loe perforce he lost his golden fame Within this Realme, thrice happy, if his name Had dide likewise, drownde in, obliuion And not haue liude here, father of sedition, The nurse of Enuy, and the gulph of shame. Then hopefull Edward did succeed to raigne, Truthes proppe, and seekes to keepe Romes Septer downe{punctel} High Ioue him sawe, but loe, he did not daigne To leaue him long, but tooke him from the crowne, And from vs thanklesse, for the Truth he sent By Henries hand: wherein, we negligent Were reft of him, and of the liuely light, And then came darknesse and a dismal night Wherein we sawe not where Religion went.
But by the blood of Martyrs that was shed Throughout the lande, to put out Truthes true light That then did shine as Sunne eclipsed red: Yet cast cleare beames, vpon each faithfull wight: Whose truth was tride, their trialls did expresse Their liuely Loue; though many made recesse And fell againe into that ougly den Of darke deceit, deuouring soules of men In filthy puddle, of fraile humane gesse. Poore soules bewitched, with inchaunted zeale Fell backe, and banisht their true sauing guide, That guides by grace, and not by fond reueale Of giddie heads, that liue and lead. And Mary Queene, alas my soule bewailes That her high vertues had so strong assailes That she was wonne, to kill the silly sheepe That were committed to her charge to keepe, Her Cleargy rent them with their woluish nailes. These vgly beasts attired yet like lambes, Lay fawning like the Foxe, that plaies, and praies, They plaide & praide, on yong ones & their dambes: If fawnes could not, they adde fierce fiery raies. To race through Rage and Rigor of the sword, Mens true desires of Loues light and Truthes word. This Loue, this Light, this Truth Iehouah sent By Henries hand and Edwards, while he lent Him life, and while he was faire Englands Lord.
But happy Henry, and truthes Edward gone, The gracefull guides, and pillers that vp-staid Religions frame, a third arose anon, That brake the building that these gracefull layd, She pul'd it downe, and did erect the stage Whereon was plaid the tragedy of rage: It stoode not long, the Actors partes were done, And they went out, Elizaes part begun, And all applaud her, and her equipage. Began it now? a part she playd before, Not of an Agent, but a patient▪ She silent sate, and heard the Lions rore, Like captiu'd Daniel in a dreadfull tent. Her part was not like daughter of a King, To whome All hayle, the truest subiects bring. Curtaines were drawne to sit in all mens view, Prince like attended: She with bloudy crew Guarded as guilty. couer'd with loues wing. She foundes her faith not on the sonnes of men, Not on frayle flesh, not on the multitude, Not on the sword not on great wisedomes pen: But on Iehouah Prince of Fortitude. Fore him she falles, to him in faith she cries, On him she hopes, he on her cast his eyes. He spread the beames of his releeuing loue, On her distressed, but elected Doue: On her he made his sauing Sunne to rise.
His heauenly doue, diuinely soar'd from hie With his swift sacred wings, and did inspire True trust in her, vnseene of humane eye: His sacred Doue once come, did not retire, But did possesse her, made his bowre her brest, With sacred vertues there he built his nest: And there begat all graces heauenly, That branch and beare true fruites of sanctity, Presaging first, now show Eliza blest. The more her vertues seem'd to fit the crowne, The more did Enuy seeke to blemish it, There want no hearts, but hands to pull her downe: Yet aymd their malice, but it could not hit, Her guard was sure, her Armour enuy-proofe, Her friends yet feare, and feareful stand aloofe Sad, gaue but ayme at th'arrowes of despight, Which flew abroad, not any on her light. Her light did shine and shrowded her reproofe. And powers diuine, diuinely made the way, Cut downe the tree that hindred her to passe, The tree cut downe, the branches broken lay, Disperst, forlorne; and all fowle Enuies Masse Became a Chaos and a limblesse lumpe, Nought stood to stop her, but fowle Enuies stump, That sprowted still and bare the leaues of spight: Truthes Sunne then shone and withred their delight. And they discouered, lay as in a dumpe.
When Mary Queene, depriu'd of life was gone, Then busie heads breath'd scruples into men: For Princes dead, then wakes Ambition, And vgly strife starts out of hidious den, And sowes sedition mongst the multitude. Suggesting in successe sad seruitude: Though our Eliza heire apparent stoode, There wanted not of that inchaunted broode: That argue in her sexe small fortitude. Among all other doubts, the difference Then in Religion, seem'd greatest let: And had it not bene heauens prouidence That swayes mens mindes, and concord set, It might haue raisde in Realme sad mutinie, But great Elizaes magnanimitie Conioynd with loue, made all applaude her raigne: And Mary dead, they all do shewe them faine To see Eliza in her dignitie. Selfe day of Maries deathNouem. 1558. she was proclaim'd With greatest ioy faire Englands Queene: Although to let it, still foule Enuy aim'd Without preuaile, the gall of hearts were seene. The Trumpet sounded, men for ioy did smile, And gaue true signes of ioy for Romes exile. That held Truth captiue, by Eliza freede, Who brought in sowers of that sacred seede: That soone grew great, and branched in a while.
And she true Lady lifted to the crowne, Ioyes not so much in her high honors throne, As in the bringing of fowle Enuy downe, That then aloft, imposed cause of moane On men then mou'd, and did retaine the light That shone as starres in that darke vgly night: Which had eclipsed all the Realme throughout, That none could see Truthes sun (dark round about) Yet some in darknesse, did continue bright. Though when their beames, were brightly seene to shine, The wolues that wandred for their pray them found And them deuour'd, or clapt in dismall shrine, Fast tide, vntill Eliza them vnbound, And brought them forth vnto the light of Sunne, And op'd truthes booke. A world to see men run To heare and learne the truth long kept from view, Forlorne, forsaken, of that dreadfull crew: Now all imbrace Elizaes worke begun. And then begun her fruites of faith be seene, And publikely she made her loues protest: Ere she assum'd the Scepter of a Queene, She would through Ioue, giue church distressed rest, And rest her selfe on his all sacred powre, Which well she witnest comming from the Towre: Before she did set forward, lifts her eyes, Giues praise to him in whom all safetie lies: Her strong pauilion, and her sauing bowre.
To him with heart and humble voyce she gaue All laud for loue, wherein he had preseru'd Her selfe from death, her person from the graue, To see that ioyfull day, yet not deseru'd She did confesse, his mercies onely rays'd Her from her dangers. And as Dauid prays'd, She prays'd his name: This argument of grace, Gaue gracefull tokens, to adorne the place, The regall throne. Her foes saw it and gays'd. They gays'd and grieu'd to see the splending rayes Of great Elizaes fame spread farre and neere: Their eyes of spight gaue ayme vnto her wayes. She wauered not, her vertues shined cleere, The Sunny beame, of high Iehouahes loue, Led her aright. All her delight aboue, Not in earthes glory, which might leade awrye, She had Truthes touch and Image in her eye, Which no delight or fancy could remoue. In this Truthes constant state Eliza stood, A liuely mirrour set before our eyes: And still she stands, Nurse and giues the foode To Iacobs line, in whome lifes promise lies. Oh great Eliza whome the powers diuine Diuinely helde, from falling, by loues line She holds the line, whereon dependeth peace, Truthes peace and plenty, and sad warres decease, Or else preserues when foes in force combine.
As hath appeared in her Royall dayes, When troupes of troubles haue presented feare By force in field, by secret spights essayes By Magicke Art. and poysons: who did beare Preseruing stroke, but high Iehouah's hand, He will preserue, were troubles as the sand, As will the sequele of this worke declare, Wherein some practises described are As were prepar'd her, though they could not stand.
A Pensiue soules delight. Here are expressed the startagems of foes, Elizaes conquests, and their falls that rose. TAke off the vaile, and ope your dimmed eies, All ye seduced, by the man of sin: Conceiue aright, consider whence do rise, And where the dangers of this Realme begin. Looke into Rome, the piller of your pride, And flatter not the things should be enuide: As treasons, murders, and conspiracies, Dreadfull Inuasions, and sad miseries. These are her fruite, they cannot be denide. Can thirst for blood, stand with Religion? Can hatefull murder, craue a recompence? Then holy writ is but a fiction: Tweene sinne and sanctitie no difference, To murther Princes, meritorious: A worke, that makes the worker glorious. Is't faith by workes, or workes by faith they showe In sheading blood? and seeking ouerthrow Of Prince and people? a thing most odious.
How did Pope Paule the fourth, fawne on the French, And fed their second Francis with desire By force, to mount faire Englands Regall bench, Who was with ease inuited to aspire In Maries name, his Queene, & Queene of Scots? He did pretend with sword to solue the knots That rightly knit Eliza to the Crowne. But right by force, is sildome seene puld downe, Nor for her right Eliza would cast lots. As Paule pretends in sentencing our Queene, No Queene, French Francis in conceit was King: And stylde him King, as if he King had bene: And Francis soaring by ambicious wing, Eggd by the Guise, did send his force with speede To Scotland, (English Papists first were feede To aide the French) and thence the Realme t'inuade, A match but halfe, not by both parties made. Though strong cōceit might thinke it won indeed. But when Eliza saw French Francis rise, And fetch his runne to leape into her Land: She knew the practise of seditious Guise, On whose aspiring wyles the King did stand. The Pope, the King, and Papists stoode Combinde in one, in hot aspiring moode. And our Eliza lately raisde, behelde This play begun, Ensignes displayde in fielde, She not dismayd, nor fearing Enuies broode.
But soone consulted with Nobilitie, Resolu'd, and sent her warlike forces hence: They paste the Tweede in magnanimity, As eger of their Queenes and Realmes defence. The French were to the Scots vnwelcome guests, Therefore the Scots made English high protests, To ioyne their forces to the English bandes, A Realme with Realme, in loue combined stands, Farre more secure, then it disiuncted rests. But when the French had view of English force, And saw Elizaes loue had wonne the Scots, The French dismay, and sue for quicke diuorce, Wishing Pope Paul were present at the lots, Where he with his vnwonted warlike trayne, Had seene sad sorrow, sequell of disdayne, That erst disdaynd Elizaes Diademe, To take it off, and rob her of her Realme: And expedition plotted by his brayne. The French saw ruine right before their eyes, If they should buckle by the dint of sword, A dreadfull myst of feare on them did rise, And they sought peace by plaine submissiue word, And yeelded rather to returne with shame, Then enter combate for the cause they came. So Solon-Cecill and graue Wotton went And gaue them parlie, and the consequent Did wholy tend to great Elizaes fame.
The King and Queene of Scots and France should leaue The armes and titles of Elizaes Realmes, By them vsurpt, to which Pope Paul did heaue With English gems to decke their diadeames, And further yeelded their submission, As did Eliza set condition. What greater honour could succeed then this? What greater victory then yeelding is? A regall guise to haue compassion. Here were three vertues in Eliza found, Her true and constant Magnanimity, Her franke Compassion, and her Wisedome sound, All prest at once, confirmd her dignity. From whom haue sprung the dangers of our Queene? From whence haue all fowle Enuies working beene? But from the fountayne of that poysond well, Of Romish Bushops, and their cursed cell? Where are fell Furies and fowle Monsters seene. Did not Pope Pius quartus who succeedes The former Paul, appeare like venemous? And did he not sow here seditious seedes? And did not againe Pope Pius quintus, Succeeding him gaue tokens of despight? Who did her sacred Maiesty indue With his fowle Bull, that came with ougly roare, Into this land, her Highnes to vnmoare, And to bereaue this Kingdome of her light.
And did he not dispence with fealtie, That English Nobles and her subjects swore, And plainely plighted to her Maiestie? And stirr'd he not the Northerne Lords, to gore Her Highnesse liege-men with his filthy Bull? Though he preuailed not, his hornes were dull, Yet did his complices obey his hest, And rais'd their force, the Pope to reinuest Whence he was driuen, their hearts of gall were full. Full of despite, breath'd on them by that beast, That bellow'd horrour to the silly sheepe, Whose bloud they sought to make their Enuies feast. But he that gaue these silly ones to keepe, To great Eliza gaue, Eliza will And powre, she suffer'd not the Wolues to kill Her lambes, but sent her sauing heardsmen hence. Sussex and Warwick, who were their defence. At whose aduent, the Bull failde of his skill. And failing fled: An vgly sight to see A beast dismembred, not by butchers knife: The head amaz'd did flie: the hornes too free, Brake off. The members do dispaire of life. Head hastes to Scotland, left the bulke behinde, The body, armes, and legges were discombinde. And suddenly captiu'de, subdude or yelde, Depriu'd of hope, (as men disarmde in fielde. See now their errour, led before as blinde.
Some of the trayne had iustly doome to dye, Most did implore, and got Elizaes grace, And yet not one could reason iustifie, As sit to liue, of this rebellious race: All vertues doe attend Elizaes trayne, Valour, and Mercy, Iustice with these twayne, Approue her absolute heroicke Queene: No former worthy, more diuine hath beene. Nor won more honour, neuer touch of stayne. But how could Pius Pope excuse his spight, In seeking true Elizaes life by sword? How could he voyde iust sentence of his pride, Her to depose, by his ambitious word? How could he cleare himselfe of subtilty, Pretending to dispence with fealty? Spight, pride, and fraude, a trine aspect of hell, Presaging ill euent out of that cell. From whence proceedes nought but impiety. This impius Bull of Pius baited thus, Came led to London in false Feltons hand, He tide the beast, and left it furious; At th' Bishops pallace in a leaden band The Bulheard left the game for others playe, His seruice done, dispaire egd him away: The Bull grew meeker, was with ease vntide. The gamester gone, the game was not reuide, But left vnplaid vntill another day.
Francke gamester Felton laie aloofe awhile, To heare and note, successe of this fierce beast, At last found out, and brought from darke exile, And sawe the game all done, become a ieast: Himselfe came forth to play his part on stage In publike view (Pope Pius trustie Page.) He acted all, as traytors vse to doe, That after doome to execution goe. Meane while the Bull was curbed of his rage. The powers diuine, that euer shelter make To shield Eliza from foule Enuies hand, Stood vp and stopt the currant of this lake, That threatn'd daunger to her selfe and land: And leaues her not depriued of reueale Of all complots, that would subuert her weale. He Madders and Barlowes conspiracies Bewraide: ere they brought forth their villanies They dide: Iustice admitted no appeale. My pensiue soule (recomforted to see Elizaes freedome, and her constant loue: How Truth and Mercy, in her linked bee, And how her vertues her spred fame approue) Cannot but lift in loue her worthy praise, And laude his name, who her for vs did raise: And in her set Religion (aptiuate) Free for Religious to participate Iehouah's bountie in Elizaes dayes.
Iehouah's bountie and his loues defence, Defendeth her and vs in her from foes: Praise him, he seekes no other recompence. He heau'd her vp, and we in her arose, We did arise, by tyrannie cast downe, Shee, shee, (our Moses,) lifted to the crowne, Saw Corah, Dathan, and Abiram rise, (Rebellious troupes) and sinke before her eies. Dispaire them swallow at Elizaes frowne. Confusion swallowes Rebels, none can stand When they conspire in publique, or conceald, For who so takes a traytors taske in hand To worke Elizaes wrecke, is soone reueald. Their treasons seene, whence is originall? Sot Someruiles, and that proud Parries gall, That swore her death with resolution, Couertly contriu'd by Romes elusion: What issue came? their owne infernall fall. And yet was Parry by the Pope assurde His fact was worthy merit of heauens blisse: What hellish vipers hath these Popes procurde, To aime at her whose glorie makes them misse? Her glory graced with Iehouahs grace, Disgraceth them with her great glories face: What could the fourteene great heroykes doe, Whom eke the Pope to murder her did wooe? Did they preuaile in that they had in chace?
Were they not found by high Iehouahs eye, That winkes not at foule Enuies lifted fist? He sees and swayes their foule malignitie: And smites them downe within selfe Enuies list. Yea though they do contriue their spight In fortaigne parts, farre off (they think) from sight, Iustice bewrayeth them where so they hide, And selfe conceit leaues not them vndescride: Themselues discouer in dispairing night. Yea though they practise darknesse in the darke, As diuellish witchcraft, and the Magicke arts: The diuel deceiues them, and they misse the marke, Yet he not his, their play is of two parts. They aime to hit, high Ioues annointed Queene, And misse, he aimes at them, (his wiles vnseene,) And hits. The Pope yet holiest of the rest, Chiefe actor, finding former shifts not blest: He will haue execrable arts be seene. And for his Nigromantiall practises, Pickes out infernall instruments for fact: As Prestall, Phayer, and their complices, Hot-headed Story, maister of the act, This worke commenced, darke & deepe as hell, Yet brought to light, and lifted from that rell. The diuel assured them Elizaes death, (He loues to lye) beleeue not what he saith, Though traytors do, so did Achitophell.
Achitophel bewitched, did bewitch Faire Absolom, a sonne vnto a king: Mou'de him to mount, to hit (but did not hiche) His fathers crowne, high Iustice clipp'd his wing. So are the wings of these fowle traytors cut, That want not will, their flight in practise put: But fall in seas of deepe dispairing shame, And Story styled led with great Sophies fame, Arm'd with fowle Enuy, mist the aimed but. The white, (Eliza) daz'd their diuellish eyes, They could not see, nor make their art to proue: Arts maister could not make that diuel rise That was of power to hurt Iehouahs Doue. Yet Story striuing to accomplish that Which in his high aspiring fancy sat, Was sent a present by Iehouah's hand, From Flaunders, where he most secure did stand: All men well know the guerdon that he gat. Yet Phayer and Prestall found a fayrer day, Elizaes mercy, her reuenge exceedes: Though mercy in this case might well say nay, And Iustice cut downe these infernall weedes. But Iustice left them not excus'd herein, For Phayer fell after to high treasons sin: Di'de for the last, a guerdon for the first, High traytors haue no doubt a dropsie thirst, Which sildome quencheth when it doth begin.
What soules keepe silence, but reioyce to see The speedy falles of all Elizaes foes? Whose foes, are foes to all that faithfull bee, Her faith, firme faith, their faithlesse works disclose, And none sit sad to see it, but the crew Of Enuies couert workers out of view, Whose hearts are hidden for a while in darke, They will be seene by some externall marke, And shew the poysond fruit that therein grew. For none so walke, inuisible in Spight, But word, or worke, or guise, or garment will At last bewray them, and bring all to light, The fume will breath and show what they distill: Throgmorton in hearts closet long conceild His Enuies fire, at last brake forth reueild, A flame to light the bringing in of Spayne, To pull Eliza downe, a painfull strayne, A deepe fetcht note, words to make Princes yeeld. Nay, weapons were preparde, the Kingdome giu'n, Our liues were sold, all offices disposde, And in conceite, they had deposde our Queene, All vp but one; but when it was disclosde, The game did turne. Throgmorton came to light, Then, Pope, was pensiue, Spanyards in sad plight, Their hope a dreame: when they awakt, they saw That shaddowes bring not substances in awe. Nor words like swords, to arme a man to fight.
This mystie morning cleared with the Sunne, Bewray'd Throgmorton with her splendant beames: He leaues his closet when his dreame was done, And findes Eliza rooted in her Realmes Which he had solde to them that could not buye, He could not sell Elizaes dignitie: Yet nought did want but sure possession, And that was hoped by his confession. Here was presumption, and credulitie. Seller presumes to sell what was not his, Buyers beleeue, yet had not Quid pro quo: What man of lawe can rightly censure this, Pactum or nudum pactum, yea or no? The buyers sue not seller for the same, Nor then required, or for bargaine came: And yet Throgmorton was attach'd therefore, And paide his head, for recompence: and More, And his consorts went not without their shame. Who sees these fruites, that grow vpon that stocke Of Romes despight, that spread into this land, And loaths them not? and would not moue the block Laide in the way to weake Elizaes hand? Who doth not ioy to see their ill successe? Who doth not wish in heart a sound redresse? The banishment of all that hatefull crew, That lurke vnseene, and some in publique view? Or wish their loue, and their despights release.
Oh how would our Eliza them imbrace? How would she guard their liues in truthes desires? How happy they, if they were in her grace Cut from that tree, of bloodie Romes aspires? That still aspires, and still her braunches fall, They rot, consume, infected with her gall: A wonder that they will not shunne the snare, When they their owne with others lots compare: They see the mirror, yet not mou'd withall. What are their liues vnto the Papacie? As are base Turkes to their ground Seignior Who wayes ten thousand liues in policie, As flies; So Catholicke Superior, Oh silly soules, that dreame of dignitie And high aduance for hatefull treacherie, To bring their natiue land, to forraigne spoile, Their friends, and kinsmen, guiltlesse to their foile. Selfe guerdon death, hell for their sallary. What recompence had Romes chiefe champion Sent to this lande from that great Bishops side? Their Alpha and Omega Campion And his consorts, concealed yet espide, They came in colour to winne soules to blisse, Of all the Locustes sent, the glosse is this: When to draw subiect, duties, and their loue, From true Eliza, and high treasons moue. Against their Queene, their true pretending is.
For can a subiect stand, liege to his Lord, And yet giue sentence with his mortall foe? Or can a man serue two with good accord, When in desire they wish each others woe? Its hard to wade in meane, betweene two friends, In equall seruice Ielousie depends. Therefore who workes to win a subiects loue From her that hath it warranted aboue, T'anothers loue, all knowe what he pretends. They may pretend, and be igniferent, Zealous in shewe, to win a man from sinne, When all they worke, is to make malecontent, And drawe the doubtfull to diue deeper in. For if their workes were of right Wisedomes skill, They would in publique, practise to instill Their right aduise, that all might be aduised, As Paul did preach in publique, not disguished: Who feare the light (no doubt) their deedes are ill. Did Campion that famous Doctor showe In publique schoole, or in the open view? Or did he preach? or his high gifts bestowe On all? as well he might, if they were true. Nay, came he not in couert, fearing light, And kept in darke, and salyed in the night? As one that would surprise the silly sheepe, Fled from the folde, and from their shepheards keepe. And do not all the Locusts thus by flight?
Haue they the habite coresponding gift? As they pretend their gift is to forgiue? If that their gift, and colour not a drift, To lay their poyson in Religious hiue. Then let them come, but not in Ruffins weede, That come to kill, when they pretend to feede: Some come like Ruffins, some like men of warre, The blinde, the lame, they know not what they are, How can they aske them then the things they need? They feare the sword (they say) therefore they lye As Leopards; white, and blacke, and greene, & gray, Attired thus to act diuinity: Beseemes it them? It fits a stage aray: But if these colours be to cloake their guile, As they assume vnto themselues exile, Then sure they feare the light, and walke in darke, Pretending one, and ayme another marke: Denominate by one, and haue another stile. What neede they feare the Magistrate, or sword? If they do well, no perill can befall, No perill falles on them of true accord, That do accord with Truth, not gorgd with gall, They gorgd, vngorge, and with the fume infect Elizaes Liege-men: who againe reflect The same on those that truly loyall be, And wrest the wils, of many by degree, To couer Treason, which they should detect.
Who then beleeues, these monsters come to saue? Or can forgiue? If they seduce from loue, Though they haue titles as the Angels haue, And be in show as is the Turtle Doue: They are but spyes, or Spiders to compact The webbe of mischiefe, which some else must act: In eighty eight, the yeare of greatest hope Of Englands ouerthrow, aduance of Pope, The Spaniard hoped to be English backt. But was kept backe, Iehouah curbd his rage, Reuerts his matter to another end, He by his power, his fury did asswage, And his Armado, did both breake and bend: It brake by force, it bended with desire, To turne againe, they saw it best retire, Some did retire; Against their wills, some saw And felt Elizae forces and Ioues Law: Who still inhabites wrongers to aspire. Yet sure Romes Locusts had enuenomed Some gyddie heads, hote, weary of their weale, And wonne them to consent (but blindly led) To their inchants, and gaue their vowes for seale, To ioyne their forces to Elizaes foes, Yet would they haue Eliza to suppose These Romish witches to be tollerable. In her Kingdomes indeed most execrable, Couertly contriuing Elizaes woes.
Elizaes woes, woe worth their trecheries, Oh high Iehouah blinde their hatefull eyes, Confound their wits, driue them to extacies, Daunt their desires, draw them to obliquies, And leaue them not, till thou haue throwne them downe That ayme at thee, and at Elizaes crowne, At thee Iehouah, to put out thy light: At her, Truthes prop, the foe to dismall night Wherein they walke, as deadly Wolues vnknowne. Vnknowne to her, her innocencie beares, No dread of ill; they yet creepe couertly Into mens hearts, with counterfaited teares, Perswade, disswade, coniure, and hold it piety To wrest poore soules from true obedience, Vnto Eliza vnder false pretence, Of liberty and true religion, When all their wiles tend to confusion, Of Queene, and Realme, this, Romes beneficence. Woe worth these Wolues, that dally with the sheepe, As Cat with Mouse, till they worke heards-man gone. Eliza gone, these Wolues will haue the keepe Of all the flocke in false suggestion: Oh liue Eliza, great Ioue let her liue, And lead her swarme to thy all sacred hiue, Where thy poore Bees, may shelter haue from those, That sucke truthes hony, from theit harts with glosse, That thy truthes, life, and light, do fanckly giue,
Where loe they giue the fruite of poison'd tree, That eaten, please as honie doth the taste In first, but second and in third degree, Infects and killes, though't first a sweete repast, But when digested, and the Conscience Pertakes at full their confluence, Then are the workings of this potion found, Deadly deuouring, and all parts confound: These Vipers, yet pretend great recompence. They haue their recompence, but farre from blisse, No Traitors, or Seducers can expect Reward aboue (where sacred dutie is) That yeeld no dutie to high Ioues elect, (Annointed here). They blinded, seeke to blinde, And drawe from dutie: bound, do seeke to binde The silly soules that sue and seeke for light, Their Duties loue, they binde by their dispight, And yet pretend they haue a sacred minde. A sacrilegious minde; for loe they steale Mens hearts, and rob them of obedience: They breede sedition in the publique weale, And worke the weake to stand on Conscience, Conscience must not perunt the silly flies, Falne in their webbe, to seeke the meanes to rise, To ope their eyes, to moue their foote or hand, To shun their snares, to heare or vnderstand. They must not doubt or reason of their lies.
Oh silly soules bewitched with this crew, Why will you follow their enchaunted wayes? Wayle, and vnwrap you of this deadly clew, Wherein these Spiders do intrap their prayes: Heare and beleeue, truth will this snare vntye, And set your Consciences at liberty: And free you from these miscrean Cananites, Infernall dogges, that vomit out despights Against Messiahs truth and sanctity, Come out from them ye captiu'd soules, and flye Their deadly charmes, and let Elizaes grace Preuaile with you, and do no longer lye In that darke denne, whence issues all that race. That raunge the mountaynes of traditions, Full they pretend of true deuotions. Beleeue them not, truth is not in their ken: A mystie cloud hangs on them witched men, Depriu'd of grace, guides to seditions. Ye see the fruites of all the Locusts, sent From that proude beast, that fits a God in show: Haue they not drawne you to be discontent With your sweete liberty, and loue you owe? Haue they not wrought you to be obstinate, To kicke against Eliza and her state? Haue they not woode you to betray the land Wherein you liue, wherein your comforts stand? Do you not see their loues pretence is hate?
Hate them that hale you to that dismall way, Loue her that lends you true protection: Your selues detect, these couert wolues bewray, And bring to light, these Locusts of infection, That lurke with you, and leaue their sting in you, Come you to light, learne truth, and liue anew. Liue as good subiects, loue as Christians, Imbrace the faithfull, leaue these Miscreans, And you shall see great blessings will ensue.
A Pensuiue soules delight Here is set forth Elizaes lenitie, And Locust-Catholiques superbitie. THe world throughou admires Elizaes loue, Her mercy, patience, and great lenitie: Her Princely vertues do at full approue, Her sacred, louing, free from tyrannie, Her hearts affections spring of clemencie. Dispearse the Riuers of her flowing grace, Throughout the vallies of true Duties soyle, Her subiects dutifull she doth imbrace, Her foes she fauours, whom her lawes might spoyle. Her sacred heart possessed with desire That all might liue, and liuing, loue expresse: Doth show her mercy, yet restraines her Ire, In hope her loue might winne her foes redresse: And spares their blood, deseruing nothing lesse: When Iustice wills, and Pollicie findes fit, The quicke dispatch and cutting off of those That ayme her ruine, though they neuer hit, Her lawes seuere, are not seuere to foes.
Her Princely heart still bent to Amitie, Aymes all her acts, to quallifie the rage Of vndeserued foes by lenitie: She doth forbeare them, hoping to asswage Their hearts despight, and to pull downe the stage Whereon they act their enuies stratagemes: And that the prompter of their practises Might see the firmenesse of her diademes: Not mou'd by weapons or by pollicies. Yet he that steres the helme of Enmitie And would addresse his barke vnto her strand, Linnes not to send his Pylots to espie What way he might securely make the land: They sound mens hearts, and heaue their enuies hand To hit the best, but high Iehouah swayes Their hatefull powres, and wythers their desires: Elizaes watchmen, winke not at their wayes, But lets them runne on, breathlesse in aspires. But in midway when they are neare the marke Whereat they ayme, vnseene they do surmise: (For all their soundings and deuises are in the darke) The powres diuine do ope Elizaes eyes, And she their soundings and deuises spies: And well considers that her lenitie Workes not effects of reformation Of their attempts, but their superbitie Increasing still their cursed faction.
They haue forgotten lawes inflictions Formerly imposde; the rod now laide aside, (They thinke) and feare not interdictions, Lawes letter cannot countercheck their pride. The sword put vp, it must be erst redide. The weather calme, they thinke no storme can rise To beate them backe in their strong impudence Ambitious thoughts, bemysteth so their eyes To see Elizaes grace, they haue no sence. They haue no sence, or make no vse of eyes, They may of both, by both they wrong the state: By plots and complots of conspiracies: Peruerting subiects, stirring them to hate Their owne sweete peace. And then to perpetrate High treasons, ougly spight, and deadly Ire, Against Eliza, for a recompence Of her loues fauours: where indeed, their hire By lawe is death, grace workes no penitence. Penitence? nay pride, props vp their hope, And hope to haue the glorie of a day: Past feare, they florish in pretence of scope Freely to worke, they dreame of no say nay, Their hearts of gall, they deeme can haue no stay Till Peace consume in their infernall flame, And Truth deuour'd in that combustion: Till they confound their natiue countries name, Faire Englands glory by sedition.
But loe, while my sad Muse recounts the things I did bewayle, (the daungers imminent) A happie herauld, constituted brings, And doth proclaime, a sweete infraunchesment Of doubtfull thoughts, the Locusts banishment. My pensiue thoughts reuiued yeeldeth prayse For our Eliza, whose diuine respects, And whose true watch, their enuies fruits bewraies, Yeeld her regards (great Ioue) their true affects. And driue their Droanes and Spiders from her hiue, That sucke the hony, and do feede with gall Her subiects hearts, and loyall loue depriue: High Ioue depriue their powre and sting withall, Cut downe the tree, let all the branches fall, That spreade their venim to her preiudice, Prolong her dayes, and maltiply her ioyes, In earth with peace, and sacred benedice, Be her pauilion, shield her from annoyes. FINIS.
