18656 99856984 22641
A warning to London by the fall of Antwerp To the tune of Rovv vvel ye Mariners. THe sturdy Oke at length▪ When forse doth fail though nere so tall: Resigneth vp his strēgth, By boistrous blasts vnto the fal. The stately Stag in time dooth yeeld: Him self a pray to Dogs in feeld. The Pecock proud, ye swelling Swan: At last dooth serue the vse of man. Pride, pomp, plumes gay: Must haue a fall who ere say nay, Hye mindes, state, power: Shall cōe to end within an houre. ¶ Let Antvverp warning be, thou stately London to beware: Lest resting in thy glee, thou wrapst thy self in wretched care Be vigilant, sleepe not in sin: Lest that thy foe doo enter in. Keep sure thy trench, prepare thy shot: Watch wel, so shall no foil be got. Stand fast, play thy parte: Quail not but shew an english hart, Dout, dread, stil fear: For Antvverps plague approcheth neer. ¶ Leaue tearing of thy God, let vain excesse be laid aside: Els shalt thou feel the rod, prepared for to scouge thy pride. Forsake thy Deuilish drunken trade: Which almoste hath the entrance made. Erect your walles giue out your charge Keep wel your ray, run not at large. Faint not, fiercely fight: Shrink not but keep your cōtries right. Stand stout, on Iesus call: And he no dout wil help you all. ¶ Trust not a ciuil foe, Which vnder coulour wisheth good: For ere thy self doost knowe, by craft he seeks to haue thy blood. The Snake in grasse doth groueling lie: Til for reuenge due time he spie. The leering Dog doth bite more sore: Then he that warning giues before. Fine flattery, fair face: Much discorde breeds in euery place. Fire, shot, must be to hot: For those which haue their God forgot. ¶ Reioyce not if thou see, thy neighbours house set on a flame: For like thy luck may be, vnlesse thou wel preuent the same. The scourge which late on Antvverp fel: Thy wrack and ruine dooth foretel. Make not a gibing iest therat: Lest stately Troy be beaten flat. Pray God faithfully: To saue vs from all trechery. Dout not if we doo so: We shall escape the forain fo. ¶ Pray we with one accorde, that God our Queene may ay defend: From those which seek by swoord▪ to bring her graces reign to end. Cut of (O Lord) their deuilish dayes: And graunt her life thy name to praise. Garde her with grace her Champion be That she may gain the victory. Hope wel, pray stil: God is our guide we feare none il. Fear not, watch pray: God sheeld this Citie from decay. AMEN. {quod}. Rafe Norris. ❧IMPRINTED AT LONDON at the long Shop adioyning vnto S. Mildreds Church in the Pultrie, by Iohn Allde.
