18976.2 25213224 27887
OVIDS REMEDY Of Love. DIRECTING Lovers how they may by Reason suppresse the pas∣sion of Love. — Nunc ego mitibus Mutare quaero tristia. Hor. Ode 16. Lib. 1. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop neare Holburne Conduit, at the signe of the Sunne. 1636.
On the Author and Booke. LOve being of a gentle disposition, Was mov'd by Lovers sighes unto contrition: So that the sweet-strain'd Ovid he inspires With a sof showre to quench those amorous fires Be up by his Art of Love, so that you see Love hath prepar'd for Love a Remedy. Wandring Aeneas talk't the faire Queene Dide In Love, and after cur'd the Royall Widdow Within a Cave: Our Poet doth approve A chaster way in's Remedy of Love, Closing those wounds that did before he open, In such sort, that no Maidenhead shall be broken. He wipeth teares from the sad Lovers eyes, And does instruct him wittily to despise His Mistresse scorne, and all in Lines so sweete, That every leafe may be Loves winding-sheete.
OVIDS Remedy of Love. Liber 1. WHen Love the Title of this booke had read, Wars against me (saith he) are threatened. Cupid doe not condemn him of that crime Who is thy Poet, and hath many a time Borne up those colours thou deliverd'st me, And for my guide and Captaine followed thee. I am not fierce Tydides who did wound Thy Mother Venus, so that in a swound In Mars his Chariot she was found to fly, And returne to Heaven through the moistned skie. Some young men are in love but for a time, But I to love doe alwaies still incline: And if you would know now what I doe doe, I must confesse, I am in love now too. Though I did once such Rules of love impart, As did reduce that passion to an Art.
I will not now betray thee gentle Boy, Nor yet my Art of Love will I destroy. That which I in my former worke have done, By my new Muse shall not now be unspun. If any one doe love, and love aright, Placing his love where it doth yeeld delight, Affording sweet contentment to his mind, Let him proceed still with a prosperous wind. But if any one love a disdainfull Maid, Then by this Art his griefe shall be allay'd: Whose Rules if he peruse, he shall not dye For her disdaine, or scornefull cruelty. For why should Lovers whom love doth entangle, Themselves so often with a halter strangle? Why with their daggers should they stab their brest Love, thou art blam'd who lovest peace and rest. Let him cease to love, who needs for love will dye, Be not thou Author of his Tragedy. Thou art a Boy, and unto sport shouldst runne, And a soft government doth thy yeeres become. Thou mayst use naked arrows in the Warres, But thy gult Darts doe leave no mortall skarres. Let others in Swords and in shaipe speares delight, And get the victory by a bloody fight. Reverence thou thy mothers Arts more mild, By which no mother hath lost her deare childe. By thy powers let the doores at night resound With knocking, and with flowry wreaths be crown'd.
Let fearefull Mayds and young men by stealth meet, Let wives their wary husbands finely cheat, Make the Lover flatter at the doore, and chide, While he shut out doth singing there abide. To see their teares, not death should make thee smile Thy Torch is unfit to light a funerall pile. When I had spoken thus, golden Love display'd His Pearle-embroidred wings, and to me said, Finish thy worke which thou hast now begun, And you deceiv'd young men unto me come, You that love hath deceiv'd in every kind. Here by my precepts you some helpe shall finde, And learne from him that did the Rules impart Of love, how you may cure your selves by Art: That the same hand which wounded you, againe May heale you, and may mitigate your paine. The earth both wholesome hearbs & weeds doth che∣rish, And by the Rose the Nettle oft doth flourish. And Pelias Speare such virtue did conceale, That it would make a wound, and it would heale. To men and maydens I declare my Art, Striving to arme them both in every part: Wherein if some things not so usefull be, Yet by example you the way may see: My purpose is good, to quench Loves cruell flame, That no vice in thy servile brest may reigne. Phyllis had liv'd, if shee had ruled beene By those precepts which may here be read, and seene.
Nor dying Dido had not seene that houre, When she beheld from the top of her Towre The Trojan ships, that would no longer stay, Hoist up their sayles, and forthwith steale away, And Progne with her sorrow growing wilde, To vexe her husband had not kild her childe. Though Philomela Tereus did please, My Art had helpt him, and cur'd his disease: So that he had not merited to be Transform'd to a bird for his impiety. Pasiphae had not a Bull affected, And Phaedra had her filthy love neglected, Menelaus had his Helena enjoy'd, Nor by the Grecians had Troy beene destroy'd. If wicked Scylla this booke had but read, Nisus purple haire had still growne on his head. Let losing lovers learne how to asswage, By my instruction their loves furious rage, That their ship with the rest saile fairely on, While I their faithfull guide and Pilot am. You should have Ovid read when you begun To love, and now you may read him againe: For I will helpe him whom love doth oppresse, Then favour him that helpes you in distresse. And I intreate thee now when I begin, Even thee Apollo, whose brow is hem'd in With the greene Laurell, thou that didst invent Both Verse and Physick, further my intent.
Helpe thou thy Poet playing the Physitian, Both which Arts belong unto thy jurisdiction. When Sun-light motions doe affection stirre, Stay them before that they doe goe too farre. Quench those new flames before they gather force, And stop in the beginning of thy course. Time and delay doe bring the imperfect shapes Of desire to ripenesse, as time ripens Grapes: And which was a tender blade in show, In time unto an eare of corne doth grow. The tree that doth afford a spreading shade To those that walke or underneath are laid. Like to a small twig at first it did appeare, At what time it was set or planted there, Then it might have beene pluckt up with our hands, Now bigger growne it firmely rooted stands. Consider first what she is thou dost love, And from the galling yoake thy necke remove. "Prevent beginnings, Physicks are too late at longth, "When thy sicknesse by delay hath gatherd strength. Make haste, in good things alwayes shun delay. "He'le be unfit to morrow, that's unfit to day. Love flatrers us, and is nourisht by delay, If you would shake it off, shake it off to day. You shall see few rivers that from great springs flow, But as they run they still more larger grow. O Myrrha! hadst thou soone perceivd thy sinne, To a Myrrh-tree thou hadst not transformed beene.
I have seene a wound that curable did seeme At first, yet by delay hath worser beene. Yet because we doe take delight to gather Faire Venus flowers, we doe deferre it rather, And flattering of our selves, we still doe say, We'le doe to morrow as we did to day. While secret flames into our hearts doe creepe, And ill affections there are rooted deepe. But if thou letst the first time slippe and perish, And that thy breast an ancient flame doth cherish; The work's the greater, yet in helplesse state I'le not leave him, though I'me cald somewhat too late. The Paeancian Heroe should have with al speed Cut off that part whence his wound did proceed. Yet many yeares afterward, as it then seem'd, Being cur'd, he brought those warres unto an end. I that can cure Love, when it first doth grow, When Love doth older waxe the cure is slow. Strive at the first to quench thy wanton flame, Or when the strength of it is spent againe. At first yeeld to it, let it take its course, It's hard to resist a violent force. He is a foole that against the streame will row, Or swimme, when as he round about may goe. "The impatient minde will no impression take, "All admonitions it doth scorne and hate. "I'le goe to him, when I his wounds may open, "When he'le endure to heare truth when'tis spoken.
While that a mother doth the funerals keepe Of her sonne, who will forbid her then to weepe, Unlesse it be one that is voyd of reason? For then to admonish her is out of season. But when she with teares hath eased her sick minde, Then her griefe may by words some comfort finde. "Physicke in season given doth availe; "But given unseasonably, hurts without faile. "You strengthen vice, while you seeke to redresse it, "If you strive out of season to suppresse it. Therefore when thou art curable by Art, This Rule I first of all to thee impart. I admonish thee most carefully to shun Idlenesse, whence all wicked thoughts doe come. This makes thee love, and doth that love maintaine; This causes, and doth feed that prety paine. Take away idlenesse, and Cupids dart Hath then no power at all to wound the heart. His Torch hath then no flame or light, but lies Contemn'd, and every one doth it despise. As the Popler, and Osier love the Rivers banke, And the marsh reed loves a muddy soile that's rank, So Venus in soft ease doth take much pleasure. Then let some businesse give thy thoughts no leasure, If to expell Loves passion thou desire, For businesse maketh Loves flame soone expire; Soft ease, and spending as thou list the time In sleeping, and immoderate drinking Wine,
Weakens the mind, and maketh it decay: For treacherous Love the unwary doth betray. "Love haunts the slothfull, hates those he doth finde Bufie, then give imployment to thy minde. Goe to the Courts, and heare how they doe plead, Study Law, or else for thy friend intercede: Sometimes goe forth, and walke into the Towne, Or behold the trainings of the City-gowne: Or practise bloody Mars his youthfull Art, And those conceits of Love will soone depart. Goe to the Warres, where Caesars troopes doe lie, 'Gainst the Parthians to obtaine a victory: Both Cupids and the Parthian shafts orecome, And bring two Trophies to thy Country home. Why Aegisthus was a murderer wouldst thou know? The cause was, because he did idle grow. Others were fighting at the siege of Troy, Which Greece with all her force sought to destroy. Would he follow Warres, at Argos none then were, The Courts of Law at Argos empty were: So that he lov'd when nought else could be done: For love from idlenesse doth alwayes come. The Country and Husbandry also yeeld delight: These cares all other cares doe banish quite. Somtimes thou maist yoke thy Oxen, and so wound With thy crooked ploughshare the hard clay ground And sometimes with the Harrow cover o're Thy seed, which thy field with interest may restore.
Looke how the crooked boughs bent downwards are With the weight of Apples that are ripe and faire, So that the labouring tree can hardly beare Those fruits which from her first produced were. Look how soft streames with a sweet murmur passe: Looke how the sheepe graze on the fruitfull grasse. Marke how the Goats the stony rocks doe climbe, Suckling their Kids when it is evening time; While the Shepheard piping on his reed doth lye, And his watchfull dogges doe beare him company. And then a Cow doth make the woods resound With lowing for her Calfe as yet unfound. Sometimes you may with smoake put under, drive The young brood of Bees out of their waxen hive: And having tooke their Honey got with paine, You may then hive the tender brood againe. Autumne yeelds apples, Summer yeeldeth fruits, The Spring yeelds flowers, & fire with Winter suits. The Country-man gathers Grapes at a set time, And with naked feet doth presse out the new wine. And certaine times he cutteth downe his hay, Rakes it, and makes it, and beares it away. Or in the Garden thou maist graft and plant, And water those hearbs which doe watring want. And sometimes thou maist make incision, The graft unto the stock thereby to joyne, That so the stock of any home bred tree With outlandish boughs and fruit may cover'd be.
When these pleasures to thy mind delight do bring, Then Love will fly away on a weake wing. Besides, thou maist sometimes a hunting run, Venus hath oft by Diana beene o'recome. Sometimes with Hounds the Hare before thee chase, Sometimes thy nets on the shady mountaines place. Or pursue the Hart, and put him in a feare, Or wound the Boare with thy sharp-pointed Speare: That at night thou weary, fast asleepe maist fall, And of thy Sweet-heart take no care at all. While fatning rest thy body may refresh, And banish Love which did thy mind oppresse. Or thou maist take the light-wing'd birds sometime, Or goe a fishing with thy hooke and line: Covering the crooked hook with such a baite, That shall make the greedy Fish bite at it straight. By these and the like wayes untill thou leave To love, thou must thy selfe thy selfe deceive. And if Loves fetters thou wouldst faine off shake, Then some long journey thou must undertake: And though thou weepe for being so unkind, When thy Sweet-hearts name doth come into thy mind, Yet still goe farre from her, goe farre I say. And the more thou art unwilling for to goe. Remember to quicken thy pace when 'tis slow. Offer violence to thy selfe, and so goe on, And enforce thy feet away from her to runne.
Let no light showre of raine thy journey stay, Nor the observation of an Holy-day: Nor yet enquire how many miles thou hast gon, But rather enquire how many are to come. Nor poore excuses, nor delayes doe not faine, That somewhat neare to her thou maist remaine. Doe not thou reckon the time that is past, Nor unto Rome a longing looke backe cast. But see that thou doe from her runne and flye, As the Parthian would doe from his enemy. Some will say my Rules are hard, I know't my selfe, But thou wilt suffer much to gaine thy health. In sicknesse I have drunke a bitter juyce, And was deny'd that dyet I would chuse. Thou canst endure to be lanchd and seard, to regaine Thy bodies health, and canst from drinke refraine: And to suffer any thing wilt thou deny, For thy minds health and her recovery? Since that the minde is a part farre compleater Then any body, and of price farre greater. Though the entrance of my Art seeme hard, the first "Beginning of a worke seemes hard and worst. At first the Heyfer's wrung with the hard yoake, At first the saddle galleth the swift Colt. Thou wilt say, it grieves thee to depart from home, Which makes thee to returne when thou art gon. But 'tis thy sweetharts love thee hom hath brought, While thou with faire words coverest thy fault.
Depart but from her once, and thou shalt see The Countrey will yeeld comfort unto thee. And the length of the way will helpe to banish Thy cares, and company will make it vanish. Yet thinke it not enough for to depart From her that is thy Love, and thy Sweet-heart. But thou must stay from her, till thy desire Doe lose its strength, and ashes hide thy fire. If thou returne before thou hast quencht thy flame, Rebellious love will assault thee againe. Thou shalt be what thou wa'st, thy love shall burne The more by absence when thou dost returne. Thinke not if thou inchanted hearbs dost use, And Magicks Arts, they can thy helpe produce. The use of charmes is ancient and old, But my harmelesse Verse doth a new way unfold. For I will force no ghost his grave to leave, Nor old wife with her charmes the earth shall cleave. I will not blast the Corne, nor make it faile; Nor Phoebus in his sphere shall not waxe pale. Tyber, (as he was wont) to the Sea shall flow, The Moone be drawne with horses white as snow. I will make thy brest with charmes lay by Thy cares, nor make subdued love to fly. What helpe did enchanted hearbs lend thee or ayd Medea, when thou wouldst at home have staid? And what did Circe by her charming Art, When Ʋlysses ships did from the shore depart?
Thou striv'st to make thy crafty guest still stay, But he hoisted up his sailes and fled away. Thou that to a thousād ships couldst men transform; Thy mindes affection couldst not change nor turne. Thou strivest to expell Loves cruell flame, But Love did still within thy Brest remaine. For'cis said, that when Vlysses would be gon, Thou to deteine him thus to speake begun; I doe not now intreate thee for to bee My hu band, though that hope was once in me; Though I deserv'd to be thy wife hereafter, Being a goddesse, and the bright Suns daughter. Now to stay a while I onely thee desire; What lesse canst thou wish me that I should require? Thou seest the Sea is rough, and thou should feare it: The Winde hereafter will stand for thee more fit. Why wilt thou goe? Troy is not built againe, Thou art not call'd these warres now o mainetaine. Here's love and peace, and it is onely I That here am wounded by loves cruelty: While thou in safety maist stay, and command My Kingdome, which I offer to thy hand. When she these words had possionately to him said, Vlysses presently his Anchor waighd So that the North-wind drove his sailes away, And her words, which vainely pleaded for his stay. Then Cerces furious love began to rage; So that she sought by art how to asswage
With her accustom'd charmes her inward flame, But yet they could not mitigate Loves paine. Therefore if thou expectest helpe from hence, In charmes or love-cups put no confidence. If some waighty occasion make thee stay in Rome, Take then my councell, for this is my doome. He hath a great strength that at once can free Himselfe, and set himselfe at liberty. He that can doe thus, I'le admire his compo sition, And say, he needeth not my admonition. But thou that lovest, and wouldst thy love forget, Yet canist not, for thy helpe I here will set These Rules downe: First, be sure to thinke upon These wicked acts which thou and she hast done. Lay all unto the charge of the poore Maide, Let thy cost bestowed on her be before thee laid: Thinke how she hath got from thee this and that, And yet her covetous mind is insatiate. Thinke how by her perswasions at the last Thy house for her joincture thou hast to her past, Howshe falsified her Oath which she had swore, And made thee lye oft-times even at her doore: Thinke that she loves some other, because she Disdaines to love, or be belov'd of thee. And though she will not grant thee loves delight, Her Peramour enjoyes her every night. Let these things deepely through thy senses strike, And from hence take occasion of dislike.
And I would have thee use such amplification That may set forth her wrongs with aggravation. For if thou doe begin once to repent, "Thy wrongs will make thee straightway eloquent. My selfe to love a Maid was once inclin'd, But she prov'd not agreeable to my mind: Yet like sicke Podalirius I was cured By my owne medicines which I had procured. For I that am Loves Physitian, will not sticke To confesse that I my selfe for love was fick: But by scanning my Sweet-hearts faults I cur'd my selfe, And by often doing so regain'd my health. My Mistresse hath, thought I, but a bad thigh, And yet, to confesse the truth, I did but lye, My Mistresse armes are not so faire quoth I, And yet, to confesse the truth, I did but lye. Shee is low of stature, and insatiate, And hence I grounded my dislike and hate. And since Vertues unto vices are so neare, Her Vertues vices to me did appeare. Thus all her naturall gifts thou maist deface, And let thy blinded Judgement her disgrace, If that she be full-bodied, call her fat; If she be browne, then thou maist call her black: And if that she be slender in the waste, For leanenesse then find fault with her thou maist: Thou may'st call her wanton, if well behav'd she be: If honest, a piece of cold rusticity.
And often presse her that she would but grant To expresse that skill which thou know'st she doth want. If she have no voyce desire her to sing: If she cannot dance, her unto dancing bring. If that her speech be homely, rude and course, Then give her still occasion of discourse: And if her skill in Musicke be not much, Desire her to give her Lute a gentle touch. If that her steps and gate uncomely be, Be sure that thou doe make her walke with thee: And if her brests hang downe on either side, Pull off the Tiffeny that doth them hide. Then make her laugh if that she have bad teeth, If slender eyes, with sad stories make her weepe. And sometimes to thy Mistresse in a morning come, Before she be drest, or head tyres put on. For what are Maides when that they are undrest? When they are in their cloathes, they are at the best. With Pearles & Gold they dresse thēselves with Art, And the Maid is of her selfe even the least part. And then thou maist imagine thou hast lost In this throng of cloaths the Maid whom thou lov'st most: And like a witty Lover take delight In a resting manner to delude thy sight. Yet to this Rule too much credit doe not give, For a carelesse beauty many doth deceive. When thy Mistresse is painting of her selfe, then rush Into her presence and so make her blush:
Thou shalt finde her Boxes, and her colours there With which she makes her brest seem white & fair. Her window will smell like to Phineus table, So that to turne thy stomacke it will be able. And now I purpose afterward to shew What in the acts of Venus thou must doe, That Love wherein thou takest such delight, May thereby b'abanisht, and quite put to flight. Many Rules for shame I must leave unexprest, But by my words thou maist conceive the rest. For some of late my Bookes doe carpe and blame, Because my Muse hath such a wanton veine. Let him disgrace those Workes which I have done, So my Verse may please, and through the World be sung. Envy detracted from great Homers Wit, And Zoilus, thou didst get a name by it: And sacrilegious tongues have out of spight Disgrac'd his Lines Vir. that did of Aeneas wrte. Envy, winds, thunder, aime at, blow, and strike Those things that are advanc'd to greatest heig. But thou that art displeas'd with our loose veine, Conceive each subject must have a fittstreme. Warres must be in Heroicke Verses writ, Not enterlac'd with pleasant strains of Wit. Anger becomes a high lin'd Tragedy, Acommon line a merry Comedy: Iambick Verses serve to jeere a foe, Whether they doe runne swiftly, or o'reflow.
The Elegy doth sing of quiver'd Love, Even as thy Mistresse curst or kinde doth prove. It would not become Callimachus to rehearse The praise of Achilles in his verse: Nor would Cydippe be a subject fit For Homers full ine, and his strength of wit. Who can endure, that wanton Thais should be Acted in the play of Andromache. My Art is directed to such as Thais be; My wanton time is sportive, and most free: Of Thais onely my Art hath a care, Not those that with a fillet bind their haire; For if my muse hath lively here exprest Her matter fitly in the way of jest: My Muse shall overcome those that abus'd her, And of a false crime, falsly have accus'd her; Let envy burst, my Muse shall haue a name, The more she frownes, the more shall be her fame. For envies hatred will encrease my fame: Then enuy be sure to crosse me, for if I live, I'le give thee more occasion for to grieve. For it will vexe thy heart (I know) to see My Verses famous with posterity. For as my fame encreaseth, my desire Of fame encreaseth, and still mounteth higher, Though my panting horses now begin to climbe The hill, they may reach to the top in time,
For Elegies are indebted unto me, As much as Heroicks unto Virgil be. Ovids Remedy of Love. Lib. 2. HItherto we have answered envy, now againe I will recall my selfe, draw in my raine; And I the Poet will proceede to runne On in that circle which I have begunne. When thou art to performe the youthfull deed, And that to lie with thee she hath agreed; And that the promis'd night is now at hand, Wherein unto thy bargaine thou must stand: Lye with some other, least thou being ful of pleasure Thy Mistresse doe requite thee with such measure, And answer thee againe, with such sweet height Of dalliance that may take thee with delight. On any one bestow thy strength of Love, And thy next affection will more milder prove. Venus is still most powerfull at the first, But heate seekes shades, and water quenches thirst. I am asham'd, yet to speake I will assay, Joyne Venus shapes in an uncomely way:
Which may at any time be easily done, For they suppose nought doth them mis-become. Then to set open the Windows I thee bid, And by day-light marke those parts that are hid. And whē the pleasur's ended which thou hadst desir'd And that thy minde and body both are tyr'd: While thou repentst that thou a maid didst touch, And resolv'st nere againe to doe so much. Then observe the faults that in her bodie are. Looke on her when she lies nak'd and bare. If these rules seeme of small use unto any Though all availe not, some may being many. The little Vipers biting kils the Bull, And a little hound the Boare will tugge and pull: Of my precepts, being many, the belt take, Many collected a great heape doe make. But since so many men and mindes there are To credit me in all things take no care; For that which doth not offend us, may be thought, Perhaps by another to bee a fault. He that hath seene those parts should not be seene His love will coole, though it hath furious beene. He that hath seen when his sweete-heart doth rise From Venus encounter and her Veneries, What staines and spots most shamefully are spred, On the olluted and defiled bed. If these things can delight you, he will say, Proceede you lovers, and still sport and play.
For when that Loves torch hath enflam'd your mind, Your suddain heate then no dislike can finde: For when Cupid drawes his arrowes to the head, The greater wounds of Love are thereby bred. And then of Lovers, the wounded company Require the greater care and remedy. What shall we say of those who have laine hid In some secret corner, while their sweet-heart did Make water, and so by that meanes did see Those parts which for modesty should conceled be? The gods forbid we should such rules invent, Though they profit, yet they are not expedient. But I advise thee for to have two Loves; Hee that loves many, to none loving proves. When Loue is so devided, then at length, One Love abateth from the others strength, Great Rivers that within the full bankes glided, Grow-lesle, being into smaller streames divided And if stickes be pull'd asunder, then the fire Doth straight goe out, and the flame doth expire. One Anchor cannot hold a stout ship fast, One hooke is not enough for to be cast Into the water: he that provides two things Obtaines his ends and still the victory wins. Thou that unwillingly didst one sweet-heart serve, Finde out another that may thy love deserve. Minos forgot his love to Pasiphae, When he in loue with Progne needs would be.
Alcinaeus did his Phegis love forget, When he Callirhoe to his bed did get. And Paris still had Oenone loved, If the Whore Hellen be had not approved. Pandion of his wife Progne tooke care, Till her Sister Philomel did seeme more faire: Why should I more examples here unfold? "Since a new Love makes men forsake the old. A Mother for her childs death makes lesse mone That had many, than she doth that had but one. And doe not thinke that I new lawes doe mention, Yet would it were the glory of my invention, Since Atrides who did all things see, this saw, And was not all Greece by him kept in awe? For he himselfe was conquer'd by the looke Of Cryses whom he in the warres had tooke: But yet her father foolishly then wept, Because he had her from Achilles kept: Why dost thou weepe old man for the happy fate Of thy Daughter hindering so her happy state? For when Chalchas trusting in Achilles aide, Had commanded that he should restore the Maide, Atrides said, even she that's next in fame, And some letters tooke away hath the same name, Her let Achilles yeeld me if he be wise, Else he shall feele that power he doth despise. If this action (Grecians) foule to you appeare, Know that my stout hand doth the Scepter beare:
If I am King, then she shall with me sleepe, Else may Thersites all my Kingdomes keepe. This said, he had her in his first loves stead, His new love cur'd the old, for straight it fled. As Agamemnon did, looke thou dost doe, Put love into a maze by loving two. If thou wovldst know to get them, read our Arts Of Love, and thou shalt have choise of Sweet-hearts. But if our Rules have any power to heale, I Apollo doe his Art by me reveale. Though thou burnst as if Aetna did thee enfold, Seeme to thy Mistresse in affection cold: Dissemble thy paine, that thou maist her deceive, And laugh then, when thou inwardly dost grieve. I would not have thee straight way quench thy flame That over thy affections thou maist raigne. I command thee onely but to counterfeit, As if thy former affection thou didst quit: And so by imitation thou shalt doe That which thou faignedst, really and true. For oftentimes that I might so shun drinking, I would counterfeit my selfe asleepe by winking: And while I in counterfeiting did proceed, I many times have fallen asleepe indeed. So those who cunning in counterfeiting are, Doe seldome fall into Loves spring or snare. The mind by custome doth Love entertaine, And it by custome is forgot againe.
He that can counterfeit himselfe no Lover, By counterfeiting shall his health recover. Come if she bid thee at the appointed night, And if shee shut her doore, yet beare it light. Doe not thou use soft complements, or prate With flattering words, or scold before her gate: Or if that shee doe lock thee out in spight, Doe not thou at her threshold lye all night: Nor yet complaine unto her in the morning; Nor shew a signe of sorrow for her scorning Thy love: for when she sees thou dost not grieve For her disdaine, she her disdaine will leave. Thy Love will cease, if thou thus carelesse seeme. The Horse resists the bridle when 'tis seene. But use such pretended shewes as I have bid, "Good effects at first are in their causes hid. Loves cure thus by a close way shall be done, "Since birds that see the nets, the nets doe shun. Lve her not still when shee doth thee despise, If shee disdaine thee let thy courage rise. If her gate stand open passe by though she call, On the appoynted night come not at all. Patience will make thee to endure annoy, And from thy sufferings thou shalt receive joy, There is no hardnesse in my Rules or Art: For of a Counsellour now I play the part. And since mens mindes doe differ, and doe varie, Our Art shall varie that may now miscarry.
Since there are thousand shapes of misery, There are thousand salves to cure each misery: Some bodies must be lanc'd, and sear'd, and cut, And some by potions and hearbes health have got. But if thou art of a more softer mind, So that Love in his fetters doth thee bind, And like a Conquerour holds thee at his beck, And cruelly doth tread upon thy neck, To struggle with thy passion thou must cease, Let thy windes drive thy ship as they doe please. I would have thee quench the thirst of thy desire, And with some common water quench the fire. And thou maist drinke farre more than will suffice, Till full of water thou dost it despise, With thy Sweet-heart take thy fill of delight, And in her company spend both day and night: For thy Love will end with such satiety, And thou shalt be able to want her company, And tarry from her: hungry Love is tyr'd With plenty, and doth loath what he desir'd. Be not thou jealous, jealousie doth nourish Love, and doth make it both to last and flourish. If to extinguish Love thou hast a care, Extinguish jealousie and idle feare. He that fears his Mistresse should be taken from him, There is no remedy can worke upon him. The Mother for that sonne doth take most care, Of whose returne from the wars she stands in feare.
Neare the Colline Gate a Temple there doth stand, Which is from Erix called, and so nam'd: There love they, in the Lethaean waves they drench, And Cupids torches in those waters quench. There young-men pray, they may their lovesforget, That on disdainefull Maides their love have set: But at the last, thus Cupid said to me; (Else 'twas a dreame, a dreame it well might be) O thou, who teachest men how they should love: And teachest them the remedy to remove Their passion: Ovid adde these rules of mine Unto those preceps, and those rules of thine: Thinke on thy troubles and thy misery, The thought of crosses will make love to flye: "And God doch never none so intirely blesse, "But that he gives them troubles more or lesse. He that hath suits or feareth his rent day, Is wrested with a debt which he must pay. He that hath a hard father, that doth keepe him in, Let him thinke on his father, though unseene. If thou seest a marryed man in a poore estate, Thinke that his wife doth cause his haplesse fate. If thou in the Country a fruitfull Vineyard hast, Take care lest ill winds should thy rich Grapes blast. If he have a ship that is returning home, Let him thinke what losses oft by Sea doe come. A Sonne at the Warres to trouble thee may be able, Or else a Daughter that is marrigeable.
"What actions to our life belonging are, "But will afford us cause of griefe and care. If Paris had remembred his brothers fate, Their deaths had made him Hellena to hate: And Cupid more unto me then had spake, But that out of my dreame I then did wake. For when my dreame (sure 'twas a dream) had left me, My waking thus, of many Rules bereft me: Yet will I still goe on, and no forsake My intended course, till I an end doe make. Let Lovers take heede of solitude, they may be Safer, if they frequent good company: For thoughts of Love by being alone increase; But if thou keepe company, then they will cease. Thou wilt be sad, if that thou art alone, Thy Mistresse beauty into thy minde will come. And thus the nights are, then the dayes more sad, Because no company can then be had. Shun not discourse, nor shut thy chamber doore, Nor in the darke, thy selfe with teares deplore. And have some Pylades, that may cure Orestes. This use of friendship' mongst others not the least is. What did hurt Phyllis, but that she did love To frequent the Wood, and solitary Grove? What caused her by her owne hands to dye, But sollitude, and want of company? For like to Bacchus Nimphs through griefe and care She was wont to goe with loose disheaveld haire,
And sometimes looking to the Sea she would stand, Sometimes being weary lye downe on the sand. Faithlesse Demophoon, full of treachery; Faithlesse Demophoon she aloud did cry To the deafe waves, that 'gainst the shoares did breake, While sobs did breake off those words she did speak. There was a narrow path cover'd with a shade, By which to the Sea she oft her journey made: Her miserable steppes had even worne This new way walking on't as one forlorne: And with a pale countenance being hither come, Upon her silken girdle she looketh downe: She looks upon the bonghes, doubts, and doth feare, And to doe what shee desired, she doth not dare. At last her fingers about her neck did knit A halter and so hangd her selfe with it. O Phyllis! hadst thou not beene alone, The woods for Phyllis had not made such mone. For every wood such griefe for thee conceives, That for thee each yeare it mourns without Leaves, Le maids and men by Phyllis example take; Beware of being alone for Phyllis sake. There was a yong man that had almost done What my Muse prescribes, & to his health was come: But while that he kept company with each Lover, Hee lost that health he did before recover: And Love did take againe his Golden Dart, And shot this young man deeply to the heart.
If thou dost love, and wouldst not love, then see That thou doe shunne all amorous company. For unto Cattell this much hurt hath done, Who from each other take infection. Their Eyes, that looke on bad eyes, are hurt by it, Bodies to bodies infection doe transmit. And sometimes a Riverthat's hard by doth flow, And moisten places that are dry in show. So love concealed through thy veines will glide, If with thy Mistresse thou dost still abide: And in framing excuses we all witty be, That we may enjoy our Mistresse company. Another too was cured, but his paine Renew'd by living neere to her againe: His wounds of Love once heal'd, did bleed afresh, And so my Art thereby had no successe. If fire be neere a house, 'twill soone take fire: Keepe from those places that may stirre desire. For if that shee within the Cloysters walke, Goe not unto her, nor yet with her talke: For why shouldst thou by talking with her againe, Thy warme love with the heate of love enflame? If thou art hungry, thou wilt not refraine When meat's before thee, to fall to againe: And when the water springs up in thy sight, To see it spring up will thy thirst incite. The Bull that sees a Cow, follows her straight way: The Horse that sees a Mare, after her will neigh.
Yet love will not leave thee though this course thou take 'Tis not enough that thou dost her forsake: But bid her Mother, Sister, Nurse, farewell, And whosoe'r doth with thy Mistresse dwell. Her servant and waiting-maid both shunne. If with commendation to thee they doe come From thy Mistresse, and doe with a feigned teare Deliver it, their words doe thou not heare: Nor how she does see that thou doe not aske, Of this silence thou wilt find the good at last: And thou that of thy Mistresse doest complaine, Cease thy complaints, they doe increase thy flame. Thy love through silence better will expire, A silent suffering will quench thy desire. In silence strive thy affection to removed. Who saith too oft he doth not love, doth love; For flames of love are by degrees expell'd, It is a wound that must be slowly heal'd. Torrents more swiftly run than Rivers deepe, Yet this is shallow, that one course doth keepe: For love by srealth away from Lovers flyes, And by degrees it languishes and dyes. Yet never hate that Maid whom thou didst wooe, Such dispositions savage beasts doe shew. He is not cur'd that endeth love with hate, For still he loves, though he doth her forsake. They that were Lovers once, should not turne foes, Appias doth hate such dissentions as those.
For Love thus to insinuate doth use, And makes us love those whom we doe accuse: And wandring Love hath found out an invention To beget love by wrangling and dissention. A young man stood by his sweet-hearts bed-side, And she began to threaten him, and chide: Whereat in being ready away to goe, She bid him draw the Curtaines, he did so; Which as soone as he had ignorantly done, He saw his wife, then he grew mute and dumbe. But yet at last embracing her, quoth he, Pardon my errour, thou hast conquer'd me, And so from her he did depart in peace. Though he were cheated yet all strife did cease. Let her have those gifts she hath from thee obtain'd, For by such losses greater good is gain'd. But if that you by chance with her doe meet, These Rules which I doe give you, in mind keepe. Take courage, and expresse thy valour on her, Thy Penthesilea with thy weapon conquer. Thinke on thy Rivall, and how often late Thou hast stood knocking at thy Mistresse gate: And for those vowes which thou hast often made, Now punish her, let her be soundly paid. Curle not thy haire, nor when thou com'st to see Thy Mistresse, let thy Dublet unbutton'd be. Nor of other Maids take thou care to please any, But let her be to thee in stead of many.
But now I'le shew what slacks the eure of love, And you your selfe shall an example prove. For we hardly cease to love, when we beleeve We are belov'd againe, and so deceive Our selves; since we most credulous and apt be To deceive our selves with our selfe flattery. But unto oaths or words no credit give, For what than they doth oftner us deceive? Nor if thy Mistresse weepe, yet be not caught With teares, for she her eyes to weepe hath taught. Lovers minds are divers wayes besieg'd and try'd, Like a Rocke beaten with waves on every side. Shew not the causes why thou dost her leave, Nor tell her why thou griev'st, yet closely grieve. Tell her not of her faults whatsoe'r they are: For if she come to excuse them, then beware, For whatsoe'r her case is, you must know; In thy owne cause she will thee overthrow. In silence beare all: for if thou dost stand To reason with a Mayd, and still demand Satisfaction for some wrong thou didst sustaine, Thou wilt scold thy selfe in love at last againe. Yet to clip Cupids wings is not my intent, Nor shall his Bow by my Art be unbent: It is councell unto you which I doe sing, Therefore obey those Rules which I doe bring. And bright Apollo as thou still hast done, Assist my worke that it may yet goe on.
Phoebus is present; harke, me thinkes I heare His sounding Harpe; Phoebus' is present here: In his resplendant robe I have him espy'd, Richer than robes in Tyrian Purple dy'd. You then that are in love, see you compare Your Mistresses to those that are more faire. Each goddesse unto Paris faire did seeme; But comparing their beauties, he did then esteeme Venus the fairest: Thus let every lover Compare his mistresse beauty with some other. And so with others thou maist compare her mind. Let not affection thy judgement blinde. Briefe are the Rules I shall hereafter sing, Yet such, as unto many helpe did bring. And I have found the power of my owne Art, Which when I was in love did ease my smart. Keepe not thy Mistresse letters, nor them read; Much harme from reading letters doth proceed: Put them into the flame, and say this fire Shall burne this letter kindling my desire. Thestias in a brand her sonne did burne, To burne a trecherous letter wilt thou mourne? Remoove her picture; why shouldst thou be tooke With the faire shadow of a beauteous looke? And also see that thou dost shun those places, That are guilty of your amorous embraces. For when thou those places dost behold and view, Past pleasures will thy present griefe renew.
Thinke not thus with thy selfe, here she and I Have beene together, here did together lye: Here on this bed we slept, both with delight, And I enjoyd her here one happy night. Such thoughts as these doe but renew our flame, And make the wound of love to bleede againe. For as a Brimston match will new life give To dying cinders, making them revive, And as one sparke may kindle a great fire, So one sparke of love may enflame thy desire. So unlesse thou endeavour to shun all Occasions, that thy love to minde may call, Thy flame of love which seemed to expire, Will burne againe in thee with fresh desire. The Sea-man rejoyceth when he hath saild by A dangerous Rocke which in his way doth lye. But take heed of those places which appeare Pleasant, because thou hadst thy pleasure there: These places Rocks to shipwrack thee become, And as Carybdis see thou doe them shun. And in some things, we can but advise our best, And must commit to fortune all the rest For love when it is poorest, is most wise, Riches and wealth doe seeme to blinde his eyes. Poore men in Love oft-times more wisedome show, For Riches doe make Love a wanton grow. Why did none of poore Hecale a Wife make? Why did none Irus for a Husband take?
For this, the Mayd was poore, and therefore tarry'd: So was the other poore, and so not marry'd. Besides, the Theaters doe not thou frequent, While in thy brest love is not resident: For while thou hear'st their Songs and Musick often, And seest their Dances, these the mind doe soften. There fained Lovers oftentimes advance Themselves, and in a Maske doe meet and dance. Actors doe shew the Lovers cunning slight, And their shewing of it stirres up a delight. Read not Callimachus who of love doth write, And Cous who doth in that straine endite. Sappho hath made me love my Mistresse better, And the Teian Muse hath made my love waxe greater. Who can with safety read Tibullus Verse? Or those which Cinthia's Lover doth rehearse? Who that reads Gallus Verses doth not melt? And some by mine the like effects have felt. For unlesse Apollo doe frustrate my labour, There are no Love-lines can like mine get favour. Though there be some that faine would imitate me, Yet beleeve that none are Rivals unto thee. The more Hermione was lov'd of another, The more Orestes did begin to love her. Menelaus griev'd not when to Creete he went, And though his wife was absent, was content: But when he saw that Paris stole her had, Then for his wife he raged, and grew mad.
"Those that love not their wives, yet when they see "Another love their wives, they jealous be. This bred Achilles griefe and sad annoy, Because that Agamemnon should her enjoy: He wept, nor did he onely weepe it did seeme, But something did, or else he had slothfull beene. Truely although my wisedome be not much, I thinke that I my selfe have done as much: For out of envy to him he did receive Her first fruits, and the next to him did leave. Though that he ne're toucht Brysis he doth sweare By his Scepter, his Scepter was no God to heare. Then still passe by thy forsaken Mistresse gate, And let thy quick steps thence convey thee streight: And sure thou maist performe it, if thy mind Doe gather strength, and be thereto inclin'd. For when thou passest by, goe quicke and fast, Spurre on thy selfe as if thou wert in haste. Thinke that the Syrens in that house doe dwell, And make haste from her, so shall all be well: And for thy Rivall never grieved be, Esteeme him not now as thy enemy: Or salute him though thy hatred doe remaine: For'tis a signe thou art thy selfe againe. And that I may play the Physitians part, What meats to use I will prescribe by Art. For Scallions from Lybia sent to thee, Or else from Megaris both hurtfull be:
And lustfull Eringoe's see that thou doe shun, Which unto Venery make the body prone. Rather eate Rue that sharpeneth the sight, And that which hindreth Venus soft delight. If concerning Wine thou wouldst have me to shew Some Rules, my Rules at this time shall be few. Wine doth prepare the minde to Venerie, Unlesse you drinke too much, and drunken be: For too much Wine the affections stupesie, When that the heart in Wine doth buried lie, For as by blowing a fire may be kindled, So by blowing a new fire may be extinguish'd. A gentle winde doth nourish the weake flame, A violent puffe doth put it out againe. Drinke so much Wine as may thy cares expell, If thou drinkst more or lesse, thou dost not well. This worke is done, now with fresh Garlands Crown My Ship which to the intended Haven's come, And to your sacred Poet offerings give, You Lovers that from hence did helpe receive. FINIS.
