19598.6 23919043 26981
The fairest Fairing for a Schoole-bred Sonne; Whereby Praise, Ease, and Profit may be wonne. That is to say, The Schoole-Masters precepts, or Lillies Lesson to his Schollers. teaching them good Manners. Translated by Iohn Penkethman Louer of Learning; and by him Dedicated to all the laureat LILLIES of these times. This Table may be cut a crosse betweene the two middle lines, and inserted in the Grammar. MY little Scholler, to thy Booke inclinde, Come neere, and print my Sayings in thy minde; Leaue thy Bed early, let not Sleepe inuade thee; Haste thee to Church and worship him that made thee: Yet first thy Hands and Visage wash thou faire, Let all thy Clothes be neat, and combe thy Haire; And when my Schoole shall bid thee come away, Be there without excuse of loytring Stay: When there thou seest thy Master, him salute, And to thy Mates in order be not mute: Sit where I set thee, and in any case, Vnlesse I countermand it, keepe thy place; And as more Learning euerie one doth get, So in a higher place he shall be set: And for thy Studies haue thou ready still, MY little Scholler, to thy Booke inclinde, Come neere, and print my Sayings in thy minde; Leaue thy Bed early, let not Sleepe inuade thee; Haste thee to Church and worship him that made thee: Yet first thy Hands and Visage wash thou faire, Let all thy Clothes be neat, and combe thy Haire; And when my Schoole shall bid thee come away, Be there without excuse of loytring Stay: When there thou seest thy Master, him salute, And to thy Mates in order be not mute: Sit where I set thee, and in any case, Vnlesse I countermand it, keepe thy place; And as more Learning euerie one doth get, So in a higher place he shall be set: And for thy Studies haue thou ready still, If ought to thee I dictate or allot, Write thou it rightly, without fault or spot; But such thy writings doe thou not commit To papers loose, for which a Booke is fit. Record thy Lessons more than once or twice, And if thou doubt'st, of Others aske aduise: Who doubts and often askes, my charge retaineth, But he that nothing doubts, no profit gaineth. Learne, Boy, nor let Forgetfulnesse abuse thee, Lest that a guiltie minde of Sloth accuse thee. And marke me well, for what auaile my paines, Vnlesse thou fix my Sayings in thy Braines: "The hardest things through diligence are knowne; Be painefull, and the Glorie is thine owne. "For as the Earth yeilds neither seeds nor flowers, "Unlesse manr'd in
"So he that doth not exercize his wit "Doth lose, with precious time, the hope of it. Let Order likewise in thy speech commend thee, Lest by vnciuill Babbling thou offend me; Speake lowe, when thou thy Lesson dost apply, But to Mee saying, let thy voice be high. To Mee, when thou repeat'st, ad vnguem, looke Thou hast all readie, laying by thy booke. And let None prompt thee, when thou art repeating, For that much hurts thee, and descrues a Beating. If ought I question, answer so the same, As thou thereby mayst merit praise and fame. No praise thou get'st in speech to runne or creepe, "The Meane's a Vertue profiting to keepe; And euer when thou speak'st vse Latine phrase, Yet shun thou barbarous words as rockie wayes; Instructions askt vnto thy fellowes grant; And helpe (to my desire) the Ignorant: "Those that want Learning, he that seekes to teach, "Himselfe (though most vnlearn'd) may all outreach. But let no paultrie Masters giue thee aime, To Romane Eloquence no little shame; 'Mongst whom there's none so foolish, or so rude, But him an Author the like Sort conclude. The Grammar Lawes if thou wouldst rightly knowe, And learne to make thy Speech more sweetly flowe, Read workes most famous by old Authors wrought, And which the chiefest Latinists haue taught; Now Virgil, sometimes Terence doth inuite thee, And otherwhiles would Cicero delight thee; All which who learnes not, onely dreames doth see, And in Cimmerian shades would euer bee. Some Boyes, (their mindes denying Vertue roome) The time doe loue in Trifles to consume: Others, their Fellowes trouble, making sport With hands or feet, or in some other sort.
And Those there are that boasting of their stocks, Disparage Others with vnsauourie mocks: Such euill patterns doe not thou regard, Lest that thy deeds at length haue iust reward: Nor buy, nor sell, nor changing giue or take; By others Losse doe thou no profit make: Let money goe, which many hath defilde. "Nothing, but what is chaste becomes a childe; Doe not lye, steale, scoffe, brabble, fight, or iarre, Ill noyse and scornefull laughter banish farre. To no dishonest words enure thy breath, "Mans Tongue the Portall is of life and death. Hold it a heynous crime, most worthy blame, To raile, or sweare by Gods most holy Name. Keepe safe thy Bookes, (not leauing one at Schoole) With all things else, which is a speciall Rule. Yea flie what ere may cause thee to offend Me, or the meanest One: and so I end. The Translators Conclusion to the Schollers. THese Precepts who performe, their Master please; And reape thereby both profit, praise and ease: But Those that breake the least, his Anger gaine, Working their owne losse with reproach and paine. To the Parents. Et isti haec rejicere malè nolunt Qui filijs & Qui mihi benè volunt. That is, And Those will not vnkindely These reiect, That honest Precepts and their Sonnes affect. FINIS.
