19843 99849857 15029
THE TRIVMPHANT AND SVMPTVOVS ARCH erected by the Company of English Marchants residing in LISBONE, vpon the Spanish Kings entry made thereinto. Togither with The Architecture thereof described, the pain∣ted Quadrants, the Figures of halfe and whole stature, the Ornaments, iewels, rich vestiments, the Histories, AEnig∣mes therein employed, with their declarations; and the Latine mottoes, and Spanish verses expressed in English. Wherein also, Mention is made of the magnificent present the Duke of BRAGANZA gaue to the King, the number of the traine that followed him, the wonderfull prouisions, and buildings set vp for the Grandes of Spaine, with the other Lords and seruants of his Maiesties Court, the salues of Artillery, with the fires and lights that were made all ouer the Citie, on the day that he came within sight thereof, to Almada, a place on the other side of the Riuer, halfe a league distant, and right ouer against LISBONE. Faithfully translated out of the Spanish originall. LONDON Printed by E.G. for Henry Seile, at the Tygers head in Paules Churchyard. 1619.
THE KING OF Spaines entertainment into LISBONE. AMongst other assignments and di∣stributions made by the renow∣med Citie of Lisbone, (at the request, and for the peculiar of∣fices of some Nations there re∣siding) of certaine parts and quarters, by which his Maiestie was to enter, and passe, there was allotted to the English, the first Port of the Citie walls, which is the Arche, called the olde Pelourino, for which the two litle Arches of stone, and the houses standing thereon, were demolished, leauing some fiftie hands breadth of entry, and an hundred & ten in height, the which, with the fifteene, that the Figure takes vp, that finisheth the Arche, makes a hundred twen∣ty fiue, there remayning on the top of the Port, fortie foure in the concaue, twenty foure in the en∣try, and on the sides, fiftie in height and twenty seauen in breadth.
In the first Quadrant ouer the Architecture of the said Port was cut in whole stature the statue of the Citty of Lisbone, in a rich vestement imbroy∣dered, with a Crowne on her head, holding in her right hand two keyes, one of steele, signifying her strength, and the other of gold, implying her wealth and opulence; who extending her hand, offered them to the King. Her left hand shee reposed vpon an Anchor of gold, to note, the sustentation, and de∣fence shee enioyes by the Sea, with the Citie armes hanging thereon, which are a ship, in which the glo∣rious Martyr S. Vincent, her Patron, came thither, to take harbour, and vnderneath it this inscription. Lisbone the great, a Citie of renowne, The faire Metropolis of Portugall; Famous for loyall seruice to the Crowne, As likewise for her strength and courage tall: To offer to your Maiestie is bold These keyes, this golden anchor, and this shield, With all the worth and power she doth hold. In which, shee giues you, all hir bounds can yield. In the Quadrants, that comprehend this picture, in the midst was delineated the taking of Lisbone by the King Don Alfonso Henriques, together with the ayde of a strange Nauie, which being in their course towards Ierusalem, miraculously there took Port. On the right hand is pourtrayed the King with the Prince his sonne, and some other great per∣sonages, & by them his Armie: & in the left Qua∣drant, William Long-Espée Earle of Salisbury, with
his English nobilitie, who accompanied him, to the winning of this Citie, and ouer his owne, the armes of Ierusalem, being a Crosse of gold enameld, with other foure Crosses of the same: as likewise in the same Quadrant hard by him, is painted and set foorth his whole fleete, of an hundred and foure∣score saile, with this inscription vnderneath: The faithfull English, which with faire pretence Doe soiourne now within this famous place; Because that many of their ancient race Did hold therein their noble residence. And got this passage like victorious Peares Ioyning the strength of Portugall to theirs. Though Strangers counted; yet with humble hearts Will be the first shall serue your hie deserts. In the other Quadrant aboue this Figure, which formes the Arch, there are fiue personages raised in whole stature, each of them being twelue hands breadth in height. One was Don Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, sonne to the King of England, arm'd onely with a gorget, his gauntlets, and coate of male, with his Spanish cape, a hat on his head, and a plume of feathers in it, after the English fashion; at his feete his Scutchion of armes, which are the golden Lyons of England: and for a difference from the Scutchion of armes royall, a red-rose: he was portraied, giuing with his right hand his daugh∣ter Catherine, to King Henry of Castile, and with the left his daughter Philip, to King Don Iohn of Portugall the first, they being very gallantly clad
after the English manner, and the Kings Statue in the same forme as the Dukes, each of them in their vsuall attire, and habite, and at their feete, their Scutchions of armes: that of Don Iohn, being a Crosse of Auis, of which Order hee was Master, and this inscription vnderneath. From these two Ladies of Great Brittaines Isle, The faire remembrance of whose glorious worth, Doth now enrich the Kingdome of Castile, And sets with honour Lusitania forth; Long since did your Progenitors descend, As by this story you may plainely know: And for this cause, great Monarch we pretend That you your Hearts-loue to the English owe. Vpon the Base, which is the full Continent of this Architecture, stood Saint George on horsbacke treading vpon the Serpent, in manner and forme as the Kings of England weare him, for their Patrone, and beareth such an inscription. He did, being Patron to great Englands King, Assist the Portugall in euery thing. Alluding to the signall that the Portugalls made of his name, in companie of these Strangers which aided them, as we may see, in the battaile of Saint George. In the inward parts were two Impreses, and o∣thers on the vpper part, which expressed the intent of the Quadrants, in this forme. On the one part
are deciphered two Faulcons flying in the aire at an Herne, which at last yeelding, they seaze vpon, with this Motto: Eodem parta labore. On the other are two trees, which grow from rootes conioyned, spreading their tronckes broad and wide, being farre distant one from an other, out of their branches come two braces of armes, in forme as if they would claspe and embrace, with this Motto annexed; Donec iungantur & ipsae. On the vpper part of the Arch there is another Imprese, of the Grandes, or Great-men, of England and Por∣tugall which are painted on the sides of the gate. There is portraied the Sun beating with his beames from on high vpon two christall Looking-glasses, which with reciprocall beames, reuerberate and giue light one to another, with this Motto: Alter, al∣teri lucet. On the right side, which answereth iustly to the Quadrant of King Don Alfonso, there is placed in foure Niches, foure demy statues, of brasse coulor'd, which were foure famous men of Portugall, that exalted themselues in England, in dignitie, and by armes. The first was, the Infant, Don Pedro, sonne to King Don Iohn of Portugall, who was Knight of the Order of the Garter in England (where he per∣formed many Heroicall Actes) with an azure ban∣dell, and English letters, expressing thus much in French: Honi soit, qui mal y pense. Which is the Motto, or Inscription of the said Order, and Gar∣ter, and a Scutchion of his royall Armes: and for his Impresse a Crowne of Oake with akornes, in the midst of it, a Ballance, and at his feete, this In∣scription.
I am Don Pedro, th' Infant of great fame, Renowm'd for Armes in euery forraine State; None yet my valour euer ouer-came, But the harsh Enuie of my cruell Fate. Braue Englands King, saw my atcheiuments such He did me Knight with warlike Hand: Nor thought the honour of his Garter much, For one so famous in a Stranger-land. The second was the Infant, Don Henrique his Brother, Knight of the same Order, and afterwards Master of the Order of the Knights of Christs in Portugall, with a blew Garter, and the said letters written: a royall Scutchion or shield, and in the said shield a barre of difference, and at each end thereof three Flowers De luce round about the shield, as it were abroad Belt, which reacheth to the Button, and in it the same Poesie of the Garter written, bearing for a creaft, a Crowne of Oake, with the habite of his Order in the midst of it, and at his feete this Inscription. Henry am I, who in my bosome bring True wisedome with me, courage, hie-command; Sonne to that warlike, and heroike King, Who honoured Portugall his natiue land. By my exploites within the English coast I there the Order of the Garter gain'd: From thence returnd with my victorious Hoste, The Mastership of Christ's I here obtaind.
The third was Iohn Vasquez, d' Almada, sonne to Aluaro Vasquez, Count of Abranches, who perfor∣med many noble exploites in England, where hee died: he weareth the honourable Order of the Gar∣ter, whereof he was Knight, and the armes of the Almada's, in his Scutchion, with these verses vnder∣written. Much celebrated is my worth and fame, From the Sunne rising to his going downe; Iohn Vasquez of Almada is my name; Who gaue one Earle more to the French kings crown: Europe hath knowne the mettaile of this sword; For England and Castile it stoutly stood: Faire England me her Garter did afford, And sweetly harbourd my congealed bloud. The fourth was Ayres de Silua, who remaining in England as Portugall Embassador, for his worthy demerit, was made Knight of the Honourable Or∣der of the Garter, he weareth his Order bearing in his Sheild a Lyon rampant of the Siluas, and at the foote this inscription: Ayres I am of Sylua by my name A Lusitanian borne, & one whose fame, In euery corner of the world doth ring; Sent with an Embasie to Britaines King Whose loue by courtly carriage I obtaind, And by my wisedome such acceptance gaind; That now each Prouince doth entitle me, Saint Georges Knight a stile of hie degree.
In the Quadrant right against that of William Long-Espée Earle of Salisbury, there are foure other famous persons of England which made themselues renowmed in Portugall, by their valiant and heroike actions. The first was Edmund sonne to the King of England, who valiantly aided King Don Ferdinan∣do of Portugall in his warres. He hath his Scutchion of the armes royall of England, with the difference of a red-rose, and these verses vnderneath. Great Edmund I, the sonne of England's King, Whose valiant arme great victories did bring To Portugall, and to his natiue land, Led by the guiding of great Ferdinand: With warlike Heart I did my selfe addresse, To meete my foes, where dangers most did presse. Whereby much fame to Britaine I acquir'd And Spaine throughout my Prowesses admir'd. The second was, Aymon Earle of Cambridge, son to the Duke of Lancaster, who atchieued maruellous enterprises, in this kingdome, in the vauntguard of the Royall battaile of Saint George; At his feete hee hath this inscription: The Poet fol∣lowing some Spanish Author (as it should seeme) hath mi∣staken the right English names, which (gentle Reader) you must pardon.Sprung from the house of Lancaster am I Haymon by name of courage bold, and stout, Th' Earledome of Cambridge was my dignity; And Portugall did sound my praises out. With her I conquer'd oft, through freindly chance; Spaine knew my Virtues did so far extend,
That highly she my glory did aduance; And ioy'd that I did from her Kings descend. The third was Don Liberche, who assisted King Don Alfonso, at the taking of Lisbone, and from him, and his Followers, the towne of Almada tooke her name, of which they were Lords: In his shield he beareth the armes of his name, and these verses vn∣derneath subscribed: Full oft made I the proud Barbarian feele The keener edge of my well-temp'red steele. And made this passage triumphe in their bloud, That sought to force it, gainst the publike good. Since when Almada hath her name retaind, From him and his who thus her safety gaind. Great Britaine, France and Portugall doe know What losse the Mores by him did vndergoe. The fourth was Don Chil de Rolim (to whom King Don Alfonso gaue the royaltie of Azambaia, and from whom, the Rolines, and Mores of this kingdome discend) with his Scutchion of Armes, and this poeticall subscription. English by birth, in worth I did abound, And was the first, that sought by force of Armes To lay these Rampiers leuell with the ground, Frighting the Mores with many fierce alarmes. By my renowmed and thrice glorious Fame, I satisfie the House, which from me came, More then Zambaia, which to me befell, A pettie Lordship, and a little Cell.
On the backe part of this worke, there are two Quadrants, which take vp the whole Base of the Figures, in the greatest whereof, Corporall Force, or Valor is pourtrayed in the forme of a lustie yong man armed, being of robustious members, and haughtie aspect, his helmet resting vpon a marble Columne, his armes powdred ouer with harts, trampling vnder foote, a Trophie, of banners and armes of all kindes; and somewhat lower hard by his side, two women, representing the English and Portugall Nations, to whom, he stands presenting a Palme, and crowne of Lawrell, and at his feete these verses subscrib'd, That looke so much desired, which with smiles The hearts of Men combines and reconciles, Not suffering Valour to admit Distrust, Nor Mildnesse to be trampled in the Dust; Hath now by Force and his Associates made, Peace twixt two Nations, which shall neuer fade. And Warre diuides the Lawrels, which she brings, Alike to Englands, and to Castiles Kings. In the litle Quadrant, which finisheth the whole worke on the backe part, answering to the Quadrant of the Alliances, and Mariage, is painted a Lyon, and a Leopard, one bearing the Sheild of Spaine, the other that of England, with sharpe pointed swords goaring and thrusting one at an other, yet in the midst of the same swords towards the points, two Oliue branches were drawne, being the sym∣boles of peace, with this motto, Iam mutata, quiescunt.
The conceipt of this Imprese is, that the En∣glish Nation did hereby intimate to the King, their noble demerit in the Conquest of Portingall, by their ancient descent, and the inviolable amitie they haue retained with the Kings of this Kingdome, implying further, their desire of loue and peace be∣tweene the Kings of Great Britaine and Spaine. The King entred into Portingall, on the eleuenth of May, stilo novo, with extraordinarie demonstra∣tions, both of ioy and magnificence, (which shall be specified in an other relation) in the number whereof, the greatest and most worthy of note was, that the Duke of Braganza, with his son the Duke of Bracelos, came to entertaine him with a 1000 men in their traine, betwixt seruants & the assistance of his name & familie. He presented the King with three hundreth Bucks, an hundred Beafes, two thousand Muttons, two thousand Connies, foure thousand Hens, two thousand paire of Peacocks, foure thousand Pigeons, foure thousand Chickens, two thousand gammons of Bacon, and a great quantitie of sweet meats, with bread, wine, fruits of the season, and many other things of great price, and esteeme. He prepared also sufficient prouisions for all the Kings Courtiers, and seruants, so as till this day, there was neuer a more famous thing seene. The King made his entry into Elues, and from thence he went to Estremos, and so passed to Euora, where the Inquisition presented him, with their acts and ceremonies. On friday being the foure and twenty of May, he went to Casillas, and Alma∣da,
halfe a league crosse the riuer, right ouer against Lisbone, and that night both by land and Sea, there was a triumphant peale of great ordinance in the Citty, and there were so many fires made, and lights burning in euery house, that the whole bo∣die thereof, appeared like a burning Globe. A ru∣mor was spread, that he would secretly view the Procession, of the Corpus Domini, and that from thence, he would goe downe to the Monasterie of Belin, where he would remaine till Thursday the thirty of Iune, the Festiuall day of S. Antonie of Padoa, on which day it is constantly affirmed, that he will make his solemne entry into Lisbone. Cer∣taine aduertisements shall be publisht hereof in due time, and in the meane while, those things which haue succeeded and past, shall be imprinted more at large, according to the forme and descriptions sent in writing, from Don Gabriel Formento, Chaplaine to the Marques of Alenquer, Viceroy and Captaine Generall of the Kingdome of Portingall. And be∣cause other vnderstanding Gentlemen, and worthy of credit, who haue bin herein sued vnto, to afford their true relations, as eye-witnesses of the Kings entries, into Merida, Medellin, Truxillo, Badaioz, and Elues, haue not as yet sent these their reports, this present discourse is prefixed, but as they are sent or come to hand, they shall be divulged and made knowne incontinently. FINIS.
