20090 99849997 15178
THE SECOND part of the booke of Battailes, fought in our age: TAKEN OVT OF THE best authors and writers in sun∣drie languages. Published for the profit of those that practise armes, and for the pleasure of such as loue to be harmlesse hearers of bloudie broiles. At London Printed for Gabri∣ell Cavvood. 1587.
A PREFACE TO the Reader. LOe heere I present vnto thee (gen∣tle Reader) a continuation of the booke of all the famous Battailes, fought in our age, and I doe hope with better hap than the first came forth, if the Printer haue done his dutie in reforming the faults noted and corrected in his proues. For as for the first part it was so maimed, mangled, and marred by the Printer, I will not saie of pur∣pose, but certes of pride and negligence, that I like a passio∣nate mother, that had her faire child foulie deformed through the negligence, or mallice of a lewde Nurse, in manner for∣sware mine owne child, bidding the Printer take it to him∣selfe, and father it on whom hee list, so he gaue it not mine name, for I would neuer acknowledge it for mine owne, but account it a changeling. But letting this matter passe, which is pleasant neither for thee to heare, nor for me to rehearse: perhaps you long to know what nouelties I do now bring: forsooth, certaine Battailes mentioned in the first parte, but not there described, because I had then no good author to fo∣low, that had set them forth at large, but all the rest are bat∣tailes fought since the publication of the first part, vnlesse it be two, which were set downe in the first booke, but since that time hauing chanced vppon farre larger and better de∣scriptions, I haue inserted them in this later part. And doubt∣les the battailes do deserue a verie perticular & exact descrip∣tion, as they which of al other were best fought: the first is the battel of Dreux in France, the other a battel in the leuāt seas,
where the confederate Christians, vnder the conduct of Don Iohn de Austria, discomfited the fleete and forces of the Turke: the which battaile I called in my first part, the bat∣taile of Lepanto, and now in my latter, the battaile of Pes∣cherias, and no doubt in both places falselie. For it was not fought in the gulfe of Lepanto, but in another gulfe neere therevnto, which you shall finde perticularlie described in this booke, but not named neither by mine author, nor by anie Geographer that I can light on: and therefore for lacke of a true name, I call it the battaile of Pescherias, of the forelong that adioyneth to the gulfe, and where the two Nauies first descried each other, beeing then too neere to retire, without apparant perill, if either of them had had that cowardlie minde and intention. Moreouer, in the description of euerie battaile, I haue, as also in the first part, followed alwayes some one certaine au∣thor, whome I thought had best of all other done it, with∣out enterlacing or adding of anie contradictions or scholies out of other writers, vnlesse it be in the Portugall battailes: where to take awaie all coulour of quarrell from the capti∣ous, I haue adioyned notes out of the booke, intituled: The Explanation of the true and lawfull right of Anthonie king of Portugall, because the common opinion is, that it was not published without the kings priuitie: and therefore I would haue made that booke my sole author in the enarration of those battailes, if it had perticularlie at large described them, as it doth but summarilie touch them. But the reason why I did not the like in the rest is: first, because I would auoide confusion (for hardlie shall you finde two authors that doe a∣gree in the description of one battaile,) and secondarilie and principallie, because I would not be reputed the author of a∣nie thing set down in this booke, but onelie the bare transla∣tor & reporter of it in English: leauing the credite of all per∣ticulars in these books vnto their authors, whose names I haue prefixed in the front of euerie battaile, as also I haue done
in the table. So that if any vntruth shalbe here found (which God forbid) the fault is not mine, vnlesse I haue bene vn∣aduised, and carelesse in the choice of myne auctors: the which I hope I am farre from. Where∣fore courteous Reader, seing that I haue taken paines for to pleasure and profit thee, speake well of mee, and so fare∣well.
Faultes escaped. Fol. 2. a. line. 12. for 205. reade 250. Fol. 3. a. line. 28. for league, reade euen. Fol. 4. b. line 37. for compassed, reade composed, Fol. 7. a. line 3. for fevv, reade vve. Fol. 16. a. line 23. for Sologne, reade Solongne Fol. 25. a. line 34. for armies, reade armes. fol. 29. a. line 3. for some, reade soone. fol. 43. a. line. 4. for 1581. reade 1585. fol. 42. a. Pe∣ter Badario the Captaine of the ninth galley is left out, & there∣by all the names of the Captaines from thence to the nineteenth are fals set. fol. 43. a. line, 37. fot 62. reade 1. and before it: The right vving, Names of Gallies. Names of Captaines. fol. 47. a. line 8. for de∣serue, read cōserue. fol. 50. b. l. 9. for Despotedo. read Despotado. fol 58. a. line 4. for there, reade therfore. fol. 59. b. li. 9. for Figheron; read Fighero a. fol. 68 a. line, 19. for 1576. reade 1575. fol 77. b. last line put out noted. fol. 78. a. in the marginall note, after doubtlesse, adde 2000. Fol. 83. a. line. 6. for Hamet, reade Mahamet. In the same page line 23. for 1581. reade 2580. Fol. 87. a. line 4. for Macolin, reade Marolin. As for Dandelut for Dandelot, Selini for Selim, Ascania for Ascanio, vp for of, and such like, I do hope the discreet Reader vvill of himselfe easily correct.
Battailes. THE Battaile of Dreux, fought in France, betweene Lewes Prince of Condee, & Annas Montmorency, high Constable of France, in An. 1562. Out of Seig∣neur Popelliniere. The Battaile of Saint Gemme, fought in France, betweee Monsier la Noue, and Monsieur Puygaillard, the daye of Iune, in An. 1570. Out of Popelliniere. The Battaile of Cheuraine, fought in Henault, betweene Don Federick de Toledo, and the Lord Ienlis, in An. 1572. Out of Popelliniere. The Battaile of Barow, fought by Sea, betweene Monsieur de Boisot, and Iulian de Romero, in An. 1574. Out of Cornelio. The Battaile of Mockerheid, fought betweene Ludouick Comte de Nassau, and Sanchio Dauila, in An. 1574. Out of Stratius. The Battaile of Giblou, betwene Don Iohn de Austria, and the Lord Gugny, in An. 1578. Out of Stratius. The Battaile of Couwenstein dike, betweene Alexander Prince of Parma, and the forces of the States. 1585. Out of Dinothus. The Battaile of Pescherias, betwene Don Iohn, & Ali Bas∣sa, in An. 1572. Out of Peter Contarini. The Battaile of Alcazar, fought in Barbarie, betweene Se∣bastian the king of Portugall, and Abdelmelec, king of Marocco, in An. 1578. Out of Freigius. The Battaile of Lisbon, fought betweene Antony king of Portuguall, and Ferdinando Duke of Alua, in An. 1580. Out of Comes. The Battaile of Saint Michaell, fought by Sea, betwene the Marques of Santa Cruz, and Philippe Lord Strozzi, in An. 1582. Out of a letter sent to the king of Spaine, by the Marques: and also out of the booke intituled the Ex∣planation of the true and lawfull right of Antony king of Portugall, &c.
The Battaile of Langside, fought in Scotland, betweene Iames Erle of Murray, and the Erle of Argile, in An. 1568. Out of Buchanan. FINIS.
THE SECOND Booke of Battailes. The battaile at Dreux in France, fought betweene Lewes of Burbon, Prince of Condee, Generall of the Protestants their forces, and An∣na Montmorencie, high Constable of France, and Generall of the Catholike armie, in the yeere of our Lord 1562. and the 19. of December, taken out of Popelliniere. LEWES the Prince of Condee, hauing receiued aides out of Ger∣manie, and also gathered together the French forces of the Religion, did take the field with about 8000. foote men, and fiue or sixe thousand horse men, two Canons, one Cul∣uerin, and foure field péeces, & came before Paris the xxviii. daie of No∣uember in Anno. 1562. and departed from thence the tenth daie of December following, after a vaine parle of peace, & that he despaired of taking the Citie, partlie for the resolute courage of the Citizens, who wonted at other times to bée fearefull, and cowardlie, and partlie, yea, and speciallie, be∣cause the Catholikes had drawen into the Citie a great ar∣mie of Frenchmen, and forreners: and marched towardes
Normandie, for to receiue the succours of men, monie, & pro∣uision brought out of England vnto New Hauen, & thereby to be able to content the Almaines, that now began to mur∣mure & to demand paie. But on the other side to stop & let the ioyning of the Prince with the English, the Catholike armie parted out of Paris, vnder the conduct of Anna Mont∣morencie, the high Constable of France, & coasting to rights by waies nothing good, was on ye 17. of Decēber come to the side of the towne of Dreux, & the riuer of Eure, within two litle leagues of the prince, who by an incōuenient ouersight (which yet was the falt of the Marshals of the camp) lodged ye night with the battaile at Yuoy, beyond & more néere to the enimie by one league, then the auantgard lead by the Admi∣rall, who had his quartier at the village of Neron, but the next daie the Admirall repairing vnto the Prince, it was a∣gréed vpon that the daie following the auantgard should be∣times march forth beyond the lodging, and battaile of the Prince, and so take againe their old & due order & range, and by this time had all the Catholikes passed the water, the which when the confederats vnderstood, some of thē thought that the battaile would be presentlie presented them: but the Admirall was of another opinion, because the Sun was not then aboue an houre & a halfe high, and thervpon euerie man fell to fantasying & imagining the good & the ill, the which might come of so great a masse of occurrents, which were presented on the one side & the other: and séeing that the most part assured themselues, yt some notable battaile would be fought, euerie man iudged of the euent thereof, according to his knowledge & practise in the feates of armes. Neuer∣thelesse feare in some, heate in other, & ignorance in diuerse, made their iudgements so diuerse, that it was a wonder to see it. Many marked on the parte of the Protestants two faults, so much the more to bée blamed, as they are of great consequence, and yet ordinarie with the warriours of this age and time. The first was, that no man was sent forth to suruey and take view of the enimie, for the Catholikes, which the Protestants might sée, were gone to sound ye foord
that they might then passe ouer their armie presentlie, or els that night, as in truth they did. The second fault was, that in liew of going to lodge in the good and strong villages néere the riuer, and the which the Catholikes seized the next daie, euerie man returned to his quarter, whereby the night following the Catholikes had meanes inough to passe the water, & to lodge themselues in the villages about to their aduantage, there being so little order & good looking to things on the Princes side, that he was neuer aduertised thereof, although there was scarcelie two leagues of ground be∣twéene the two armies. Likewise also many of the Catho∣likes did iudge that their Chieftaines did manifestlie amisse in this, that they did prepare themselues to giue battaile directlie in a place where the Campaine of Beause did end, considering that al their force was in their footmen, and the Princes in his horsemen: wherevnto adde the great mul∣titude of wagons that the Reisters carrie with them: it being a thing of certaintie, that if they had let the Prince passe to the borough of Trion, as he pretended, he shuld haue had such déepe and hollow waies, both on this side, and be∣yond, and in passing further should haue found the Countrie so full of trées, that the Catholikes might with the third part onelie of their footmen haue defeated the Prince, and taken all his cariages without anie hazard, and another thing there was (saie they) which made their falt more in excusable, that séeing they were maisters of all the Countrie of Norman∣die on this side and beyond the riuer of Seine, it was in their power to constraine the Prince to yéeld himselfe to their mercie, or else to driue him backe euen to the gates of Orleans, without hazarding of themselues anie whit at all. The Prince (hauing in that, better iudgement than the Admirall) armed himselfe two houres before daie, & signed many dispatches to be sent into Albemaigne, & other places frō whence he hoped great succors wold come, & because the auantgard which was to come frō Neron séemed to be slow, (wherof ye prince complained much) he sent many gentlemen
one after another for to hasten them, but for all that euer he could do, it was farre forth daies before that they came. So then at length his armie marched, but after the accustomed manner, without aduertising the companies perticularly, to prepare themselues to the battaile, either by solempne spee∣ches, or perticular, or by anie other aduertisements, than a few wordes, short, but verie couragious, and with a good grace: insomuch that many Gentlemen found themselues disarmed when they should go to the charge, & fought with∣out either harnesse on their backe, or helmet on their head, of this armie parted into two bodies of men of armes, the vantgard lead by the Admiral had about 305. French horse, foure Cornets of Reisters, sixe Ensignes of Almaines, and twelue of French men: the battaile, whereof the Prince had the conduct, contained 450. lances Frenchmen, sixe Cor∣nets of Reisters, sixe Ensignes of Almaines, and twelue of Frenchmen, besides sixe cornets of Argoulets, which might serue for light horse, vnder the conduct of La Curec, but they had not marched aboue a leage and a halfe, when the vant∣courers aduertised the Admirall that they had discouered on this side the water a great troupe of horse: whome he ha∣uing commanded them to assaile at a signall giuen as they did) with assurance that himselfe would follow them at the héeles, sodainlie the battaile which the Constable lead ap∣peared at the side of a village. The which being reported to the Admirall, and afterward to the Prince, they caused all their horsemen to set their launces vpright, ranging their battailes within a good Culuerine shot of them. Afterward séeing that their enimies came not forth, they two went fur∣ther with only Dandelut (who had a third daie Ague, & was mounted on an hackney, & apparelled for all harnesse with a furred robe) vntill they came to a place, from whence they might easilie iudge who had the aduauntage of the place, whereby they were perswaded that it was not for them to assaile the enimie whereas he was, that is to wit, at the head of a village betwéene Nogent and Lormay, towardes the which place the Countrie séemed to be plaine, but it was
not so indéede, but they must néeds go vp an hill and downe againe: insomuch that the Prince to passe ouer his men, and to auoide the furie of their artilerie, wherwith all they were well furnished, was forced to hasten his people to march so fast that he put them out of breath, but because they marched slowlie, they abid at the least thrée volées of their péeces, which might make a great checke and affright the armie, in the which not all men had their eares accusto∣med to the sound of such flutes. Furthermore, the armie Ca∣tholike did couer so great a compasse of ground, that if they encountered in that place, one part of them might compasse in, and charge the Prince in the side, and so by that meanes he being inclosed, should bée at the mercie of his enimies. These things being considred, and presupposing also that the Catholikes were not verie sharplie set to fight, a resolution was takē to go directly for to lodge at Trion, following ye in∣tention ye they had when they departed frō Ormoy, & thether were the Marshals of the lodgings sent. The better to re∣present vnto you one of the most renowmed battailes that euer was fought in this Realme, I will first figure out vn∣to you the seate and qualitie of the place, which afterward was embrued wt the bloud of so many gallant men. After∣ward I will set as it were before your eies, the estate and disposition wherein these two armies maintained them∣selues before, during, and after the conflict. Which béeing done, yée may easilie iudge, to whom the aduantage of one so notable occurance ought to be giuen, vpon the end of the league and leuell champains of Beause, Nogent le Roy doth present it selfe to Normandie, pretie néere to Dreux, a little towne at the foote of an hill (wherevpon stands a Castle of sufficient strength within the towne, by the side whereof passeth the riuer) a Countrie fertile & well peopled, betwéen the which two Countries that are separated by the course of Eure (the which comming out of Beause for to water Chartres, doth trauerie Nomandie euen to Pont de L'arche, & below the same doth léese it selfe in the Seine, the nurse of Paris) is a couert of certaine woodes, and a number of little
Towneshippes, of whome the Catholickes had alwaies to that daye, kept the aduantages, as they that séeing them∣selues stronger in footemen, and weaker in horsemen then the Prince, would not hazard ought, but where the place did fauour footemen, for lacke of whome the Prince was constrained to take a contrarie course. The which was the cause that at his parting from Lormoy néere Nogent, he had purposed to take Dreux, more for to force the Catholickes to an open and generall fight, then for the importaunce of the place: where Sourdeual commanded, with an hundreth light horse, and fiue Ensignes of footemen. But the Cheif∣taines Catholickes followed him, (coasting alwaies) with∣in fiue or sixe leagues, but holding their waye thorough countries so strong and such couerts, that the Prince could not finde any possibilitie to encounter them, but with his disaduantage. And in the ende the Catholickes séeing oc∣casions and meanes to preuaile in that countrie, by reason of the great number of their footemen, resolued for to fight: and therefore the .xix. daye, did set forward to get before the Protestants, and if they could get to Dreux before the Prince, there to offer him battaile at the head of the towne vpon an high péece of ground, lodging in the village two great Bataillons of footemen, which garded xiiii. Canons, placed and prest to play before them, and a little before on the side a number of Enfans perdus, whome they had chosen out of all the Regiments. The two flankes of these Batail∣lons were two great troupes of horsemen, for mutuall in∣tersuccour of the footemen and horsemen, as was best for their behoofe. Moreouer, they had chosen a place so fauou∣rable, that the Confederates could not charge neither thone nor the other, but by one way of a xiiii. or xv. hundreth pa∣ces, the which also the Herquebuzes Catholicke, did no lesse scoure, then dyd their Artillerie. Also a little below, they had a small vnwalled towne for to gard their baggage, & the Riuer of Eure néere to their back. But being resolute, & hot to fight, they aduanced themselues farther, for to get betwen two Villages, by a woods side, with far greater aduantage
then before. Herevpon the Prince following his resolution, begā to turne head towards Trion, shewing his right side to his enimies, who perceuing the Argolets, & one esquadrō of Reisters to be a faire marke, discharged vpon thē one volée of great Ordenance, which did affraie them in such sort, that almost all the Argolets ran awaye, & the Reisters tooke the way in a litle valley for to couer thē against ye Canon shot. Wherevpon Anna de Montmorency Constable of France, & general of that Armie, taking occasion to goe to ye charge, for to ouerthrow & break thē all intirely (as he had assured many ye his owne battel alone was more then sufficient for to ouerthrow all the Protestant Armie) caused the prin∣cipal of his troupes to come néere to him, vnto whome he made such a like speach. At the length (my maisters & friends) I haue brought you within sight of our enimies, who haue alwaies hether∣to made semblance that they sought battel, the which now they cannot flye, but also with ye losse thereof, & cōsequentlie of all the rest ye they haue & possesse in France. For whether ye be assailants, or defēdants, the aduantage is assured you, as well for number of men, that doubleth theirs, for the or∣der & disposition of the Armie, for the qualities of the armes & furniture, as also for the commoditie of the places, which fauoreth vs in all sorts, if they wil come to vs. Adde there∣vnto a thing more considerable, that we doe maintaine the cause of God, who wil haue but one Religion in the world, that is to wit, the aūcient Catholick Romane, frō the which these mescreans & infidels haue lewdely cut of themselues: we doe also vphold ye partie of our king & soueraigne prince, who cannot permit other exercise in his Realme, then ye of his predecessours: & finally, we fight for the weale of our na∣tural coūtrie, for the suertie whereof, we hauing euer to this day done infinit exploites, & fought in so many places, with such honour and profit, as your vertuous and holie de∣sires haue deserued: we should now be of lesse beléefe then they are, and more timorous then women, if we should not assure vs all, that this acte as the last of so manie trauailes
passed, shall be crowned with the good honor and felicitie that all good and couragious people cannot but desire. More∣ouer, thinke ye yt we are not héere to quarrel for other mens lands, nor for the defence of the borders of anie Lordes, nor to enlarge the Empire of the Crowne of France, but for the saluation of our soules, for the maintenance of the Religi∣on of our ancestors, for the holie alters, for the sacred reliks, for the reuerent Priests, and the wonderfull and awefull mysteries of our Religion. In sum, it is for the honour of Jesus Christ, and then secondarilie for the conseruation of our owne liues, and of the life of our Prince, and of his Of∣ficers, and by a consequent, for the honour, good, and suretie of the state, the which these mischiouous heretikes would no lesse reuerse, than they haue done alreadie our true and Catholike faith so defiled by the mortall venim of their pe∣stiferous heresies. We might well haue hastned the bat∣taile, but that the counsaile haue alwaies bene of aduise for to staie for the cōming of all our forces, as wel naturals, as alies and strangers, for to make them all pertakers of the present honour attended of all, yet neuerthelesse rather remitted than denied anie one of you. Wherefore assure your selues of the victorie, if ye do not beelie and denie your valour héeretofore: march resolutelie to the fight, kéepe wel your rankes, succour one another as shal be néedfull, holde your selues certaine and assured that this one daie will bée the beginning of your honourable libertie, and of a treble miserable bondage of the enimies of God, of the king, and of all good people. But now he had caused the Artilerie to plaie vppon the formost of the Protestants, who were therewithall so gal∣led and affrighted, that many going out of the rankes, made them beléeue that their Generall refused the battaile for to gaine still ground: which caused them to begin to make to∣wards the troupes of the Prince, who shewed vnto them his side with a dismarch, and an araie and appearaunce so proude, that the armie shewed how great Captaines dyd leade it. The Catholike armie was compassed of fiue
fiue great battailons of footemen, intermedled and interla∣ced still with their horsemen, because they were weaker than the Princes horses, as their footmen were stronger by a treble. The Catholike armie séemed to bée diuided into partes, rather in the respect of the Chieftaines that gouerned it, than for anie difference of troupes (as the ancient fashion was to diuide an armie into an auantgard, a battaile and a rereward) for the Catholikes represented the forme of an hedge, the which béeing bias, high, low, straight, and crooked, according to the nature of the places where they stood, made the confederates to sée more or lesse the bands Catholyke, according as the nature of the passage did permit, wherein the thrée chiefe Captaines seemed to bée well accomoded and placed, either to receiue, or to giue the charge in this battaile. If you will call the troupes lead by the Marshall of Saint Andre, the auantgard, it was composed of nine∣téene companies of men of armes Frenchmen, thirteene en∣signes of Spaniards, so many of French, and eleauen of Al∣manes, with foure péeces of Artillerie, all placed on the left of the Constable, who béeing chiefe of the armie, lead the battaile, which was néerer the enimie than all the rest of the troupes, and it consisted of xvii. Estanders of men of armes, three of horsemen, xxii. ensignes of Suisses, and xvii. of Frenchmen and Britons, with eight péeces of Artillerie. The Duke of Guise lead the rereward for to helpe the oc∣currents which might be presented, but had but a few men: they almost all standing on the right side of the Constable, who stoode formost of them all, and euerie one of the thrée Chieftaines hauing before them their Enfans Perdus on foot to begin the game. The summe of their armie amounted to 19000. footemen, and 2000. horsemen, and the Prince was about 4000. horsemen, all apparelled in white Casaques, the which the Prince had caused them to weare for a marke of the purenesse of their conscience in the dessigne by them made for to maintaine the honour of God, and the pub∣like, with 6000. footemen diuided into two battaillens of Almaines and Frenchmen.
Then the armie Catholike marching in this order a∣gainst the Princes, that shewed them his side, ariued be∣twéene two villages L'Espine, and Blainuille, distant asun∣der 1200. pace. The which space not béeing capable to com∣prehend the armie Catholike in length, it happened that the battel Catholike was farre beyond the auantgard Pro∣testant, so that it stoode much behinde it. Wherefore the Prince imagining that they marched directlie to him for to fight, hée without farther leasure to make publike pray∣ers to God for the victorie, as the Parisians did (that made the shrine of Saint Geneuiefue to come downe, for to emploie her as an intercesseresse to God for their behoofe) made his troupes tourne head with as much spéede as hée could: but as a whole armie is not easilie remoued, so specially by Chieftaines, that haue alwayes made more of the estate of actions of the bodie, than of the spirit, and wit, prising higher a furious valliance, shan an order and a∣raie militarie, (whereby the troupes accustomed to tourne, and change in all sortes, and in a moment, doe carrie awaie moe victories without great losse, than all those hardie and outragious feeses, the which cannot bring but a mise∣rie irreparable) the disorder shewed it selfe to bée such, that the Admirall and the auantgard found themselues ouer∣right against the Constable, and the Battaile: and the Prince and his battaile that was opposed and set agaynst the auantgard of the Catholikes, was so farre behinde it, as wée sayde, that the Prince coulde scarce sée it at all. Moreouer, the onelie battaile of the Constable stretched almost as farre in length as all the whole armie of the Prince. And for lacke of order, if that the constant resolu∣tion of some had not serued for an example vnto the rest of the armie, the Protestants had béene that daie the more vn∣happie. In summe, that backwardnesse was the cause, that the Prince and the Constable bare all the brunt, the Con∣stables horsemen that strengthned his battaillon béeing charged at one end by the Admirall, and the Battaillon of the Suisses that made the other ende, by the Prince, as I
will tell you. But as the troupes of the horsemen Protestant were seuered in diuerse small Battaillons of two or thrée com∣panies Frenchmen, with as manye or moe Reisters on their side, so they made diuerse charges. And to set the battaile abroach, the Prince set forth out of a little valley, wherevpon he marched, and resolued to go to the charge, be∣cause that the Artillerie of the Catholikes being well leuel∣led, lighted among his bandes, with great slaughter of good men, as well of one Nation as of the other: but in stead of going directlie against the auantgard Catholike, which was farre from him, hée left it on his left hand, tourning head a∣gainst the side of the esquadron of the Suisses which stren∣thened the end and vttermost side of the battaile of the Con∣stable, the which some went about to disswade him from, as well because he should thereby leaue all the auantgard of the enimie whole, who might charge him on the backe or side at their pleasure, as also because his footemen tarried thereby behinde all naked, and abandoned to the mercie of the rest of the Catholikes. Moreouer, seeing that he was the stronger in horsemen, he ought not to assaile the footmen of the enimies, who would of themselues either break, or yéeld shortlie after, if the horsemen of the Catholikes were defai∣ted, but the heate of the Prince pricked him forward to ef∣fects, and inconueniences, which yée shall sée. For hauing as∣sembled the principal chiefe men of the armie, with the Mar∣shall of Hessen, and certaine other that vnderstoode French, for to report afterward the substaunce of that hée shoulde saie, vnto their Captaines and souldiers, hée spake to this effect. My companions and good friends, if that I had not long time, and namelie by the false alarme yesterdaie, know∣en your couragiousnesse and resolution to fight, I woulde stretch out my selfe in discourses and remonstraunces as much as my leasure woulde permit, for to represent vnto you your deuoire in an accident of so greate
consequence as this is, but the néerenesse of these tyrantes which doe attend vs, without daring to attach vs, and your determinate courages which are knowen vnto mée by so many feates of armes, whereby ye haue alwaies gotten ho∣nour ouer your enimies, doe dispense with me for saying of anie other thing vnto you, but that time, occasion, & meanes doe present themselues to daie more than euer héeretofore, not onelie to make the fame of your valiance to runne throughout the whole world, but (that which is farre grea∣ter and iuster praise of so many paines passed, and of the vertuous indeauour which you haue shewed in this action) the rest and tranquilitie of your Gentlemanlie soules, the enfranchisment of your bond consciences, and the free exer∣cise of your religion: for maintenance whereof God, yea, the great God of Hosts, hath assembled you héere out of so many Countries and quarters, so that it is more than a worldlie hononour that yée ought to séeke for in the issue of this battaile, although that you cannot want it, as also yée shall gaine and get an incredible bootie of so many noble men, who haue alwaies feared you, and fledde your fight, neither durst they now approch you in anie equall and indif∣ferent manner, but fortified on all partes, for the iust di∣strust that they haue of their partie, & the feare of your ap∣proued prowesse. But for the honor of God, by whose secret motion wée bée incited to the defence of his holie name, yée must assure your selues that hée will leade and guide you himselfe, that hée will double the force and dexteritie of your arme, and will in such sorte fauour your furious es∣fortes to the mischiefe of this rascall Papist, which is no∣thing but a blowen bladder, and a vaine bragger without heart or hardinesse: so that yée hauing resolutelie charged, broken, dispoiled, and slaine these men, the rest of the run∣awayes will send vnto you the white paper for to per∣mit you to liue as yée will your selues. Haue not yée made them runne away in all parts of France? Haue ye not couped them vp in Paris, as it were foxes in their earthes?
Haue not ye beseaged and beate them so often in this the chiefe Citie of the world? out of the which they durst not put their heads for feare of blowes? doe ye think that they are now more hardie? What other spurre doe you expect to prick you forward, for to purchase their ruine, then so many losses of your goods, so many of your places ruined, so many of your wiues, so many of your daughters defiled, so manie blasphemies, so many denyings of the name of God. Such and infinit other barbarous facts farre more detestable, will be, I doe assure my selfe, a sufficient occasiō for you to grow in heart, strength and diligence, for to clense the world of such wicked soules. This doth greatly gréeue mée, that wée must blouddie our hands in the bodies of our cosins, of our allies, of our neighbours, and good friends. Our victorie can∣not be but lamentable, but theirs deadly, and what ende so euer then counter shall haue, it will rest pitifull to either of the two, that shalbe blessed and embraced, with a good houre, But because we must iudge of the desert of all actions by the vprightnesse of the occasions of them, we haue a strong consolation in this, that seeing the motife of these diuisions came of the ambition of the Triumuirate,So be Guys  And  and  Cō. we shall neuer be thought to haue caused, much lesse to haue begunne these warres. We haue neuer sought ought then to liue peacea∣bly vnder the Edicts of our king. On the contrarie side they armed themselues for to destroy and murder our poore bre∣theren at Vassy, onely for this, because they dyd pray vnto God according to the libertie which the king had caused to be published thoroughout his whole Realme. Seing then that they would take our liues from vs, what dishonour and punishable vilanie will that be not to vse meanes de∣sensiue? True it is, that first nature, then a certaine con∣formitie of maners, entertained by certaine lawes, which we doe call bandes politicke, (the spring of the amiable ciui∣litie yt goeth betweene man and man) hath so allied vs that few doe hold them for friends. But if that they degenera∣ting from vertuous passions, doe pursue vs as enimies, we haue so much the more iust cause to estéeme them for such,
because the honor of God is the true and first foundation of their hatred: for the maintenance whereof, we ought to ex∣pose all that we haue, and leaue vs nothing at all. And for the rest, assure your selues, that a multitude of men assem∣bled against the ordinance of God, against right, against all reason diuine, & humane, shall neuer doe faire exploite, ver∣tue hath no sympathie with wickednesse. So then kéepe your selues together without forsaking one an other, and for to enter, succour one an other, when néede shall bée. After the first charge rallye your selues spéedely, and disperse not your selues to pillage, which is yours assuredly after the death of the owners: folow the victorie so sagely, that theni∣mie, and all those whose eares the bruite of this acte shall beate, may haue occasion to admire, & no lesse to feare your discretion, then your valiāce, whereof you haue made so ma∣ny prooues heretofore. Now for to shew you, that I will not spare my selfe, but giue and receiue my parts of the first blowes: I doe praye God that he will make you all goe as resolutelie to the charge, as I shall giue you example. This being done, euery man returned to his troupe, to encourage them by the same reasons that they had learned of the Prince: whereof they had no sooner assured the re∣solution to their people, but they dyd set them all in araye, for to folow their chieftaines, in the same order, and with such dismarch as I will tell you. First and formost Mouy, with his troupe incorporated with Danaretts, the successor of Genlys, (both of them being of the Auantgard, prepared for the first shockes) were also the first that charged the Suisses in the flanke, with such force, that being resolutely entred their ranks, they passed thorough them trauerse. The Prince that folowed them, not onely pierced their bataillon, but also brake all ye whole taile with great mortalitie of those footemen, as good pike∣men as they were. The Reisters that folowed, gaue in also after him, and dyd a meruailous execution. The which Danuille, who was with thrée companies of men of armes
and the light horse, betwéene the Bataillons of ye Suisses, & Almans séeing, did set foorth for to make head to the Prince, but two cornets of Reisters setting vpon him, did breake him in such sort, that he was forced to retire himselfe to the Auantgard Catholicke, which was a good distance of, which yet remained still firme. In this encounter was Monbron, one of the Constables sonnes slaine by an Esquire of the Prince, who had promised it him before Paris. Vpon these dismarches, Rochefoucaut with about an hundreth lances, who were also of the troupe of the Prince, who hadde not thought it good to leaue their footemen without succour, was also constrained to take the same course, & charged the Suis∣ses in the front, whome he found so close together, & so well prouided of courage, or perhaps not dismarching with such resolution as the Prince did, and therefore could not break them, gained nothing but thrusts of the pike, although he slew some, and among them the Colonnell. On thother side, at the verie same instaunt that the Prince charged, the Admirall with two cornettes of Rei∣sters that were on his right side, marched with his owne regiment, and the troupe of the Prince of Portian directly to the Constable his Vnckle, and seuen or eight standers of men of armes, that strengthned the other ende of the batail Catholicke. And after he hadde borne one vollée of their Artillerie, and certaine Harqueburiers Enfans perdus, that endamaged them a good litle, brake all that he encountred, notwithstanding anie resistaunce that could be made a∣gainst him. Many dyd then their best, but their number was no∣thing equall to them, that made more deere accompt of lyfe then of honour, and who béeing better prouided of good spurres, then assured of heart, fledde with such spéede that a great number were the next daye at the gates of Pa∣ris, by eight of the clocke in the morning, crying that all was lost. Now ye Cōstables horse was stain, & he remoūted by Dorai∣sō, vpō his own, but yet anon after, he was so hurt wc a blow
of a Pistolle on the lower iawe (whereby he loft some of his téeth) and so enclosed, that he yéelded vnto Vezines, from whome yet the Raisters that came to the spéede, pulled him by force, and tooke away his sword, & making him to giue his faith, ledde him away prisoner. Vpon this the Prince of Portian sonne of the Countesse of Seniguan, to whome the Constable hadde done many displeasures, came to him: But (as he was of a good and gentlemanly nature) in steed of his pistolle, offered him his hand, promising him all help and fauour. The Bataillon composed of xvii. Ensignes of French men and Bretons that sided the Suisses, were eaiely bro∣ken, and so all the whole battaile of the Constable was scat∣tered and entirely defaited after a great slaughter of men, the rest that fledde were pursued euen to the Riuer, where many were drowned, whiles that they that were more de∣sirous of botie then of honor, rifeled the bagage, which was almost all spoiled. Herevpon the Lansquenets of the Prince, séeing so great a foile fallen on the Suisses, would also lift vppe their hands, and doe also some thing on their partie, worthie of memorie vpon them, namely, whome they saw as men a∣stonied after two so furious escheckes, to rest halfe broken, attending their entire mischaunce: beside an olde deadly hatred that they had borne against that nation, with whom they haue long contended for honor, the which neuer thelesse the Suisses doe carie awaye from all the footemen of the worlde. So then they dismarched towards the Suisses, who were now closed together againe, notwithstanding all that had bene done before, but so faintly, that as soone as they sawe that the Suisses that were left, did in stéede of being dismayed, buskle themselues to goe straight to them, they lost their harts, flying without giuing one push with ye pike. The which gaue occasion at the same time to two cornetts of Reisters, and certaine French horses that were rallied, to giue a newe charge on those Suisses. But in déede they found them so lustie and of so haughtie courage, by reason
of the flight of those that durst not so much as looke them in the face, that they could not wholie breake them, but their front remained still whole, and made countenance to re∣couer their eight péeces of Artillerie, which they had forsa∣ken, and with the which they might bring great domage to the troupes, that the Prince and the Admiral rallied with all diligence and spéede: Wherefore for to méete with, and fullie to defaite thē, that vanted that they could not be, van∣quished by reason of their courage, their araie, & martial dis∣cipline (whereof other Nations being ignorant, for the most part make so light account of) they were againe attached so lustilie, that they were forced to leaue all to the vnresistable furie of the desperate French, before whome they fledde in small bandes, yet neuerthelesse hoped to rallie and to sight againe. And in truth they did retire in good number, and with some order towards the auantgard, sundrie times ten or a dousen of them that remained behinde ioyning toge∣ther, and defending themselues with stones (which was all the weapons that many of them had left them) euen to the death, in such sort, that neuer Nation did better than they did this daie. All the time of these hot attaches, the auant∣gard Catholike kept themselues close together, and stirred not one foote for the space of about an houre and an halfe, beholding with a discontented eie the euents of so metall encounters, the feare of whome bredde soone inough in some a desire to take backe againe the waie to Dreux, after that they vnderstoode, and in parte had seene the entire discom∣fiture of their battaile, with the taking of the Constable. But the Duke of Guise had soone inough considered, that after such charges and endeauours, the Protestants could haue neither weapons, nor araie for themselues nor their horses, to sustaine and abide the shock of so many fresh men, and furnished fullie with all necessaries. Moreouer, hée knew that their batthillon of French footemen, amounting to 500. ill armed, and destitute of horsemen (who nowe went about to rallie with them) was not able to abide him, béeing resolued to die, or else to carrie awaie the ho∣nour
of so renowmed a battaile: Wherefore vsing the counsaile of Biron, he drew out 200. horses of his troupes, making a good number of Harquebuziers to march on his right side, and the Bataillon of Spaniardes after them, while in the meane time hée made this spéech vnto the Chieftaines and personages of greatest marke, that hée found néere him in that quarter. Maisters, & good friends, the onelie discouerie of this bed of honor on the which are now laid so many braue warri∣ors, your kinsmen, your neighbours, your allies, and your friends, cannot be vnto you otherwise than verie lamenta∣ble: but againe, therefore it is the stronger & more forcible occasion for to make you runne with bowed heads against these mischieuous murthering Lutheranes, who making no account of the léesing and damning of their owne soules in the fire of euerlasting punishment, after that they hadde defiled our Churches and holie places with so many villa∣nies, haue with a more than brutish furie, massacred so many good Catholikes throughout the whole Realme, are also so rashe, and so shamelesse, as to attainde the sacred person of the King, and of his most faithfull Officers, for to confound the Stater, for to tourne all thinges vpside downe, and for to establish a tyrannie most agréeable to their proude passions, and haue gathered together a troupe of Théeues, of Roagues, of Banqueroutes, and spend∣thriftes, and of men condemned to diuerse punishmentes, and other sortes of malcontents. Who haue bewitched by certaine Preachers, and other Huguenotes, and so strong∣lie inchaunted my Lorde the Prince of Condee, that hée is made head of this vnhappie troupe, which you doe sée alreadie defaited by those violent endeuours, that they haue sustained by our battaile. Séeing then that they are so broken, what resteth for you but that raising vp againe the honour of the Generall of this armie, their Prisoner, yée goe noblie to the charge, and bring awaie the victorie, the which otherwise the enimie will carrie awaie, with their no lesse honour, than the vnrepayable domage of vs
and all Christendome? Yée néede doe no more but looke them in the face. For their horses tired with so many char∣ges and long carriers, will no more than the men weari∣ed and vnfurnished of weapons, sustaine one moment the gallant lustinesse of your fresh dismarch. Doe but dare to attempt it, and yée shall get the noblest victorie that euer Nation gained: as on the contrarie part it will redound to so much your greater dispraise, if that séeing yée haue ad∣uauntage in all things, you doe let so faire an occasion slip, and holding your armes a crosse, and fighting onelie with your eies, ye will suffer the enimies to remaine maisters of the field of the battaile. But to the end that the valiant may not be without knowledge of their reward, and that these villaines doe not remaine vnpunished for their villanies, I doe assure you of the liberall recompence of our king, I doe sweare vnto you by God, that I will shew my selfe so libe∣rall towards them that I shall sée or heare, beare themselues valiantlie, that they shall neuer lacke goods, besides the cur∣tesie of the bountie of their Maiesties, and the honours which the lawe of armes, and the custome of the Countrie doe giue. But those Chelmes and enimies of God shall bée fullie assured of the same, yea, and a more cruell death,The most reproch∣full name in Dutch. whih they doe thinke to escape by running awaie, for recom∣pence of their villanie, and punishment of example to all other, that dare vsurpe the name of Souldiours, and men of warre: with an euerlasting inhibition of burying them, but to lie in the field to haue none other graue than the bel∣lies of dogs, of wolues, of birds, & other beasts, that shal glut themselues of thē at their pleasure. On, on then my friends, and let vs sée who hath most desire to sacrifice honourablie the rest of his daies for the seruice of God, of the king, and of France. Vpon this resolution, and béeing well followed by these troupes, hée charging on all partes this Bataillon of foote∣men, had a faire daie, they béeing first retired, that should haue conducted other, and as well by wordes as Gentle∣manlike examples of their persons, haue encouraged them
to doe their beuoire, and afterward all the Souldiours, but not so spéedelie as they could, because they were on horse∣backe, and the other on soote, so that none of them fought, but the thrée or foure of the first rankes, after they had shot off one volée of their foure field yéeces. At the same time the Marshall of Saint Andre, with all the rest of his horse∣men, went to range with the two sides of the battaillon of the Almans, which did close vp the vtter boūd of the auant∣gard. In the front whereof were seauen or eight hundreth French Harquebuziers, shooting at the Reisters, which had rallied themselues returning from the chase of those that had béene broken, as I tolde you before: Who séeing their French footemen, and Lansquenets defaited, and so greate forces comming against them, retourned with a pretie trot towardes a woode that was néere them. In the meane while Dandelot, although hée were pressed with his a∣gue, yet hée forced himselfe to giue order for all thinges that were néedfull. And séeing those Lansquenets of the Prince to flie crosse the village of Blaynuille, néere where∣vnto the Constable had béene taken, hée gallopped to cut of their waie, and to make them make head to a troupe of horsemen, that chased them a good waie off: but they had no order once to staie, they were so afrighted, it being most certaine, that these fiftie yéeres there entered not into France more errant cowardes than they were, although they had the fairest apparaunce in the worlde. So that Dandelot, with whome abode not aboue seauen or eight horses, and who by reason of his age had no other armour than a furred Cloake, could not reioyne with his fellowes, but retired without great impeachment towards Trion, in∣to a place where he reposed and rested himselfe as he could, finding meanes the next daie to get againe to the armie both finelie and fortunatelie. Vpon this the Prince and the Admiral séeing the auant∣gard also to come vppon them, who hadde not yet rallyed moe than about two hundred Frenchmen, of whome one onelie hadde a Launce, praied the Reisters to staie
readie for the recharge. But they being alrie packing a∣way sayd that they must goe to recharge their Pistolles. Moreouer when they saw their footemen both French and Allemans ranne away, & themselues pursuen, they flung away a galloppe, and the French men with them: so that the Prince was constrained to doe so likewise, & was hurt in the hand, & his horse, that had receaued an Harquebusse shot in his legge, had not gone aboue 300. pace, but that he halted downe right, and before he could be remounted O. Anuille was on the backe of him, to whome he yéelded. The Reisters and the French men, hauing crossed a woode cut downe, found a little valley the which they passed, & stayed vpon an high péece of ground in the sight of the Admiral: who had taken his flight more on the right hande, with a number of other a long the side of the same wood, to make head to their enimies, that closed it vpon thother side, and both thone & thother were aboue a good quarter of an houre without other aduauncing, or making in one to thother, wherein a number of Catholickes curious quite to ouer∣throw thenimie, noted a grosse fault committed by S. An∣dre and the Duke of Guyse, assuring that if they had li∣uely folowed their victorie, the Protestants trembling at such fearefull accidents, would neuer haue rallyed together in grosse. But the Admirall, as a wise, resolute, and diligent Capitaine, had done all that he could possible to rallye his horsemen dispersed thorough the whole field, and in great disorder, and finding that he had assembled about 250. hor∣ses French, that had nothing but their swords & pistolles, and about 1000. Reisters, of whome he set thone halfe on his right side, and thother on his left, and being accompani∣ed with the Prince of Portian, Rochfoucaut, and other gen∣tlemen, well deliberated, he resolued to goe yet once more to fight with thenimie, what price so euer if shold cost him, after that he had vsed a few words to the Chiefe men of the Horsemen, that accompanied him, and the Marshall of Hes∣sen, the Truchmen, and certaine Captaines Allemains, that vnderstoode French, for to encourage them the better to the
charge. Although it séemeth to mée a matter néedelesse to vse a∣nie speach to them that haue sufficient assurance in their owne vertue and valour, and to make tryall whereof ye are come: yet whilest we doe stay vntill all our people be rallied, I may well saye vnto you, that vnlesse great enter∣prises were accompanied with great perills and difficul∣ties, the praise could be but small to them that should at∣taine to the honour of them. But as the high desseines for to maintaine the honour of God, and the good of theyr Countrie, can not be executed without infinite bazardes, and paines incredible, so must they also assure them∣selues, that the price and rewarde of so manie extreame labours is not onelie prest and certaine, but also great, when the vertue is great whereof we constantlie poursue the end. This is the reason, why that hearts that would be knowen to be gentlemanly, doe alwayes pourpose and at∣tempt enterprises of great hazard, because that they doe know that héereby they shall gette them eternall honour, and their long trauailes be recognised with immortall re∣nowne. On the contrarie part, those that are of small stomacke, baselie minded, and of a vile cowardise, doe neuer addresse themselues but to things base and easie, as also their name doeth dye as soone as the effect of that they enterprised. Moreouer, as assurance of the will of God is necessarie for to testifie all actions, can we fight more lawfully, or for a thing of so great importaunce, then for the libertie of our conscience, (and doe they not take away the bright light of the worlde, that will take from vs the libertie of our faith) or can wée kéepe warres more iust then this which is of necessitie? Be not our weapons forced, and therefore con∣sequently holy and religious in the handes of them, that haue no other hope to liue, but by the helpe and endeuour of them? In, in, valiant hearts, In, in. It is not the multitude, but the valour of courage, that giueth the vic∣torie.
God fighteth for vs, as he hath done heretofore for so manie small troupes, which you haue séene, and heard of, being well conducted to haue broken those, that were ten times greater then themselues. And otherwise also ye shall mightely enrich your selues as well by the incredible boo∣tie and spoile, as for the great raunsomes, that ye shall get. As touching the rest, ye haue alreadie vanquished the grea∣test part, which are rallied with them, that durst not ad∣uaunce themselues vppon vs after the taking of their Ge∣nerall. Is it likely to be true, that they which haue bene alreadie tamed, and subdued, haue taken force by their fall? and that the victorious haue ben made more vile & worse by their felicitie? March then resolutely to the defaite of the rest, folowing the good houre that hath louingly welcomed you. It is a common saying, he that hath begon well hath halfe done, which is not spoken to make slouthfull or to bring a sléepe him whose first attempts haue bene happie: no but contrarie for to prick him forward still so much the more to the poursuit and perfecting of his desseine. But as it is more dishonor for him that through negligence or lack of courage doth let the satisfaction & contentment to be lost, the which he had almost thoroughly gotten, thē for him that had alwaies bene infortunate at the beginning, in the poursuite, and at the ende of his enterprise: so you must assure your selues, that God dyd not send into your hands the beginning of so renowmed victorie through the strange hardinesse, and not credible valoure of my Lord the Prince, but for to heate and enchafe you to attempt the aduaunce∣ment, and entier gaine of accomplished happinesse. O thrise fortunate, ye that shall retourne vnto your houses triumphing of the victorie, loaden with the spoiles of your enimies, which ye shall bring out of the field, and sée your selues embrased, and swéetely welcomed home by your kinsfolkes, wiues, children, neighbours, and allies, who shall for euer from Father to sonne sing the eternall praises of you, that haue so willniglie expo∣sed your liues for the honour and glorie of God, suretie
of the king, and publick good of your countrie. For although to die be a thing common both to the good and the wicked, whatsoeuer they be, yet death is not honorable, nor worthie of praise in any man, but in those, ye shot at no other marke then the vertuous actions of their life. Goe then my mai∣sters, and shew thenimie by effect, that our courage redou∣bleth in aduersities, making them to know that with the losse of our braue companions, we will reuenge the woun∣ding and taking of our Generall. March then forward gal∣lantly and lustely, and as they that doe fight with heartie hatred, making all ye world sée, that as Germanie & France are two Nations of one originall, so that thone can not bring foorth more resolute souldiours then the other. Thus they being all encouraged, marched directly to the village of Blaineuille, wher the first fight was made. There the Catholickes were in great number ranged in thrée es∣quadrons, manie of whome imagined a while, that the Ad∣mirall and his people séeing they came againe so soone, and specially séeing that they had neuer a lance, were come to yéelde themselues to their mercie: but they soone knew that it was to begin againe the battaile. For although their for∣ces were vtterlie vnequal in number, specially the Reisters on the left side, being slipt away without doing ought, yet the reencounter was very furious and mortall to a great number of gallant men, In so much, yt the Duke of Guyse the better to breake, or to slacke this furious dismarch that the Admirall made vpon him, folowing his first point néere to the Mill against ye village of Maumontell, caused to come with all speed ye French footemen, lead by the young Chunte de Brissac, their Colonel in Piemont, Martigues and other, which yet could not be perceiued because he had set them in battell behinde the horsemen, they being without pike∣men, were 2000. harquebuziers, with the Spaniards, who all shooting incessantly against the Admirall, hurt manie horses, and a number of the Confederates, thorough theyr so hot and so long a showre of harque busse shot. Who yet could not let but that the horsemen of the Catholicke, were
perced lustelie by the Admirall with two hundred horse, and by 600. Reisters in another quarter, and in the end were forced to recoile and giue place to blowes, and they had ben wholie broken if that the Harquebushes had not slacked the course of the horses, and the furie of the Protestants, who hauing now changed their trot into a gallop, & béeing cha∣fed valiantlie to execute the charge, behaued their hands so well, yt of all the horsemen on the side of the Duke of Guise, there remained not with him vppon the place aboue foure score or an hundreth, who in the end went to rallie them∣selues by the helpe of their great bataillon of Frenchmen, who bare all the brunt, for the which it was well cheapned by the Admirall, who turned round about to finde a place of breach and ouerture, whereby he might doe some great mat∣ter, to the losse and euerthrow of the whole bodie of the ar∣mie. But for lacke of lances, and because the Admiral was not followed by all the Frenchmen, nor the Almans, they could neuer pearce them nor do other God, than destroie and endomage many of their troupes. The sight had now endu∣red aboue fiue houres, and hardlie could one discerne the white scarfes which the Admiral and his ware, from the red of their enimies, when he caused his troupes to close toge∣ther, putting ye Reisters that he had left in two esquadrons, and marching in the middest with the French horsemen, and commanding Bouchauanes the Lieuetenant of the prin∣ces Cornet, for to tarrie in the taile with about 50. horses. The Duke of Guise likewise rallied his men, & séeing that the Admirall retired, assaied for to pursue him with all his footemen, as long as their breath wold serue them, and a ve∣rie few horsemen that were left about his person, but they had scarce gone seauen or eight hundred paces, but that the darknesse of the night did take awaie the sight one of ano∣ther. So the Admirall retired a pace with those footemen that were saued, the great artillerie, and all the baggage of the armie, a good league from the place of the Battaile to the village of Neufuille, where hée lodged. You sée howe the Protestantes retyred from the place where they had
attached their enimie, whom they left in the possession ther∣of, for to search, spoile, and burne the dead, and to lift vp at leasure the spoiled confederates. At the same time the Duke of Guise went to lodge in the suburbes of Dreux, a little league from thence: the place of the battaile remaining voide, vnlesse it were of them that were appointed for the effects before said, & a great number of dead men lying héere and there spoiled of all about them, and the Artillerie of the Constable, with foure field péeces of the Princes. Such was the end of the battaile of Dreux, in the which God balancing the victorie as it pleased him, made manie warriours to marke thrée notable occurrances, and verie rare in such feats of armes. The first, that ther was no skir∣mish before the battaile: the second, that both the Generals were taken prisoners: and thirdlie, that they rallied so of∣ten. As touching the dead, the Catholikes sayd, after yt they had buried them, the next daie, that they found them to bée eight or nine thousand. But other said assuredlie, that there were dead on the place not aboue 5000. without accounting the hurt men that died shortlie after, who were no small number. At the reuiew which the Admiral made foure daies after, he found that there remained of the French footmen neere one thousand of about 2500. that had ben there, & neere 900. Almanes, of thrée thousand that should haue béene in their regiments: of whome about 1400. (that had yéelded themselurs prisoners in the chase that we spake of) were sent home into their Countrie. Now of horsemen, to speake the most, he found not missing aboue 140. both of French & Reisters, not comprehending those yt were taken prisoners. So that there died on the Prince his side but about 2200. footmen. But on the Catholikes their part, the abatement of the Suisses was meruailous, of whom 17. Captaines were slaine, their Colonell Freulich being dead before at Paris of a laske. The rest of the men slaine on that side were almost all horsemen, who were hardlie handled by the Reisters as well at the taking of the Constable, as at the last charge: in the which among other, the Marshall of Saint Andre, the
Chieftaine of the auantgard hauing béene taken prisoner, and charged behinde by a Gentleman to get a great raun∣some: Baubigny who had at another time taken at the heart a certaine displeasure done by him, comming vpon him slew him, with a Pistoll shot ouerthwart his head. Many other knights and Lordes were slaine there, as D'Annebault, Dr Gemy with his Guidon, and the Marshall of the Logis, la Brosse, a great fauourite of the Duke of Guise, and a sonne of his. It was a long time an opinion, both during & after the bat∣taile, that the Duke of Guise was slaine. But some had ta∣ken his Esquire from him, who was not much vnlike him in stature, & whom the Duke had mounted on one of his best horses, vpon whom he was slaine, euerie man taking him for his maister. Le Conte of Rochfort, called Damoisel de Comeri, & de Beauuois, & Brichanteau were sore hurt, Beau∣uois died in the end, the rest escaped. Saint Heran was saued by the meanes of one of the Princes Trumpetters, yt was his Countriman, wherefore he was afterward in great dan∣ger to be hanged. Pienne, whom we told you departed from Orleans, fell into the hands of la Loue, an honest & valiant Gentleman, one of his olde friends. Who notwithstanding rehearsing vnto him his fault, wold haue carried him away prisoner, but he could do and speake wel, so assuring him at the last, that he should soone die in his armes, he was so sore hurt, that he let him goe, and Pienne recouered. D'aumalle was hurt, & had one of his shoulder plate thrust out of ioynt, whereof he remained long time hurt. Ausson a gentleman of Gascogne so renowned in the parts of Piemont, yt he had made a Prouerbe of his hardinesse, ran away with the first, euen to Chartes, where he died of an ague, that he tooke for griefe & sorrow: so much can the feare to léese reputation do in a gentlemanly heart. But the death of Frances of Cleues duke of Niuernois, gouernor of Champagne, the heire of the late Frances of Cleues his Father, is most remarkable, of all things that happened in this Battaile. This young Lorde béeing so wonne by Desbordes a Gentleman
of Niuernos, by whome and by his Secretarie called Vige∣naire, he let himselfe be so wholie possessed, that notwith∣standing that he had made profession of the same religion that the Protestants did, and had twice promised the prince to come vnto him and follow him, yet he liked better to fight that daie for the Catholikes, whome he had before follow∣ed. But it happened vpon the pricke of the first charge, that Desbordes himselfe ill handling his Pistoll, wounded the Duke in the thigh thrée fingers belowe the hanch, and to∣wards the knee, so grieuouslie, that there could be no meanes found to saue his life. And being so hurt, hée was carried as well as it could then be, vnto a village, and from thence to Dreux, passing vpō the waie with fiue or six of his men, who carried him néere to Dandelot, who enquiring what he was, and hauing vnderstood that it was the Duke of Ne∣uers wounded to death, would not staie him, but bidde him thinke vpon his faultes and offences. But as for Desbordes hée leauing his maister, did for despaire that he had slaine him, or for some other cause, runne so farre into the thickest of the enimies, that hée left his life in the place. But the poore Lord dyd sore torment himself, but hee was somwhat comforted by Mouie, who onelie of all the Chieftaines of the Prince, had béene taken in the last charge, and hée ha∣uing beene in his youth greatlie loued of the Duke of Ne∣uers, serued him for a comforter, and as a minister, euen vn∣til he died. The principall prisoners besides the Constable, was D'Oraison, De Rochfort, D'Esclauoles, & certain other Gentlemen. On the Princes part were slaine, the Baron of Arpaion, de Saux, de Chandien, de Liencourt, de Ligneris, de la Fredonniere, de la Carliere, de Rougnac de Mazelles, Saint Germier, almost all of them of the Cornet of Mouy, who was taken prisoner in the last charge, hauing ben hurt, and afterward tarrying long on foote in the wood adioyning. Throckmorton ye Ambassador of England, & Fances Perrucel the princes minister, thinking ye all had been lost, saued thē∣selues in ye néere town of Nogeant, wher was the Dewager of Bouillon, the daughter of the great Seneshall, who had
giuen a tast to the Prince the day before. And although they were deliuered prisoners to the Catholickes the next daye, yet Perrucel was afterward sent to the Prince, to whom he serued well for to fortifie him, during the time of his im∣prisonment. Also two other Ministers were sore hurt, but neither of them dyed: they were both gentlemen and bare armes. The one being Minister of Mouy his company, had scarsely made an ende of prayers going to the charge, but that he was stroken to the ground with the blow of a stone that hit him on the reines, and from thence after a thousand strange chaunces, carried to the next village, and afterward to Dreux, and finally to Paris, and was so well thought of among his enimies, without euer being knowen, or con∣strained to doe any thing against his conscience, that in the ende he came againe safe and sound to Orleans. The other being brother of de la Cour de Chire, a learned gentleman of Poitou, had receaued an harquebusse shot in his reines, which carried a peece of his harnesse into his bodie, and the bullet going to the other side euen to the skinne, néere to the nauell, was so well thought of, and holpen the euening after the battaile, that the péece of the harnesse being taken out at the entrie of the wound, and the bullet at the ende, & he being shut vp in the castell of Maintenon, was readie to take horse againe within thrée wéekes. The newes of the battaile was soone brought by the run∣awaies, both to Paris, and to Orleans, both the one and the other reporting that all was lost on their side. The first that gaue the affright to Paris, was Guilaureau d' Orleans, folowed by many other, of whome some were good great ones, who all affirmed the ouerthrow of the battaile, and the taking of the Constable, as true it was, in so much that the partakers of the Catholickes stoode in no great sure state: when Losses ariued, reporting the taking of the Ge∣nerall of the Protestants, and how the Duke of Guyse had recouered all: adding also, that the Admiral was intierly defaited. Vpon the which report there were made at Paris, and in all other places, to whome these newes were writ∣ten
with all diligence, all kinde of ioye, as bonefires, feasts, dauncings, Maskes, accompanied with Processions, & ring∣ing of Bells, with all ioye and mirth On the other side the most speedie to flie, made all things vncertaine at Orleans, but not quite desperate, which helde all the people in sus∣pense vntill the next day being the xx. of the moneth, when certaine newes came with them that brought the Consta∣ble prisoner, to whome they had giuen but a little refresh∣ment on the way after his taking, they making him march without once resting all that night, and the day folowing, vntill he came to Orleans, and was put in the Princes lod∣ging. He was not rescued as he looked for, by 100. light hor∣ses, & eight companies of French men ouer whome Charry commaunded at Chartres, within sight of whom they made him passe a pace. But for to come againe to the two armies, the Duke of Guyse encamped néere Dreux, vsing all gra∣ciositie towards the Prince: who also on his part shewed himselfe nothing astonned, and so they passed the night, ha∣uing supped simply enough. In the morning the Duke who now remained sole Chiefeteine of the armie, hauing caused halfe a score or a dosen péeces of Ordenance to be shot of, for to assemble his people, made all the hurt men to be sent into Dreux, and all the dead that could be found, to be buri∣ed. Also the Ensignes that had bene wonne from the foote∣men of the Prince, were brought vnto him, which he sent afterward to Paris, in signe of victorie, because the field was left vnto him. On the other side, the Admiral being at Neu∣fuille, & hauing but slenderly rested, & giuen order to all that was possible, assembled all the Captains, aswel Frenchmen as Reisters, that he could, vnto whome, for to encourage them to an intiere & assured victorie, he proposed the hope of certaine victorie, if that at the very breake of the daye the next morning, they would charge their enimies, whome he knew were in great feare, hauing lost their two principall Chiefeteines, and their horsemen being for the greatest part slaine, and the rest very much scatered, insomuch, that they should scarcely finde an hundreth horses together, as
he also learned by certaine souldiours prisoners, that had escaped, and came backe to the Campe last night. Where∣vnto the Reisters made aunswere, that his counsell was verie couragious and good, but that it was impossible for them to execute it, many of their horses being hurt, and the other tired, besides that, many of their people were yet dis∣persed, with a good part of their Wagons, the which they would not léese, and that they must néedes mend and re∣paire their pistolles. So by this meanes was that enter∣prise broken of. Yet neuerthelesse they went foorth the next day in battaile araie out of the village, and marched a lit∣le way ouer against the quartier of the Catholickes, where he tarried about an houre, considering the countenaunce of his people, and for to reuoke as manie of his men as he could, that had bene scattered in the wood: and in the ende seeing himselfe out of hope to be followed for to beginne a∣gaine the fight: drew directly to Gallardon, and the next day being the xxi. hauing left by the way one of his great peeces, to wit, a Couluerine, which was mired, but after∣ward waied vp, and carryed away by them of Chartres, he lodged at the village of Arneau, where he was chosen Ge∣nerall of the armie in the absence of the Prince. And from thence into Beausse, and Salogne, and from hence into Nor∣mandie, to méete with the English, winning many townes in those parts. As Guyse tooke Estampes, and was faire for Orleans when he was slaine by Poltrot: wherevpon ensued a peace. ¶ The Battaile of Sainct Gemme in Poitou, fought in Anno. 1570. betweene la Noue a Protestant, and Puygaillard a Catholick. Out of Popelliniere. PVygailliard, who hadde bene sent into Poitou, by the King, with an Armie of about. 4000, men, for to impeach the roades of the Prote∣stants of Rochell, Marans, & other places there∣abouts into Poitou, built a Fort at Luson, where
the ordinarie and vsuall wayes met, for to stop their passa∣ges, and placed therein a great garrison vnder the gouern∣ment of Mascaron, with promise assured, that he would suc∣cour him, if he happened to be beséeged, as in déede he was shortly after by la Noue & Puuiant, with all their forces, which might be foure Cornets, and eleuen Ensignes, with 300 Lansquenets, commaunded by Colonel Hector Reilen, and Frederick Vuis his Ensigne bearer, and thrée péeces of Ordenance, hoping to winne it before that Puygailliard could bring thether his forces that were disperced thorough Niortois and high Poitou. But the Fort was not so soone beséeged, but that Puygaillard being aduertised by Masca∣ron, as well of the desseines, number, and power of the Pro∣testants, as also of their incōmodities, assembled his forces assuring himselfe, that the meane that presented it selfe was more then pregnant, for to shaue la Noue his beard, as ma∣ny gallants gabled. He had nine companies of Ordenan∣ces, and light horse: his owne, those of Malicorne, de Bouile, the gouernour of Nantes, whom his Ensigne Castemer led, & certaine other all French, with two of Italians, one that Iulio Centurio led, the other of Charles Birague, which had Brandy his leuetenant, thrée regiments of footemen, to wit, one of the late Counte de Brissac, whereof Captaine la Rade then absent, was chiefeteine, and the regiment of Strossy, the Colonel general of the French footemen, and that which Magarin an Italian, Sergent Maior, led, all olde souldiors, of the kings garde, consisting of 18. or 20. Ensignes in all. He had other troupes, but that he made such hast, that he might enclose the Protestants betwéene Marans, and Lu∣son, that he had not leasure to assemble them. And the spéede that he vsed in the march was so extréeme, that he made them trauaile on the way two dayes and a night without eating or drinking, but verie little, nor resting but a verie short time at Fontenay, and almost onely so long, as their baggage was in laying vp, being left there that they might march more spéedely and orderly. But before I doe goe any farther, I thinke it expedient to giue you a topographie, and
describe not onelie the place were the battaile was fought, but also the Countrie and the quarters néere aboutes, as well to represent vnto you more plainelie the most me∣morable perticulars of so famous a fight, as also for to make you vnderstand the better that which I haue sayde before of the fort of Luson, and the waies of Poitou. The Catholikes then came from Fontenay straight to Saint Gemme, from whence to Luson is a good halfe league, and the fight was more néere to Saint Gemme: from thence going forth right, there are two tuffes of woode, to whome doe adioyne a great quarter of woode cut downe. Betwéene the two woodes are vines which doe continue and stretch, béeing separated by hedges and great bushes, euen almost to Luson, both on the right and the lefte side, vnlesse it bée in thrée or foure places, where bée certaine plaines laide out for the sowing of Corne: as one comes from Fontenay to Saint Gemme, néere to Nalliers, the waie parteth it selfe into two, the one waie goeth straight into Nalliers, and from thence to Saint Gemme, the other leaues Nalliers on the right hand, and after it hath cut crosse ouer many quarters of vineyards, and many plaine fields, & some marshes, at the last it comes out againe into the great waie of S. Gemme vnto Luson, whereof I will speake vnto you anone: for by reason of it the Protestants did order their battaile other∣wise than else they would haue done. Puygalliard that did not beléeue yt the smal number of Protestants wold present themselues vnto his old bands in a plaine, yet séeing yt they were come forth, deuised how he might force them to a gene∣rall fight, & for that intent, setting forward with his troupes with all spéede towards Saint Gemme, he sent the Itali∣ans and Albanoises for to kéepe the passage of Moreilles for to cut off their waie of returne, and also caused very subtilly a bruite to run therof, that he might bring the Protestants in despaire of returne to Rochel: for they had none other way but yt, except another yt leads frō Marans to Lusō, which was verie ill and bad, by reason of the waters, & the mirie marshes which lie betwéene them, where the horses would
soone be stabled, making by this meanes an estate of the vic∣torie, if ye they durst to present themselues vnto him, or if ye they would retire by Triaise & Charrie, that then both they of the fort of Luson, and also his owne armie would pursue thē in the taile: to the which ends he made his men march with all spéed. And to make you knowe more certainlie all thinges that passed in this occurrence, I will tell you the meanes that he vsed to assemble his troupes, his march on the waie, and his conduct. He hauing appointed the Rende-uos or place where all his troups should méet at Fontenay, he did set them on their waie, & with sixe horses he came thether himself about mid∣dle night of the day before the battaile. When he was come, he caused a bruite to be noised abrode ye he had gotten an hot ague, the which made him to kéep his bed verie sick: & he cau∣sed many to sée him in bed, to the end yt the newes might go the sooner to the eares of the Protestants, and make them therfore carelesse to kéepe themselues vpon their gards, yt so he might more easilie break them by a surprise, rather than by the hazard of an entire battaile. And yt he might not faile in his deuise, he commanded the Maire of Fontenay to send vnto them a Trumpetter, who assuring thē of his sicknesse, might bring him word of the estate of their gards, ye nūber & resolution of their forces, vnder coulour of dealing for ye deli∣uerance of Roussiere, & other prisoners, that they held in S. Gemme. In the meane while his companies by litle & litle ariued at Fontenay, not without great paines, & displeasure both for the length of the waie, & also the trouble yt the dark∣nes of the night brought them, yt were to passe in such long marches, & because yt no man should be suffered to stay in the town for to bait, or to rest thēselues, or to do any other thing than leaue there their baggage: the Maire caused a number of pipes of wine, & certaine bread to be set forth in ye stréets for the souldiers to take as they passed along. In sum, yt he might spéed & assure his enterprise, he would giue them no more time for to tarrie, than leasure for to make awaie that distribution. But the companies came thether so by péece∣mele,
so wearie & so tired with the long iourney, yt he could not let them, but that the souldiers woulde néedes lodge there, some to rest both their bodie & spirit, that sleeped as they marched, some for to bait & get them new strength, that they might be better able to accomplish the commandement of their Generall, who being forced to please the souldiers, & iudging that he should be able to get them from their rest at the least foure houres before night, commanded ye Maire & certaine of the inhabitants, who might happelie make 15. horses, for to beat ye waies, & to learne newes, & to bring him certaine word of ye enimie, of whō he had heard no certaintie 3. daies before: assuring them that he would be at Mozeuil (two leagues from Saint Gemme) with all his armie by Sun set. The scouts gaue in as far as (heuretes, a league of Saint Gemme, & sent some to tell him, that Puuiant and the greatest part of the Poiteuins were at Saint Gemme, doubting nothing of him. But because the souldiers mar∣ched not resolutelie, he was when he receiued this newes but halfe a league frō Fontenay, which is distant 4. leagues from S. Gemme, & as much from Luson) ranging his troups in battaile néere to Longesue. In like manner Puuiant had sent forth a number of horse for to discouer the plaine, & to haue certaine aduise of the desseines of Puigaillard, of whose fained sicknesse he had ben aduertised by the Trumpetter, yt I told you of before, whom Puuiant (suspecting by his speech & countenance, yt he was come to espie the estate of the Pro∣testants) had beaten so long, vntill he discouered all that had bene done, and thervpon he sent his people into the plaine, vpon whose discouerie the Maire of Fontenay retired him∣selfe. Vpon these things done by the one and the other side, Phygaillard made his armie march crosse ouer the fields, to the intent to get betweene Luson and Saint Gemme, mea∣ning to ouerthrow and defait the Poiteuins first, who were almost all the horsemen of the Protestants, lead by Puui∣ant, Saint Esme, and others, and that done, to giue vpon the fst that were at Luson. But his people marched so slow∣lie, that the  ssme vpon their before they were
at Mozeuil, the darknesse whereof hauing made them léese the sight and light of the waies, where they should go: with in short time the greatest part of them scattered, béeing dis∣banded héere and there whether the vncertaintie of the paths lead them, yea, those that knew the waie best could not tell which waie to take. At that instant the Ensignes and Cor∣nets, found themselues so forsaken of their scattered souldi∣ers, and there happened thereby such confusion among thē, that the formost auantcourers found themselues néere to them that were formost, to make the taile. But on the other side the courers of the Protestants béeing returned to Saint Gemme, to make reporte of the Catholike beaters of the waies that they had discouered, were the occasion that cer∣taine Gentlemen (that well knew the waies of the Coun∣trie) mounted on horsebacke, to bring more certaine aduice, and they had not rode long, but that they heard the greate noise of the scattered troupes, that hallowed and called one vnto another, for to bée set into the waie: and riding yet a little farther, to be more throughlie informed of all that was done, they lighted at the last vpon seauen or eight of the eni∣mies, some on foote, & some on horsebacke, marching as men assured, because they were perswaded that about 500. of their auantcourers were before them, which was the cause, that when they were asked whether goe you? They answered amiablie, Amy, Amy, Friend, Friend: marching still without putting themselues in defence, estéeming them for their owne people. But being astonied by thrée Pistoll shot that was giuen them for a good night, they refused not to mount behinde the Protestants, who carried them to Pu∣uiant, to whom they declared their intent and purpose, & the néere approch of the troups. Presentlie the alarme runneth throughout the Borough of Saint Gemme: the Trum∣pets (all the men hauing vppon the aduertisements of the first scoutes armed themselues and saddled their horses) and being readie to march, néeded to do no more but sound to the standard & set forward. For at that instant they dislod∣ged, for to aduertise la Noue that abode at Luson, of all that
we haue folde you before, and to exhibite into consultation of the counsail, what was to be resolued vpon in this mat∣ter. The which la Noue dyd also soone doe, as well for to sound the hearts of his, as also not to misse, but with the opinion of them all, if that fortune should make their first desse in fall out ill. The opinions were diuers, and the assembly was diui∣ded into two aduises, as it doth ordinarely happē in a mat∣ter of such importance, namely among ye Chiefeteines, that would manage their affaires considerately, and rather by the common aduice, then their own particular motion. The chiefe Captaines being assembled, la Noue did declare vnto them, the enterprise that they had made against the Fort, and the occasion thereof, that now it was come to this point that they could not longer abide before the place, but that they must either fight, or else retire them selues. As tou∣ching the first, the armie of the enimie is great, well furni∣shed both for men, and equipage, and a third mo in number then the Protestants. But that which is more to be con∣sidered in this occurrence is, that although we doe obtaine the victorie, yet we shall thereby not aduaunce at all the af∣faires of the publicke, and the totall cause, if that fortune fall out ill to our great armie, vnder the conduct of the Ad∣mirall, which euery day is in doings with the Marshall of Cosse, and vppon the point to darreyne battaile with the kings forces: for then shall this victorie of ours, be rather lamentable, then profitable. For as it can not be obtained but with great effusion of bloud, and the death of manie braue Captaines and valiant souldiours: so that if the ar∣mie of the Princes be broken, those that shall dye in this fight now at hand, will so lessen our forces, that we shall not be able to maintaine Rochell against the Catholickes, who may soone repaire and leuie an other armie: because they doe swarme in people vnder the auctoritie that they haue stolen from the king. But, séeing that he remitted the resolution of the one and the other vnto the pluralitie of voices, those that maintained the fight, carried it away in
number. Besides the dishonor (sayde they) that the armie shall gette by such a retraite, it can not be done but with an other greater losse of men, then shall be spent in the bat∣taile: namely, séeing that the Catholickes march vpon them with so great spéede. Adde therevnto, that the Italians (as they thought) had sette foorth for to cut of the way for none other consideration, but to impeach them of all wayes of retires. Wherevpon Puuiant, tooke the word out of their mouthes, and of a particular motion sayd aloud: So that wée doe goe resolutely to the charge, the victorie is certainly ours, for they are all so werie, so couered ouer with dust, by reason of the long iourney that they haue made, and besides they are so charged with sléepe, that they will not be able to sustaine the first charge of our people. As touching the rest, God, who is as great, as strong, and as well willed to∣wards his, as euer he was, hath prouided for farre greater inconueniences than those that can befall to vs, if our great armie hap to be broken. If in all occasions that are presen∣ted to men, man shew himselfe noble and couragious, God will supply, the rest, and furnish vp the imperfection of man, of whome he demaunds no more, but his deuoire. Let vs then doe that lieth in vs, & he that hath guided vs herevnto for to maintaine his cause, will of his almightie power, ac∣complish that, which our feeble power lacketh. The auctori∣tie and no lesse the good fortune, that accustometh to fauour such a Chiefeteine, was of so great force with the rest of that troupe that la Noue had no sooner asked them all whether they were resolued to fight, but that their long acclamatiōs, & laughing countenances, assured him of the good will that they had to doe it. In so much that hauing admonished them not discharge before they were néere their enimie, to pursue their poinct furiously, & to recharge without cease, as long as they should sée any number of their enimies in troupe, for feare, least they should rallie after they were broken: gaue commaundement to euery Captaine for to goe & order and encourage his troupes, and that the Ministers should presently preach vnto euerie companie, praying God to send
them an happie successe in this battaile, so daungerous as euerie man is more religious when he sées him selfe pressed néere to any ill, but if all things laught vpon him at plea∣sure, then our nature is to forget him quickly, to whom we were so deuout whē we feared ye bastonnades of a mischief néere at hand. But I will leaue them at their prayers, and preparing of themselues to the reencounter, the which they held assured, and bring Puigaillard forward, who staying for nothing lesse then for feare of raising of Puuiant and his companions out of their beddes, hasted amaine. But he was scarse at Cheurettes, but that the companies of the Kings gard, who being the spéediest, had made a stand for a certeine tyme, staying for the rest, gaue soone enough in∣to the barries of Sainct Gemme, (for the Protestants had shutte vppe the wayes of Sainct Gemme, and Luson) which they gotte, and passed without resistaunce, and ran thorough the borough, in the houses whereof, they founde the beddes yet hot, wherewithall they finding themselues grieued, did whilest they stayed for the armie, some of them lay them downe to sléepe, other fell to filling of their bel∣lies, and some ranne to hasten Puigaillard, and to carrie him the newes of taking of Sainct Gemme: whereinto he entred before the pricke of the daye, crying in all quar∣ters to his Souldiours to come out of the houses, to putte them in order, and range of Battaile, for to folow the Protestants, who, some sayde, were fledde to Marans, and from thence to passe to Beraud. In the ende, séeing that the most part of the companies were out of the Bo∣rough, he made them turne headde directly to Luson, wher he hoped to be reuenged of the occasion that had hadde slip∣ped out of his hande. There fiftie souldiours Auantcourers (of the best moū∣ted of the Kings garde) whome he had sent before the ar∣mie, sent him woord, that they had discouered the enimie, who was prettie néere, and in battaile. These were a nūber of Gentlemen of the countrie, who going out of Lu∣son for to deuaunce the Armie, hadde giuen in as farre
as the tuffes of wood (which were before marked vnto you) being determined to trie the assurance and resolution of the Catholickes by some notable skirmish, the which yet passed lightly enough, as well on the one side as the other. Vpon this certaine of the Catholicke armie being returning, re∣encountred x. or twelue valets of the Protestants, that led Roussiere prisoner, whome they recouered, and sent him to Puygaillard, who was so ioyfull thereof, that this incoura∣ged him more to hasten his companies for to folow the luck of so good a beginning. And vpon this, making all his peo∣ple to assemble vnder their Ensignes, he placed in the front one of the companies of the kings gard to serue for Enfans perdus, to skirmish with the formost of the Protestants, vnder the fauour of the hedges, and bushes, that I haue de∣scribed vnto you before. As the footemen ranged themselues to march in battaile, the horsemen came péece by péece, and man after man, to be at the medley: whome he deuided in∣to two hedges within a fielde néere to the vale of Erant, directly lying betwéene Saint Gemme and Luson. But af∣terward séeing that from that place he discouered not his enimie enough, he made them passe on the left hand of the way, for to enter into a Viniard, which stoode almost ouer∣right directly against that valley, where the footemen hadde encamped themselues. But by reason of the diches that they must needes passe, (with whome I haue alreadie tolde you, the most part of the way is enclosed, to kéepe those that passe by, that they come not into the Vines) they were for∣ced to make their horses leape ouer the dike, one after an other, and in like order afterward to put themselues in bat∣taile as they ariued one after an other in a row, at the place appointed, the which the horsemen of the Protestants, who were alreadie in battaile marked: and séeing the Catho∣lickes as it were to rise out of the groūd before them, would not giue leasure to aboue sixe or seuen score horses to take range of battaile, and to put themselues in estate of defēce, but that they charged them before they were all assembled, and in aray for the reencounter: while in the meane time
the footemen of the Catholikes, ranged themselues also by little and little vnder their Ensignes towards the vally E∣raut, where I doe praie you leaue them all to take range of battaile, that you may sée the disposition that in the meane time, the Protestants gaue to all their companies for to su∣staine the assaile of Puygaillard, or according to occasion to charge to their aduantage. The dawning of the daie appro∣ching, beganne to chase awaie the thicke darknesse of the night, when the scoutes of Puuiant aduertised la Noue, that Puygaillard not willing to rest at Saint Gemme, made his footemen to march forward a great pace on the lefte hand, and his horsemen directlie to Luson, and that he heard the noise of the formost that marched in battaile without the Borough: which was the occasion that he set Puuiant in the front with fortie horses, and before him la Roch with fiftéene or sixtéene horsemen, and yet farther before Saint Estienne with thirtie helmet men and certaine Harquebu∣ziers, leauing at his backe twentie horsemen, that Bruncli∣ere lead. Afterward he ordered the rest of the armie at lea∣sure. The footmen whereof were quicklie ranged in bat∣taile, vnder the charge of their Colonell Payet, at the foure wayes of the Mill Chapitre, flanked by the troupe of Sou∣lize, to whose side la Noue sent those horsemen that he him∣selfe woulde leade. Héere was the grosse of the armie which la Noue caused to encampe in that place, as well to supplie the necessitie of succour that Puuiant might craue as for to couer and hide the plaie, and to kéepe the besieged stronglie in breath, to the end that hée might take from them the knowledge of the armie that Puygaillard hadde brought, and consequentlie to impeach them from issuing out vppon the taile of the Protestants, whilest they fought with other Catholikes in front (as Hambal dyd a Tesin a∣gainst P. Scipio, whome hée put to flight, by reason that he had sent certaine Numidians to charge him in the taile du∣ring the battaile.) And without doubt all things séemed to laugh on Puygaillard, if that fortune had not ouerthwarted
the course of his desseines, for he should neuer haue put him selfe betwéene two enimies, although the Protestants were few. Sée what hapned to the Fidenates, that had put them∣selues betwéene Mamercus Aemilius the Dictator, & Quin∣tius his Lieuetenant, for they were wholie broken. Lyke∣wise Aluian, the Generall of the Pisans was vnhappie, because hée béeing assailed at Saint Vincent by Bentiuo∣gli the Generall of the Florentines on the Front, on the side, and behinde, sawe all his whole armie defaited. These troupes were not so soone set in araie, but that the Enfans Perdus aduanced in two bands (without the bodie of the foot men) in number of 100. or 120. harquebuziers lead by the Captaines, Normand, & la Garde, had the signall to charge, almost at the verie same time that Puuiant and Saint Esti∣enne were at the charge. Now sée the forme of the battaile. Puuiant who lead the greatest part of the forces of Poitou, had distributed all his troupes in forme of an hedge, by reason of the small number of his men. Moreouer, his troupes did not follow one another straight, but as it were bias, to the ende that all his troupes might bée séene within the waie of Fonte∣nay, fearing that Puygaillard woulde cause some of his troupes to march along that side to giue them the flan∣quado. In the meane time Puygaillard set his men in a∣raie, and made the more hast because it was tolde him that the Protestants came to séeke him. I haue tolde you be∣fore, that betwixt Saint Gemme and Luson, there is no∣thing but Vines enclosed with hedges and thicke bushes, and certaine large plots of plaine ground, which are seue∣red from the waie, the which is straight and forth right, and of a good largenesse, and flanked on both sides with like defences. Hauing set one front of Enfans perdus behinde those hedges, and in certaine ditches and chanells that are there, and namelie behinde the bushes of certaine vines, separa∣ted one from another by a plaine field, the which is leuell
inough: hée made one regiment to aduance into the valley Eraut, and set the rest of the footemen more on the left hand of Saint Gemme, hée would haue flanked them with hors∣men, but he had no leasure to doe it, as I will tell you. You haue séene the desseines, the number, the iourney, the con∣duct, and disposition of the two armies for to fight: now it resteth for you to beholde what was the charge, the medlie, the pursuite, and the flight of the lesse happie, and how the victorious followed their good houre. I sent Saint Estienne (otherwise called young Violle-uigne) followed by their hel∣met men, to the front of the Protestants armie. As soone as he sawe the Catholikes range themselues in battaile one af∣ter another in a rowe, he aduertised la Noue: who rightlie presuming, that if Puigaillard had time and leasure to order all his troupes, that he might carie awaie the honour of this battaile, gaue the word of S. Estienne, and commanded him to go resolutelie to the charge, & to follow his point, as long as he sawe himselfe accompanied by anie of his fellowes. At the same instant he ordeined Puuiant to sustaine him, if hée sawe him weake, and to second his good houre if he sawe the first charge to beare it selfe as he hoped: then he abode himself lower, with all the rest for to succour al occurrances. At that verie present, Saint Estienne dismarched in view of all the Catholikes, who would not set forward when they were so far of, but suffered them to come within fiftie paces of them, yea, & till they saw them change their pace to a trot, that they might take a gallop for to charge them: the 25. or 30. helmet men of Malicornes companie of men of armes, whome D' Heruilliers lead, disbanded themselues out of the troupe, and hasting their pace, receiued them after such a fashion, that if the other that mooued not, had seconded them as cou∣ragiouslie, they had gotten more honour that daie. But the confederates, who as assailants went resolutely to the charge, turning otherwise to their aduauntage, the small account that the Catholikes made to remoue themselues, pearced so lustelie, and with such pursuite all that they reencountered, that after the death and wounding of some, the companie
of D' Heruilliers found themselues not sufficient to sustaints them. But being returned to the bodie of the horsemen, who now setting forth made a good number of them, without the remonstrances of Puigaillard, (who tooke all paine for to encourage and to aduance them to the defait of them, that for the shocke receiued of D' Heruilliers, were halfe scatte∣red and readie to turne face if they were liuelie pursued) to march: When the two troupes of Puuiant pre∣sented themselues on the lefte side, as though they woulde haue charged them on that side. But séeing that the Catho∣likes came not forward at all like men resolute to fight: as soone as they hadde receiued those that rested whole of the Cornet of Saint Estienne, they turned vpon the right hand and charged them so furiouslie, that not one of them had the heart to sustaine them, but all tourned their faces thether from whence they came. The worst was, that they béeing hotlie pursued, had no pittie, and lesse feare to breake the companies of their footemen, that came at their backes, bee∣ing scarce yet all in battaile araie, thorugh whom they pas∣sed so spéedelie, that the footemen felt their harme as soone as they had discouered their flight. In summe, their so so∣daine departure out of the field of the battaile, did so discou∣rage all the rest of the horsemen, by reason of the assurance that they had in the formost, and farthest aduaunced, with whome the Generall thought to arme the front of his horse∣men, that all the wordes, threates, and remonstraunces of Puygaillard, who thought to staie them for to rallie them for the defence, if not of their honour, alreadie halfe lost, yet at the least of the footemen, whome they lefte to the bout∣cherie, profited him nothing, but was at last constrained himselfe, béeing lefte alone, and so neere his enimies, to fol∣lowe that long and large waie which the best mounted had traced vnto him. Puuiant and many other pursued some so néere, that those which were worse mounted were lesse happie, and first vrged to yéelde their life. Insomuch that the most parte béeing (as of the Ordinaunces, passing well mounted, the poursuite
profitted them nothing, and they retired themselues with∣in Fontenay, which was with foure leagues, where Pu∣igaillard ariued about noone, and yet the retrait could not be neere enough for them, that thought themselues ouer hotly pursued. King Antigonus séeing himselfe mocked for flying away, with the fewe that were left him: I fled not (aun∣swered he) but I pursued the profit that I sawe behinde mée. So the Catholickes ranne to Fontenay, for to finde there a neadeful commodie to saue their liues. I haue tould you alreadie that the field wherein the horsemen of the Ca∣tholickes began to range themselues, had but one entrie, flanked on both sides with Vines, fensed with high bushes, betweene whome they must passe to charge the Catholicks, these bushes couered a great number of haquebuziers, who shot at Saint Estienne: but they could not staye aboue thrée or foure, but the rest of the horses furnished their carriere, and carryed their men (some of whome were hurte) euen to the charge. Granzay (the youngest of the Bogifiere Courterne le Re, and la Roche du Gue, tarryed there. Chas∣selandiere the Ensigne of Saint Estienne, and fiue or sixe other, although they were hurt, yet went forward, but being susteined by Malicornes men, they were so hurt, that they could liue no longer then the next day. Now touching the Enfans perdus, they marched so cou∣ragiously one against the other, as though they would not fight but onely with their swords, wherefore they appro∣ched so neere together, that all of them cryed away har∣quebuzades. Then the Captaines with their swords and targets, & the souldiours recharged as spéedely, as the prac∣tise of warres would permit them, sending fresh succours where néede required, eming as though they would haue continued that play a long time. But the Catholickes ha∣uing heard the piteous crye of them, whome their horsemen flying, had broken, dyd not so soone know that the Prote∣stants folowed their victorie (the which they pereeued by the long cryes and ioyfull acclamations of their enimies) but that they began to tremble and shrinke backe in the
meane time that their companions dyd their deuoire to de∣fend themselues vnder the auantage of the hedges & bushes that couered them. But yet in the ende, séeing the Prote∣stants approch and stil come vpon them thorough the vines, they forsooke their bushes, for to cast themselues into the plaine, where the rest of their fellowes had rallied with other, and encouraged themselues for a certaine time for to susteine their enimies. But when the Protestants were seased of the bushes, behinde whome they shot at their ease without euer missing that great regiment, they with many horsemen, crying victorie, cast themselues among them, as on a lost bodie, for to ouerthrow them intierely: so that they were in ye ende constrained some to flye, other to put them∣selues to the mercie of the sword, or the pitie of the victo∣rious. And to say the trueth, if it had not bene for la Noue, very few had escaped the furie of the Protestant, namelie, of the Lansquenet who came to the defait. These souldiers doing the worst they could vppon these olde hands, for to shew that they would be reuenged of the ill happe, that had fell vpon them at Moncoutour, spake nothing else but desti∣cot Chelme Moncoutour, villaine doest thou not remem∣ber Moncoutour, vnto those that being disarmed, could not defend themselues, much lesse aunswere to their outragious speach. And except their Colonell, who contenting him∣selfe with pillage, had appeased his wrath, they were all de∣termined not to returne into their Countrie, but well re∣uenged for their companions, that had bene so well feasted. This battaile made many Catholickes and Protestants note and marke, as afterward some of them dyd often con∣fesse, that as footemen are at this day furnished and conduc∣ted, they must not fight in the plaine against horsemen, vn∣lesse they be flanked or sustained by horsemen: séeing that the very Suisses who kéepe their rankes best, and rest most assured to rallie, in case they be broken, wil no more march, vnlesse they be flanked, with French Harquebuziers and horsemen, namely against the French horsemen. Sée what happened to P. Valerius and L. Aemilius, a∣gainst
the Vosces and Latines, who had ouerthrowen their footemen, if their horsemen had not come to their succour. And what of our blacke bands before Naples, who being incited by to much hardinesse, as they which had passed wel before, were so ill entreated by the Neapolitan horsemen, because they had no horsemen to susteine them, that their braue enterprise was bpoken: as were the Suisses by the Protestants at the battaile of Dreux, and by king Frances at the battaile of Saint Brigide néere Marignan, vpon the Milanese. The footemen in generall, were endebted and bound to la Noue and Soubize, who caused the boucherie of the Frenchmen to cease, they yéelding to haue their liues saued, except one Captaine Ensigne Colonell, who preferring death before dishonor, the which he thought he should de∣serue by suruiuing so many valiant souldiours slaine, wold not abandon one so honorable a péece of silke, but with the losse of his life. And doubtlesse, the suretie and sauing of an Ensigne is of such consequence, that any good souldiour will neuer omit to doe his deuoire to kéepe it for any daū∣ger that shall be presented him: in so much that he will resolue to fight vnder the shadow of his Ensigne, euen to the last breath of his lyfe. Sixtéene Ensignes, and two Cornettes were taken, and about 500. slaine, and 700. or 800. prisoners sent away with a white rodde in their hand. Many Captains died there, as Marguarin & other, but all ei∣ther Liuetenants or Ensignebearers: for ther were not one but la Hiliere, a Captaine in chiefe of a companie of the Re∣giment Reall. Of horsemen lesse then thirtie dyed, for they saued themselues by flight. Vpon a sodaine the victorious presented their Ensignes before the Fort, which yéelded, the foure Ensignes, whereof made vp the number of two and twentie, brought to Rochel. And because that Mascaron complained of la Noue, for ye contrarie to the promise of assu∣red compositiō, he had certain baggage taken frō him, which had ben permitted him to carry away, la Noue tooke 400. crowns of a prisoner, which he caused to be caried to him, to
content him, and to maintaine his promise. But the carier being slaine at the taking of the Minister de Chire at Mo∣zeuill, as I will tell you in an other place, the money was not deliuered vnto him. But to returne backe againe to our battaile: the dismissed souldiours retired, attributing the occasion of all the ill hap vnto the ouer hot hast of Pui∣gallard, and for that it was accompanied as some say, with a contemning of the Protestants. In déede he little practi∣sed the example of Paulus Aemylius, the Consull and Ge∣nerall of the Romans, who trauailing with an armie tho∣rough Macedonie, against Perseus the king of the Mace∣dons, had marched almost all one whole day a great pace, for to ioyne with the enimie, and to come to fight the which was presented vnto him. But although his people made countenance of accepting of the good offerre, & cred of them∣selues that he should leade them to the enimie: yet neuer the lesse because be saw thē wery, by reason they had mar∣ched preatie long with their bagage on their back, all bathed in sweat, lilling their tongue half a foot out of their mouth, for extreeme thirst, that tormented them, their eyes, mou∣thes and faces full of dust, and burnt vp, and halfe roasted with the scorching heate of midday, he would not present them to the battaile, nor bring them in sight of a fresh and aranged enimie, seeing that for lack of strength many rested and stayed themselues vppon their bucklers and iauelins, sticked in the ground, for to hold them vp: but contrarie to the opinion of many, commaunded the formost bands to lay downe their burdens, and baggage that they carryed, and measure out the front of a Romane campe. (They were not so delicate as our bands be, for the meanest of whome a dosen of baggage carriers, and so many gouiats or drud∣ges after them be not sufficient) And when Publicus Na∣sica, one of the best qualited gentlemen in the army, tould him, that it were better to pursue the enimie, who vnto that day had alwaies fledde before them, then to leaue him one night frée for the flie longer, and to renew the paine of the Romans in séeking him farther: he aunswered modestlie
without shewing of himselfe anie whit altered for that bold aduertisement: I haue had héeretofore the minde that you haue now Nasica, and you will one daie haue that which I haue now. Many & diuerse accidents of warre haue taught mée to know the time when to fight, and when to refuse. But séeing that leasure is denied mée to saie anie more, con∣tent your selfe for this time with the authoritie of an olde Captaine: neuer contemne your enimie more than you haue had good occasion. One ought also to consider the commodi∣tie of the place, the circumstance of time, the qualitie of the furniture, the number of men of warre, the forme, the man∣ner of the fight, the good heart and hardinesse of his men, the obedience of his souldiers, the authoritie and braue reputa∣tion of the Generall, which both serue oftentimes to bring to a good end an exploit wel conceiued. But so it is, that al∣waies fortune doth saie and sing aloud, and cléere, that all is hers, and she doth plaie in enterprises of warre as fréelie as the fish doth in the great and wide Ocean. But of all other the olde bands that serued Puigaillard, as the best footemen of this age, did take verie impatientlie to bée spoiled of their weapons. What (said one) after that I haue done notable seruice to my king for the space of fifteene yéeres together, shal I suffer such dishonour? And shal I after twentie yeres, and I after thirtie, and I after fortie, sayd another, beare the scorne of a souldier disgraded? Good fellowe, for Gods sake leaue me (sayde they) but my harquebusse, but my pike, but my sword, take all euen to my shirt, that the face of his ma∣iestie may not sée me in the habite of a gouiat and drudge. But the Souldiers victorious growing in despite, because they could not take from them their liues for the counter∣maund of their Generall, stopped their eares against such praters. The which one of the Captaines, an Ensigne Co∣lonell perceiuing, for to shew in what honour wee ought to holde the Armies and degrees that haue béen given vs, and also what difference there is betweene a chiefe of marke, and a simple Souldier, loued better to die with honour, couered and wrapped in his Ensigne, than to
drinke of such shame. So before these braue chiefe died, hée patientlie sawe the purple of his bloud die the white Taffe∣tas of his Ensigne Crimson. I doe remember me of the en∣signe Colonell of Caesar, that bare the Eagle Imperiall in the ciuile warres. This Romane Captaine knowing what shame it is to leaue the Ensigne to bée wonne by the eni∣mie, when he sawe that he was neere to his end, did so much wt his companions, that it was saued and brought vnto the handes of his Generall. I must néedes also recite the nota∣ble example of the Counte de Charny, that bare the Banner of France in that so famous battaile of Malpertuis, néere Poitiers, which king Iohn lost against Edward the Prince of Wales, and the English men. This gentle Frenchman loued better to die in the field with the soueraigne Banner of France in his hande, stroken thorough with a thousand blowes, than to liue with the reproch to haue fled from the Englishmen as farre as Poitiers, as two partes of the ar∣mie did the twelfth of September, Anno. 1356. But the raunsome of so many prisoners was not intollerable, but moderated for the pittie and compassion, that they had of so many braue warriours, who yet layd all the falt of their foule daie on the conduct of the armie. But that I maye omit nothing of my deuoire, Puygaillard had great reasons for the iustifications of his dooings. First, the ennie that he bare him at the charge, saying that hée was of too small an house to commaund so many seigniours, was the cause that hée was forsaken, by not onelie two partes of the men of armes that were appointed him, but also of many Ensignes of footemen, and namelie of all the Captaines in chiefe of those bandes that remained. I will not speake of the Romanes, many of whose ar∣mies were ouerthrowen by the hatred borne to their Gene∣ralls, no more then I wil of the Counte de Galeaz despigh∣ted, because that his brother Galeas Saint Seuerin was pre∣ferred before him in the estate of Generall of the armie a∣gainst the French. I wil also passe ouer in silence how néed∣full it is that a Generall be loued of those that follow him:
and will not recount vnto you how Persy (by reason of the authoritie that he had with the souldiers) made Monpensier léese many faire enterprises at the conquest of the kingdome of Naples. Some men onelie wished héere, that the Gene∣rall and his souldiers had done as Liuiano and his armie did, who hauing trauailed his armie through foule & déepe waies and full of mire, and foulie soused with continuall raine, and tired with marching daie and night: yet when they should haue rested themselues, and béeing at the place appointed therefore, he spake vnto them so effectuallie, assu∣ring them of the victorie, and the greate spoile of Ruiglio, that they quite forgot all their long iourneyes passed, & be∣hauing themselues as they ought, got no lesse honour, than they did riches by their spoiled enimies. But the enuie, that namelie the Poiteuins bare Puygaillard, ouerthrew the hap∣pie course of his faire desseines. So ended the battaile, the which began in the verie breake of the daie, although that the mist of the thicke cloudes woulde not at the beginning thereof suffer the armies to enteruiew one another at ease. And it may bée, that if the Protestants had discoured so great a masse of men, that they had chosen the retraite for the fight, through the meanes of such fogges, that gaue them the true meane for to surprise and breake the enimie. After this battaile, the Protestants in those partes wonne Fontenay, Marans, Brouage, and the Isle of Santogne, and besieged the Citie of Saintes, when a generall peace was proclaimed. The battaile at Chieuraine in Henault, fought betweene Don Federike, sonne to the Duke of Alua, and the Lord Ienlis, a Frenchman, in Anno. 1572. out of Popelliniere. THe Comte Lodouick of Nassau, hauing for∣tunatlie surprised the towne of Mouns in Henault, by the aide of certaine French for∣ce lead by the L. Ienlis: within short time after r back Ienlis himself into France, so,
respects. First to aduertise the French king (who sée∣med highlie to fauour these desseines of Lodouicke, and the reuolt of the low Countries from the obedience of the Spa∣niard) of the successe of their enterprise. What order they had giuen to the estate of the cause, of the meanes that they had to aduaunce their fortune farther, of the stirres and re∣uolts in Holand and Zeland, of the fauour that they had re∣ceiued out of England, Scotland, and Germanie, and aboue all, of the great leauie that the Prince of Orenge made in Germanie, and of the hope of their spéedie ariuall: that it would please his maiestie to pursue so braue a beginning, or at the least, to suffer men to bée leauied in France, to bée sent into Flanders, to ioyne with the Prince and the Al∣manes, against the Duke that prepared an armie to take the field. But if the king refused so to doe, then to solicite the Princes of Bearn and Condey, and the Admirall for to send as many souldiers as they could. Ienlis promised him to do what was possible, & did for his owne perticular assure him, that he would emploie all the meanes he could to leauie for∣ces, and woulde leade them himselfe into the place appoin∣ted. Hée went to the Court, and aduertised the king and his Counsell of all that I rehearsed before. The which did diuerslie mooue their mindes, according to the diuersitie of their fauours and factions. Afterward hauing receiued a good answere of the king, and a promission to leauie men, & assurance of the Admirall, that hée had alredy sent forth his commissions into all parts of France, for to leuie companies both of footmen and horsmen, & had appointed them to méete all together within one daies iourney of Paris, where by that time he hoped to haue his owne companie of men of armes, to conduct all these forces himselfe into the lowe Countries: hée rode into Picardie, where, vppon the bruite of the conquest of Flanders by the king, and of the great and rich booties and spoiles that they looked for there, hée had within few dayes leauied thrée or foure thousand footmen, & 200. men of armes, with two companies of harquebuziers on horsebacke.
The Admirall, that had tould Ienlis, that he should goe finde out the Prince, and serue him for the auantgard, wil∣led that Beauieu the Ensigne of his companie of men of armes, should take thirtie of his companie, and as for the rest he should carie them that he could get without anie re∣gard had of what religion they were. The Baron of Renty had one Regiment of nine Ensignes of foote men, Ieumel∣les of eight, Berenguaruille of sixe, Ianissac was appointed for to conduct the Auantcoureurs. The seuenth of Iuly they began to march with a thousand insolences, and misorders committed on the paisants, and namely by the footemen. As soone as Counte Lodouick vnderstood of their dismarch, hée sent Ienlis word that he should take the way by Cambresis, and goe to ioyne with the armie of the Prince his brother, as well for to assist him to passe ouer the Mase, the which the garrisons of the countrie being assembled dyd empeach, as also to auoide the hasard of being broken by the troupes, of the Dukes sonne (who was Generall of the armie that then beséeged Mouns) which he might happelie send to as∣saile him. Moreouer, he could doe him no seruice at Mouns, for he had no such number of men as were sufficient to re∣moue the seage: and therefore his troupes (séeing he lacked no menne with in the towne) could serue him to no other turne, then to eate vp his victualls, which they would soone doe, and he should be constrained in the ende, to giue vp the towne for famine. But Ienlis returned aunswere, that he feared not the enimie, and that after he had bene at Mouns, and séene his olde companions, he might passe further as should be thought best. Vpon this the troupes marched stil so carelesly, and so taking their ease in the farme houses and small villages, as though they had held themselues assured, that the enimie had not bene within an hundreth leagues of them: and that which was worse, they had not any sure guide, not well instructed what way they should take to be farre from the enimie. In fine, they being come néere to Bossu, one league and an halfe from Mouns, they sent forth an hundreth horse to make discouerie. The Regiment of the
Baron of Renty, marched formost of the footemen, Iuinelle followed next, and so the rest. Ienlis, le Ringraue, Ianissac, & others, being in the taile, thinking that the enimie would assaile thē there, but they after felt ye discouerie before them, which they neuer once thought of. As the countrie hath many seueralls, and is full of hedges and bushes (which en∣duced Ienlis to think he should preuaile because he was strōg in footemen) the scoutes aduertised that they had séene cer∣taine horsemen within a wood, which caused the Baron of Renty to choose out certaine hundrethes of his men for En∣fans perdus, and seperate them for to serue at the heade of his battallon, looking for the charge. But as soone as the protestant horsemen that had discouered them, sawe that the horsemen that came out of the wood into the plaine, dyd neuer make an ende, and that an number of harquebuziers were auaunced to draw them to the skirmish, they were so estonnied, that they could not retire themselues but a gal∣loppe. This was on the xvii. of Iuly. The horsemen of the Duke, who were of the ordenances of the countrie com∣maunded by Noircarmes, and others, seing these felowes retire so hotly, tooke courage to pursue them, and namely, séeing that their hundreth Mosquetaires Spaniards, had alreadie attached fight with the head of Renty his Regi∣ment, who being feared with the flight of their horsemen, and the comming vpon them of so great forces, faire & wel ranne away: whom all the whole regiment not long after followed, ouer the bellies of whome the discouerers had pas∣sed. Then the rest being dismaied with the flight, and disor∣der of so many men, were not long, but they also disban∣ded. But three thousand paisants, whome they had so tor∣mented, and that folowed them, crying to God for vengeāce, receaued them with ill courtesie, for besides those that they striped into their shirts, there were slaine there aboue 1200. Renty, the master of the Campe, assuring himselfe vpon the strength of his horse, slue aboue twenty pasants before he dyed. The Ringraue was slaine, Ienlis, lanissac, and the Ba∣ron of Renty yéelded, and were sent awaye prisoners to
Antwerpe or Tourney, and aboue 600. other into diuers prisons, of whome there were aboue 60. gentlemen. That night Beauieu ariued with seuen or eight at the Abbay of Epinleu, adioyning to the walles of Mouns, and kept by the Protestants, where he gaue such cognisance and markes of himselfe, that Payet let him in. And the next day 100. har∣quebuziers entred into Mouns. Ienlis dyed shortly after in prison at Antwerpe. And the Prince of Orang, not being of sufficient force to remoue the séege of Mouns, Lodouick yelded it on honorable conditions. ¶ The Battaile of Barrow, fought betweene Moun∣sieur de Boisot the admiral of flissinghen, & Iulian de Romero, Campe maister of the Tierce of Sici∣cile, the second day of Ianuarie, An. 1574. Out of Cornelio. FLissingen, the Kaye of the low Ctrie, standing at the mouth of the riuer of Scheld, th unneth by Ant∣werpe, & a great part of Holand (as we tould you in ye last battaile,) being reuolted from ye Spaniard, & for∣ces repayring vnto Flissing out of Englād, Scotlād, France & Germanie, & the low countries, they became so mightie, & namely, by sea, that they streightly beséeged Middlebourg, their neighbour, the chiefe citie of the Isle of Walachren, and their fléete was so mightie, cōmonly called by the name of Vribuiters, that they excéeded the number of 150. saile and had in An. 1572. discomfited the fléete of the Duke of Medi∣na Celi, consisting of xxv. Saile, but most Merchants, of Spaine, Portugall, and Italie, setting vpon them vpon a sodayne, who knew nothing of this reuolt, and tooke twelue of their shippes with a prise of aboue 600000. Crownes, whereof 200000. was in readie coyne. This dyd set the Prince of Orang, the head of the Pro∣testants (opprobiously called Geux) so on slote, that as I said, he did in a maner take al traficke frō Antwerpe, & had brought the towne of Middelbourg into extreme necessitie
of all necessaries: to relieue the which lacke, (being a mat∣ter of so great consequence, as the cutting of all trafick and victualles by Sea from Antwarpe,) Lewes Requesenes, the great Commendador of Castilia, who lately succéeded the Duke of Alua, in the gouerment of the low Countries, thought he might not neglect without his perpetuall re∣proch, & contempt of his name, power, and person, for euer, if at his first comming he should léese a place of that momēt. Wherefore séeing that he could not victuall Middelbourg, vnlesse he did defaite the strong fléete that laye before it: he determined to assemble and to gather together into one, all his dispersed nauall forces. To effect the which desseine he commaunded Sanchio Dauila the Castellane of Antwerp, to saile with certaine great shippes from Antwerpe, downe the Hont, towards Flissing, and not farre from the point of Tergoes, to expect the comming of Iulian de Romero, the Campe maister of the Tierce of Sicile, who should set forth from Bergen op Soome downe the Scheld, with a nauie of xxx. great Hoies and small shippes, verie well appointed, in whome he had embarqued besides Flemings & Wallons, tenne bandes of Spaniards: so that both fleetes méeting together about the point of Tergoes, might with ioyned for∣ces passe thorough to Middelbourg, and encoūter the Prin∣ces fléete, if they would assay to stop their passage. Sanchio Dauila, was so sharpe sette on this iourney, that he would needes wilfully launch forth both against winde and tide, thorough the which rash part, it came to passe, that one of his shippes striking vpon the flattes, was lost within the sight of the Citie of Antwerp, and an other néere to Roiner-s wald in Zeland, yet he being nothing dismayed for this vn∣luckie losse, went forward with his iourney, and lay at an∣ther not farre from Flissing, staying there as he was com∣maunded, for Romero: who also had an vnluckie abode∣ment at the beginning. For when the Comendador came downe to Bergen to the fléete, and they according to their maner would welcome him with a peale of ordenance: the barrelles of Gunpouder that were in one of the shippes
caught on fire, and tare the shippe and the men therein into péeces, and yet better was the beginning than the ending. For the Prince of Orenge hauing some intelligence of the intent of the enimie (as hard it is to finde a sailer a Catho∣like) commaunded Monsieur de Boisot, the Admirall of Flissingen to spéede him with all the forces of his Fléete (the which some report to be an hundreth great hoies, and Flie∣botes) (leauing the great ships still before Middelburg, spoi∣led of their men and munition, for a vaine skarcrowe to Dauila.) And such in déede was the diligence of Boisot, that Romero had scarce weied vp anker, when he presented him battaile in the sight of the Comendador. The two Admi∣ralls shippes, of whome the one had two hundred, the other an 180. men, encountered the one the other verie fiercelie: se that the Spaniards had boorded the Admirall of Flissengen, and had gotten as farre as the mast, when they were vali∣antlie driuen out a gaine by the Flissingers, and namelie, through the succour of a Flie bote, that timelie laide Rome∣ro aboord on the other side, and Iulian was forced to saue his life by swimming, after he had séene foure of his shippes drowned and ten taken, and the rest flying fast towardes Bergen, but yet the Flissingers tooke foure in ye chase. They report that almost a ridiculous déede of a boie of Soutlant, a village néere Flissing, much hasted and helped the victorie. Fortune shewing that her force and ficklenesse is séene in nothing more, than in vniuersal conflicts and battailes. This boie, whilest all mens heads, eyes, and handes were busied belowe with fierce fight, stole of the flagge of the Admirall of Spaine, and wrapping it about his middle, slidde downe therewithall into the Admirall of Flissing: and then holding it vp, cried, victorie, victorie, not to the small terrour and dis∣couragement of the Spaniardes, it béeing thus séene on a sodaine. When Sanchio Dauila heard of this ouerthrowe, hée wayed vp anker, and hasted him to Antwerpe for feare of a foile. Héerevpon the valiant Mandragon surrende∣red the towne of Middlebourg, whereby the Protestants became Lordes of all Zeland, yea, and of the Sea also, the
which they doe reteine still to this daie: and euer since they first tooke Flissingen, fortune hath fauoured them on the wa∣ter. As not many moneths before, the Duke of Alua com∣maunded a Fléete to bée rigged at Amstelredam, and to be conducted by the Comte Bossu, to encounter the Nauie of North Holand: the which ye Earle did, rather to accomplish the commaundement of his gouernour, than of his owne good will, because hée knew right well the strength of his enimie, the which hée coulde in no measure match: yet be∣cause hee would not séeme to be a coward, and gréene liue∣red, he with nine or ten shippes assailed aboue thirtie of his enimies. The battaile was passing well fought on both parties, as well at the first with the great Ordenance, as afterward with small shot, push of the pike, and sword and target. And at the first the victorie séemed to encline to Bossu, but at the last the North Holanders, being fortefied by a new supplie of ships, ye timely ariued carried awaie ye victorie. For while parte of them had enuironed the Admirall of the enimies, casting down vpon thē incessantlie frō their tops vnslacked Lime, in such sorte, that they coulde not tell which waie to turne them to saue themselues from the furie thereof: their fellowes had so lustelie assailed them on the other side, that they within were constrained to yéeld vpon composition, although they had before béene of opinion to haue put fire to their pouder, and haue destroied themselues, fearing that they shoulde finde no mercie with those of North Holand. The which the other ships séeing, hoised vp all their sailes, and hasted amaine towards Amstelredam, the which they all recouered, except the shippe of Captaine Vesthen, the which was sunke with Canon shot, & the Admirall a great shippe called the Inquisition, wherein was found greate ri∣ches, and was taken with the Comte Bossu, many Captaines, and carried with great triumph and ioy to Horne.
The battaile of Mockerheid fought in Gelderland, between Lewes Earle of Nassau, and Sanchio Dauila, in the Easter weeke, Anno. 1574. Out of Stratius. THE March following this discomfiture of the Spaniards at Barrow, the Comte Lo∣douicke of Nassau, accompanied with his brother Henrie, and Christopher, one of the sonnes of Federike the Paulsgraue of the Rhin, came downe towards Brabant with an armie of about eight thousand men, leauied in Germa∣nie, hoping according to promise, to haue had Mastretch, Antwerpe, Valencenes, and Gaunt, deliuered vnto him. But the Comendador hauing intelligence of the approch of these troupes, commaunded Sanchio Dauila to dismarch, with the forces that then besieged Leiden, and to hasten towardes Mastritch, for to let the passage of Lewes ouer the Meuse. The which hée happelie did, béeing ariued at Mastritch the fourth of March, a little before the Comte could come the∣ther. Wherevpon Lodouicke wrote vnto his Brother the Prince of Orenge, to méete him the next daie at a place be∣tweene the Rhin, and the Meuse, called Herwerd, with his forces, shippes, barkes, and boates, for to bée readie to helpe him to passe ouer the Meuse. And although the Prince liked nothing of this aduertisement, because it was impossible for him within so short time to send downe to that place all necessaries for that desseine, yet hée went with his arme as farre as Gouicque, néere Bommel, often saying these wise wordes: Although I woulde bee gladde to see my Brother héere, yet I would to God hée were with his armie an hun∣dred leagues hence: for the Prince did consider that he could not come without extreame daunger, as at the last the ende shewed. As soone as Sanchio was come to Mastritch, hee sent forth certaine horsemen to suruey his enimies armie, and to bring him word what number they were, the which they did, finding the Earle mustering his men about
a few miles from Masricht, which made him abandon his first resolution that he had to bid them battaile out of hand, because they did dailie increase, séeing that he found himself farre too weake: yet the eight of March he laide an ambush of 200. men, who slew certaine good souldiers of their eni∣mies, and in such sort he kept his enimie continuallie occu∣pied with alarmes, and skirmishes, vntill such time as Co∣lonell Mondragon ariued with a new supplie, the which Lodouicke vnderstanding, retired a little, and withdrewe his armie to the towne of Walkenbourg, where the 18. of March, Sanchio Dauila vsing a stratageme, flue aboue 500. of his enimies. Wherevppon they retired wholie into the towne, fearing that their armie that consisted almost of all fresh water souldiers, although they were moe in number, yet would bee broken by the kings armie, who were olde souldiers, and farre better experimented in exploites of warres, and namelie in supprises, embusses, and camisa∣does. And when Lodouicke sawe that by reason of the re∣sistance that was made against him, it was impossible for him to come vnto his brother, nor to passe ouer the Meuse in that quarter, he made semblance as though he would re∣turne backe againe into Germanie, and to that effect remo∣ued his campe. But Sanchio Dauila doubting that he wold passe the riuer lower, because a long time he heard no newes of him, caused his armie to dismarch (the which with the regiment of Mondragon was 4000. or 5000. men) and as he marched a long the riuer side to kéepe the passage, he vn∣derstood of treason within the towne of Nieumegen, and how that those within would yéeld vnto Comte Lodouick, that he might passe ouer there. Wherefore to preuent that enterprise, he incontinentlie thrust a garison into the town, and continuallie followed his enimie, vntill such time as he was aduertised that the Earle woulde fortefie himselfe not far frō a small village called Moken, & two leagues from the kings campe, by the riuers side. The Earle had chosen this place, because he sawe that his purpose of taking Nieu∣megen was discouered, and also that hée might enter into
Flandets vpon the first occasion that should be presented vn∣to him. Betwéene his campe and his enimies, there was a riuer without a bridge, which kept the Catholiks from com∣ming vnto him. But Sanchio Dauila to bring his iourney to an end, and that he might léese no time, marched to Graue, a towne in the confines of Brabant, where he caused a great bridge to bée made with all possible spéede, of many Botes and Barkes, by the which he passed the riuer in the sight of the Earle, and encamped himselfe in his enimies quarter. When the Earle sawe this, he remoued his campe to∣wards night néerer to Moken, not being minded to fight, and stronglie fortefied his campe. To whom Dauila gaue many alarmes that night, fearing least they would steale awaie priuelie in the darke. The next morning both armies stoode aranged in araie of battaile, and the Trumpets called to the encounter. Then Sanchio to léese no time, caused a certaine number of harquebuziers, with 100. pikes, in the manner of an esquadron, to back them, for to assaile the eni∣mies their trenches: al the rest of the armie standing to look what the enimie their horsemen would doe. This esqua∣dron gaue in lustelie on the enimie, who also receiued them couragioussie, but were at the length broken, and their tren∣ches wonne vpon them: many of the Earles footemen, cry∣ing out, monie, monie, and refusing to fight for lacke of pay, Lodouicke being rather chafed than affrighted with this vnlooked for and sodaine flight, and trecherie of his footmen, couragiouslie charged the enimie (whom this good happe at the beginning had made hot) with his horsemen, who also after many hadde solde their liues déerelie, were in the end forced to giue place to the force of their enimie, and to saue themselues by flight. But the thrée noble men, Christopher, Lewes, and Hen∣rie, refusing to saue their liues with shame, honourablie ended their daies in the battaile. When the Spaniardes shoulde haue prosecuted the good fortune of this battayle, they fell to mutenie for their wages, and two thousand of them forsaking their Ensignes and Captaines, hased to
Antwerpe, for to extort from the wretched citizens 35. mo∣nethes pay for themselues, and their fellowes. And also the kings fléete that lay in the Hauen, being affrighted with this fray, got them farther from the towne, wher they were sodainly assailed by the Flissingers, and all either taken or sunke. So that the Spaniards hadde not a shippe of seruice left them in the low countries, and in that predicament doe continue euen to this day. ¶ The Battaile of Giblou in Brabant, fought be∣twene Don Iohn de Austria, and Mounsieur de Gugny, Generall of the armie of the States in the absence of the Comte de Lalaing. In An. Do. 1578. the last of Ianuarie. DON Iohn de Austria, Gouernour of the low Countries, not long after he had sent out of the countrie all the forreyne forces, and the States of the Countries fell so at two pieces, that he for feare of being sup∣prised, couertlie vnder an other colour, withdrew himselfe out of Brabant, and fortunately tho∣rough the practise of the Comte Barlemont, and his valiant sonnes, (who almost onely of the nobilitie fauoured him) supprised the Castell of Namur, a place of great consequēce for the recept of forraine forces and entrance into Brabant. After he had furnished this towne and castell with all ne∣cessaries, he went into the Duchie of Luxenburg, (the which onely prouince continued in his obedience) there to expect men and money, from the King (who still fauored him) and also other aides. The Comte Barlemont leuied a regiment for him in Loraine, and the Comte Mondraquert an other in Luxembourg, also xix. companies were sent him out of the Countie of Bourgogne, and Charles Manfelt sonne to Peter Comte Mansfelt, and gouernour of Luxembourg,
brought him 7000. Frenchmen, & also the dismissed Spa∣mards, who were not yet gone out of Italie accompanied and encreased with certaine Italian troupes, leuied and ledde by the Prince of Parma, Octauio Gonzaga, and other, were returned: that he hadde now about 16000. footemen, and 2000. horsemen. With the which power he marched towards Namur, for to make head against the great armie of the States, that lay not farre from Namur, winning, wasting and harrying all euen to the gates of the towne. And it was Don Iohns good happe to enter into Namur with 78. men, the verie same night that the armie of the States (whether because their cheife Captaines were retyred to Bruxelles, or by reason of the colde wea∣ther, (for it was Ianuarie, or because the souldiours de∣maunded their paye, or for all three causes) began to re∣moue their Campe, to trusse vp their baggage, to retire their artillerie, and to doe other such things, as in warres doe giue suspition of feare. Don Iohn meruailing there∣at, issued out of the towne with the Prince of Parma, and Octauian Gonzaga, the Generall of the horsemen, for to view the Campe of the enimie, who came, as we told you before, euen to the gates of the Towne, and all thrée went vp vpon a little hill, from whence they might well dis∣cerne all that passed, and then returning into the towne, sent for the Maire, and the counsaile of the towne, for to consult what was best to be done. In the ende it was determined, that the Colonell of the companies of Bour∣gogne called the manne of Gibrao, should issue out at one gate with one thousand Harquebuziers of his Regiment, and the Counte Reux, with as many at an other, for to skirmish with the enimies on two sides, not onely to the entent to assaie their forces, but also to take some of them prisoners, of whome they might learne what the enimie was minded to doe. When the Souldiours were thus issued out, the eni∣mie receaued them in suche sorte, that Don Iohns men were forced to retyre ncontinentlie, with some litle losse,
but yet neuer the lesse with two prisoners, the which was it that they dyd desire: by whome they knew that the ar∣mie was conducted and gouerned, by the Lord de Gugny, in the absence of the Conte Lalaing, & that they had charge to retire themselues that night vnto the towne of Giblou néere Louuaine, and that for this effect the artillerie had al∣readie begunne to march, and they dyd also particularly de∣clare many other things, that were enquired of them. When Don Iohn vnderstoode this, he caused the men of armes that were there abouts, to be assembled, and at the breake of daye he found there eight Coronets of horsemen, Italians and Spaniards together, with whome Don Iohn issued out of the towne, with intent onely to take a view of his enimies, or to giue them some skirmish, as they had done the day before. The enimie that saw him conte with this troupe of sixe hūdreth men, stayed, although they were in march, and shewed them their faces, they aranged theyr troupes, and placed a good part of their best souldiours, who were Frenchmen, in an embush betwéene trées that grew there. Then afterward they did set the horsemen on the left hand of their esquadron, and the front was all of Mosque∣tayres, in such sort that the arriereward came to make the auantgard, and with it ioyned the battaile, because that the auantgard hauing begun to march forward galantly, could not come in good time. The Lord of Gugny shewed great valoure and industrie, in setting in array such an Armie within so short a time, séeing he dyd dispose it so well, as though he had had long time to haue done it, and in such sort, as if it should haue encountred with a great armie. He composed his rereward, which was first to be charged, (reenforced as wel with mosquetaires, as with six thousand horse) of thrée companies of braue & valiant French foote∣men, and xxiiii. companies of Walons, who were two re∣giments, the one gouerned by the Conte de Eghmont, and the other by the Conte de la March, otherwise called ye Lord of Lumay. He had in the battaile xiii. companies of English men and Scottes, and two other regiments of Flemings,
the Colonels, of whom were the Counte de Bossu, and the Lord of Champagnie. In the auantgard were the regiments of the Lord Montignie, and the Lord de Heze, both which regiments were either of them of ten or twelue companies, and euerie companie had 150. men. They had also besides many other Gentlemen that serued on their owne char∣ges, in hope of aduancement. The kings campe séeing this good diligence, entertained them still by little and little, ma∣king a stand, as they that had neither forces, nor intent to ioyne in battaile with their enimies, vntill such time as a Captaine of a companie of Italian horsemen, called Mutio, aduanced himselfe a little forward with his companie, bée∣ing followed of some few souldiers, and so betwéene the one and the other, there beganne a skirmish, when the kings men had so valiantlie charged, and ventured so farre, that it séemed verie hard and dangerous for them to returne backe and to retire, by reason that the Frenchmen and the mos∣quetaires shewed by their first furie great resistaunce, and gaue an honourable charge on the Spaniards, but with lit∣tle damage: the Prince of Parma séeing this, buckled down his helmet, and taking his shéelde, made a shew as though hée would encounter them, hauing lefte the footemen at a corner of the horsemen, who were seauen hundreth men, and nine Ensignes of the Ordinaunces, euerie Esigne of fiftie men of arms, and an hundreth and fiftie archers, whom wee doe call light horse. The intent of Don Iohn was nothing lesse than to fight, considering as wée haue tolde you, the small number that hée had, but hée made semblance that hée would doe it, stay∣ing for mo of his people (for his whole armie followed) that hée might retire safelie. But when the Prince of Parma that was formost in the field, with a valiant knight called the Lord of Billy, otherwise Colonell Robles, aduanuced to encounte and charge his enimies, they siedde at the first recounter without anie resistance, and flying, they ouer∣ran d dested the esquadron of their owne foot, which were in the waie that they shoulde passe. And
meane time the people of Don Iohn being come in, follow∣ed the horsemen that fled, and perfected the defait of the es∣quadron, and slue still following the victorie, vntill they draue them into Giblow. Besides those that were slaine, there were taken prisoners about foure hundred souldiours, and of the principall Captaines aboue thirtie, among whom was the Lord of Gugny, who was taken by the verie same souldiour, that at another time had taken him in the towne of Antwerpe They gained 70. Ensignes of footemen, and many Cornets of horsemen, and all the monie that they had to paie the souldiours, good store of munition, and sixe peeces of artillerie. After this, Don Iohn diuided his armie into two partes, and sent the one vnder the conduct of Signeur de Hierges to Bouinges, whether the Frenchmen and cer∣taine Almanes were fied, & he himself went with the other vnto Giblou, whether the noblest and best of his enimies their armie were retired. Who considering the present fu∣rie, and the small hope that they had of succour, yeelded them selues to the mercie of Don Iohn, who chose amongst them twelue of the best to remaine prisoners, whome he sent to the Castle of Namur, for to exchange for other, if occasion re∣quired, the rest he sent awaie with a sticke in their hande, without anie weapon vnto the estates, and yet neuerthelesse amiablie receiued them that would turne to the kings ser∣nice. The Lord Hierges did as much to Bouinges, for after that the artillerie had made a brech, those within neuer stai∣ed assault, but yéelded the next daie in the morning, with the same conditions that they of Giblou did, & were vsed in like sort. There were slaine (saith Dinoth) in this iourney on the states their side 10000. and but ten men on the victours part. After this ourthrow, Don Iohn tooke Louaine, Tile∣mont, Arescot, Sichenen, Diest, Spie, Niuelle, Philippe ville, and the whole Dutchie of Limburg.
The battaile of Couwenstein dike neere Antwerpe, fought betweene Alexander Prince of Parma, and Monsieur de Haultan the Admirall of Flissing, and Monsieur Saint Aldegonde, the 26. of May, in Anno. 1581. WHen the Prince of Parma had taken awaie the vse of the riuer of Scheld from the Citie of Antwerp, by building of a bridge ouer the riuer. The Citizens and their confederates of Holand and Zeland attempted to cut out Couwenstein dike, and to bring the course of the riuer to Antwerpe that waie. To the which intent the 26. daie of Maie, the Antwerpians hauing sent that euening twelue ships against the bridge (hoping that through the vi∣olent force of them, it might be broken) did that night about thrée of the clocke send another fléese against Couwenstein dike, the which the enimie kept. And the like was done on the other side by the Holanders, who laie at anker vnder Lillou. For first sending certain ships set on fire, which shuld be carried against the bridge, they incontinentlie after assai∣led the dike with about an hundreth ships full of olde soul∣diours: and such a furious storme of great shot, and so great a showee of small was sent out of those shippes, vpon both sides of the dike, that the kings men were not able anie lon∣ger to defend themselues on the plaine and open dike, but hauing lost many of their fellowes, were forced to forsake their wards, and to retire themselues to safer places. In the meane time the states went a shore, landing their men, and hauing brought with them sackes full of earth, wooll, & other stuffe, did with incredible celeritie raise them vp fortificati∣ons, so that they were defenced with a Rampire and trench as high as their neckes. And winning still farther and far∣ther through the helpe of their shippes, they hadde gotten more than halfe the dike, the which they dyd cutte tho∣rough in cleauen places. They defended their
Nations & wards for the space of sixe houres together, with∣in which time they had slaine many of the valiantest Cap∣taines and souldiers on the kings side: for they sent so great force and store of shot against the kings men, that they not onelie tare all their bulwarkes and fortifications, but also rent almost all their artillerie, and made them of no vse. Now when that the Spanish state was almost desperate, and the Prince standing vp to the wast in water, did driue his souldiours against the enimie with his sword drawen: a Spaniard called Peter de Padillia, a souldier of the Tierce of Peter de Paz, taking courage againe, did with eight of his fellowes first renue the charge on the States, but hée was slaine in the attempt, and his right hand cut off by the enimie. In the meane time the kings men gathering toge∣ther their forces, dyd verie resolutelie with all their power assayle the munition that the Antwerpians had made, and bent their thrée péeces of artillerie (which onelie were lefte them whole) against it. When they first planted their bat∣terie, there was a verie thicke mist, which by little and lit∣tle vanished awaie, so that the Maister of the Ordinaunce might sée the enimies campe a farre of, and more certainlie leuell his péeces. The kings souldiours dyd twice assault this fortification, and were twice repelled, but at the third assault, they sighting with irresistable valour, wanne the trench, and slue all that were within it, and the rest hast∣ing to their shippes, were parte slaine, parte taken, and part drowned. The valour of the Almanes did appeare singular in this fight, of whose prowesse almost all men had now despaired. Those that were in the shippes, disdaining to giue place, fought so long, that the tide lefte them, and laide their ships drie, so that they could not get them from the Flats. By this meanes thrée and thirtie ships were taken, a great num∣ber of men slaine, and mightie store of artillerie, and other warlike furniture taken. There was found in the shippes many dead bodies of them that had béene slaine with the Ordenance that was shot from the dike.
The kings men vnderstood by the prisoners that two thou∣sand of Antwerpians were slaine in fight, and many also drowned, and that among other shippes there was one ta∣ken, that carried the sonnes of very rich Merchants, but all the men in her were slaine. Moreouer, not a few of the Ho∣landers & Zelanders were slaine, among whome are num∣bred the Lord of Haultan, the gouernour of Flissing, two Colonells of Scottes, and English, (but in trueth there was no English Colonel slaine there) xiiii. other Captains, and xxix. Gentlemen. On the kings side were found missing about 400. or as other report 300. Italians and Spani∣ards: among whome were diuers renowmed Captaines & Colonells, who were most of them hurt and slaine from the Holand shippes. For whilest the Antwerpians fought on the Dike a front the enimie: the Holanders that kept themselues in their shippes plagued with their artillerie, the sides of their enimies. This fight endured from thrée of the clocke in the morning, vntill about two in the after∣noone, and was fatall to Antwerpe, for after that time no forces were assembled, nor enterprise practised to relieue the Citie, which yéelded in August folowing. ¶ The Battaile of Pescherias, fought by sea, vpon the coast of Grece, betweene the Nauie of the Chri∣stian league, vnder the conduct of Don Iohn de Austria, and the Turkish fleete, gouerned be Ha∣ly Bassa, the viii. of Octobar, 1572. Out of Peter Contarini. WHen Selini the second, the great Turke, had false∣ly on a sodaine broken the firme league of his Father, with the Venetians, and inuaded with a mightie Armie, the Ilande of Cyptus, app∣teining vnto the Venetians: they entred into a  offensiue, and defensiue, against all the enimies of the ¦stian name, with Philip, the king of Spaine, a  Quintus, the Bishop of Rome: and Don Iohn de
base brother vnto the king of Spaine, was ordained Gene∣rall, and high Admirall of the Nauie, & armie of the league, with whome were ioyned in Commission the high Admi∣rall and Generall of the Venetians and of the Pope, with decrée that to bée executed, which should be allowed ano ap∣proued of them all thrée, or else of anie two of them. For the execution of this league, Don Iohn departed from Spaine with fortie seauen Gallies, and after he had béene at Genoa and Naples about necessaries touching men, muni∣tion, & victuals, he ariued at Messina in Sicile, where Mark Antonie de Colonna, and Sebastian Veneri, the Admiralls of the Pope and Venetians, had staied for him with their Nauies, and also the foure Gallies of the great maister of Malta. There were come thether also the Ambassadours of Venice, for to signifie vnto the Admiralles of the consede∣rates, how the Turkish Nauie did so much hurt on the coast of Slauonie, and also to bée instant on them for spéedie suc∣cour. The next daie after when the thrée Admiralls or Ge∣neralles met, accompanied and assisted with other men of account, for to consult what was best to bée done: Vene∣ri tolde them, that of a certaintie the Fleete of Candie would also bee there verie shortlie. But when almost all men doubted that it woulde be somewhat late before they would come, and the time of the yéere was well spent (for it was the 22. of August) and because on the other side it séemed that certaine determination could be made without them: some propounded this deuise, and some that. But amongst the rest, Ascania de Cornia exhibited his opinion conceiued in writing to this purport. Because you haue thought good (soueraigne Generall) that I shoulde declare mine opinion in writing, what I thinke ought to be done in these weigh∣tie affaires, with the power that we haue now, I wil so dee, and will beginne with the rehearsall of our for∣ces. Wee haue now as I doe thinke, 146. Gallies furnished, sixe great Gallies or Galeares, twentie ships for but then,
and so many Foistes, and we doe looke for 60. gallies out of Candy, of whome yet we haue not heard these many daies. Againe I doe suppose that the Turkes haue two hundreth & fiftie gallies furnished, & be in Sclauonia, where they haue an other armie on the land, of fortie or fiftie thousand men. If this be so (soueraigne Generall) I doe not thinke, that our forces are so great, that we may be so bold as to seeke out the enimie, and to fight with him without apparant perill. For (we are to much inferiour, specially because it is likely that their nauie is passing wel furnished both with rowers and souldiours: for seeing that they haue taken three of our galleies, and to many of our shippes for bur∣deine, & haue conquered all the sea coast, they might if they wanted ought, repaire it easely, and also dayely take into their nauie souldiours, out of their armie on the land. If you can passe ouer hence vnto Brindisi (in Naples) without daunger, (the which I doe leaue to be adiudged by these excellent men, and most skilfull in Sea affaires) I would thinke it very well so to doe, for hereby at the east, the Venetians (whose affaires no doubt, are administred with great feare) would be brought into some hope: then also séeing we should be so néere vnto our enimies, perhaps God would giue some occasion for vs to haue a faire hand vpon them. But if it be to be feared least the enimie doe méete vs by the waye: I doe not see what we should doe, but staye for the Galleies of Candy, or at the least, for some certaine newes of them. For if we dyd knew that they would not come at all (which God forbidde) my ad∣nise should be to furnish and arme passing well, as great a number of our Gallies as wée are able, and so to rigge them, that if they lighted on the enimies, they might al∣so escape from them by flight, and then I would giue charge to the rest of the Galleyes to followe also after to Brindisi, with the Shippes for burdeine: for with these gal∣lies, who happely wilbe thrée score or foure score in nūber, we shold be able to signifie many things vnto ye Sclauoniās,
and put the whole prouince, which is infested both by sea & land, in heart and hope: whereas other waies certes we can send them no succour. Moreouer, if we were there, we should be readie vpon euery occasion to annoy the enimie, & therewithall also all the whole world should vnderstand, that you (soueraigne Generall) were most readie to serue God, and the holy league, in all things that may be dene. But yet I would that all that I haue saide, may be so in∣terpreted, that I had rather willingly subscribe vnto them that can iudge better of this matter: and almightie God bring to passe that we may vse his counsells and helpe, vn∣to an happie ende. In the meane time there hadde come vnto the Turkish nauie (which was at Saseno) about the ende of August, Me∣hemet Bey, and the Treasorer, who brought newes that Fa∣magosta the chiefe citie and kaye of Cyprus, was taken, & that good fidings gaue them a stomacke to attempt some new enterprise. But anone after when two small gallies of the espies, had returned, and brought newes that they had chased a shippe of the Christians aboue Crotone, but could not take her, but that yet they vnderstoode that the nauie of the confederates being mette together, was in rigging at Messina, they leauing Saseno, sailed towards the Leuant or East. The case thus standing, Mark Quirini, and Canali, ari∣ued at Messina the second of September, with 62. Galleys of Candy, and were receued with great and generall ioye, for they had ben looked for with great longing, neither could our Captaines resolue vpon any certaintie without them. Also the day before came the Marques of Sancta Cruz, and Iohn Andrew Doria, with twelue Galleys, and anon after also 40. Neapolitane shippes for burdeine, and thirtie Gal∣leyes, with whome also all the Galleys of the Palermo had ioyned themselues. But the enimies sailed from Saseno to Butrinto, & there taking in 500. horsemen, carryed them to Corfu, that they  wast and made the Iland. But there the ordenance
of the Castle brake and drowned thrée of their gallies, and much other harme did also the souldiours of the garison doe them, for our men did take many of the enimies prisoners, and among other, Baffa an Apostata Christian, a man of great authoritie with the Emperour of the Turkes: which made them, that afterward they did not much infest the sub∣urbes that laie about the Castell. Wherefore when the eni∣mies had indomaged the Isle as much as they coulde, they shipping againe their horses, departed thence the eleauenth of September. And when they were come to Parga, there ariued a messenger from the great Turke, who signified vnto Ah, the Admirall of the Nauie, that séeing Famagosta was taken, hée shoulde vse the fruite of the victorie: that is, hée shoulde take all the Isles néere, hée should spare no man, yea, and should also assaile farther, and destroie the Christi∣an fléete (as though that were in his power to doe.) Wher∣fore when hée had receiued his message, hée departed from thence the sixt of September, and sailed towards ye Leuant into the gulfe of Patras, that after hée had now furnished his Fléete with Bisket and other necessaries, hée might sette forth to assaile the Christians. But our men reioycing that all their forces were ioyned in one, beganne to deliberate what was to bée done. And nowe all Christendome was mightelie feared with the prosperous successes of the ty∣rant, and the deuastation of the Venetian Empire, and do∣minions. Neither had the Venetians now anie more hope than in the good will of God, and this same Nauie of the confederates at Messina. Now there were in this fléete, for the Pope twelue gal∣lies, for the king of Spaine foure score and one, with twen∣tie ships for burthen, for the Signoria of Venice one hun∣dred and eight gallies, sixe great gallies, that they call Gali∣ares, with a good number of Fragats, and other small ship∣ping. In this fléete besides rowers and other necessarie per∣sons in a fléete, were 20000. Souldiours of Italians, Spa∣niardes, and Germanes, and besides these, a good indiffe∣rent greate many of them that serued without paie (other
authors doe make the number of them two thousand. So then Don Iohn de Austria, the Admirall Generall of the league, Marke Antonie de Colonna, the high Admiral of the Popes power, Sebastian Veneri, the Admirall of the Vene∣tian forces, consulted what was best for them to attempt: there were also present at this consultation the great Co∣mendador of the knights of Malta, Ascanio de Cornia, An∣drew Doria, Augustine Barbarigo, Marke Quirino, Anto∣nio Canali, the Secretarie of the Venetians, with ye Scribe, and sometime also the Princes of Vrbine and Parma, Paulo Iordano Orsino, the Marques de Sant Cruz, & other: among whom, Ascanius de Cornia, after he had heard many mens opinions, spake to this effect. For two or thrée causes onelie, (most Honourable) may a Generall with honour refraine to ioyne in battaile with his enimie. Of whome the first is, if hée shall gaine lesse profite by the fruite of the victorie, than hée maye feare de∣triment if hée happe to bée ouerthrowen: whereof take this example. When the Duke of Guyse not many yéeres agoe, had inuaded the kingdome of Naples, the Duke of Alua had done vnwiselie, if hée would haue giuen him bat∣tayle: for the French could haue lost no more in that bat∣tayle than their armie, but if the victorie had inclined to the French partie, wée dyd leese with our armie the king∣dome of Naples too. The second is, if he doe vnderstand that his enimies ar∣mie will bée broken and scattered without fight: whereof the inuincible Emperour Charles the fift, your Highnesse his Father, of sacred memorie, maye bée an example. For when hee made warres against the Protestants in Germa∣me, he wold neuer ioyne in battaile with them, because hée vnderstood that their armie would bée dispearsed without battaile, neither could the strength of that league long indure and continue. Finallie, for a third cause may a Generall shunne bat∣taile: if he doe know that his power is so much inferiour to his enimies, that hée can in no wise hope for victorie. But
(most Honourable) none of the former causes dubtlesse can moue vs, for although the losse of this Nauie of the Christi∣ans bée a matter of verie great consequence, as some haue sayde before mée, and that wée doe graunt that the victorie will fall on our enimies side, yet notwithstanding if wée do fight valiantlie, as it becommeth vs, it is likelie also that their Nauie will bée so sore shaken and spoiled, that it can∣not bée easilie and lightlie repaired by the Turke: neither againe are our Princes of so small strength, that they shall not bée able to repaire our power, at the least as much as shall bée sufficient for to defend their owne. But if that we doe obtaine the victorie, then whereas wée may hope for other greater matters, than speciallie the enfranchisement of Greece. Moreouer, the which we ought chiefelie to consider, and holde for a certaine (as I haue often admonished also héere∣tofore) that we can doe nothing, neither with this present power, neither with anie other that shall bée supplied vnto vs hereafter, nor doe anie thing of moment agaynst the Turkes, except that we haue first desaited and broken their Nauie. But that it will be dispearsed through wearinesse or lacke of things necessarie, we cannot hope: but rather our enimies may promise themselues the same of vs. Séeing then that our power is now so great, that we may hope for victorie in battaile: mine opinion is, that in anie wise wée ought to fight, neither is this present occasion in anio ease to be let slippe. But whether our forces be so great as theirs, that in déede is to be considered. The forces consist, as farre as I can conceiue, in men and in gallies. As for the men, yea, although they be such as it hath sayd before me, that is to wit, that the Spaniardes and Italians are for the grea∣ter parte fresh water Souldiours, and of small experi∣rience, and also that the Almanes are of small seruice in Sea fight, and that there is but a small number of Harquebuziers amonge them: yet I doe not see howe
our enimies can by anie meanes be in this point better fur∣nished, both by reason of the great plague that we doe vn∣derstand raged and raigned in their nauie the last yéere, and also because they are forced to haue a great armie in Ciprus. But now of the greatnesse of their Nauie we doe heare di∣uerse reportes, so that I cannot pronounce of certaintie, whether that ours bée the greater of ye smaller. For séeing I am smallie experimented in sea affaires, I cannot tell with how many, or how great common gallies, and Foists of the Turkes, our great Gallies may bee matched: wherefore I will leaue the iudgement of these things vnto other. This onelie I doe pronounce and thinke, that wée must trie for∣tune: for warre matters cannot so be managed, but that fortune may doe much in them. Therefore let vs departe hence with this Fléete, and saile either towards Brindisi or Corfu: for when wée shall bée so néere our enimies, wée shall bée able to vnderstand some certaintie of their state, and thereby take aduise: and vnlesse some difficultie of get∣ting victualls doe let, I doe thinke it better that we saile to Corfu than to Brindisi, because the enimie must néeds passe that waie when he saileth into the Leuant. But before wée doe departe hence, I doe thinke that wée must first and chiefelie doe one thing, and that is, fullie and assuredlie to determine with our selues that wée must fight, and let this bée the firme and fixed resolution of vs, that whensoeuer wée shall light vpon our enimies, that wée will assaile them, and to this ende let all thinges bée before hand disposed and ordered. For if wée goe hence doubtfull, then wée shall bée forced to take aduice at the verie instant, and if wée doe chaunce to fall vpon our enimies on a sodaine, wée béeing out of order and vncertain what to do, shall easilie bée ouer∣throwen and scattered. And these are the things (most Ho∣nourable) that I doe thinke wée ought to doe: but yet so, that I will willinglie subscribe to them of more skill. When Cornia had made an ende of his spéech, all men
assented to that he had sayd: for they being forced by neces∣sitie did vnderstād, that this was the onely way to doe wel, for to set vppon the enimie couragiously, when occasion should be offered. Wherefore Don Iohn that he might omit nothing that dyd beséeme a good Generall, commaun∣ded what euery man should doe afterward, and how and in what order they should goe foorth. He deuided all the Na∣uie into foure battailes: that is to wit, two winges, a middle battaile, which they called the fight, and secret suc∣cours. In the eight wing were 53. Galleies, vnder the con∣duct of Iohn Andrew Doria, and they had a gréene flagge, in the toppe of the mast. The left wing consisted of the like number of galleies, and were ledde by Augustine Bar∣barigo, with a yelow flagge in the starre-bord side of the mast. The middle battaile, wherein were 61. galleies, dyd the General himselfe Don Iohn gouerne, and he had a blew or skye couler flagge. These thrée battailes consisted of 161. Galleies, and were so enstructed, that the middle bat∣tailes with the two winges, on either side néere to it, went forth with equall pace, one neither before nor behinde an other: but the winges were so farre distant from the mid∣dle battaile: that thrée or foure gallies might be put into that voide space betwéene them: the which was left to that ende, that euery one of the battailes, might turne them∣selues as vse and profit should require. Aluares de Basan, the Marques de Sancta Cruz, commaunded ouer the battaile of succour, whose flagge was white, borne in the puppe. But this battaile had 38. galleies, of whome eight vnder their Cheifteine Iohn de Cordona, went about 20. or 25. miles before all the fléete, for to descrie: and had in commaunde∣ment for to signifie vnto the fléete by swift fragats, what they had séene, or found: but if they should descrie so great a number of Shippes, that they suspected it to be the Nauie of the enimie, then they should retire to ye rest of the fléete, and foure of them succour the left winge, and so many with Cordona, the right. The great galleies, that are called Galeazes, and were
set about halfe a mile before the middle battaile, and the winges: and Antonie and Ambrose Bragadini had the con∣duct of the two that went before the left wing, and the two that went before the middle battaile were gouerned by Iames Guory and Antonie Duodi, and they that went be∣fore the right wing, were commaunded by Andrew Pisau∣ro, and Peter Pisano. But euerie one of the Galeazes were almost a mile one from another, that they might after a sorte protect and gouerne the whole Fleete: and because, they that were not so easilie rowed with oares, as the rest of the Gallies, the high Admirall Generall had commaun∣ded, that if the winde did not serue for them to sayle, that then they shoulde be towed by other Galleyes, whereof he had distrivuted the charge to certaine Captaines: for he himself & Colonna had taken vpon them to tow with theyr Galleies, the Admiral Galeaze of Frances Duodi, & had com∣mitted the Galeaze of Iames Gori to Sebastian Veneri, & to Christopher Leyni, the Galeaze of Andrew Bragadini, to Augustine Barbarigo, the Galeaze of Antonie Bragadini, to Antonie Canali, the Galleaze of Andrew Pisauro, to the Prior of Messina: and the Galleaze of Peter Pisano to Iohn Andrew Doria. The high Admirall Generall hadde chosen a place for himselfe in the verie middest of the bat∣taile, and was garded on the right side with Antonie Co∣lonna the Admirall of the Popes Nauie, and on the lefte, with Sebastian Veniero, the high Admirall of the Venetian Nauie. And Colonna was strengthned on the other by the Ad∣mirall Galley of Genowayes, whereof Hector Spinola was Captaine, and hee had with him the Prince of Parma, and Venerio was also defenced on the lefte side with the Ad∣mirall Galley of Sauoy, of whome Leyni had the gouern∣ment, and she also carried the Prince of Vrbine. But be∣hinde at the puppe, the Admirall Generall, Colonna and Venerio, had the Galley called the Prince of Spaine, and also the Galley of the greate Commendador of Castilia. The right side of the middle battayle, where it was sepa∣rated
from the wing, dyd the Admirall of Malta comman∣ded by the Prior of Messina, close vp, but the lefte side the Captaine of Peter Lomelyno, vnder the gouernement of Paulo Iordano Orsino. At the right wing Iohn de Cor∣clona had ioyned himselfe to the side of Doria. In the lefte wing Augustine Barbarigo had on the one side Marke Quirini, and on the other Canali. But in all the battayles, Galleyes of the king of Spaine, of the popes, and of the Signories of Venice were blended together without di∣stinction. These things being dispatched, the high Admirall Generall commanded all the Captains and Maisters of the Gallies, that they should do their best for to see that al those vnder their charges did leade a godlie and holie life, for ther∣by it would not come to passe, that God, speciallie, in so iust a cause woulde help them in that they went about. Things being thus ordered, they departed from Messina the sixtenth of September, being Sundaie, hauing sent the shippes for burthen the daie before, vnder their Captain Iohn Dauolos, and vpon sundrie occurrents and occasions went to diuerse places in the kingdome of Naples, and then backe againe to Palermo in Sicile, and from thence to sundrie places in the Isle of Corfu, and then to port Gomenizearo, a great & safe hauen on the continent. Here because the weather was clou∣die, and they had no good windes, they thought good to suruey their Nauie, that if anie thing lacked, they might prouide it, and the same night ariued there Gildas Andrada, and Iohn Baptista Contarini, who had giuen in as far as Zante, & had learned that the 28. of September the enimie was in ye gulf of Patras, & their Nauie was in ill case, for about ten of their Foists & small gallies, with the Moceniga, & Constantina, ships for burthen, carrying sicke men (the which was yet af∣terward found to be false) were gone toward Modone: the which newes made all our men growe in heart and cou∣rage, and excited them to pursue the enimie. But yet the ad∣uerse tempest continued still▪ wherefore the high Admirall commaunded the first of October that all things shoulde be layde vp in their places, and the next daie hee tooke
a generall muster, and spoiled foure Galleies of all their souldiours and equippage, that he might furnish the rest the better. The sixt of October the winde was layde, where∣fore they ioyfully launched out of Port Gomenizearo, and had their Nauie thus particularly distributed, and their battailes thus arranged, In the Battaile that went before the rest of the fleete to descrye, were these Galleies, and their Captaines. Galleyes. Captaines. 1 The Saint Magdalene of Venice. Marco Contarini. 2 The Sunne of Venice. Vincent Quirino. 3 The Vice Admirall of Sicile.   4 The admirall of Sicile. Iohn the Cardona, the Ad∣miral of the Sicilian flett, of Dauid Imperiali. 5 The Admirall.   6 The S. Ioānica of Sicile.   7 Saint Catherine of Ve∣nice. Marco Ciconia. 8 The Our Ladie of Ve∣nice. Peter Frances Malipetrol ¶ In the left Wing. The names of Galleies The names of Captaines. 1 The Admirall of Ve∣nice. Augustin Barbarigo the high and chiefe Prouiditore of the Venetian fleete. 2 The Admirall of Ve∣nice. Antony Canali, Prouiditore also of the Venetian fléete.
3 The fortune of Venice. Andrew Barbarioo. 4 The Archer of Naples. Martin Pyrola. 5 The treble hand of Ve∣nice. George Barbarigo. 6 The double Dolphin of Candie. Frances Zeno. 7 The Lion and Phenix of Cania. Frances Mengano. 8 S. Nicholas of Cherso. Colanes Drasi. 9 The victorie of Naples. Occauo Rocardi 10 The Lomelina. Augustine Coneuali. 11 The Elengina of the Popes. Fabio Valciati, Knight. 12 The Ladie of Cania. Phillippe Polani. 13 The sea horse of Candy. Antonie de Cabellis, 14 The double Lion of Candie. Nicolas Fratello. 15 The Lion of Istria. Dominicke de Tacco. Before these vvē Ambrose Bragadin vvith his galeaze▪ 16 The crosse of Cefalenia. Marke Cimera. 17 The Saint Virginia of Cefalenia. Christopher Chrissa. 18 The Lion of Candie. Frances Bonacchio. 19 The Christ of Candie. Andrew Cornelio. 20 The Angell of Candie. Iohn Angelo. 21 The Pyramis of Can∣die. Frances Bono. 22 The Ladie of Candie with the armed horse. Antonie Eudomeniano. 23 The Chrit raised again of Venice. Simon Goro. 24 The Christ raised again of Venice. Federicke Reniere. 25 The Christ of Corfu. Christopher Condocolli. 26 The Christ raised again of Cania. Geogge Calergio. 27 The Christ of Venice. Barthelmew Donata. 28 The Christ raised a∣gaine of Vegia. Lewes Cicuta.
29 The Retimana. Nicolas Auonali. 30 The Christ of Candie. Iohn Cornelio. 31 The Christ raised a∣gaine of Cania. Frances Zancaruolo. 32 The Rodus of Cania. Frances Molino. 33 The Saint Euphemia of Brescia. Horacio Fisogna. 34 The Ladie Marques of Doria. Frances Sphedra. 35 The fortune of An∣drew. Iohn Lewes Belui. 36 The arme of Cania. Michael Vizamano. 37 The Sea horse of Ve∣nice. Antonie de Cauallis. 38 The Christ of Cania. Daniel Calefatio. 39 The arme of Venice. Nicolas Lipomano. 40 The our Lady of Zāte Nicolas Modino. Before these gal∣leies vvēt Antonie Bragadini vvith his galeaze. 41The Christ raised a∣gaine of Cania. Frances Zancaruolo. 42 The our lady of Venice Marke Antonie Pisano. 43 The God the father vp-the Trinitie. Iohn Contarini. 44 The flame of Naples. Iohn Cueua. 45 The S. Iohn of Naples Garzias Vorgaro. 46 The enuie of Naples. Toribio Acaueso. 47 The valiant of Naples. Michael Quesada. 48 The S. Iacobea of Na∣ples. Monserratto Guardiolo. 49 The Saint Nicolaico of Naples. Christopher Mongiua. 50 The Christ raised again of Venice. Iohn Baptista Quirini. 51 The Angell of Venice. Vmfrey Iustiniano. 52 The Saint Dorethe of Venice. Paule Nani. 53 The Admiral of Venice Marke Antonie Quirini, pro∣uiditore of ye Venetiā Nauie
In the middle Battaile which they called the fight, this was the order of the Captaines, Admirals, and Galleies. The names of the Galleies. The names of the Captains 1 The Admirall of Lo∣melina. Paulus Iordano Orsino, the Admirall of that fléete. 2 The maister Lomelina. Peter Baptista Lomelino. 3 The Admirall Bandi∣nella. Bendinello Sauli, the Admi∣rall of that fléete. 4 The maister of Genoa. Pallerano. 5 The Toscano of ye popes Metello Caracciolo, knight▪ 6 The man of the sea of Vicenza. Iames Dressano. 7 The our lady of Venice Iohn Zeno. 8 The Saint Hieronima of Lesina. Iohn Balzi. 9 The Saint Ioannica of Venice. Iohn Antonie Colleoneo. 10 The Saint Alexandri∣ca of Bergomo. George D'Asti, Admirall. 11 The Admirall Marina Hierome Canali. 12 The log of Venice.   13 The Mongibello of Venice. Bertucco Contarini. Frances Dandalo. 14 The virgin of Candie. Ciprian Marini. 15 The temperance of Iohn Andrew Doria. Vincentius Pascali. 16 The good fortune of Naples. Roccano Fuluio. 17 The castle of Spaine. Baccio Pisano. 18 The victorie of ye popes   19 The Pyramis of M. Antonie of S. Vliana▪ 20 The Christ of Venice. Hierome Contarini. 21 The S. Frances of Spain Christopher Guasches. 22 The peace of the popes. Iames Antonie Perpignano▪ 23 The perle of Iohn An∣drew Doria. Iohn Baptista Spinola.
24 The Whéele Serpentin of Venice. Gabriel Canali. 25 The Pyramis of Ve∣nice. Frances Bono. 26 The Palme of Venis. Hierome Veneri. 27 The Admirall of Gil∣lio Andrada. Bernard Cinoguerra. Paule Botein. 28 The Granado of Spain Hector Spinola with the Prince of Parma. 28 The Admirall of Ge∣noa.   29 The Admirall of Ve∣nice. Sebastian Veneri the Admi∣rall of the Venetian fleet. 30 Behind ye pup of ye high Admirall Generall, & Veneri, was the Mai∣ster Roiall.   31 The gallie roiall. Don Iohn of Austria, chiefe Generall of the league. 32 The Admirall of the great Comemdador, which defenced Don Iohn and Colonna at the pup.   33 The Popes Admirall. Marke Antonio de Colonna high Admirall of ye popes Nauie. 34 The Admirall of Sa∣uoy. The Lorde Leiny with the Prince of Vrbine. 35 The Grifonia of the Popes. Alexander Nigroni. 36 The Saint Theodoro of Venice. Theodoro Balbi. 37 The Mendozza of Na∣ples. Martino de Caide. 38 The Mountaine of Cania. Alexander Vizamano.
39 The Saint Iohn Bap∣tist of Venice. Iohn Mocenigo. 40 The victorie of Iohn Andrew Doria. Philip Doria. 41 The Pisana of ye popes. Hercules Lotta. 42 The Figiera of Spaine. Diego Lopes de Diglia. 43 The Christ of Venice. George Pisano. 44 The Saint Iohn of Venice. Daniel Moro. 45 The Florence of the Popes. Thomas di Medici. 46 The S. George of Na∣ples. Eugenio de Vargas. 47 The maister of Naples. Frances Benauides. 48 The Moone of Spaine. Emanuel Aguilar. 49 The Passera of Venice. Lewes Pasqualigo. 50 The Lion of Venice. Peter Pisano. 51 The Saint Hierome of Venice. Caspar Malipetro. 52 The Admirall of Gri∣maldi. George Grimaldi the Admi∣rall. 53 The maister of Dauid Imperiali. Nicolas Luano. 54 The Saint Christopher of Venice. Alexander Contarini. 55 The Iudith of Zante. Marino Sicuro.Frances Dundo Captaine of the galea. 56 The Larmelina of Can∣die. Peter Gradenigo. 57 The middle Moone of Venice. Valerio Valeresso. 58 The Doria of Iohn An∣drew Doria. Iames Casali. 59 The order of S. Peter. Santubio. 60 The order of S. Iohn. Lewes Tessera. 61 The Admiral of Malta. The Prior of Messina, Ad∣mirall. 62 The Admirall of Sicile. Iohn de Cardona the Admi∣rall
who yet went before when they sailed. 2 The Piemontan of Sa∣uoy. Octauiano Moreto. 3 The Admirall of Nicolas Doria. Pandulfo Polidoro. 4 The force of Venice. Reniero Zeno. 5 The Quéene of Candie. Iohn Barbarigo. 5 The Nino of Venice. Paule Polani. 7 The Christ raised a∣gaine of Venice. Benet Soranzi. 8 The armed man of Re∣tima. Andrew Calergi. 9 The Eagle of Retima. Andrew Calergi. 10 The Palme of Cania. Iames Medio. 11 The Angell of Corfu. Stellio Carchiopulo. 12 The S. Ioannica Ar∣bera. Iohn de Dominis. 13 The Ladie Frauica. Lewes Cipico. 14 The ship of Venice. Antonie Pasqualigo. 15 The our Ladie of Cādy Marke Foscarino. 16 The Christ of Crema. Frances Corneri. 17 The Saint Victorio of Crema. Euangelist Zurlano. 18 The maister of Gri∣maldi. Laurence Treccha. 19 The maister of Marini Antonio Cornili. 20 The Margarit of Sauoy Bataglino. 21 The Diana of Genoa. Iohn George Lasagna. 22 The Gingana of Naples Gabriel Medino. 23 The Moone of Naples. Iulio Rubbi. 24 The fortune of Naples Diego Medran. 25 The hope of Naples. Peter Busto. 26 The fure of Lomelino Iames Chiappeo. 27 The maister of Lome∣lino. Georgo Greco. 28 The Negrona. Nicolas Costano.
29 The bastard Negrona Laurenzo de Turri. 30 The fire of Candie. Antonie Bono. 31 The Eagle of Candy. Hierome Georgio. 32 The S. Chistopher of Venice. Andrew Trono. 33 The Christ of Venice Marke Antonie Lando. 34 The hope of Candie. Hierome Conarini. 35 The Reatila of Padoa Pataro Buzacarino. 36 The S. Iosephica of Venice. Frances Osedo. 38 The resolute of Naples. Iohn de Carasse. 39 The Sicilia of Sicilia. Frances Amadeo. 40 The maister of Nico∣las Doria. Iulio Centaurio. 41 The Eagle of Corfu. Peter Buono. 42 The S. Trifonica of Cataro. Hierome Bizanteo.Peter Pi∣sano vvith a galca 43 The towre of Vicēza. Lewes de Portu. 44 The S. Marie of the Popes. Pandulfo Strozzi, Knight. 45 The S. Ioannica of the popes. Augulo Bifalio, Knight. 46 The maister of Nigroni Lewes Gamba. 47 The Admirall of Ni∣groni. Iohn Ambrose Nigroni. 48 The Monarcha of Iohn Andrew. Nicolas Garibaldo. 49 The hande maide of Iohn Andrew. Nicolas Imperiali. 50 The Admirall of Iohn Andrew. Iohn Andrew Doria. The battaile of succour that followed behinde for a gard, had these Gallies and Captaines. The names of Gallies. The names of Captaines. 1 The S. Ioannica of Sicile  
2 The Baccana. Iohn Peter Morilo. 3 The Leina of Naples.   4 The Constancie of Na∣ples. Peter Delagia. 5 The Marchesia of Na∣ples. Iohn Machado. 6 The Saint Barbara of Naples. Iohn Aschaleo. 7 The Saint Andrew of Naples.   8 The Saint Catherine of Naples. Iohn Rufio de Valasques. 9 The Saint Barthelmew of Naples.   10 The Saint Angelo of Naples.   11 The Terana of Naples Iohn de Ripa Meillino▪ 12 The Christ of Venice. Marke Molino. 13 The double hande of Venice. Iohn Loredano. 14 The Admirall of Na∣ples. Aluares de Bazan, Marques de Sante Cruz. 15 The faith of Venice. Iohn Baptista Contarini. 16 The piller of Venice. Caterino Malipetro. 17 The Magdalen of Ve∣nice. Lewes Balbi. 18 The Ladie of Venice. Iohn Bembo. 19 The Minidus of Ve∣nice. Philippe Leo. 20 The hope of Venice. Iohn Baptista Benedicto. 21 Saint Peter of Venice. Peter Baduato. 22 Saint George of Sabe∣nica. Christopher Lucicho. 23 The Saint Michael. George Cochio. 24 The Sybilla of Venice. Daniel Trono. 25 The Crane of Spaine. Lewes de Hereda. 26 The Admirall of Vas∣chedo. Veschedo Coranado.
27 The Suprana of the Popes. Antonie de Ascoli. Peter Roises. 28 The Occasion of Spain   29 The maister of the popes.   30 The faire weather of the popes.   The Nauie being thus distributed, they sailed forth, and euerie man was carefull for his charge, the which, that it might bée the more exactlie done, the Generall had also ap∣pointed a Captaine ouer euerie 20. gallies, who shuld dily∣gentlie looke that this order were obserued by them all. So they sailed to Cefalonia where they receiued Letters from Paule Contarini the gouernour of the Isle of Zante, that sig∣nified how the enimies fléete was in the gulfe of Patras in ill case, and that fortie vessels were gone awaie vnder the gouernment of Oluzali towards Modone, nor long after they receiued Letters from Famagosta. Which things bée∣ing knowen, our men were full perswaded that they ought to goe forward and to assaile the enimie. But whether in the meane time were our enimies idle, for when Ali their high Admirall was come to Lepanto, within the gulfe of Patras, the 28. of September he sent Me∣hemet Bey, with thrée score galleyes to Aspropitio, a Citie within that gulfe, for to bring thence victualls, and special∣lie souldiours, that he might be redie for all euents. And he had now dispatched the matter, and being returned, hadde brought besides victualls and other necessaries 10000. Ia∣nizares, 2000. common souldiours, and as many voluntarie. In the meane time he had vnderstoode that our fléete was come from Corfu to Cefalenia, but of the greatnesse there∣of, or what they meant to doe, he had yet learned no cer∣taintie, for although that Caracoza, being sent to take view of our Nauie, had brought word backe, that hée had dily∣gentlie surueied it, and that there were not in it aboue 150.
Galleyes: yet that was false. But yet notwithstanding as though they did fore-sée their misfortune, all in the fléete were afraide. Wherefore Ali, albeit he was fullie resolued to fight, yet for that cause and reason he thought good to con∣sult with the principall men that he had with him, what was to be done héerein, before that he did put these newe aides and supplie into his gallies. Wherevpon hauing cal∣led together all the chiefe men of marke and authoritie, and the most skilfull in martiall matters, he gaue euerie man large leaue fréelie to vtter what they thought. They sate long in counsaile, for many to gratifie Ali, whom they knew was resolued to fight, affirmed that fortune was to bée tri∣ed: neither on the contrarie part were there few that sub∣scribed vnto Portau Bassa, the Generall of the souldiours, who held it stiflie that they ought in no case to sight. Thus when diuerse opinions were spoken by diuerse men, Has∣san Bassan, the sonne of Barbarossa, sometime king of Ar∣gier, hauing craued license to speake, and laying his hande vpon his breast, according to the vsage of that Nation, spake to this effect. Most excellent and mightie aboue all other, beloued and aduanced by the maiestie of our most inuincible Emperor, vnto the highest degrée of glorie, men most desirous to doe seruice vnto the immesurable glorie of our Emperor, which is the shadowe and spirite of the liuing God for euer and euer. These Idolaters are in diuine matters worse than beastes, and enimies of the true sonne of God. Therefore I woulde not haue you doubt whether their Nauie ought to bée assailed and taken. For besides those signes that ma∣ny before mée haue wiselie rehearsed, wée may certainlie knowe by the prisoners, that these men are of the same Na∣tion, and gathered together after the same order, that they were that thirtie yéeres agoe, béeing ioyned together wt a great number of Galleyes, in these verie same seas, were broken by Hariadin Barbaressa my Father, with so greate facilitie, that hée neuer néeded to doe so much as once to brawe his sword. For although they had a greater Nauie
than my Father had, yet as soone as they sawe the beakes of our Gallies, and heard the crie and valiant féese of our men, they betooke them to flight: for they are so faint hear∣ted, that they runne awaie as soone as they doe heare of our name. Besides this, they being blended together of di∣uerse Nations, doe mutuallie hate one another, neither wil anie one of them obey another, the which is a matter of ve∣rie great moment in an armie: there be a great number of Gallies of diuerse Princes come together, not for to expose themselues to anie perill for their common defence, but that they may séeme to haue a great Nauie. They be blasphe∣mers, despisers of God; apparelled and furnished with rich and precious clothes, and armour, and laden with monie. But we on the other side are ignorant what blasphemie is, and doe mutuallie loue and reuerence one another, and are met together héere in armes to this onelie end, that we may doe our onelie Emperor, alwaies inuincible Prince, seruice in fight. And séeing yt al our men haue assembled to this end, they will with one minde obey your valiant aduises, and chieflie because they doe know that ye are the lieuetenants of our Emperor himselfe, & therfore fighting as it beseemeth valiant and well appointed men, will carrie awaie assured victorie. And this we may the more lightly hope, because we haue 280. vessells well furnished, of whom 200. are common Gallies, and fiftie small Gallies, all of them passing well armed: to the augmentation of whose power & strength yet more, and to the farther encouragement of our most valiant men, if that ye do distribute & put into the gallies ye 14000. men, ye came verie latelie, & also those of the Leuant that are in the 20. foists, we shal rest assured of the victorie, although we doe grant that our enimies are valiant men. But now we doe certainlie know, as we haue learned of our fellow Caracoza, a verie wise man, that they haue but 150. gallies furnished with such men, as I told you before. Wherefore (most valiant and wise Gentlemen) séeing that we do suffi∣entlie know their state, goe forward, ye shall finde them in the vale of Alexandria, and dispearsed along that shoare,
more giuen to idlenesse, ease, delights, and delicatenes, than is méete for warriours, so that thereby, ye shall take them al without difficultie, for when they shall sée our Fléete, they either flying awaie, will runne on the shore, and suffer ship∣wracke, or else they will light and fall on our Nauie, and be taken. But that I maye comprehend all the matter in fewe wordes: we haue the greater number of vessels, and them also better furnished than our enimies, verie valiant and skilfull souldiours: wherefore wée must not let slip this oc∣casion offered vs to fight with them, that are so much infe∣riour vnto vs, in number, prowesse, and experience, and spe∣ciallie, séeing that thereby wée shall execute the commande∣ment of our high and mightie Emperour, whose glorie shall indure for euer, and winne our selues immortall praise: but ye namelie, shall performe that which yée promised vn∣to this our supreame Emperour, when he appointed you in his owne place for to conduct this most mightie Na∣uie. The same arguments vsed also at that time Oluzali, the Chieftaine of the forces of Barbarie, vsing a long spéech of the power of the Turkes, and of the commandement and anger of the great Emperour of the Turkes, who, as also Cayabeg, the Sanzach of Smyrne, shewed with an effectu∣all spéech, that neither they ought, nor coulde without shame let passe this occasion, to destroie the same Christians, ha∣uing now a lesser power, séeing that they had alwayes ben defaitad and spoiled héeretofore by the souldiours of Otto∣man the great Emperour of the Turkes, although they had a fléete farre better furnished than theirs. But of a flat contrarie minde were Syrocke the San∣zach or gouernour of Alexandria, and Carabiue the Captain of Suurasar, both verie ancient Captaines, and singularlie well experimented in sea affaires, and many other besides. But Mehemet Bey the Sanzach of Nigreponto, who som∣time had gouerned Barbarie, going about to extinguish this hot fire of Hassan Bassa, spake to this sense.
I doe thinke and iudge (most prudent péeres) that the wordes ye Hassan Bassa hath spoken, are signes and tokens of a verie valiant man, and namelie of him, that desireth in all things to obey our most inuincible Lorde and king of kings, who draweth his sword with the arme of God▪ and liueth for euer and euer, yet notwithstanding séeing it so pleaseth you, the Bassaes your excellencies, who next after our supreame Emperour doth deserue this Empire of Ot∣taman. I will also speake what I doe thinke: doubtlesse it is likelie ye our enimies would not haue come in this far, vn∣lesse they had before diligentlie learned out our strength & forces, wherefore it must néedes be, that they haue a power at the least equall to ours, or else greater: because that o∣therwise they would neuer haue come thus farre. Of the which thing this may bée an argument: that they them∣selues may easilie knowe, that the hope of kéeping and con∣seruing of the rest of their dominions and Empire that is left them, or of recouering that which they haue lost, doth lie in this onelie Nauie. Therefore let vs not beléeue that this Fléete of our enimies hath come hether for to expose them selues to manifest perill, and to cast awaie themselues wil∣fullie: the which they must néedes doe, if their Nauie be so simple, as it hath béene painted out vnto vs, & also so small as our fellow Caracoza, yet a man of great prowesse, hath affirmed. I for mine owne parte doe surelie thinke, that a Nauie that commeth from Sicile thus farre, to séeke their enimie, speciallie at this time of the yéere, is verie well appointed, and doth come with certaine aduise and purpose to fight, & with hope to obtaine the victorie. And if we doe diligentlie wey the thing, we vnderstand that the reports of the Chri∣stian prisoners doe in all pointes agrée héerewithall, for if they would onelie vantinglie and vainlie shew themselues, and then flie awaie, what néede they to haue come so farre vp into these our seas? What? That they flying awaie, might léese all? Wherefore grounding your selues vppon
these arguments, thinke that the Nauie of our enimies is verie strong, and hath determined to fight with vs, séeing that they are come vp thus farre, not prouoked nor forced by vs, but of their owne accord: Neither haue wée reason to compare this fléete with that which our men in former yéeres did put to flight at Preuesa. For this league of the Christian Princes against vs is another manner of thing, than yt which was made thirtie yéeres agoe, the preparation other, the skil in warfare other, so that ther is no proportion betwéene them. In that fléete were many and diuerse Ge∣neralls, but little wisedome, and that was the cause that they fled: In this Nauie is Iohn of Austria, the sonne of the Emperour Charles the fift, and the brother of Philip the king of Spaine, a verie valiant man, and one excited by his Fathers glorie, and inuited by the supreame degrée of ho∣nour, that he hath obtained in this league through his bro∣ther, & finallie, one beloued and reuerenced of all the whole Nauie, the Captaines, and Souldiours with one & common consent. And therefore without all doubt he will giue vs battaile, neither without hope of victorie. Moreouer, the Venetians, because they haue béen so déep∣lie endamaged by vs, can (being almost mad for anger) séeke nothing else but reuenge: that is to wit, because we haue flaine so many of their people: whom to be all verie valiant men, we haue learned by ye great losse of many of our men: & yt certes we wil the more easilie beléeue, if we do cal to mind how the same Venetians went about the last yéere to giue vs battaile, although they had not then entered into league with these other Princes. Therefore without doubt they wil fight, & the more fiercelie, because they being lead with emulation, wil indeuour one to excell another in prowes, & euerie man preferre his owne Nation before others, the which thing I haue alwaies thought to be a matter of verie great moment in warres. And this also am I the rather in∣duced to thinke, because we doe heare, that Don Iohn is an hardie and venterous young man, a contemner of danger, and golde, and one that couetetl, and careth for nothing so
much, as that the fame of his valour may runne euen to the farthest coasts of Spaine. To bring the which thing to passe, can he séeke for a more commodious occasion than this is? Séeing yt he hath them his helpers, who being endomaged by vs, doe burne in desire of fight, and there with all hope, that as soone as they haue discomfited our Nauie, they shal soone recouer all that they haue lost? The which things cer∣tes, if they should happen, not onelie the glorie, but also a a great part of those things that they shuld get, yea, and the Lordship of this whole sea euen to the East, wil redound to him. But if contrariwise, he should runne awaie, would hée euer dare to come into his brothers sight againe? Also, the Venetians, that haue diligentlie sought and searched these seas, where could they séeke to saue themselues, if they shuld betake them to flight? Therefore let vs thinke that they haue carefullie considered all these things, in whom the con∣seruation of their liues, goods, and Empire doth lie, and that they will all fight-together most valiantlie, the which they did not at Preuesa. But we are now in this gulfe, a place well defenced both by nature, and two verie strong Castles, and we haue as good meanes to get victuals and souldiours as we our selues would wish. But before we ariued here, we wonderfullie afflicted our enimies: we wasted a parte of the Isle of Candie, we destroyed Cerigo with fire, and harrying. The like we did in Zante, & Cefalenia: we great∣lie anoied Corfu, we recouered Suppoto, we entered into the gulfe of Venice, and there we tooke Antiuari and Dulcino, Townes nothing small, with many other places and Ca∣stles. We burnt Budua, and with so greate triumph we came at the last into this gulfe. Can we not hold our selues con∣tented with these glorious giftes for this time, speciallie séeing that we doe vnderstand our men haue taken Famo∣gosta, and conserued the whole kingdome of Ciprus at this verie same time?
Surelie it is no lesse vertue to kéepe things gotten, than to get them: for when we doe attempt to win things by force, that enterprise hath a doubtfull beginning, and is most commonlie much subiect to fortune: but the kéeping of things gotten hath a certaine and finall end, which may bée attributed to the counsaile of a wise Generall. But of our great Emperour, this doe I certes promise you, that he will accept as well the safetie of this Nauie, and will as much commend you, for that ye haue not exposed it to apparant perill, & for the wasting of so many prouinces, for the con∣quering of kingdoms & cities, & for the presentation vnto him of so great a spoile of all kinde of riches. For it will aske vs many yéeres to furnish so great a fléet, but our enimies wil prepare a greater within a short time. Wherefore my opi∣nion is, (most excellent) who are the soule of our greate Emperour, the safetie of the Ottomanicall Empire, that for∣tune is not to be attempted, but our Nauie is to bée verie carefullie and curioustie spread out, and set forth in good or∣der and arraie within this gulfe, and that we doe expect in this safe place what our enimies minde to doe: this daie or to morrow they will be come as we doe heare vnto Zante, and Cefalenia, and ye thereby taking occasion shall knowe what may be done with most safetie, for wheras in all mar∣tiall matters, then speciallie in nauall, it is of great conse∣quence to catch the occasion, of doing things fortunatlie and safelie. All which things I doe vnderstand that yée know better than I: and therefore I doe hope that ye will take aduise of those things that shal be still reported vnto you, and that I doe trust ye wil doe so much the more, because the enimie cannot staie there long by reason of hard comming by vi∣ctuals, and also because the place is nothing safe. For the which causes doubtlesse, one of these two thinges will hap∣pen vnto them, that either they will be constrained to re∣turne backe from whence they came, or else they will come forward to méete with vs, But if that they shall resolue to goe forth to méete vs, cer∣tes
I doe not know whether they can come into this gulfe, and if they doe come in, it cannot bée done without greate daunger, for we being defenced with two Castles, shall a∣noie them safelie, and shall know without coniectures and of a certaintie, how great their forces bée. And if wée shall séeme to be superior, we may safelie assaile them, if not, then remaine heere safelie without anie danger of our Nauie, or Empire, and yet neuerthelesse retaine, and maintaine the dignitie and honour of our selues, and our great Emperour. Neither is there cause why we shoulde in anie wise feare, that they wandering on this coast, will farrie héere longer than we would, for that they can in no case doe for lacke of victualls, and for ill weather, vsuall at this time of the yere. And if they wold go about it, they shuld do it with greater daunger of themselues than of vs, because the difficultie of the time of the yéere, wil trouble and make rough these seas now euerie daie, and will scatter their Fléete, whereby we may take occasion for to inuade them being dispearsed here and there. But yet I woulde not that we should bée idle in the meane time, but séeke to learne by all industrie (sending sun∣drie espies) the power and purpose of our enimies: for so, if that wée haue diligentlie learned their state, wée maye take and follow that aduise which shall bée most for the pro∣fite and dignitie of our Emperour. But to goe forth out of this well fortified and strong place, while wée are yet vn∣certaine of all thinges, and to commit our selues vnto the daliance of fortune, doe I déeme to bée an action nothing praise worthie. I doe not doubt but that our enimies will busilie goe about to prouoke vs out of this strong place: and that they will doe, béeing forced either by the time of the yeare, or the season of the weather, but then it stands with your wise∣dome to moderate and staie your selues so much the more. By the which wise parte, yée shall get no lesse praise and opinion of wisedome, than yée haue alreadie gained in con∣quering so greate a kingdome, and winning so many Ci∣ties
and Castles, because through your wisedome in this point, yée may séeme to haue conserued the Empire of Ot∣toman. Yet I would haue all that I haue sayd, to bée so taken, that neuerthelesse I am readie to yéeld and obey your ad∣uises and resolutions, and will spend my life in the executi∣on of them. This spéech of Mahemet Bey liked Portau Bassa verie well, and also the Sanzaches Syrocke, and Caraby did ap∣proue it: but yet because they had contrarie commaunde∣ment from Sultan Selim, the which was then publikelie read by the commandement of Oluzali, and for that Ali be∣ing verie desirous to fight, had drawen many to take his part, and most chieflie because it was the good pleasure of God, that the destruction of that Nation shoulde one daie haue a beginning, they decréed by common consent for to depart thence, and to giue the Christians battaile. For they did thinke that they should finde our Nauie in the Hauen, without men, and so shoulde without much a doe take it: the which falling out so, they had determined to conquere also Zante and Cefalenia, and then besieging in the Winter the places of strength in Candie and Corfu, and in successe of time entering into the gulfe of Catato, for to winne these and other places of the Venetian Empire, & so make them∣selues a waie into Italie, and all Christendome. Wherefore they did distribute into their Gallies the 14000. souldiors that came latelie, they did manakle the Christian prisoners, that they should be apt for nothing else but to rowe, & then aranged all the whole Fléete into foure battailes, as fol∣loweth. The right wing. 1 The first was the Admirall of Mehemet Siroch, the gouernour of Alexandria. 2 The second Galley of Alexandria was gouerned by
Caras Tubat. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 3 Bagly Saraf. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 4 Giafer Chiagey. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 5 Osmanan Celebin. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 6 Perusio Reis. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 7 Binke Casapogly. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 8 Osman Occan. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 9 Driuis Aga. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 10 Baiazet Siman. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 11 Osman Ali. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 12 Dely Aga. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 13 Dardagan Bardābely All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 14 Casly Caian. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 15 Iusuf Aga. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 16 Iusuf Magar. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 17 Calafact Cheder. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 18 Mustafa Genouell. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 19 Dermigy Pery. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 20 Mat Assan. All these had Gallies of Alexandria. 21 Cheder Aga. Their Gallies were of Constantinople. 22 Soliman Bey. Their Gallies were of Constantinople. 23 Hibraim. Their Gallies were of Constantinople. 24 Saban. Their Gallies were of Constantinople. 25 Caiacebebin. Their Gallies were of Constantinople. 26 Chedar Siman. Their Gallies were of Constantinople. 27 The sonne of Cara Mustafa. Their Gallies were of Constantinople. 28 Iaran Saba. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 29 Dauid Iusuf. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 30 Solack Rais. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 31 Arnaut Ferrat. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 32 Iuzel Memy. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 33 Schender Selim. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 34 Lumag Iusuf. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 35 Bardach Celebin. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 36 Bagdat Asan. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 37 Guzel Allibi. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie.
38 Brusali Pyri. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 39 Rodle Ali. Their Gallies were of Tri∣poli in Barbarie. 40 Aga Bassa, with the Admirall of Constantinople. 41 Sinaman Mustafa. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 42 Giegiore Ali. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 43 Amurates Rais. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 44 Callipey Memy. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 45 Marul Mustafa. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 46 Heder Lumet. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 47 Sinaman Deruis. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 48 Meminey Durmis. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 49 Algagias Sinan. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 50 Adagi Rustan. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 51 Chingeuey Musata. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 52 Iusuf Cebebin. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 53 Tafer Mustafa. These commaunded ouer Galleies of De∣spetado, in olde time Actolia. 54 Ali a Geneuose, & Pirate, a Captain of smal Gallies 55 Megil Reis with a small galleaze. 56 Mehemet Bey, with the Admirall Gallie of Nigre∣ponto. The middle battaile, which they did also call the fight, had these Captaines and Gallies. 1 Assam Bey, the gouernour of Rhodes. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 2 Dely Chiafet, the warden of Rhodes. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 2 Occy Rais. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 4 Postunag Ogly. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 5 Calefact Ogly. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 6 Gazizy Reys. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 7 Dromus Rais, with an Admiral gally of Constantinople. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 8 Herbetcy, warden of Rhodes. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 9 Caragias Rais. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 10 Ocean Rais. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 11 Dely Piry. With Gallies of the Rhodes. 12 Giafer Aga. With Gallies of the Rhodes.
13 Bachlan Rais. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 14 Coz Ali. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 15 Colach Rais. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 16 Oluz Rais. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 17 Assan Bassa, the sonne of Bar∣barossa. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 18 Caraf Rais. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 19 Almau Rais. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 20 Gurngly Ogly Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 21 Arnault Celibin. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 22 Magar Ali. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 23 Giafer Celebin. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 24 Dely Celebin. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 25 Dely Assan. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 26 Carapery Aga. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 27 Sinam Rais. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 28 Carau Mustafa. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 29 Saly Arnuar. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 30 Preuil Aga, Captaine of Na∣poly in Albania. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 31 Balahzy Ogly. with Galliees of Metilena. 32 Bararzy Mustafa. with Galliees of Metilena. 33 Sinan Baly. with Galliees of Metilena. 34 Agdagy Rais. with Galliees of Metilena. 35 Two sonnes of Ali, in a Galley of Constantinople. 36 Osman Rais, in an Admirall of Constantinople. 37 Dely Iusuf. with Galleyes of Metelina. 38 Ferath Baly. with Galleyes of Metelina. 39 Caiacelebin. with Galleyes of Metelina. 40 Bagdar Rais. with Galleyes of Metelina. 41 Haluagy Mustafa. with Galleyes of Metelina. 42 Giaur Ally Mustafa, with an Admiral of small Gal∣leyes. 43 Caracoza, with a Galleye of Vallona. 44 Mamatre Saiderbey, gouernour of Metelina. 45 Ali Bassa, high Admirall of the fléete in the Galley Royall.
46 Portau Bassa, Generall of land affaires, with an Ad∣mirall Galley. 47 Mustafa Esdey, Treasurer. 48 Marmary Rais. 49 Alcicogly. 50 Caras Dely. 51 Ferat Ceragly. 54 Tramontana Rais, with an Admirall of Constanti∣nople. 55 Suliman Celebin. With Galleies of Constantinople. 56 Deli Ibraim. With Galleies of Constantinople. 57 Murat Chorosaa. With Galleies of Constantinople. 58 Demir Baly. With Galleies of Constantinople. 59 Caby heit. With Galleies of Constantinople. 60 Murat Trasy, the Scribe of the Arsenall. With Galleies of Constantinople. 61 Peruis Sinam. With Galleies of Constantinople. 62 Dardagan Baly. With Galleies of Constantinople. 63 Giafer Caran. With Galleies of Constantinople. 64 Deruis Sach. With Galleies of Constantinople. 65 Curbaly. With Galleies of Constantinople. 66 Giafer Aga the Captaine of Tripoli in Barbary. 67 Carau Hamat. These Gallies wer of Tripoli. 68 Rustan Cialmagy. These Gallies wer of Tripoli. 69 Durmis Ogly. These Gallies wer of Tripoli. 70 Schender Dernigy. These Gallies wer of Tripoli. 71 Maumet Alius. These Gallies wer of Tripoli. 72 Afis Cluega the gouernour of Callipoli. These gallies were of Callipoli. 73 Sellim Sciach. These gallies were of Callipoli. 74 Heder Baschy: These gallies were of Callipoli. 75 Sicuri Mustafa. These gallies were of Callipoli. 76 Salarais. These gallies were of Callipoli. 77 Dely Ischender. These gallies were of Callipoli. 78 The Lorde of Mania, with an Admirall Galley of Constantinople.
79 Peruis Luhumagy Alius Rais. Their Gallies also were of Callipoli. 80 Hasuf Baly. Their Gallies also were of Callipoli. 81 Siran Bardachy. Their Gallies also were of Callipoli. 82 Iusuf Cinigy. Their Gallies also were of Callipoli. 83 Piry Begogly with an Admirall Galley of Constan∣tinople. 84 Dely Osman. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 85 Piry Sisnam. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 86 Demir Celebin. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 87 Deruis Hidir. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 88 Sinam Mustafa. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 89 Hasirgy Reis. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 90 Ascy Ogly. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 91 Caias Saraf. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 92 Agady Ahameth. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 93 Osman Sehet. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 94 Deruis Celebin. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 95 Giafer Rais. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 96 Dardagan the Gouernour of the Arsenall. The left Wing. 1 The first was an Admirall, whereof was Captaine Carau Hozias, a Pyrate. 2 Catalus, a Pyrate. With Gallies of Natolia. 3 Chiuzel Sinam. With Gallies of Natolia. 4 Chior Mehemet. With Gallies of Natolia. 5 Hignau Mustafa. With Gallies of Natolia. 6 Cademly Mustafa. With Gallies of Natolia. 7 Vschiufly Memy. With Gallies of Natolia. 8 Carau Morat. With Gallies of Natolia. 10 Passa Deruis. With Gallies of Natolia. 11 Iagly Osman. With Gallies of Natolia. 12 Pisman Rais. With Gallies of Natolia. 13 Tasciuis Sisman. With Gallies of Natolia. 14 Iesil Hogly. With Gallies of Natolia. 15 Cara Cialibina, Captaine of small Gallies.
16 Suizi Memi. They hadde small Galleyes, and dyd obey Cara Cialibin 17 Magli Rays. They hadde small Galleyes, and dyd obey Cara Cialibin 18 Oscy Assan. They hadde small Galleyes, and dyd obey Cara Cialibin 19 Cumigy Hasuf. They hadde small Galleyes, and dyd obey Cara Cialibin 20 Cadeh Sidir. These 2. had Gal∣leyes of Constāti. 21 Osman Rais. These 2. had Gal∣leyes of Constāti. 22 Carapery, a pyrate, & also a Capteine of small Gal. 23 Iulio Peruis. These had small galleies, & wer cō∣maūded by Cara∣pery, their captain. 24 Calabodan Soliman. These had small galleies, & wer cō∣maūded by Cara∣pery, their captain. 25 Iachuli Amat. These had small galleies, & wer cō∣maūded by Cara∣pery, their captain. 26 Sayr Giafer. These had small galleies, & wer cō∣maūded by Cara∣pery, their captain. 27 Chior Memy. These had small galleies, & wer cō∣maūded by Cara∣pery, their captain. 28 Giusuel Giafer, with a Galleye of Constantinople. 29 Ramazzan. 30 Calemy Memi. 31 Giesman Ferrat. 32 Hiupris Assan. 33 Zambul Murat. 34 Sarmusach Rais. 35 Tunis Suliman. 36 Calcepy Iusuf. 37 Techedel Assan. 38 Cian Memij. 39 Osman Bagli. 40 Caragial with the Admiral Galley of Algier. 41 Caraman Ali. 42 Alman. 43 Sinam Celebin. 44 Agdagy Mustafa. 45 Daglias Ali. 46 Seith. 47 Perius Selim. 48 Murat Derus. These had small & also some com∣mon Galleyes of Algier. 49 Hes Ogly. These had small & also some com∣mon Galleyes of Algier. 50 Muchaczur Ali. These had small & also some com∣mon Galleyes of Algier. 51 Ioias Osman. These had small & also some com∣mon Galleyes of Algier. 52 Saly Deli. These had small & also some com∣mon Galleyes of Algier.
53 Nasut Fachir, with a Gallie of Constantinople. 54 Gimongy Mustafa. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 55 Rustan Cinigy. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 56 Baly. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 57 Dauid Ally. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 58 Sitinau Rais. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 59 Caram Hidir. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 60 Magar Ferat. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 61 Arnaut Alius. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 62 Nafis Rais. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 63 Curmur Rhodo. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 64 Cos Clueagin. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 65 Clusly Memi. Their Gallies were of Nigreponto. 67 Caram Bey, with the Admiral of the sonnes of Vlue∣ciali. 68 Deli Murat. They had small gallies of Vallona. 69 Abazar Rais. They had small gallies of Vallona. 70 Scin Schiander. They had small gallies of Vallona. 71 Alman Bally. They had small gallies of Vallona. 72 Assan Suambar. They had small gallies of Vallona. 73 Seit Aga. They had small gallies of Vallona. 74 Assan Sinam. They had small gallies of Vallona. 75 Cumy Falagan. They had small gallies of Vallona. 76 Osman Ginder. Their Gallies were of Suriasaro. 77 Dermar Bey. Their Gallies were of Suriasaro. 78 Iusuf Alius. Their Gallies were of Suriasaro. 79 Carau Alman. Their Gallies were of Suriasaro. 80 Murat Biassan. Their Gallies were of Suriasaro. 81 Carabiney, gouernour of Suriasaro. Their Gallies were of Suriasaro. 82 Calan Bastagy. These gallies wer of Cō∣stantinople. 83 Caraby. These gallies wer of Cō∣stantinople. 84 Giafer Hidi. These gallies wer of Cō∣stantinople. 85 Ferath. These gallies wer of Cō∣stantinople. 86 Memy Beogly. These gallies wer of Cō∣stantinople. 87 Osman Piry. These gallies wer of Cō∣stantinople. 88 Piry Raia. These gallies wer of Cō∣stantinople.
89 Casam Rais. These Gallies were of Con∣stantinople. 90 Talatagi Rais. These Gallies were of Con∣stantinople. 91 Rus Celebin. These Gallies were of Con∣stantinople. 92 Tatar Alius. These Gallies were of Con∣stantinople. 93 Oluzali the king of Algier, with an Admirall gallie. The battaile of succour. 1 Was an Admirall Gallie of Constantinople, gouerned by Amruat? Dragut Rais. 2 Caram Casly. These were Foists. 3 Hassam Reis. These were Foists. 4 Abdula Reis, and that was a little Gallie. 5 Aligan Assan. These were also Foistes. 6 Cus Ali. These were also Foistes. 7 Giuzel Ali. These were also Foistes. 8 Curtat Celebin. These were also Foistes. 9 Dely bey. 10 Sandagy Memy, this was also a Foist. 11 Dardagno Reis, and he had an Admirall foist of Con∣stantinople. 12 Deli Dorni, and he had a gallie. 13 Caidar Memi, the gouernour of the Isle of Scio. 14 Shetagi Osman. These had Foists. 35 Haeder. These had Foists. 16 Delius Heder. These had Foists. 17 Armat Memi. These had Foists. 18 Susan. Reis. These had Foists. 19 Giafer Bey. 20 Cabil Sinam, his was a foist. 21 Amurat Reis. These were foists. 22 Sariogy Grafer. These were foists. 23 Mor Ali. These were foists. 24 Piali Murat, and this was a small Gallie. 25 Caragiali Rais. These were Foists. 26 Murat Alius. These were Foists. 27 Iumez Alius. These were Foists.
28 Assan Sinian, a Gallie of Constantinople. 29 Bostagi Murat, a Foist. 30 Deli Suliman: This was an Admirall Gallie of Constantinople. The Nauie being distributed in this manner, they lan∣ched forth the seauenth of October, and came to the coast of Galanga, two houres before Sunne set, and there they stay∣ed. But our men, because they had decréed to fight, determi∣ned with common consent to depart out of hand from the vale of Alexandria, that making towardes Patras, they might doe what in them laie, to prouoke the enimie to bat∣taile. Yea, and if perhaps they would refuse it, that then they should goe farther forth, euen vnto the mouth of the gulfe of Patras, and by battering the Castels, and pittifullie wast∣ing ye places adioyning, vrge thenimie to battaile. Therfore Don Iohn, the high Admirall Generall, beeing verie desi∣rous, that those things which had béene decréed by common counsaile, might bee executed, and namelie being at that time earnestlie desired and egged on by Augustine Barbarigo, a verie valiant man, and verie zealous of the Venetian safe∣tie, departed from the vale the same night, which went be∣fore the seauenth of October, béeing Sundaie, although hee had no verie good winde, and kept his course to wardes the rockes Cruzulari, which are not farre from the maine, with the intent to assaile the enimie the next morning in the breake of the daie. But they on the other side had the same saterdaie shew∣ed great signe of ioy, triumphing before the victorie, because they thought that they had now alreadie gotten our Na∣uie wholie at their deuotion, and wrought their pleasure therewithall. Wherefore they also launched from thence the eight of October, verie earlie in the morning, hoping to finde our men yet in the Hauen, for they did not thinke that they woulde méete them, and were now in their waie. And so they sailed with their Sailes somewhat lowe, and a good winde towardes Cefalenia, and as if GOD hadde of his immeasurable power then directed these
two most mightie fléets, one against another, although they were neuer aboue twelue miles one from other, yet one of them all this while did not sée another, for certaine eminences of the lande, one sailing againste another, not farre from the Nauie. And when both kept on their course, and our Nauie was gotten out from the Rockes Cruzula∣ri, in no verie good araie, because the rockes did impeach them, and our enimies were passing the foreland called Pes∣chieras, and of the Gréekes Mesolognias: they did first de∣scrie one another. Wherefore our men reioyced that they had happilie espied their enimie, and now they beganne to make all things readie for the fight, they set vp their net∣ting, they laied weapons of all sortes at ye sides of the Gal∣leyes, and in other conuenient places, they armed the soul∣diours with harquebusses, holbards, pikes, pollaxes, and swords, and disposed them in their places: and there were in euerie common gallie almost 200. men that vsed swords: & in the Admirals (as some were greater than another) 300. and in some 400. men. Which things béeing dispatched, they bestowed the great Guns in their places, béeing charged with chaine shot, and other square shot, and stones, and brought forth trunkes to cast wilde fire with all. And ha∣uing made readie all things with singular diligence, at last they enfranchised all the Christian prisoners that had béene condemned to the oare, pulling off their yrons, and armed them for to fight valiantlie for the name of Christ, who had made them frée, and without difference mingled them a∣mong the rest: and they in hope to obtaine libertie, did pro∣mise to performe the duetie of valiant Souldiours. And whilest that these thinges were thus in dooing, euerie Galleie was come into his appointed place, and the Ga∣leazes hadde be towed thether whereas they shoulde bée, by them to whome the charge hadde béene committed, and now all the whole Fléete was with singular silence sette and placed in conuenient order and araie. But our enimies comming on-ward as fast as we, dyd also prepare them∣selues to fight.
And when they saw that Iohn Andrew Doria, the Captain of the right wing, being accompanied with many Galleies, stretched out his wing more into the seaward, they hadde thought that he had fledde. As also many of our men when they saw the enimies to make out into the sea with their sailes hoised vp aloft, they then thought that the enimie had fledde. And this false coniecture on both sides, made both our men, and our enimies the more bold and couragious to fight. The two Nauies being thus furnished & arranged, did set forward to fight valiantly, and occupied so great a space of the sea, as séemed vnto them sufficient to kéepe them from running on the shore, and making thereby shipwrack, and so came faire and softly one towards the other. And now our men had shut and locked all the cabines, a certaine few excepted, for the hurt men to be carried into, and out of whome the scribes were to supply things necessarie. And that whilest they were sailing towards the battaile, they might repaire the strength of their bodies, they distributed Bread, Wine, Chéese, and such like victualls, vnto the soul∣diours, thoroughout euery Galley. But in the meane time, that the souldiours were at their victualls, the high Admi∣rall Generall him selfe, Don Iohn of Austria, going a bord a Skiffe, accompanied with Don Iohn de Cardona, went spedely about all the whole Nauy, omitting no one thing that doth beséeme a Prince and a valiant Generall. He ex∣horted both the Captaines of the Galleyes, and also all the rest of the souldiours for to fight valiantly, for the name of Christ, for their Sauiour himselfe would be present to help them, if they dyd the duetie of stout souldiours, and that he would giue them assured victorie: That this was the one∣ly occasion to reuenge so many iniuries receaued, and to at∣taine immortall glorie. Whiles he spake thus, many aunswered him couragi∣ously: that he should not in any wise doubt of their prow∣esse, for they were come thether for no other entent, & ther∣fore they would accomplish the duetie of valiant men. This being done, he returned to his Galley Royall: neither was
he him selfe also lesse encouraged by the valour of Colonna and Venien, the Admiralls of the Hopes & Venetian for∣ces, then he himselfe had before confirmed the rest, with his owne prowesse. For they being now armed, had so exhor∣ted, prouided and commaunded, that they omitted nothing that  make for the winning of so great a victorie. And now the Ensignes of all sorts were aduanced in the masts of euerie Galley, and in the high Admiral General Galley of Don Iohn of Austria, they hanged soorth the Ensigne of the Holie League, where were depainted the armes of the confederate Princes: & that the heartes of all men might yet be more incensed to prowesse: they made a great noise & signe of ioye with Drums, Trumpets, & Fiftes & other kinde of instruments, & with a loude voice called vpon God Almightie, one in Trinitie. Also Priestes going from the puppe of the galley to the stem, did exhort all men with ef∣fectual words, to be valiant, for Christ himself would come downe from heauen, because they fought for his name, and would be present himselfe to help them all. By the which exhortations of the Priestes and Admiralls, all men were so thoroughly confirmed with concordious consent, that they were readie to enter into, and to vndertake any daunger. But it was much more worthy of admiration, that at the very same moment, they that vntill that very instant had borne great hatred, and vsed extreme enimitie one to an other, were then mutinally reconciled one vnto other, wher∣vnto they could neuer before be brought, neither by inter∣cession of friends, nor by Magistrates for feare of punish∣ment. Such certes was the power and goodnesse of God, that brought to passe that those that persecuted one an other before with deadly hatred, did now vppon a sodaine forget∣ting all miuries, mutually embrace one an other. But such was the nature of the place where the two fléetes did one happen on thother, that it threatned manifest daun∣ger vnto them that would flye: both for that the fléetes were now to néere one an other, and also because that gulfe of the sea was nothing greater, for it was not in compasse
round about aboue 250. miles, and almost on euerie side in∣closed either with the maine land, or Ilands, the Sea that runneth betwéene them being scarse twentie or fiue & twen∣tie miles broade. For on the North they had a part of Al∣bania called Natalico, which reacheth from the Ile of Saint Maura to Lepanto, 80 miles in length. On the East, was the coast of Morea, which lyeth out in length 70. miles frō the entrance of ye gulfe of Patras, to the Cape Torneseo. On the South, they had the Ile of Zante, whose length is 25. miles: & on the West Cefalenia, and the Ile of S. Maura, of whom thone is 40. miles long, thother 15. On the coast of Albania, almost a mite frō the maine, rise vp the 3. Rocks Cruzulari, differing in greatnesse, but yet neither of them notorious great: they are from Lepanto 45. miles, from the Ile of S. Maura 35. from Cefalenia 70. and finally from Zante 80. miles. Now these rockes were to our men as they sayled on the North, and they had Lepanto & the Gulfe of Patras betwen the East & North. Betwene the South & the East, was a créeke of the sea, that runneth in betwene Mo∣rea, and Zante 25. miles broade. They hadde betweene the South and the West, the sea that lyeth betwéene Cefale∣nia, and Zante, 12. miles broade. The gulfe called Viscar∣do sited to them on the West, was but seuen miles broade. After that the two fléetes had thus on a sodain, vnlooked for, descryed one the other, they could not auoyde the battaile. Wherefore when one about Don. Iohn saide, that it were good yt a consultation were held before yt they descended to the fight: Don Iohn auns wered very wisely, That now there was neither time nor place left for new counsailes and aduises, and that it was enough and enough againe, if that euerie man would by fighting valiantly, endeuour to execute yt which had bene before cōcluded in the coūsaile. But our enimies had 270. vessells, of whom 200. wer com∣mon Gallies, fiftie smal galleies, and twentie Foistes. But they had distributed all this Nauie into foure battailes, as also our men had done. And the middle battaile Ali him∣selfe ledde, and he had therein nintie Galleies.
In the middest of whome he abiding, was garded on the right side with Portau Bassa, and on the left with the Trea∣surer of the Nauy: who did defense him on both sides with eche of them thrée Admiralls. The right wing, which was opposed against our left, had fiftie Galleyes, and Mehemet Siroch, for Captaine. Their left wing, which came against our right, had 90. Galleies vnder the conduct of Oluzali. In the battaile of succour were not aboue ten gallies and 20. Foistes. Being thus arranged, they came against our men, but yet otherwise affected in minde thē they were, for Don Iohn, Colonna, Venieri, and the rest of our Captaines, and voluntarie men, yea, and all the whole fléete, had with one consent, determined to fight, and therefore they went foorth to méete with their enimies, not onely with entent to fight, but also with good hope to obteine the victorie. But the Turkish Bassaes, with the rest of ye Pyrates, and the whole Nauy went to méete our men with this minde, that they dyd assuredly think that they would flye, insomuch that they measured the euent of the fight more by their owne light beléefe, and their former successe, then by comparing of the powers: because they could not learne in so short a time the strength of our holie league. Wherefore they were in trueth astonned when they comming néerer had séene that the power of our nauie was so great. But séeing there was now no time at all left for to consult, and they saw that our men drew towards them couragiously, they also prepa∣red all things necessarie for fight. They aduaunced first very proude and rich Ensignes, and then after the maner of that nation, the rest of the Galleies being almost filled full of other innumerable Ensignes, they vehemently inci∣ted all their men to fight valiantly, setting before them the fauour of the great Emperour, and the hope of an inesti∣mable prise and bootie. And yet they had still thought, that our men would flye, but when the néerer they came, the greater they found our mens forces to be: then they began to doubt of the matter, & saw that they must néedes fight. But although this was so, yet the Captaines omitted no∣thing
that became valiant men. For séeing that they sawe but onelie the right wing, she middle battaile, and the bat∣taile of succour, neither could yet sée the left wing, because it was hidden by the maine, they did not yet suppose the for∣ces of our men to be greater than Caracoza bad reported vnto them. But when they had within short time after de∣scried also all the lefte wing, and had séene the Galleazes verie happilie rowed forth with Dares, (a thing that they had thought impossible) they beganne to bée a little afraid. In our Nauie the Drums and the rest, of the instruments played, and sounded still incessantlie, and all our whole fléete went forward in the forme of a croisant, with their ranges verie well kept, and euerie Gallie was so farre one from another, that the Dares of the one dyd not let another: for the which consideration, the rowers were forced to marke and obserue exactlie the motion of their fellowes, that the order which had béene before appointed by the Captaines, might bée continuallie kept. And now the two nauies were not far from asunder, when the maiestie of God being wearie of the prosperous succes∣ses of the most cruell tyrant, and taking compassion of the wrongfull and heauie oppression of the Christian common wealth, decréed at the length one daie to deliuer and extoll the name and honour of Christ our sauiour, and dulie to pu∣nish the tyrant. And he first beganne this thing, when hée did by a certaine meane beyond all mens expectation, a∣laie the winde that hetherto had blowen against our men, and ill for them, and made the Sea so quiet and calme that it might séeme to bée rather lande than water. This happened about the leauenth houre, and now the Nauye were almost vpon the verie point to ioyne together, when the Sunne that had passed the fore part of the Heauens, did with his beames strike the enimies, who stoode Eastward: at which time a certaine lyght small winde good for our men, beganne to blowe againe from the West, in déede so greate, that it carried the mists and smoakes from the sight of our men vppon their enimies.
Now a péece of Ordenances shot out of Ali his Admiral Galley, and ans wered by two other shotte from the two wings, was a signe for to assaile our men with a mightie séese. So then they making an hideous crie mended theyr course, rowing towards our men a maine which béeing de∣scried by Venerio, he strengthened his Gallie at the puppe with the verie well furnished Gallies of Iohn Loredano, and Catharino Malipetro. And Colonna did the like, calling two other vnto his defence: and now they were come so néere together, that one might reach another with their Or∣denance, wherefore our sixe Galeazes who went before all the rest of the fléete, verie lustilie assailed the enimie with continual thūder of shot. And because they neuer missed, they made such a slaughter and spoile, that they layed the grea∣test foundation of breaking the enimies, and the neerer they approched, the more mischiefe they did them. In this terri∣ble storme of the Ordenance, the enimies could not repaire themselues, wherefore being stroken with feare, they kept not their cankes, yet they reselued to goe forward with ob∣stinate hearts, that passing betwéene our Galeazes, who they thought had borne no Ordenance on their sides, they might enclose the rest of our Nauie. And when they passed betwéen them, our men beganne to thunder vppon them ten times worse: and did indomage them so much the more, as they were staied and their course hindered by the wind that blew against them, for that being a litle augmented did let them, so that they could not soone passe beyond the storme of migh∣rie pellets, and also it carrying all the smoake vpon them, made them that they could sée almost nothing, and that al∣so gaue our men that shot their great Ordenance lustelie out of the Galeazes, time for to recharge and shoote off their péeces againe, with whom almost the third part of their Na∣uie was destroied and broken, not without the death of ma∣ny men. So that now our men heard a mightie cracking and noise of the falling downe of Masts and saile yardes, and of the Galleyes broken trauerse and drowned, many Gallies were séene light in fire, and other stoode destitute of
maisters to guide the healme. Moreouer, there was séene an infinite number of men, oares, and saile yards, barrells, hogsheads, and all sortes of weapons swimming in the sea: & therfore was this accident most worthie of wender, bée∣cause these sixe Galeazes alone (the vse of whom had neuer ben before found out in sea fight) did make such a slaughter and spoile of the enimies by turning themselues round, and shooting now from the stem, then from the puppe and sides. In this so great a checke, Mehemet Syroch that lead the right wing of the enimies, seuered himselfe a little from the rest of the fléete, that he might prouide for the safetie of his charge, and créeping close to the shoare, came against our left wing. But that being espied by Augustine Barbarigo, he went forth to méete him, kéeping his ranges and araie most exactlie, and taking occasion by the helpe of a certaine mountaine called Mahanguli, did so stoppe and shut vp his waie, that he could not passe by, no not with the least of his vessels. And Marino Contarini, the Nephew of Baibarigo, vnder∣standing that so great a number of Gallyes ranne against his vnkle, made in, and impelled with too good a perswasion of his owne valour, and affinitie of bloud, rowed in before all the rest of his fellowes: so that the great ordenance thun∣dering on both sides, a mightie fight was begunne in this place. The left wing of the enimies which Oluzali lead, and our right commanded by Doria, were almost ioyned soge∣ther: but that both the Captaines being verie skilfull in sea fight, did either expect some occasion to be ministred to haue a faire hand, but by diuerse and differing meanes. For Oluzali béeing readie both for fight and pollicie, obserued which waie the victory enclined, but Doria because he knew himselfe farre inferiour in forces, for that Oluzali had nine∣tie Gallies, and he himselfe but fiftie, held his enimies in suspense as much as he could: for the which reason hee made out into the Sea, with certaine of his Gallyes,
almost a mile from the rest of his wing. In the middle battayle, Don Iohn, Colonna, and Vene∣rio, kéeping their ranges verie wel and close, had with their battaile met with the middle battaile of their enimies: but yet before they came to hand strokes, they had shot off their great ordenance twice or thrice, yea, and some of them fiue times, which was both a great terrour, & also a detriment to the enimie: & so much the more in truth, because that many of their péeces woulde not goe off, by reason (as it was af∣terwardes found) that our men had shot their Gunstones into them: and againe, those that woulde goe off, could lit∣tle endomage our men, because the deckes of our enimies Gallies were so much higher than ours, that although they did leuell their péeces a little downward, yet the shot dyd alwayes flie ouer our Gallyes. But notwithstanding these incommodities, they lyke men in a rage, rowed in still, and ioyned with our men, at which time there arose a mightie tempest of arrowes and smal shot, and all the whole sea séemed to burne, by reason of so many arteficiall fires cast on the one side and the other by diuerse engines. And now in some places, foure Gallies encountered with thrée, and sire with foure, and in other also sixe with one, and one leaping into the other Gallies, made a great slaughter with swords, daggers, kniues, battleaxes, arowes, wild fire, and other short weapons: and also when many woulde for diuerse causes retire themselues, they were hurledhead long into the Sea, the which was thereby now become as redde as bloud. In the meane time Syroch had in the right wing of the enimie felte the force of our valyant men of the lefte wing, and sawe that hée coulde not effect that which hée hadde thought to haue done, because hée beheld his Gal∣leyes to lie broken, their Saile yardes, and Masts fallen downe, and other things caried vp into the ayre by the shot of our great Ordenaunce. Wherefore he endeauoured to his vttermost, to kéepe his men in their duetie, but yet for all that euer he coulde
doe, many of his galleies at length coueting to escape out of so great a slaughter and garboile, and to saue themselues, ranne headlong for hast on the shore: after which mischance most leaped into the Sea, that they might escape into the maine by swimming, but many being wounded, and many vnskilfull of swimming, or else hindered and impeached by some other meanes, stayed still because they had some hope in the clemencie of the Christians, that they would saue their liues. At the which place this olde manner of the na∣tion of the Turks, which is now plainly become a custome, is worthie of noting. For at the beginning of an encounter they doe shew singular fiercenesse, with a most vehement féese: but a little while after, when they doe perceue yt they are stoutly resisted, they casting away courage, betake them to flight. And certes, at this time they could not hope for helpe of their infinit number of footemen and horsemen, as they are wont in battailes by land. Wherefore when they could not withstand the valour of the Christians, who ha∣uing entred their gallies, slew all they founde, they within short time forsooke their Gallies, and ranne away: at the which time the Christians that had bene before prisoners in the Turkish Gallies, perceiuing that now they were come into the hands of our men, taking the Turkes their owne weapons, brake of their chaines and manackles, and valiantly reuenged the crueltie of the tyrannie which they had suffered vntill that instant. Marke Quirmi, and Antony Canali, who were in this same wing, but in an other part, made out, but yet they could not so soone shut in this wing of thenimies, but that they had first all leaped into the sea. Yet all the galleies were taken by our men, and those that were left in them were all slaine, for to reuenge their cruel∣tie. But of our Captaines there died in this left wing Ma∣rino Contarini, Vincent Quirini, and Andrew Babarigo. But Augustine Barbarigo being shot into the eye with an arrow, receaued a deadly wound, the which did incontinent∣ly bereaue him of his speach, of whose death we wil speake hereafter. Also Marke Antony Ciconia, was very sore hurt
with wilde fire. In the middle battaile Don Iohn de Austria encounte∣red with Ali himselfe, and two other Captaines that com∣manded Admirall Gallies. And Ali had in his Admirall Galley thrée hundred Ianizars, with harquebusses, and an hundreth with crossebowes, who fought all verie valiantly both with shot and swordes. And againe with Don Iohn were foure hundred chosen harquebuziers of Sardinia, vn∣der the conduct of Lopes de Figheroa campe maister, and many other Gentlemen and valiant men besides, ye fought with great prowesse. Colonna plied with might and paine to laie a boord the Galley that encountered him, and was vehementlie stirred vp thereto, because he sawe a mightie slaughter of his enimies committed by his fellowes before his face. Neither did also Veneiro lesse execute the dutie of a good Admirall, for that his Gallie was to fight with thrée principall Captaines of the enimies, and seauen Admirall Gallies, to whose succour also did other euer and anone come. But in the meane time when the great Commenda∣dor of Messina, sawe that our thrée high Admiralls were to fight with such a great number of ye enimies, he taking with him the Gallies of Loredano and Malipetro, went thether with a great spéed and valour, and thrusting into the middest of the troupe, committed a great slaughter. But Loredano & Malipetro entering into the thickest of the fight, like valy∣ant men, were straight waie slaine with the ordenance: but the rest that were in their Gallies were so farre from béeing dismaide with their death, that they rather hauing encreased their courage, and after a sort, their strength, with desire of reuenge and anger, began to fight ten times more fiercelie: so that within short time they had taken two Gallies of the enimies, and so many had Veniero and Colonna ouercome, that fought with them. And almost at the verie same mo∣ment Don Iohn of Austria, who vntill now had borne the charge and force of fiue Gallies, and had, conquered thrée of them, did take the Admirall royall of Ali, whō he had slain, but had beene before beaten thrice out of her with greate
slaughter, after that he was come as farre as the mast. So then whēn Ali was slaine our men ioyfullie cried, victorie, victorie, for although then had done the like before, yet it was then doubtfull, because both sides yet fought most eagerlie, and verie great spoile and slaughter was yet committed on both sides. But now the enimies resisted our men no more, so that they did acknowledge them for victors: wherefore our men were now busied in gathering together the pillage, and rather in binding than killing the enimies. And now a verie great number of principall men had ben either taken or slaine by our men, but almost an infinite number of Ia∣nizars and other souldiours, insomuch that they onelie esca∣ped, that foreséeing the entire destruction of their fléet by the pittifull spoile that the Galeazes made, had fled awaie at the verie beginning of the battaile in skiffes and other small vessels, as Portau Bassa did: who straight after the begin∣ning of the fight, stale awaie priuitie into the maine in a small vessell, and saued himselfe by flight. There died also of our Captaines in this middle battaile Iohn Loredano, Ca∣therino Malipetro, Hierome Veniero, Fances Bono, Iohn Baptista Benedicto a Cypriot, and Iames Tresino of Vicen∣za, and ther were wounded, Iohn Bembo, Theodore Balbi, the Prior of Messina, and many other noble men & knights. In the left wing of the enimie, when Oluzali vnderstood that his fellowes were discomfited, and perceiued that hée might be assailed & broken by Doria, who did now acknow∣ledge the happie euent of this battaile, began diligentlie to consider what meanes he might make to saue himselfe. Wherefore séeing certaine of the Gallies of our ryght wing diuided and separated from the rest, hée taking holde of that occasion, valiantlie charged them. But cur men re∣ceiued them verie couragiouslie, trusting not so much to their own strength, as they assuredly hoped for spéedie suc∣cour from their fellowes. But Doria, who I tolde you be∣fore had made out into the Sea with a parte of his wing, that hée might suspende Oluzali from fight,) was too farre off for to come to succour them presentlie: but
he had prudently fet a compasse as farre as the Galleaze of Pitano, that he might assaile Oluzalion the back. But when Oluzah had perceaued him, & saw that he prepared to come against him with many of his owne Galleies, and other of the left wing, he passingly plagued these fewe that he had assailed, and sodainly flying vp into the sea, fled away with many of his Gallies. But he had also taken of our Gallies, and being tied to his gallies, had dragged after him, the gal∣lies of Peter Bua of Corfu, of the Prior of Messina, and of Lewes Cipico of Trau. In this forious and fierce conflict, Benedict Soranzo, although he had receaued thrée wounds in his face, yet he fought most valiantly, & with a few men defended his galley a good long while, vntill that the forces of the enimies being mightely augmented, they tooke away from him with his Galley his life also, for a sacrifice vnto Christ: Neither yet was his death vnreuenged, for when the enimies were entred into the Galley, there was a fire kindled in the munitions, wherewith the Galley was con∣sumed, and the enimies cast into the aire. There dyed here also besides Soranzo, Hierome Contarini, Marke Antony Lando, Marke Antony Pasqualigo, Iames Medi, George Corneli and Peter Bua. But among them yt were grieuosly hurt, was Lewes Cypico of Trau. For after he had fought valiantly, and had but onely sixe men left him, and had re∣ceaned seuen very great wounds, he being at the last van∣quished, was carried away with his galley. But he and the Prior of Messina, were soone succoured, and rescued, & their Gallies taken away from Oluzali, who had towed them af∣ter him, as taken prisoners, and they themselues were brought backe againe aliue. In this encounter with Oluzali, there were much enda∣maged besides these, a galley of Sauoy, an other of Florence, and a third of Spaine: and although both in this wing, and also in other places, many of our men had bene grieuously hurt and staine, yet so great was their valour, that with the aide of Gods goodnesse, they lost not one galley, but that of Peter Bua of Corfu, which was carryed away by the eni∣mie,
And now at ye 21. houre the enimie was vtterlie bro∣ken. and ouercome, so that the rest of the Gallies that remai∣ned were all taken by our men without resistance. But they could not pursue Oluzali, because it was almost night, and also for that he beeing got vp into the maine Sea was said to bée gone too farre for to bée recouered. But this now was a most memorable and horrible spec∣tacle, that all the sea was séene red of bloud, and almost an infinite number of dead carcases were séene swimming therein, and a wonderfull number of cries were heard of the wounded and swimming men, as well of the one side as the other, calling for helpe: yea, and oftentimes our men and the enimies would at one time take holde of one péece of woode, séeking thereby to saue themselues, with such shri∣king, roaring, and pittifull cries euerie where, as woulde haue amazed a man, and all these thinges seemed to bée so much the greater and more pittifull, as the aire waxed darker by the approach of night. After that the Fléete of Oluzali was now come into our mens handes, they fell to getting and gathering toge∣ther of the prise and pillage: and therein they spent that little of the daie that was lefte, and at euening went mer∣rilie with the Ottomanicall spoiles into certaine Hauens called Petalici. And this was the successe of this battaile by Sea, which doubtlesse was very great: for since Augustus his time, ther was not so great a battaile fought by Sea. And this victorie of ours ought to be esteemed the more worthie of admira∣tion, because it befell vnto vs néere to that place where Au∣gustus Caesar did long before discomfite Marke Antonie at the foreland of Actium, where now Preuesa is. Neither doth it also lesse make for the augmentation of the renowme of this famous victorie, that although they fought but onelie foure houres, yet they trode to péeces the head of that great Serpent of the East, and brake the strength of Selim, that most mightie tyrant. The first houre of the night after all our whole Nauie
was brought into the Hauen through the singular industrie of our Captaines, there sodainlie arose so great a wind, and so great a tempest, that the inhabitants of that place did af∣firme, that they neuer in all their liues felte the like. But our men lying ther safelie, wer so careful for the healing of the sicke and wounded, that the Captaines did take them into their owne cabines. Now to grow to an end, singular was the wisedome and diligence of our thrée high Admiralls, Don Iohn de Austria, Marke Antonie de Colonna, and Sebastiano Venieri, in learning out the state and intent of the enimie, and also their industrie in sage consulting and discréete appointing what should be done: and then again, no lesse praise worthie was the dexteritie and readinesse of the rest of the Captaines in the executiō. And in perticular, the Marques de Santa Cruz, that lead the battaile of succour, shewed rare prudence in sending of succour with singular spéed vnto those that were oppressed by the enimie: and finallie, wonderfull was the valour of the common Souldiours in the action and fight. And to conclude, all that were there present at this bat∣taile, and fought for the name of Christ their sauiour, if they bée aliue, may glorie that they were pertakers of this so great a victorie: but if they lost their liues there, they doe inioy the rest of the blessed, and hauing exchanged this mor∣tall life for immortall, doe possesse the true fruite of the vic∣torie: the which may bée a great comfort to their parents and kinsfolke. For séeing that we doe knowe that no man can be borne immortall of mortall parents, the onelie waie to obtaine immortall life, is to get glorie and praise by ver∣tue and valour. The number of those that were slaine on our part, as farre as could bée vnderstood, were 7656. & they were these. Augustine Barbarigo, the high Prouiditore of the Vene∣tians, who hauing as I tolde you before, lost the vse of his tongue by a wound, when he vnderstoode that our men had obtained the victorie, lifting his handes vp to heauen, dyd declare the valour of his heart by euident signes, and thrée
dayes after the battaile, deprting out of this mortall lyfe into heauen, carried with him the triumph of the Turkish tyrannie. Seuentéene Captaines of Gallies. Eight men in compleat armour. Fiue Chaplaines, Priests. Sixe Contes of Gallies. Fiue maisters of Gallies. Sixe Scribes. Seuen Pilots. A hundred and thirtéene Gunners. Thirtie two shipwrights appointed to repaire the Gal∣lies. A hundred and foure and twentie Marriners. Nine hundred and fiue and twentie voluntarie souldi∣ours. Two thousand, two hundred, thrée score and fouretéene rouers. A thousand, thrée hundred, thirtie & thrée, common soul∣diours. Two thousand of the Spanish fléete dead. Eight hundred in the Popes fleete. But on the other side there were of the enimies slaine or taken, nine and twentie thousand, nine hun∣dred, foure score and ten, that is to wit. Thirtie foure Captaines of the dignitie of Sanzaches. An hundred and twentie Captaines of Gallies. Fiue and twentie thousand Ianizars, voluntarie foote men and rowers. Thrée thousand, eight hundred, fortie sixe taken. Our men did take 117. common Gallies, and thirtéene small, and all of them verie well furnished with bread, tal∣low, butter, rise, beanes, and other such kinde of victualls, and the same night they carried them awaie with them into the Hauen. Besides these, there were drowned,
or otherwise destroyed about foure score of the enimies gal∣lies: and those that escaped were thought to bée almost fortie. Which thinges béeing thus dispatched, our men ly∣ing safe in the Hauen, praised God for giuing of them so great a victorie, and kept it holie daie for the space of thrée daies, shewing sundrie signes of reioycing, and making good chéere. Neither did they in the meane time omit anie of those things that might make for the reparation of theyr Gallies, or for the pursuite of the fruite of the victorie. For the which cause when they had tarried in those Hauens, vn∣till the fiftéenth of October: yet by reason of the aduerse sea∣son of Winter at hand, and because many of their woun∣ded men did dailie drop awaie by death, they thought good to depart from thence. For Don Iohn, because hée thought that no memorable thing more coulde bée done that yéere, would saile towardes Messina, but did put them in great hope, that he would ioyne his forces with the rest the next yéere. But in truth he did not so, neither the next yéere, nor next after that: so that the Venetiās after yt they had spent in these wars 14000. li. of gold (euerie pound conteining 100. Duckets) were forced to by peace of the Turke, who also ha∣uing repaired his Nauie, did in Anno. 1574. conquere the kingdome of Tunes from the Spaniard, & his vassall king, slaying aboue 10000. Hyspaniards in the Guletta & Biserta. So that the fruit that the Christians gained by giuing this great ouerthrow, was nothing but the recouering of an ob∣scure towne or two that Winter by the Venetian Fléete, besides the staie of the Turkish prosperous course, and the prise and spoile gotten in this battaile, the which when they came to Corsu, they diuided by common consent, as fol∣loweth. Gallies. The Pope had ninetéene common Gallies, & two small. The king of Spaine 58. common Gallies with an halfe, and sixe small Gallies and a halfe. The Signorie of Venice 39. common Gallies & a halfe, and foure small gallies and an halfe. Great Ordenance.
The Pope had nintene great péeces, and of péeces that shot stones thrée, lesser péeces. 42. The King of Spaine fiftie eight great péeces & an halfe, eight péeces to shoote stones in, and 128. lesser péeces. The Seignorie of Venice had 39. great péeces and an halfe, fiue stone péeces, and an halfe, 86. lesser péeces. Prisoners. The Pope had 881. The King of Spaine had 1713. The Signorie of Venice 162. The chiefe men of name takn prisoners, were the San∣zaches of Alexandria, and Nigreponto, and two of All, the Admiralls sonnes. The Battaile of Alcazar, fought in Barbarie, betwene Sebastian King of Portugall, and Abdelmelec the King of Marocco, the fourth of August 1578. Taken out of a namelesse Portugall auctor, trans∣lated into Latine by Thomas Freigins. THat ye may the better vnderstand what the principall Persons that were present & fought at this Bat∣taile were, & also to know the quarel and cause thereof, I haue thought good to insert myne auctors whole Historie, not omitting his, as it wer pleasant and profitable preamble of the foundation and familie of these mightie Kings that reigne now at Marocco. The founder of that familie and house, which are now Kings of Marocco, and the first king of that stocke, was a certaine Moore of the Mahometicall superstitiō, called Mu∣ley Mahamet Xeque. His father Muley Xarif, being ac∣compted in his countrie of Mecha in Arabia, the chiefe man
of the Moores (as he that was descended of the bloud & line of the damned and cursed false Prophet Mahomet) had hea∣ped together an immeasurable masse of money, and great innumerable treasure. He being moued by I know not what dreame, did take occasion to depart out of his Coun∣trie, and to get him into Africa with all that he had. Wher∣fore that he might bring to effect that which he had deter∣mined with himselfe, he going from Mecha with his onelie sonne, whom we spake off before, and trauailing all Aegypt and Africa, and other regions subiect to the Turkish Em∣pire, came at last into that parte of Barbarie that is at this daie called Sus. In this Countrie when Muley Xerife had gotten a great opinion of wisedome (as touching their sect and religion) among the Moores of Barbarie, and had obtai∣ned a singuler surpassing fame throughout the prouinces there▪ defiled with the superstition of Mahomet, he wanne also the grace and fauour of the Alarbes (that doe dwell in this Barbarie) and namelie of those that did inhabite in the kingdome of Sus. Héereby it came to passe that within short time he had gotten about a thousand horsemen to bée as it were his clients, vassalls, or reteiners at command: that I may passe ouer in silence a great number of seruantes and ordinarie waiters, that still attended on him with horse and armour. Through the helpe of these men and many other that did afterward ioyne with him, he tooke certain Cities of that kingdome, and made them subiect vnto him. But in all tourneies he carried about with him his sonne Muley Mahamet Xeque, that the people subdued might be sworne vnto him, and promise to doe all those things that faithfull subiects doce o performe vnto their Princes. And in déed both the Father and the sonne did so stirre them about their businesse, that within short time they had gotten them that power and strength, that they tooke by force Turodant, the head Citie of the kingdome of Sus, and there the sonne Xeque was constituted king of that Countrie. This vic∣torie did mightelie augment the power and courage of this nw king. Wherefore he ordeined a strong legion of eight
thousand pike men, with purpose to attempt the Citie of Marocco, where the Marines reigned. Wherefore leauing his Father in Sus, who being now broken with age, had be∣come vnable to do anie seruice, besieged Marocco with fiue hundred harquebussiers, and 7000. pikemen that he brought with him. The twelfth day of the siege, the citie yeelded, and taking also other cities, townes, and fortresses adioyning to Marocco, tooke vpon him the name and stile of king of Ma∣rocco and Sus. A few dayes after, he assembling a mightie armie, be∣sieged the citie of Fes: the which no man resisting, he tooks with the onelie terrour of his mightie armie, the king ther∣of (whose name was Claude) prouiding for himselfe by flight, and withdrawing into the citie of Tremissen, which was then subiect vnto him (for the Turke had as then no∣thing to doe there) where he also spent all the short time of his life that remained. But as soone as Xeque was proclai∣med king of Fes, all the cities, townes, and villages of that kingdome, sware him homage and fealtie, and subiected themselues vnto him, and the like did other Nations neere, and came vnder his obeisance of their owne accord, and yéelding him the victorie without sweate or bloud. So that the limites and bonds of his kingdome were on the East Tremissen (which at this daie is subiect vnto the Turke) & beyond mount Clario, in olde time Atlas, towards ye South, the line that goeth by the prouince of Figiga, a slope euen to Zahara (actie taken by the king of Portugal) and from hence towards the West the space of fortie leagues from the coast of the Atlantike Ocean (now Golsode Ynegas) looking to∣wards the Canaries. On the West the coasts and forelands of Aguesio, Cafi, Azamor, Sala, Larissa, Letuams, all fronter cities of that kingdome, euen to the straites of Gibaltar, towards Ceuta, Penon, & Melilla (which cities ye Catholike king of Spaine possesseth at this daie) & from hence euen to Tremessen. Ouer all these Countries long & brode▪ did Mu∣ley Mahamet Xeque raigne, & his father being shortly after dead, held thempire alone, & was the fist king of M  that house.
When Muley Mahamet had reigned many yéeres after in passing great quietnesse and peace: and was also desirous that his sonnes might enioy peacebly the kingdomes that he had gotten: being now growen in age, and loaden with yéeres, he assembled the princes, noble men and gouernours of the prouinces, subiect vnto him, that thorough their coun∣saile, he might the more maturely and wisely set an order, for the succession of his sonnes. But although he had a great number of them, as well lawfull as bastards, yet we will speake in this place onely of them, which were cause of trou∣bles and stirres in this kingdome, who were in number foure. Of whome theldest, borne in lawfull wedlocke, was called Muley Abdallas, the second and youngest of the law∣fully begotten, were called Muley Abdelmunen, and Mu∣ley Abdelmelec: the youngest of all was a bastard, called Muley Hamet, who doth at this day possesse the kingdome. But when the péeres of the kingdome were come together at the citie of Marocco (the Kings seate) and the King had proposed the matter vnto the Parliament: it was inacted by common consent, that the Kings sonnes should one suc∣céebe an other, according to their age, so that the right of the kingdome might come vnto them all, and thereby all cause of strife and contention among them, might be taken away. This decrée made by the princes, did the King like and a∣low, and commaunded that it being confirmed by his auc∣foritie, should be kept inuiolable by all their posteritie: and wrought so much, that the Princes and principall men of the kingdome did sweare, to doe their best, that it might re∣maine stable and firme for euer. But not onely the Péeres, but also the kings sonnes did take that othe: for there was no man that gainesaied this law, or was of any other minde and opinion. Wherevpon Muley Abdallas (because he was the kings eldest senne) was immediatly after nominated in the campe Prince and heire of all his Fathers kinge∣domes, and all men were sworne vnto him. These things being thus ordered and ordained, the old Ling, because ye he himselfe (as he had of long time vsed)
laie still in the Citie of Marocco, he sent the new Prince for to gouerne the kingdome of Fesse, as the people of the Countrie had requested. When he came to Fes, and was re∣ceiued verie dutifullie of the Citizens, he began his gouern∣ment ouer them verie kindlie and curteouslie, shewing him selfe verie affable & gentle vnto the people of the prouince, and promising much more lenitie and gentlenesse in time to come. Within few daies after, when Muley Mahomet X∣eque flourished in great peace, there happened a tumult in the prouince of Sus, which forced him for to leauie an armie for to represse the insolent. Hauing gottē together all things necessarie therefore, he departed out of Marocco with many horsemen, footmen, and harquebuziers, and marched towardes Sus. Now a few daies before, 500. Turkes had come to him frome Tremissen, with their Captaine (whom they do call in their language Alcaida) who counterfaited that they had runne awaie out of the garison of Tremissen, but in vie truth, they did it, that they might dispatch out of the waie (the which they did indéede) the king of Marocco, For when they came to Marocco, the king that thought they had come to serue him, caused them presentlie to be put in wages, & to follow him to the wars in Sus. So they went forth with the king, marching with him a long iourney towards Sus, but when they were come to ye confines of those two kingdomes, they hasten their purpose of murthering the king. Where∣fore about a 15. or 20. of the most audacious & desperast fellowes, faining as though they had I know not what to moue the king of, entered his pauillion, & finding him fit for their purpose, slue him & cut off his head after he was dead. This so sodaine & so vnthought of a trecherous & villanc as part, stirred vp a great tumult in the campe betweene the Turkes & the Moores (of whom the one fauoured the greate Turke, the other Muley Abdallas) & the matter at last came to that passe, ye within one houres space, aboue 1000. Moores wer slaine, & not passing fiftie Turks. Who séeing thēselues oppressed with the multitude of the Moores, withdrew them (yet still kéeping their face towards themmies, & defending
themselues into thicke woodes, and tops of mountaines of harde accesse. But when the Moores did also assaile them there, and the Turkes perceiued that they laboured in vain to saue themselues, and namelie, séeing now their victualls began to faile them: they set fire to seuen barrells of Gun∣pouder, that they had set round about them, chosing rather to destroie themselues by furious fire, than to come into the hands of the Moores their enimies. But the kings armie was also constrained to returne to Marocco, where the Prince Muley Abdallas (although that he was then in the Citie of Fes) was agayne proclaimed king. But he, as soone as he heard of his Fathers death, went forth of Fes, and when he bare him as king, there was none of the prouinces ye did not willinglie and gladly receiue him. Wherevpon within few dayes after, he gathered a mightie armie of many Nations (who offered him their ser∣uice) with the which hée marching to Marocco, was recei∣ued of the Citizens with surpassing ioy, honour, and gratu∣lation. For whilest his Father was yet liuing, he had per∣ceiued the singular fauour and good will of his subiects, and found it also after his death: because as long as he liued, he sought for nothing else but golden peace, and the quietnesse of his subiects, and to kéepe them happie and blessed, without anie harme. Whereby he gathered together so great riches and treasure, as scarce anie king that euer liued before him had gotten. So Abdallas raigned alone certaine yéeres, and kept his Court by turnes, one yere at Fesse, and two at Ma∣rocco, vntill such time as hée made an heire apparant, and instituted a successor. After Abdallas had raigned long time in singular quiet∣nesse, and had alone vsed & exercised the supreame rule & go∣uernment, he determined with himself to abrogate & disanul the law, ye his Father with the péeres of the kingdome had made, for the succession in the crowne: which should in order still descend alwaies to ye elder brother liuing. And although that Abdallas did priuelie & secretlie practise it, with those in whom he reposed greatest trust, yet notwithstanding the
matter came at length to the notice of his brothers: of whom some béeing carefull of their liues, and fearing to bée made a∣waie by some trecherie, fled out of the kingdome, as Abdel∣munen and Abdelmelec, who not without passing great pe∣rill (because there were many priuie awaites laide for them in their iourney by the seruants of their brother Abdallas) fledde to Tremissen. And béeing there, they were cur∣teouslie entertained by the Turkes, as young Gentlemen of the bloud rotall. And anone after they withdrew them∣selues to Argier, that they might liue more safelte there, vn∣der the defence of the Turkish Emperour. When Muley Abdallas, who as we told you before, priuelie compassed the murther of his brothers, that hée might safelie leaue the kingdome to his sonnes, heard that they sought to saue them selues by flying out of the Countrie, hée dissembling his anger (for it greeued him at the heart that some of them had escaped) least the rest of his brothers should bée also afraide, gathered together all his forces out of hand, vnder pretence of going to the Citie of Fes. Wherefore being first encamped before the Citie of Marocco, and anone after his Campe remooued, as though he woulde goe to Fes: When he heard that his Brothers were come to salute him, hee leauing his youngest brother (whose childish yéeres hée contemned) staied for them feare daies iourney from the Citie of Fes. So then when they were come together, and hadde sa∣luted one another, it happened that a littie while after, they suspecting no ill, nor fearing anie falschoode, were with monstrous crueltie all thrée beheaded in their Tentes▪ The which thing dyd not pricke the kinges subiectes a little at the heart, but déepelie pearced it, yet they were for∣ced to dissemble their sorrow. After that hée had done this so Tragicall an act, hée fi∣nished his iourney to Fes, to the intent for to thrust his sonne Muley Mahomet vpon the Fessans for their Prince and sole heir of all his kingdomes, & so force them to sweare faith & obedience vnto him. For although he had other childrē
and in déede more worthie of the Empire, yet because this was his eldest, and also for other causes, he rathest made choice of him to be his successour. Wherfore as soone as hée came to Fes, he assembling the States, brought the matter to that passe, that they gaue their allegeance to his sonne, & sware to be true liegemen vnto him, rather constrained by feare, than brought to it by loue and good will towards the Prince, or for anie right that he could pretend to the king∣dome. After he had dispatched these matters, and séeing ye al things had succéeded as he did wish: then, that he, who was now almost broken with age, might passe the rest of his life in quiet idlenesse, he returned with his armie to Marocco, leaning his sonne in the Citie of Fes for to gouerne that Prouince. Things standing in this state in Barbarie, ye two brothers got then to Argier, for to escape and auoide the furie of their brother Muley Abdallas, and the younger of them, Muley Abdelmelec went to Constantinople. Where he did serue so well both by sea and by land, that for his noble courage of heart, and passing strength of bodie, he allured many men to his loue, & through his valiant acts and victories gotten of his enimies, he wan the fame of a great name, not onelie a∣mong the people, but also with the Prince of the Turkes himselfe. The which thing got him not onlie singular fauor, & honor full of good will, but also gained him immeasurable riches. That I may omit with what & how great promises the Emperor of ye Turkes loded him, & in how great hope he did put him, that he wold reduce him into his fathers king∣dome, out of the which he had ben driuen by his brothers in∣iurie. But Muley Abdelmunen that abode at Argier, was so simple witted, that by the perswasiō of his brother Abdallas he returned again to Tremissen, whether Muley Mahamet ēt thrée cut throte villains for to dispatch him out of ye way. And it fel out to, as he wold haue it, for when these villains were come to Tremissen, they so well eied Abdelmunen, ye one fridaie as he was praying in the temple, they wounded him with an arow, of yt which wound he died within 2. daies
after, no auctor of the trecherie and villanous fact being knowen. When newes was brought to Abdelmelec at Constantinople, of the death of his brother, he was verie heartely sory therefore. Which caused Solyman themperor of the Turkes to promise him aide to recouer his kingdome. But that this promise was not performed, ye death of Sul∣tan Solyman that followed shortly after was the let. But when Sultan Amurathes, was come to the Empire, (& now reigneth ouer the Turkes) Abdelmelec obteined more fa∣uour and credit, then euer he had before. About the same time, Muley Abdallas fell sick, and dyed within thrée daies after, in the Citie of Marocco. His death was concealed & kept close thrée dayes, not onely that in the meane time Muley Mahamet (who was then in the citie of Fes,) might be certified of the decease of his father, & but also least that if his vncles had knowen of the death of their brother Ab∣dallas before him) they would make themselues Princes of the citie of Marocco, in the possession whereof, the state of the kingdome consisted. But the subiects bare more good will to the two brothers of Mahamet, although they were younger then he. But when Mahamet had receaued newes of his Fathers death, he caused himselfe to be proclaimed king of Fes, and immediatly after went out of the Citie with an armie, and came to Marocco, the head and Metro∣politan citie of the whole kingedome, and there, although the people were vnwilling, dyd assume the dignitie royall, no man resisting nor impeaching him, except onely his bro∣ther Muley Banacar, whome as soone as he had ascended the seige royall, he bereft of lyfe. But an other brother Mule Hazar, he cast in prison, and sent certaine men to murder his youngest vncle of all, that then liued at Tasblet. But when he vnderstooee of the trecherie, he sought himselfe f∣tie by flight, & went to Tremissen, with the household fur∣niture royall. And being thus escaped out of the hands of the cutthroates, he opened a way for himselfe to the king∣dome. For this is he th reigneth at this present in Maroc∣co, called Muly Hamet. The death of Abdallas and the
of things that had happened in Barbaria, were soone brought into Turkie, and when Muley Mahamet had with singu∣lar diligence, ordered and appointed those things that sée∣med vnto him necessarie for the establishment of the state of the kingdome: at the same time Abdelmelec vsed that di∣ligence, that within few daies he came to Argier with man∣dates of the Turkish Emperour, in whome it was contei∣ned, that the Captaines in those parts, should supply vnto him all things néedefull for the warres. And straightway he had ready to take the field, fiue thousand harquebuziers, as well Turkes, as Azuagas, warlike men and well practised in feates of armes. With these he marched to Tremissen, taking vp by the waye so many horsemen of the Alarbes, as he could get, and gather together. When he came to Tre∣missen, he was very honorably receaued, and there stayed sixe dayes for to make prouision of all things necessarie for the warres, and he with his younger brother Hamet, whom he sound there, leuied twelue thousand speares, and foure hundreth Harquebussiers on horsebacke, and toke with him out of Tremissen, twelue field pieces, with victualls, and all other munition. Being furnished with these forces, he marched to take the Citie of Fes. But although Muley Mahamet, (who was that time at Marocco) was certified of the enterprise of his vnkle, yet he did so contemne him, and did so despise his forces in comparison of his owne, that he tooke no regard thereof, vntill he saw that the mat∣ter was come to good earnest in déede, and that he vnder∣stoode that Abdelmelec hadde now assembled his forces at Tremissen. And then he leuying men in hast, and in a hur∣lie, without choise, encamped a league or two miles from Marocco, and commaunded all the subiects of his kingdoms to repaire vnto him, spredding a rumor that he would as∣saile the Christians of Tangar, that by this allurement they might take armes more chéerefully, because the Moores doe desire no warres more, than those that are kept against the Christians. These forces being made readie, and furnished with
great Artillerie, he commaunded them to march towards Fesse, and because the greatest part of his power had ioy∣ned with him in his iourney, as soone as he came to Fesse, he mustered his armie, which then consisted of foure score thousande horsemen with speare and shield, thirtene thou∣sand footemen, harquebuziers, and foure thousand harque∣buziers on horseback, with sixe and thirtie field péeces. At the same moment that Mahamet did set foorth with his ar∣mie against Abdelmelec, there came vnto him a noble man Ambassadour from Sebastian the King of Portugall, who promised him in his masters Maiesties name, aide against the Turkes, and his Vnkle. But Mahamet being made more proude for that he saw so great an armie and so strong vnder his commaund, contemned the benefit of the king of Portugall. Wherefore as soone as he vnderstoode that his vnkle was departed from Tremissen, he marched against him with that heate, that theyr Armies mette betweene Fesse, and Tremissen, the seuententh of March, in Au. 1576. The Battaile was begonne about euening, and the furious tempest continued so long, vntill that Mahamets armie being wearied both in heart and bodie, turned their backes. The fault of that flight was ascribed to one Du∣gall, who being Captaine of the Andalousians, reuolted from Mahamet to Abdelmelec, with two thousande verie choice harquebuziers. The which when Mahamet hadde perceaued (who as soone as the Battailes hadde ioyned, withdrew himselfe a nule off prouiding for one, and stan∣ding vppon a Wagon, did beholde the fight a farre off) and was afrayde least the rest of the Captaines following that example, would also take part with his enimie: he im∣mediatlie stole out of his Tent, and with fiue hundreth horsemen, posted a pace to Marocco, leauing his Souldi∣ours to the furie of the enimie, and all his Treasures and riches to the spoile. So Abdelmelec got the victorie, without much sweete or bloud, on either side, and doubtlesse Mahamet, might
haue easilie defaited and destroied Abdelmelec his power with the tenth part of his armie. But Abdelmelec hauing obtained so famous a victorie, sent a good great troupe for to pursue and take Mahamet, but he himselfe béeing receiued with great ioy of the Fessans, was proclaimed king by them, and the rest of the Cities and Townes of that kingdome. And because he hauing caught an ague was not well in health, he determined to rest a litle while in ye Citie of Fes, & there dismissed the Turkish forces which came with him vnder the leading of Rabadan Bassa, to the king of Argier. For that Bassa had no more in his commission but to accom∣panie Abdelmelec to Fesse, and to put him in possession of that kingdome. So Abdelmelec dismissed all his Turkes, except a few that hid themselues when their fellowes went awaie, that they might gratifie the new king, and become his subiects: who were in number 1500. verie valiant and stout men. But that we may returne to Muley Mahamet: as soone as he came to Marocco he repaired his power, he leuied sol∣diours in all parts of the kingdome, he opening his Cofers monyed the Captaines, rewarded the souldiours, and went about more diligentlie to winne all mennes good will with giftes, than euer he had done in his life before, hauing re∣gard and respect of this onelle, that he might wash out with some notable victorie, the shamefull blot that his vnkle had giuen him, and to make amends therefore. So by this care∣fulnesse and diligence, he got together ten thousand harque∣buziers scotemen, and a thousand on horsebacke, but fresh water souldiours, and besides them thirtie thousand horse∣men with speare and shéelde. The which forces, with foure and twentie field péeces, he brought into the field, and proui∣ded so much victuals as was néedfull for that iourney. But if happened that also at this second muster the king of Por∣tugal sent againe an Ambassador vnto him, with Letters, & againe offred him aide against Abdelmelec his vnkle. But he made the verie same answere to the second Ambassador that he did to the first: but that he mustering all his whole
armie, brought it in the sight of the Ambassadour, that his maister might vnderstand that he had no néede of the Portu∣galls. When Abdelmelec had a little recouered himselfe of his ficknesse at Fesse, and had augmented his armie with sixe thousand harquebuziers, after the departure of the Turkes, (whereof we tolde you before) he lead forth his armie with purpose to march toward Maroccco, for he had heard that Mahamet was in the field with a mightie armie. And be∣cause he began to be now a little better, he being carried in an horse litter marched towards Marocco with sixe thousand harquebuziers, twentie thousand horsemen with speare and shéeld, two thousand argolets, with twentie field péeces. On the other side Mahamet being aduertised of his vnkles in∣tent, went verie spéedelie out of Marocco with great hast, and heate to fight, and to trie the right of a kingdome with the perill of his life. And because the narration of the order and araie of the battailes which they both vsed, maketh al∣most nothing for the thing that we do purpose, we will com∣prehend all the whole Hystorie in few words. So in a cer∣taine valley thrée leagues from the riuer of Sala towardes the West, a long the sea coast, in a place called Motha Arra∣cahana, they encamped, where the 29. of Iune at thrée of the clocke in the after noone, a cruell and a bloudie battaile was fought, in the which the victorie enclined now to Mahamet, and then to Abdelmelec his partie. But Abdelmelec being a wise & a skilfull Captaine, when he sawe that night was at hand, and that his men, although they had a long time laide on with might and maine, could not obtaine the victo∣rie, and that his enimies resisted stoutlie, he going out from the middest of his band, and vambrashing his semitarre in his hand, compelled his souldiours with thicke blowes to renue the charge, and hée himselfe béeing seene among the formost, ranne in vpon his enimies with such force and vi∣olence, that hée forced them to turne their backes shame∣fullie, of whome Mahamet was the first that ranne a∣waie.
The victours in this last battaile slue aboue sixe thou∣sand. But Abdelmelec sent his brother Hamet for to pur∣sue Mahamet with certaine light horsemen, but hée him∣selfe after he hadde stayed a while for the burying of the dead, marched towarde Marocco with his whole ar∣mie. Mahamet séeking safetie by flight, came to Marocco, not without the greate infamie of his men, followed by a sixe or eight speares, and then going into the plaine, hée tooke out as much treasure as could bée commodiouslie carried a∣waie, and laide it on fiue Mules, & staying in the Citie not aboue two houres, betooke him againe to flight, hasting to escape his vnkles troupes that were not farre off. Béeing thus departed out of the Citie with a few horse men, he ha∣sted a fling on the spurre towards Mount Atlas (now Cla∣rio) which béeing sixe leagues from Marocco, is the sanctua∣rie and refuge of proscribed and banished men and théeues. But leauing Mahamet in the mountaines of Clario, let vs returne vnto Abdelmelec. He as soone as he had gathered to∣gether the spoiles of the vanquished enimies, marched with all his armie to Marocco, and being ariued there the eight daie after the victorie, was receiued with so great pompe & ioy, as neuer was séene before in those Countries, for he had gotten a great fame, to bée a good, curteous, affable, and pit∣tifull man towards those in calamitie, and was also verie well furnished with many other vertues: Then againe, the insolencie and tyrannie of Muley Hamet, made Abdelme∣lec the more gratious & better beloued of all men. As soone as he was entered into the Citie (which was the xv. of Iulie, in the same yéere) he began to set in order the politike state of the kingdome, that he might shew himselfe to be not one∣lie valiant in armes, and the field, but also singular in wise∣dome for framing of a publike weale. For he abrogated ma∣ny lawes & statutes, made by his ancestors, he vsed passing great curtesie and gentlenesse towards his subiects, he also gaue great gifts and largesse, & diuided victuals among the people: applying all his actions to this end, that he might by
these meanes extend his same, and get himselfe immortall glorie aboue all the kings of Africa, that went before him. Although at the first he was nothing gratious, speciallie be∣cause that the people were offended with the vnreasonable∣nesse and vnrulinesse of the Turkes, that he had with him, because yt they (as they are proud, vnrulie, intollerable, and lawlesse) did verie licentiouslie oppresse the poore Moores wc many grieuous iniuries & violences: but the king did soone rid the Countrie of them, sending them awaie by little and little, and by two and by thrée at a time, so yt at the length there remained not aboue 200. whome yet he kept from his companie & sight, and being brought into order, constrained them to liue quietlie, & without doing harme. The which thing made his subiects to turne their loue towards him, and they bing moued with the onlie fame of his vertue, did offer themselues vnto him most humbly, & promised him due obe∣dience, & finallie, they with liberall and bountifull mindes brought him a vie great, rich, and honourable gifts and pre∣sents, out of all partes and prouinces. There were also not a few Christian Princes, that did take singular ioy of his friendship: and he also on the other side receiued them into his friendship with a most louing heart, & did thinke himself flourishing in their familiaritie & fauour to be a happie and blessed man: insomuch yt many Christians did continually & out of all quarters repaire vnto his kingdome, whom he did more loue, & made more of, than he did of any other kind of men yt vsed to come into his countries. For he gaue thē ma∣ny & great beneuolences, & vsed thē with wonderful curtesie & gentlenesse, he also dismissed many frée without ransome, gratis, of an vnwonted benificence. But I will not dwell long vpon this his liberalitie & magnificence, namely, seeing that his noble workes are verie well knowen to the whole worlde, through the publike reporte of fame. But after he hadde obtained the roiall throne, the first thing he did, was to appoint who shoulde succéede him in the king∣dome, and to confirme the lawe made by Muley Maha∣met Xeque his Father: and therefore hée swore all the
péeres of the kingdome vnto his brother Muley Hamet, al∣though that he himselfe had a sonne, but yet of tender age, whom he might haue nominated to be his successour. The which thing, although it held the nobilitie in suspence with admiration, yet incontinentlie incredible feasts & triumphs were kept in honour of the new Prince, and memorie of the olde law, and also the memorie of his granfather Xarif was honourablie mentioned & renued by ye péeres. In the meane time Muley Mahamet, who had gotten him to the streights of mount Clario, beganne straight waie to gather together some souldiours, and among them some outlawes & théeues: insomuch that he had gathered together fiue hundred har∣quebuziers, and two hundreth horse men with shéelde and Speare. Being furnished with which bands, he beganne to com∣mit robberies, he spoiled those that he met, and sacked the villages, and places that laie vnder mount Clario, and forced their inhabitants for to acknowledge him for their Lorde, and to paie him tribute, as to their king. These robberyes and roades he vsed the space of seauen or eight moneths, so that Abdelmelec was forced to leuie forces for to coole his lustinesse, & to driue ye théeues out of the dens of the moun∣tains. For the doing of the which exploit, he vsed the seruice of the new prince Muley Hamet, who was with a power in the kingdome of Sus, for to make excursions. He discomfited Muley Mahamet in certaine places, and almost wholie de∣stroied all his band as wel footemen and horsemen, and for∣ced him to hide himselfe in the verie thicke woodes, and in∣accessible cragges of the mountaine, where hée lurked aboue a yéere, almost killed with colde, snowe, and other miseries, and the inclemencie of the aire, and most miserablie mole∣sted and beaten with despaire of his lyfe, and feare of a∣waites, which his Vnkle layde for him, proposing greate rewards to him that could bring him eyther dead or aliue. At length he was driuen by necessitie, (the sharpest wea∣pon) to that which hée hadde before refused, and tooke scorne off: that is, to desire the aide of the Kinge of
Portugall, for to deliuer him from the awaites, and hands of his vnkle, and to restore him vnto his graund fa∣thers and fathers kingedome. For the which cause he sent a messēger from Mount Clario, with letters vnto the king of Portugall, and willed him to goe by Mazaga. But that he might receaue some aunswere more safely & speadely, he resolued to leaue the mountaines, and to get him to Tan∣gar. So through the woodes and wildernesses of the moun∣taines, where the way was very safe, and not beaten with tract of mens féete, he came without any great daunger vn∣to Penon: where after he had stayed a few dayes to gather his men together, he went towards Tangar, where he was courteously receaued into the Citie, by the Gouernour, but leauing his forces without the walles. From that Citie he sent two of his Captaines in Ambassade with letters, ac∣companied with two gentlemen of Tangar, vnto king Se∣bastian, and desired of him aide for to restore him vnto his Fathers kingdome. And because the gouernour of Tangar was not ignorant, that if he vsed the king of Marocco cour∣teously, that he should thereby well please the king of Por∣tugall, he dispatched a Carauell to Lisbon with the Ambas∣sadours for their spéedier passage, of whose iourney and suc∣cesse, we wil speake, after that we haue first admonished the reader of certaine things necessarie to be knowen. King Sebastian being by nature verie much giuen to loue of armes, sought for no other pleasure then by marti∣all matters, which had caused him in former yéeres to passe ouer to Tangar, to thentent to conquere Barbarie, but with vaine endeuour. For Mahamet, (as we haue tould you before) had of a vaine and foolish confidence, twise refused aides offered him by the Portugall. But when the king of Portugall saw that now his ayde was desired by the letters of the king of Marocco, he was very glad that a most wish∣shed occasion whereby he might fill his long lust and long∣ing, was offered vnto him, who was desirous of praise, and studious to enlarge his Empire, and Religion. Wherefore he receued magnificently the Ambassadour of Muly Maha∣met,
being ariued in Portugall, and graunted them their re∣quest in all demaunds, and also wrote letters to Mahamet, wherein he promised his trauaile, helpe, and fauour, in re∣storing him into his fathers kingdome, no man of his coū∣seile, or of the nobilitie holding much against it. And this might be the cause of that interview, where the Catholick king, and the king of Portugall met and talked together, in An. 1578. at Guadalupea, a citie of Castilia. Where the Ca∣tholicke king laboured all that he could, to feare the king of Portugall from that enterprise: or if he would néedes goe through with it, nor could not be disuaded frō his purpose, that then he would doe it very substantially, and effectual∣ly, prouiding and furnishing himselfe passing well with all things néedefull for so great an attempt. But when the King of Portugall continued constant in that he had once purposed, he returned home: whither anone after the Ca∣tholike king sent his Ambassadours for to deale with him about the same matter that he himselfe had talked with him off in presence. For the Catholick king was not ignorant, how the king of Marocco did surpasse in strength & power, & how skilful, expert, & valiant a warriour he was, and how great power and prouision, so great an enterprise required, wherof he knew that the Portugall was yet fully vnfurni∣shed. But ye king of Portugal remained constant in his pur∣pose, & began to prouide all things necessarie for ye voiage. First he made leuies of souldious throughout his own king¦dome, he sent some into Germany to take him vppe 5000. footemen. He also wrote letters to certain knights of Anda∣louzia, to bring vnto him olde souldiours. Moreouer he com∣maunded great store of ordenance, wepons, armour, & other munition & victualls to be prouided & brought together, & that all these things might be the more cōmodiously trans∣ported, he commaunded shippes to be staied in all hauens of his kingdome. The number of the souldiours that he leuied in his owne kingdome was great, but they were ill furni∣shed, & freshwater souldiours, taken vp of clownes, & hus∣handmen, and a rable nothing fit for the field.
As for the Germaines, they were also fresh water soul∣diour, and vnskilfull of martiall matters, and when they came to Lisbon, they fell sick, and aboue 2000. of them died. There came also vnto the king, 600. Italians, with whom the Pope had furnished the Counte of Ireland, who being ariued at Lisbon, offered his seruice to the king & promised to follow him in ye iourney. Moreouer the king caused pro∣clamation to be made with sound of Trumpet, thoroughout his whole kingdome, that all Noblemen and Gentlemen his vassailes, should attend vpon him to the warres, vppon  of losse of landes, and rentes, and all priuiledges gted by the king. So then all things néedefull for an armie being prouided, and sufficient store of shippes and boates gathered together, he commaunded the ordenaunce, victualls, munition, horses, and other necessaries to be ship∣ped, that when the feast of Saint Iohn Baptist, (on which day he had determined to leaue his house) drew néere, ther might be nothing to let & hinder, but that the armie might be embarked, and transported into Africa. When Abdelmele the king of Marocco was admoni∣shed, and aduertised of these things, and what the king of Portugall entended against him: he was verye sorrow∣full therefore, not so much because he feared the King of Portugall his forces, as for that he being well affected to∣wards men of the Christian Religion, did foresée in minde that Africa would be the graue of the King of Portugall, yea, though he brought with him thrise so great an Armie as he had. Wherefore it is well knowne that he spake one day to this effecte: The king of Portugall ought diligentie to weigh and thinke with himselfe, how iust and lawfull a cause he hath to come into Africa. For séeing that he eth about to take the kingedome from him, to whome it dot of right appertaine, & to giue it to the Negro, and that with no profit nor commoditie to the Christians, that will almigh∣tie God, who is a iust Iudge, neuer suffer. Furthermore, Abdelmelec, as he was a man of a sharpe witte, and in
such matters of surpassing diligence and prouidence, began also to make prouision for the warres, and to bethinke him of things necessarie therefore. Wherefore he commaunded Tents to be set vp in a fielde a league from Marocco, and warres to be openlie proclaimed through his kingdome a∣gainst the Christians: the which thing highlie pleased the Moores. He also commanded a great number of great Guns, and speciallie field peeces, and also infinite store of victualls and of horses and Camells, for to carrie necessaries for their ar∣mie, to be prouided. Which being done, when he heard that the king of Portugal was now vpon the point to goe a ship boord, and to ariue at Arzil, he also went out of Marocco the sixtéenth day of April with great applause of the people, and with almost an infinite companie of men into the campe, and kept the armie in the Tents, where he staied twentie daies, looking for the rest of his forces. From hence he marched with Ensignes displaied by small iourneyes towards Ar∣zill, and that he might the more commodiouslie ioyne with those forces that he looked for, he staied a little while at Te∣mocen, which is in the confines of his kingdome. But the king of Portugall, who was hot set on his voiage, comman∣ded before he went on shipboord, processions and praiers to be publikelie made throughout all the kingdome, that God might vouchsafe to graunt happie successe to this enterprise, and victorie against his enimie. At length on Midsommer daie the whole armie was embarked, and the next daie after verie earlie in the mor∣ning, king Sebastian (hauing nominated before seauen of the chiefe of the Realme gouernours of the kingdome) because the Cardinall his vnkle had refused the gouernment, for that he could not intreate the king to relinquish the voiage, launched out of the Hauen, and hoised vp sailes the 26. of Iune, with ten or twelue Galeons, in whom were embar∣ked almost all the whole Nobilitie of his kingdome. The sea was passing calme, the fléete of the whole armie launch∣ing from Lisbon, was of great and small vesselles about a
thousand and thrée hundreth saile, so pleasant a spectacle, that many sayd they neuer sawe such a fléete before, and hauing a good winde they ariued at Caliz on Saint Peters eue. The king being receiued with singular gratulation and ioy of the people, staied there fiftéene dayes, for to prouide ne∣cessaries that he lacked, and that he might transport with him certaine bands of Spaniards, that were leuied for him in Andaluzia. Which things being dispatched, he departed from Caliz the eight of Iulie, and sailed with the Galeons towards Tangar, but commanded the rest of the Fléete to kéepe their course towards Arzil. So the tenth of Iulie the king ariued at Tangar, but before he was come into the ha∣uen, Mahamet sent his sonne, a child almost ten yéeres old, named Muley Xeque, against the king in a small vessell, whom the king did verie gentlie and curteouslie salute. But béeing come on land, he shewed greater signes of good will and friendship to Mahamet, and verie liberallie offered his trauaile & aide for to restore him into his kingdome. When Mahamet was come to the kings presence, although he had before sufficientlie certefied him both by Letters & Ambas∣sadours of his will and mind: yet that he might more safe∣lie prouide for his state, he did then more-plentifullie and more at large open vnto him by spéech what he was min∣ded to doe: and did tell him how that his vnkle, supported by the power and strength of the Turke, did vsurpe the kingdome, the which hée had taken from him by force. Hee added moreouer, that the vassalles and subiects of Abdel∣melec did practise nothing else, and were wholie busied, how they might secretlie kill Abdelmelec, or at the least forsake him, and reuoult to Mahamet, and that thereof hée receiued dailie without intercession Letters from the Péeres of the Realme, in the which Letters they promised to re∣noult vnto him, as soone as euer hée would come agaynst the enimie, yea, and if it were but with a small power Hée woulde also perswade the king of Portugall that he shoulde not fight with the Abdelmelec, but onelie go into the field: which thing if hée did, then his vnkles souldiours
would immediatlie bée at his deuotion and command. Hée promised also to giue the king of Portugall two or thrée Hauens in Barbarie, with their territories adioyning, and for suretie thereof hée gaue his sonne in hostage. The king of Portugal as hée was a Prince of noble passing good na∣ture, credited all that Mahamet spake, and assented to his petition without conditions, couenants, and sureties. From hence hée went with Mahamet to Arzil, where his armie was, and there Muley Xeque was Generall of his Fa∣thers small forces, and had with him the horsemen and foot∣men of the garison of Tangar. The king came to Arzil on Sundaie, béeing the foure∣téenth of Iulie, and as soone as hée was come on shoare, hée commaunded the Ordenaunce, victuall, and the rest of the warlyke furniture to bée disbarked, but sent foure shippes well appointed to Massaga, to carrie thether Muley Xeque his pledge: but commaunded his campe to bée pitched néere the walles of Arzill, and it to bée entrenched rounde with rampires and ditches, that hée might lye there the safer. But that wée may returne to Abdelmelec: as soone as hée came to Temocen, a greate multitude of horsemen that serued with shéelde and Speare, and many other forces ioy∣ned with him. But thrée dayes after hée came thether, hée fell verie sicke, the cause wherof, as then no man vnderstood. But anone after when he felt a mightie torment in his sto∣macke, it was easilie vnderstoode whereof it came: that is, hée had eaten gréedelie of sowre milke, which had curded in his stomacke. That he might cast it vp, hée assayed in vaine two and almost thrée daies to make himselfe vomite (as he had vsed to doe) and so at the length be cast vp a great gob∣bet of Chéese, which made his stomacke so weake and faint, that afterward it could concoct no meate. Also his sicknesse was increased by harde and ill lodging. But as soone as hée heard that the king of Portugall was departed from Caliz, to sayle to Arzil, although hée were at that time no∣thing well, yet hée commaunded his armie to march for∣ward
towardes Arzil, he himselfe béeing carried in an horse litter. And now he was from Alcazara (where his brother ex∣pected him with an armie) not aboue a dayes iourney, but when hée drew néere him, his comming was receiued with a great peale of great and small shot, in token of ioye. And there hée was forced to pitch vp his Tents, and to lie there in a Campe certaine daies, staying for other forces and to recouer his strength weakened by sicknesse. Wherefore as soone as those forces that hée looked for were come, he sooke muster of his whole armie, and found fiftéene thousand foot∣men harguebuziers, of whome fiue thousand were verie choice olde souldiours, and the rest fresh water souldioure, and of none experience. Then he had two thousand Argolets, two and fortie thousand Alarbes with shéeld and spere, & sixe and twentie field péeces verie well furnished, and Gunners verie good and readie. Moreouer, all his whole armie was verie well prouided of victualles, and his souldiours well paide, the which is one of the chiefest thinges in warres, and where∣of the Generall ought to haue most speciall care. So his souldiours were paide euerie moneth a Duckate or péece of golde, wherefore they were also all readie to abide all extre∣mitie for Abdelmelec, and to spendr their liues for him, ex∣cept the horse men of the Alarbes, whome hée little trusted, as he that was not ignoraunt that they were full of false∣hoode, nor gaue their mindes to anie thing else than to gette booties, and to rob they cared not whom. And that I may tell you all in few words, he had more trust in none than in those fiue thousand old souldiours har∣quebuziers. But the thing that gréeued Abdelmelec most, was, that at so great and perillous a battaile, whereat hee must néeds be present himselfe and order it, vnlesse he wold endaunger the whole state of his Kingdome, hee dyd finde himselfe to bée so weake and quite broken with sick∣nesse, the which the burning Dogge dayes dyd in∣crease.
Wherefore he laie still there eight or nine daies, vntill that the king of Portugall constrained him, yea, vnwilling for to march forward, and to encampe at Alcazar. In the meane time the king of Portugal béeing issued out of Arzill, and readie to march, mustered his armie, wherein (besides the thousand stipendaries, that he had left to kéepe the fléete, and the two thousand that hée had sent to Massaga) he had foure∣téene thonsand footemen, and two thousand horsmen, a great part armed. Moreouer, there were thrée thousand pioners, and aboue a thousand cochmen, and almost an infinite number of drud∣ges, flaues, Negroes, mullotters, horse boies, land resses, and those swéete wenches that the Frenchmen doe merrilie call the daughters of delight, for now the world is come to that, we thinke we cannot kéepe wars without these snailes. So that all ye insauorie companie of baggage did excéede sixe and twentie thousand persons. He had also sixe and thirtie field péeces, and 1500. wagons full of mattes, vessell, and house∣holde stuffe onelie for noble men. He might in deede haue brought a greater power in this voiage, as wel out of Spain as out of other Countries, but that he giuing credite to the words of Muley Hamet, who said that the armie of Abdel∣melec would reuoult vnto him, he dismissed many Spani∣ards that would haue gone aboord at Caliz, and did more ea∣silie discharge them, that vnder pretence of sicknesse, desired that they might goe home. In the armie that followed him were thrée thousand Germanes, sixe hundreth Italians, two thousand Spaniardes, sire hundreth Souldiours of Tangar, two thousand fiue hundreth light horsemen, in whome hée reposed his greatest trust. The rest were Por∣tugalls. And the greater parte of these forces had their wa∣ges sparingly and verie ill paide them, and were distressed with want, and many other ills, for now victuals beganne to faile, the which were so sparinglie distributed, that many died for hunger. The fault was in the purueiours, who do full often in the time of wars through their knauerie, cast princes & generals
into extreme calamities. But that which was worst of all, the greater part of the armie consisted of fresh water soul∣diours, who were without skill of martiall discipline, nei∣ther had euer séene battaile or campe. That I may omit those eight thousand that bare long pikes, then the which kinde of souldiours there is none of lesse vse and seruice, & more vnfit for wars in Barbarie. By that time the king of Portugal had mustered his armie, Abdelmelec was come to Alcazar, with an armie full of fury and wrath. Which caused the King of Portugall his Counsell to desire their Prince in no case to ioyne in battaile with his enimies, who did farre surpasse him in men and might, but rather that he would march with his armie to Larissa, & take that fortified place, and prouide for himselfe. But when Abdelmelec knew by espies almost euerie houre what was done in the campe of the Christians, and how weake the Portugall forces were, and how coldly all things were ordered, and therefore did sée that the wretchen king being in the prime of his yeares, was néere to death and desiruction: he wrought by all meanes he could, that he should not be forced to fight a battaile, because he was not otherwise verie ill affected towards Christians. Where∣fore he laboured priuile and secretly by certaine men, and they mostly merchants, to certifie the king of Portugall of the guiles and deceits of Mahamet (that had brought him into these daungers, and so present ruine and ieoperdie of life.) But although these aduises of Abdelmelec were not vnknowne to the king of Portugall, and his counsaillours aduised him the verie same that Abdelmelec dyd, and went about to withdraw him from his purpose: yet he wilfullie contemned all that could be sayde, not onely that he might fulfill his burning desire to fight, and to trye his strength and valiant heart, but also chiefelie because he trusted the promises of Mahamet, which he beléeued to be verse true. To he short, his Counsaile laboured to their vttermost, to disuade the king from ioyning in battaile, but rather adei∣sed him to march to Larissa, and they wrought so much by
blaming and brging him, that the king at length yéelded to goe to Larissa. Wherevpon the Nauie was commaunded to make saile towards Larissa, & he himselfe marched by land the therwards, going out of Arzil the 29. of Iulie (which was tues daie) and thrée daies he marched, but making small iourneies by reasen of the multitude of haggage that follo∣wed the armie, and then he fraied the fridaie, because he loo∣ked for some aide from Arzil. The Saterdaie verie earlie he began to march againe, and at length came to the riuer of Mazaga, which runneth to Larissa, and there he lodged, wat∣ches and wardes being diligentlie appointed and set after his vsed manner, for feare of the Moores that were dispearsed round about him. At that time Abdelmelec remained at Alcazar, verie weake and sicklie, and although he heard that the Portugall was gone out of Arzil, and was encamped at Mazaga, yet he would not stirre out of his place, vntill that he vnderstood by espies, that his enimies made towards Alcazar. For hée would haue suffered his enimie to haue taken Larissa, thin∣king that the Portugall being contented with the taking of it, would from thence returne home. But when he was aduertised that the Saterdaie morning his enimie marched forward, he also at the same time made towards Arzil by Alcazar. And when he had marched with his armie a little more than halfe a league (that is, aboue a mile) he encamped on a certaine high downe in the sight of the Portugails, who were a league from that hill, and were encamped on a great and pleasant plaine. And being néere to the riuer of Alcazar, he commanded his Tents to be pitched on the banke of the riuer, not farre from confluence of another riuer that goeth to Larissa. After that noone was past, he and his armie refre∣shed themselues from the heate of the Sunne in their tents, hée taking his rest in an horse litter. In the meane time hee sent forth certaine horsemen for to bring him more cer∣taine newes of the enie, and placed souldiours before the waroes, for to let that none of his people should flie out of his campe to the Portugall, and Muley Hamet. When the
king of Portugall was come the Saterdaie morning to the riuer of Larissa, & was encamped néere to the place where he thought ther might be a foord foūd to passe ouer his ordenāce, & was minded to go to Larissa: then Mahamet, a subtile fel∣low, ambitions, and deceitfull, thinking with himselfe, that if the Portugall should enter Larissa, and did consider the power and most puisant armie of Abdelmelec, that then hee would returne home, and doe nothing, and leaue him forsa∣ken and alone to be deuoured of his enimies: he resolued to talke with the Portugall that daie, and to dehort him from the iourney ye he purposed towards Larissa: and ye he might the better bring it to passe, he began with a craftie tale to tel him that many Moores horse men had fled vnto him from Abdelmelec, & that the rest of ye armie went about to do the same. That if he should goe to Larissa, then all men would blame him, as one fearefull, and such an one as reposed sase∣tie in running awaie. That Abdelmelec was naked of friendes: for hée handled his Souldiours hardlie, and that they didde therefore minde to doe him a mischtefe, ei∣ther by slaying of him, or else by forsaking him in the bat∣taile. That it was better and more wisedome to march to∣ward Alcazar, namelie, séeing that enimie that came against him had not so much heart as to goe about to impeach him. He added also other arguments making for his purpose, by the which hee diss waded the Portagall from going to Larissa, and to saie the truth, it had otherwise bene an harde matter for him to haue gon forward, séeing ye his enimy was so néere. The Sundaie morning verie earlie the Portugall remoued his campe, and went vp a long the banke of the ri∣uer, that he might come into the high waie that leadeth from Arzil to Alcazar, and when he had found a foord, he staied, and commaunded the pioners to make it readie against the next daie. But Abdelmelec vnderstanding ye intent of the Portugal, caused a signe to be giuē by sound of Trumpet, ye euerie man
should make himselfe readie to fight. Wherefore in the af∣ternoone he marching forward almost a quarter of a mile, stayed and commaunded his armie to breath, vntill he vnderstoode what his enimie, that was about halfe a league off, ment to doe. For as we haue tolde you before, Abdelmelec had determined not to ioyne in battaile, except the Portugall did first desire it. When the Portugall being encamped along the Riuer of Larissa, heard that the enimie made towards him, he was forced also to remoue his Campe, and to put his people in array of battaile, not for to fight, because the fourde of the Riuer could not be passed ouer without very great difficul∣tie, and also there was a great troupe of Moores that dyd continually prouoke his men with skirmishes, but that he might defense himselfe, and he vsed the mightie Riuer in stéede of a wall against the enimie. In this sort those two Armies, when either did looke that the other should beginne the battaile, kept themselues in, the rest of the day. So when it drew towards night, and Abdelmelec saw that the Por∣tugals stirred not out of their place, although ye chiefe Cap∣taines were verie instant on him to fight, and to giue the signall of battaile, yet because night was at hand, he com∣maunded the retreate to be sounded, and ledde his Armie backe to their Campe. But yet he commaunded proclama∣tion to be made in the Campe by sounde of Trumpet, that no man should put of his armour, nor lay downe his wea∣pon that night, and also commaunded the watch to be dou∣bled, as he also did the night before, that no man could flye out of his Campe vnto Muley Hamet. And doubtlesse this watch was the cause of Mahamets ouerthrow, because that no man durst to goe out of his ward & tente. In the meane time Abdelmelec was fully resolued to fight, for séeing he had heard that many horsemen, and men that had abiured the faith, were fled out of his Campe, and did feare that if he deferred to fight the next day, that then the greater part of his armie would reuolt: he thought that he must staye no longer, but determined to goe on forward, and to aduenture
the battaile. Wherefore he commanded that it shoulde bée signified by a Trumpet, that all men shoulde be in a readi∣nesse, and prepared either to liue or die. After that the king of Portugall sawe that his enimies were retired into their camp, he also did the like, and lodged in the verie same place from whence he came. He assembling in counsaile the chiefe men of the armie that night, determined the next day, being mundaie, to offer the enimie battaile. And it is the constant same of all men, that Muley Hamet gaue him coun∣saile to beginne the battaile the next daie in the euening, not so much because by this meanes the souldiours of Ab∣delmelec might the more commodiouslie rououlf vnto him, as for that he coulde not by reason of the darknesse of the night remedie it, if anie confusion did arise in his armie. This counsaile as good and wholesome was approued of all men, and therefore the king commanded that the same night it shoulde bee proclaimed in the campe, that the next daie béeing mundaie, as soone as it was light, the ordenance and the carriages shoulde bée speedelie passed ouer the wa∣ter through the foorde. For if they had tarried longer, no doubt the enimies wold haue impeached their passage, which also was the cause that the battaile was not begn in the euening, but sooner. The foord béeing made readie, the armie straight waie passed ouer, and they encamped beyond the ri∣uer, and also the king began to arange his battailes, to set forth his bands, and to dispose his ordenance in commodious places. He also made a long Oration to his souldiours, and ex∣horted thē with curteous & louing spéech, vsing also verie ef∣fectuall arguments for to present themselues to perills cou∣ragiouslie, for the honour of God, and the increase of the Christian Religion, promising them great riches, fauour, honours, and priuiledges, willing them to haue good hope of the victorie, speciallie through the helpe of God, in whom he had all his whole trust fixed. The like did the noble men that followed the king in this voiage doe, to their vttermost, name lie, the Bishoppes of
Coimbra and Portua, and also the Popes Commissarie, and many other spirituall persons. In these adhortations all the forenoone was spent. On the other side Abdelmelec séeing the Christians come in battaile araie, he also commanded the signall to be sounded throughout his campe, and willed the Captaines to bring forth their souldiours, & to dispose them into the order that he had prescribed. And because that hée through sicknesse was verie weake in bodie, and of coulour pale and wan, and by reason of the palsie could in no wise vse his armes, the wiser and warier of his counsailours dehor∣ted him from comming in person into this instant battaile: to whom he would in no case consent, but whereas he had not come on horse his back in more than twentie daies be∣fore, he resolued to leaue his horse litter, and to bée clothed in most sumptuous apparell, and to be adorned with infinite most precious stones, and most excellent pearles of ye East, and mounted on a goodlie and lustie strong horse. Being in this sort prepared to fight, he began to adhort his men to va∣lour, promising honors and great warlike rewards to them that should behaue themselues like men, and doe their du∣ties and accomplish their charges valiantlie. With the which wordes and promises he did so incourage and inflame his souldiours, into whose sight he had not come long time before, by reason of his sicknesse, that they séemed to bee in∣spired by Mars, and to runne to the battaile like Lions. And although at the beginning there were some that went a∣bout to murther him, or reuolt from him, yet now they chan∣ging their mindes, did so subiect themselues vnto him with all reuerence, that they disdained not, yea to kisse his féete. At length his armie béeing cast into the forme of a semi∣circle, or croisant, and diuided into thrée battailes, he began to aduance his armie in that order that this table doeth shew. The right wing the Prince, the brother of Abdelmelec dyd leade, who had with him a thousand verie choice Har∣quebuziers on horsebacke noted. He had also ten thousand
horsemen with speare and shéelde. The lefte wing of the new Moone, which held two thousand argolets, and tenne thousand horsemen with speare and sheeld. These did the Vireroie Mahamet Zareo leade. The third battaile, which was the maine battaile, wherein king Abdelmelec stoode, was defenced with harquebuziers on foote. Thou dyd the king followe, enuironed with his garde of two hundreth souldiours, that had forsworne the faith, who were all wea∣poned with halbardes. But he had in the battaile of suc∣cour twentie thousand horsmen diuided by two thousand in a troupe. But ye Portugal arāged his armie far otherwise, for he di∣uided his whole armie into 4. battailes. On ye right side was the first battaile, consisting of the light horsemen and gari∣son of Tangar, and Aluares Peres de Tauora lead them. The lefte or the middle battaile consisted of Germanes and Ita∣lians, which the Marques of Ireland gouerned. In the third battaile of succour, stoode the Spaniards and certaine Ita∣lians, the Captaine whereof was Alonzo Aquilar. The fourth battaile were Portugals, vnder the conduct of a cer∣taine noble man of that Nation, whose name was Ludo∣uicke Caesar. Euerie battaile hadde almost thrée thousande footemen, but some moe and some fewer. But the Generall of the whole armie was Duartes Meneles, the gouernour of the Citie of Tangar. Besides these forces, hée had ten thousand horsemen ve∣rie well appointed, and diuided by fiue hundreths,It should be tvv, doutl as well in the first battaile and the battaile of succour, as in both winges. In the middest and middle of the whole armie were placed the baggage, the weake rable, the wagons, and slaues. Muley Hamet stoode on the right side of the bat∣tayle, with his fewe Souldiours, to the number of fiue hundreth harguebuziers, and sixe hundreth Speares. The king had placed sixe and thirtie field péeces in the front of his battaile.
So then the two armies were thus aranged on a mightie large plain, which was so open and bare, that there was nei∣ther tree, plant, nor stone, to be séene within two leagues round about. The Moores were defenced on the left side with the riuer of Alcazar, which serued them for a rampire or munition, and the Portugalls had on their backes the riuer of Mazaga, that runneth to Larissa. But for two causes hée desired to come to the riuer of Alcazar before they came within Gunshot: first, that he might take the winde from his enimies, and secondlie, that he might vse the riuer for a rampire and wall. So the Christians had the winde indif∣ferentlie well with them, although at the beginning the Sunne beames were against them. For afterward, and that too sodein, the cléere Sunne shine was turned into darke weather, and so cloudie, that the Sunne beames troubled them nothing. But when the two armies were come within an haquebusse shot one of another, about halfe an houre be∣fore high noone, the Moores began to staie their march, and to leuell their péeces. The fourth daie of August, which was mundaie, in the yéere of our saluation 1578. the battaile was begun between the two kings about twelue of the clocke, and the Moores did first begin to shoote off their great ordenance against the Christians, but they had not shot off thrée, but that the Christians answered them with theirs. And straight waie the harquebuziers on foote on both sides discharged as thick as haile, with such an horribie, furious, and terrible tem∣pest, that the cracking and roaring of the Gunnes did make the earth so to fremble, as though it woulde haue sunke downe to hell, and the element séemed to burne with the fire, flames, lightning, and thunder of the Gunnes. After that the storme of the shot was past fiue hundreth men of armes of the first battaile, whom the Duke de Auero lead, gaue a charge on the left wing of the Moores, and brake and scattered them, and hauing slaine many, compelled the rest to flie, so that aboue eight thousand harquebuziers on horse∣barke, and twentie thousand Speares (who were Alarbes)
left the place, and flying some one way, and some an other, almost twentie leagues, spred euery where a rumour of the victorie of the Christians. In this first encoūter the Moores lost two guidons, not without the great griefe of Abdel∣melec, who when he sitting on his horse in the middle bat∣taile did see his men flye so soulye, he was so kindled with anger and furie, that although for weakenesse he could scarse sitte on his horse, yet he went about to charge our men in that quarter where his menne fledde, that he might repaire that winge broken, and shamefully dispersed, and to staye them that fledde, and to turne them againe against the eni∣mie. But the souldiours of his gard knowing his extreme weakenesse, tooke his horse by the bridle, and would let him goe no farther. But when he would haue set his hande to his swoord to haue rid himselfe out of their handes, he per∣ceaued that his armes and hands were as stiffe as a stone, with the palsey: whereof he conceaued so great griefe at the heart, that leauing himselfe forward vpon the pommel of his saddle, he lost his speach, and neuer spake worde after, but yt shuld they o forward fatter: the which was done but no farther then a man could cast a stone. In the meane time the gad ooke king from his horse, and layd him in his horselter, where he gaue vpp the Ghost within halfe an houre after. Ye his death was subtilly dissembled, they bruing th  was layde downe to rest him. But although the Christians vanquished in the first encounter, yet the rest of the king of Mortugall his Armie knew not how to vse the victorie: For because there was no man to com∣maund what was néedeful to be done, or did send the bands of succours with aide, they did suffer a goodly victorie to slip out of their hands. When the Moores saw so great a dis∣comsture was giuen by the enimies their onely horsemen, neither was there any man that backed them, they sent out a thousand Argolets, and many other, who made the Por∣tugalls before victors to flye with that force, that they run∣ning vpon the middle battaile of their footemen, mightely disordered all the whole armie of the Christians. The thing
was done in the sight and presence of the king, who through the counsaile of them about him was yet in his Coch, but as soone as he sawe the flight and disorder of his men, hee spée∣dely mounted on a horse strangely bardbed, and accompani∣ed with the Duke of Auero and other men of armes, char∣ged the enime. But although he were carried against his enimies with that force and féese, that he brake their araie againe, yet because the armie of the Moores did not abandon the place, those horsemen that were scarse fiue hundreth, were forced to retire: whom the Moores followed with such force, that flying many of them, they forced the rest to runne among their footemen with such hast, that they ouerranne and troade to death a great number of their owne footmen, and committed a miserable misorder and slaughter. In the meane while all the forces of the Mahometan armie running downe from the hill, began to charge the Christi∣ans with great violence. In that conflict the Duke of Aue∣ro was slaine, and many other noble and valiant men, and also the horse of the king of Portugall was slaine, but hée himselfe safe and vnhurt, and the great ordenaunce which serued the Christians to no vse in this battaile, was taken. Now as touching the right wing of the Moores: the soul∣diours thereof neuer ceased from the beginning of the bat∣taile to powre downe showers of shot vpon the Christians, yea, and moouing out of their place, but alwayes kéeping the croisant figure of their armie, they beganne to inclose the Portugall armie, and to charge the hindermest battaile of the side. Wherefore the king (who had mounted another fresh horse) perceiuing that the hindermost battayle néeded suc∣cour, taking with him fiue hundreth men of armes, who hadde beene appointed for that purpose, charged the third tune the Moores that were vnder Muley Hamet, the bro∣ther of Abdelmelec: whom he did so skarre, that he forced them to giue ground more than halfe a league, slaying ma∣ny and scattering the rest. But séeing he was alone, and had no man that woulde
follow him, he was forced with great griefe, and full sore a∣gainst his will to retire to his armie, for to beholde the sor∣rowfull sight of the entire discomfiture of his whole forces. For the Moores in the lefte wing after they hadde taken the Ordenance of the Christians, pursuing the victorie, dyd also so discomfite those Christians that stoode néere to the banke of the riuer, that they ranne vppon the forces of Mu∣ley Mahamet (that stoode betwéene the Christians and the Riuer) and made miserable spoile and slaughter of them, yea, and many of Mahamet his men ranne vppon the Chri∣stian troupes. Muley Mahamet séeking to saue himselfe by flight, as he would haue passed ouer at the foord of the riuer of Larisla, which is myrie and moorish, was cast out of the saddle by his horse that striued and struggeled to get out of the durt, and beeing vnskilfull to swimme, was drowned and peri∣shed in the riuer. The victours Moores following the van∣quished, came to the warde of Muley Hamet, the brother of Abdelmelec, and there either slue or carried awaie pri∣soners the principall men of the Christians being inclosed, and as it were brought into a pinfolde. So then our men being thus enclosed on all partes, and not hauing Gunne∣pouder (for that through negligence had taken fire, and was all consumed) nor anie other thing to defende themselues, or else had with indifferent slaughter as wel destroyed their owne fellowes as their enimies, ranne awaie amaine, so that through headlong and hastie flight, one ranne vppon another, and many were squised with the weight of horses running ouer them with a miserable slaughter. For yée might sée the heapes of men troden downe and squised lye as thicke as sheafes of Wheate cast downe in a Barnes floure. The enimies also that did insatiablie thirst for Christi∣an bloud, shotte off their Harquebusies thicke and thrée folde vppon them, with whom they did hurt not a fewe of their owne men, and foulie tare them. But as for the eight thousand pikemen, whome the Portugall had in the
field, séeing they did nothing else, then leaue so many pikes for the barbarous enimie, experience it selfe taught how lit∣tle good they dyd in the battaile. For when the King vsed them for so many harquebuziers, whom he shuld haue sent against the enimie, by taking them, he deuised assured ruine for himselfe. And although the Christian state was now become desperate, yet the king of Portugal ceased not to in∣damage the enimie, now in this quarter, now in that, being accompanied with no nto then seuen or eight souldiours of Tangar, for the noble men, gentlemen, & horsemen of Por∣tugal were so cowardly, and so delicate, (they say) that ma∣ny of them leauing their horses, got them to shadowy pla∣ces, and vnder the shadow of the wagons, for to coole them∣selues: with this minde, that when they saw all lost, they might séeke to saue themselues by running awaye. And so when they began to flye, part on foote, and part on horseback towards Arzill, from whence they came: the Moores folow∣ed them with such violence & speede, and specially the horse∣men, (who were yet fresh) yt they made a miserable slaugh∣ter of them. Yet king Sebastian forsaketh not his people: thinking it dishonorable to séeke safetie by flight, and with those few that followed him, behaued himselfe valiantly. He slue so manie, he sent so many to hell, that many called him the lightning, and few durst to looke him in the face, or to defend themselues against him. At length about a three score of Abdelmelec his souldiours seeking glorie by slaying of a King, enclosed him. Then he séeing no way left him to escape, commaunded one of them that followed him, to hold vp a white scarfe hanged on a launce, in signe yt he would yeeld. But they that had enclosed him (that is to wit, A∣larbes, a kinde of people of all other most barbarous & cru∣ell) supposing that by this signe he dyd call the Portugalls to ide him, charged him a fresh on all parts, and wounded him in many places, and at length tooke him, and cutting a sunder the lace of his helmet, gaue him two blowes on the edde, and as many in the face, so that he tumbling off from his horse, gaue vp the Ghost.
The Moores followed the flying Christians vntill it was late nights. So when all were vanquished and scattered, or brought into wretched captiuitie, Muley Hamet comman∣ded the retraite to bée sounded, and returned to the Campe with the bodie of his brother Abdelmelec, and it was euen night when he came thether, and straight waie was the death of king Abdelmelec published, and thereby also Mu∣ley Hamet acknowledged and receiued for king, and all the whole armie was verie sorrowfull for the losse of Abdel∣melec. Although ye this ouerthrowe was no doubt sent vs by God for our sinnes, yet two hundreth or few lesse, with hap∣pie successe escaped out of the handes of the Barbarians a∣liue and well, of whome thrée score were horsemen, and the rest footemen, and among them Don Antonio, a Portugall, who was deliuered by a certaine Moore out of the handes of his enimies, and brought to Tanger. But there were slaine of Christians in this battaile, aboue twelue thousand. For all the whole field was filled with dead bodies of men, yea, and of horses, mules, asses, oxen, and other beasts of bur∣then and draught. Among the nobler sort that died in this battaile, were be∣sides king Sebastian, the Duke of Auero, the Bishoppes of Coimbra and Portua, the Commissarie General sent by the Pope, the Marques of Treland, Christopher de Tauora, and many other knightes and Gentlemen, whome I doe omit for breuities sake. The Tuesdaie, which was the fift of Au∣gust, the new king sent in the morning a band of footmen to seeke out the men slaine on their side, of whome a thou∣sand fiue hundreth being knowen, were buried in the same place, among whome were many valiaunt and renowmed Captaines, friendes and familiars of king of Abdelmelec, They being buried after their manner, the bodie of Muley Mahamet (who was the author of so many euils and slaugh∣ters) was found on the banke and sands of the riuer, where∣in he had ben drowned. The bodie of the king of Portugall was also found a∣mong the bodies of the slaine Christians, by two of his
seruants that were prisoners: whom the new king had sent for that purpose in the hard morning, promising them liber∣tie, if they did finde the kings bodie. Wherefore when they had found it naked, they brought it to the new king couered with their owne clothes, and with it was also brought the bodie of Muley Mahamet. These dead bodies of thrée kings being brought into one Pauilion, made an horrible specta∣cle, and wrong teares from the beholders. For what more sorrowfull and horrible a sight could there bée, than to be∣holde thrée most mightie kings, that died in one battaile, ly∣ing together. The armie of one of whom was vanquished when he liued, & after he was dead did straight waie ouer∣come the armie of the other two kinges: and whereas all thrée did aspire to the kingdome of Marocco, none of them helde it. But this thing being shut from mans senses, and reserued to the hidden iudgement of Gods maiestie, I doe omit. The bodie of Abdelmelec was carried in an horse litter to Fesse, distant about twentie leagues from Alcazar, that it might be buried there. All the horsemen with one legion or regiment of footemen attended on the coarse. Which be∣ing brought to Fes, and receiued with the great sorrowe of the Citizens, was laide in the tombe of his auncestours, in the verie same sumptuous apparell, and precious garnish∣ment of gems that the king died in. Many of the noble men that were taken prisoners, were verie desirous to redéeme the bodie of the king of Bortugall, and they offered Muley Mahamet ten thousand Duckates if hée would vouchsafe to send it to Tangar. But the Barbarian aunswered, that it was not séeme∣lie to sell a dead mannes bodie, yet notwithstanding if they woulde giue him Tangar or Arzil, they shoulde haue the bodie, but when that was not in their handes and power, they coulde goe no farther: yet this they obtained of the new king, that hée suffered the bodie of the king of Por∣tugall to bée carried to Alcazar, where also it was buried in the Hospital, (which is in the pallace of the gouernour of
the Towne,) and some appointed to kéepe it continuallie, least the Christians shoulde steale it awaie. But as for the bodie of Muley Mahamet, the newe king his vnkle com∣maunded the skinne to bée pulled off (because he had béene the author of so many slaughters) and to bée salted, and then stuffed with strawe, and to bée carried about thorough out all prouinces of his kingdome, for to deferre all other for attempting the like at anie time after. The men, wo∣men, boyes, slaues, and blacke Moores taken in this battaile by the Moores, were in number aboue fouretéene thousand, and they béeing the next daie diuided among the Souldi∣ours, were carried into all Prouinces of Barbarie. For as the Moores came out of all places to the battaile, so euerie man carried home with him his prisoners and spoyle. But although the counsailours of the new king were verie ear∣nest with him to besiege either Tanger or Arzill, namelie, séeing that there was no man that woulde resist or de∣fend it: yet hée refused so to doe, but rather prepared him∣selfe to goe to Fes, that hauing taken the possession of that Citie, hée might bée seised of the inheritance of all the king∣domes: thinking that there woulde not otherwise want them, that would assaie to set him besides the saddle, if they did perceiue him to be slacke therein. And hée was acknow∣ledged for king but with vnwilling heartes, and in a man∣ner repining thereat: neither in déede was hée receiued with the same chéerefulnesse and ioye, that they vsed to receiue other kings: and the cause thereof was, for that there was no mettall in this newe king Hamet, an art∣lesse man, not caring for martiall matters, nor such an one as was fit for to vpholde the dignitie of a king, but contrariwise effeminate, nice, giuen to delicacies, de∣lyghtes and pleasures, and lurking at home in the Pal∣lace. Hée was then about nine and twentie or thirtie yéeres of age, of coulour blacke, not bigge, but yet faule and weake, and of no strength, and much lesse skilfull of things,
and endued with that wisdome which is required in the go∣uerning of a kingdome, and that I may comprehend all in few wordes, he was altogether vnlike his brother Abdel∣melec, for he was of a meane stature, of a fine proportion of bodie, with brode shoulders, white face, but intermixed with red, which did gallantlie garnish his chéekes, a blacke beard thicke, and curled, great eies and graie. In summe, he was a verie proper man, and verie comelie in all his actions and iestures, and verie strong: the which strength he conserued by continuallie exercising of himselfe in skirmishes, and in bending of bowes. He spake Spanish verie well, and with a great grace, he could also write in Spanish. But hée had the Italian tongue best of all other, yet he tooke most delight in the Turkish tongue, so that for loue of it he cared not for the Arabian, the which was his mother tongue, and wherein he was accounted for the most excellent Poet of his time. He was ingenious, sharpe witted, and passing prudent and wise, wheras in other things than speciallie in the gouern∣ment of a kingdome. He plaied wel on diuerse instruments, and also daunced excellentlie, but delighted aboue measure in armes, and the art of warre, in which things he also exer∣cised himselfe much: insomuch, that he made with his owne hands many great péeces of ordenance, that are yet at this daie in Barbarie. For he was of a singular and wonderfull wit in all things that he went about or tooke in hand. And although he professed the religion of Mahamet, yet he so lo∣ued Christians, and of them Spaniardes, that I cannot ex∣presse with wordes the loue and good will which he shew∣ed towards many captiues & prisoners. For he suffered thē to returne into Spain, being dismissed without ransome, and we this munificense & liberalitie he had set at libertie aboue 200. within ye 3. yeres tthat he raigned. I do now omit to tel you with what fauor & curtesie he vsed ye prisoners, least I be ouerlong, or may be carried too far with his loue. But ye he néeds not my publication of his praise, the thing it selfe doth witnesse: & the hospital built for sick Christians, adioining to ye tēple of Marocco, & endowed we gret reuenues, doth proue it
manifestly. He died in the 35. yéere of his age. When he had reigned not full 3. yeeres, leauing a son of 3. yéeres and an halfe olde, whose name is Ismaell, & as yet is it at this day brought vp with the Quéene his mother, the wife of Ab∣delmelec at Argier. But as touching his nephew Muly Hamet, he was younger then Abdelmelec, being about xxix. or xxx. yéeres of age: of stature meane, of bodie weake, of coulour so blacke, that he was accompted of many for a Negro or black Moore. He was of a peruerse nature, he would neuer speak the trueth, he did all things subtelly and deceitfully. He was not delighted in armes, but as he shew¦ed in all battailes, of nature cowardly, and effeminate. But he so cruelly hated Christians, that he would kil either with famine or nakednesse, those that he caught. If that in these warres he being constreined by necessitie, gaue any signi∣fication of good will towards them, he did it against the heart, & in a maner vnwillingly, that he might make them the more readie and chierfull to endaunger themselues for him. The Battaile of Lisbon, fought in Portugall, betwene Antonio king of Portugal, and Ferdinando, Duke of Alua, Generall of the Spanish forces, the 24. of August. An. 1581. PHillippe the king of Spaine, prosecuting his pretence vnto the Crown of Portugall, wherin Don Antonio sonne of Don Lewes brother vnto Henry the last king, was in∣uested, sent Ferdinando the Duke of Alua into Portugall, with an armie of 25000. footemen, part Spaniards, part Italians, and 2000. light horse, and 600. men of armes. Against which forces king Anto∣nio had leuied in hast of vnskilfull warriours, Portugalls, about 20000. Encamping himselfe before the Citie of Lis∣bon, within a péece of ground fortified with diches and ram∣pires, there minding to expect the doings of Alua. Who be∣ing
arriued néere vnto ye kings campe,6000. footemē, and 80. horsmen. assembled the chiefe of the armie in councell what was to be done. And there it was concluded that the kings campe was to be assaulted, séeing that neither the skill nor the number of their eni∣mies were such, as might make the victorie much doubtful: and againe the armie being ouerthrowen, the conquest of the whole kingdome would incontinently folow, because there were no places of strength in the whole Realme, to staye the course of the victor: the late kings of Portugall being wholly busied in enlarging their Empire abroade by inuading others and vtterlye neglecting for tifications at home, to withstand the iniuries of their neighbours, with whome they had long liued in peace. And so accordingly the next day Alua dismarched to assault the campe, and sent be∣fore a great band of Italians for to take a foridge nere vn∣to ye citie, leading to Altara, ye which bridge was kept by certaine Portugals. The victory for a while was doubtfull, now the Italians, now ye Portugals, hauing the better, but at ye length through the valor of the Italians, ye Portugalls were beaten from the bridge, & it won. And ouer it Sanchio Dauila passed, with many bands of footemen, for to assaile ye camp, & he had not fought long, but ye he wenne ye first trench cōmitting great slaughter, sent vnto the Duke to send the∣ther the horsemen, whiles he went forward, & assailed ye se∣cond trench. In ye meane time Ferdinando de Toledo, com∣ming with a part of ye horsemen, fought by ye way with 400 Portugal footmen, & a few horsemen whom he met, & put them to flight, pursuing them euen to Lisbon, at the which time Sanchio wan the second trench. When Ferdinando hea∣ring a great noise of harquebusse shot at ye camp, rallied toge¦ther his horsemen, & hasted towards ye camp. But by ye way he met with 15 ensignes of footemē, & almost 100. horsemē whom he couragiously charging, easely put to flight, chasing thē euen to ye gates of ye citie. And anon after ye whole armie of the Portugals was defaited & put to flight,The Ex∣planat∣ saies, & their artilla∣rie taken, & many of ye ensignes of ye footemē, & at last ye king being woūded in two places fled we a few horsemen, after he
had long fought. Dauila folowed ye chase we his whole power euen to ye gates of Lisbon, whether also shortly after came Ferdinando, but they gaue no attēpt vpon ye citie because the king of Spaine had seuerely cōmanded ye they should not en∣ter the citie although they could for feare of tacke, ye which he in no case could like. When the citizens vnderstoode ye ouer∣throw of their armie, they yelded their citie & themselues to the mercie of the victor (who refused to receue their submis∣sion vnder any other cōditions). Wher vpō a messeger was sent vnto the king of Spaine for his resolution, but before it could come, ye vnruly souldiors had sacked ye suburbs. And ye citizens fearing ye the like wold be done to the citie, promised a certain sūme of money to be diuided among ye souldiors, ye which when they could not performe at their day, they could not auoid the furie of the souldiors, who endamaged thē a∣boue 3. Millions. But when ye Spanish fléete ye lay before the hauen of Lisbon vnderstood of the victorie of their armie by land, they assailed the Portugal nauie ye lay in the hauen, cō∣sisting of 42. great ships, of whom 7. were goodly galeons, & among thē diuers ye bare aboue 90. péeces of great ordenance & had 400. men in a ship. But when they heard of ye discomfi∣ture of their land forces, & of the flight of ye king, neither had they any Admiral, they yelded to ye Spaniard, not making a∣ny shew at all of defence. Afterward when Alua vnderstood that king Antonio was at Monte Maior, not far frō the sea, with an armie of 6000. footemen, he not thinking ye he had ye kingdom frée, wherin his enimie had an armie: sent Sanchio Dauila with 3000. Spaniards & certain Italians, & 500. horse∣men for to encounter him. When Sanchio came to ye riuer of Rubera, his horsemen swam ouer, & he transported his foote∣men in flat botom boates. When the king vnderstood of the smal nūber of his approching enimie, he determined to giue thē battaill, séeing that he himselfe had also 600. horsemen Sāchio sent certain harquebuziers before for to take a view of the kings camp, & in the meane time marched toward the king with ye rest of his forces. But the Portugals as soone as they saw the Spainiards a farre of, neuer once staied for the
signall of fight, but shewed them a faire paire of héeles, in∣continently. Which being knowne, Dauila poursued them, and slue many, and came before the Port of Portugall, wher many had saued themselues. When the citizens vnderstood of the first & second ouerthrow of their countrimen, thinke∣ing it no wisedome to expect the fortune of woorse warre, yéelded themselues voluniarilie. But when the king saw that his armie so shamefullye fledde from him, neither could he by any meanes reuoke them to fight, neither if they dyd rallie, could repose any trust in such fearefull fe∣lowes, he also fledde with his horsemen, and left the Spani∣ard the full and entire possession of the kingdome. The Battaile of Saint Michaell, fought at the Iles of the Aslores, betwene Phillip Lord Strozzi, Ad∣mirall of the nauie of Antonio, king of Portugal, and Aluares de Basan, Marques de Santa Cruz, Admirall of the fleete of Philip king of Spaine, the 25. day of Iuly. In An. 1582. Taken out of a letter sent by the Marquesse vnto the Kinge of Spaine his maister: Wherevnto is adioyned the enarration of the same Battaile, out of the booke intituled: The explanation of the true and law∣full right of Antony king of Portugall. &c. AFter that ouerthrow at the Port of Portu∣gall, the Spaniardes sought for the king of Portugall as it were with a candle and a lanterne, and yet could not finde him, he was so carefully kept and concealed by the poore paisants of the coūtrie, among whom he seiourned in wretched state vntill the ninth of Iune, in An. 1581. When he happening on a shippe of Enckhusen in Holand did take shippe not farre from Setuball in Portu∣gall, and was brought to Cales in France, from whence he
wafted ouer into England, and from thence he sent newes vnto the gouernour of Tercera that he was aliue, the which newes confirmed him in his fidelitie and purpose not to yeld the Ile vnto the Spaniards. Wherevpon the king of Spain for to assure the trade into both Indies, prepared a nauie for to conquere the Isles. Whereof when the king of Portugal, who was then passed ouer into France had intelligence, hée obtained of the quéene mother of France a nauie of 57. saile, great & small, wherin were embarked 4000. souldiours, be∣sides 600. gentlemen, & the officers of the ships, & mariners, vnder the conduct of her cosin the Lord Philip Strozzi, Cap∣taine Generall of the French footmen, & his sieuetenant the Countie Brisac. With this fléete the king of Portugal him∣selfe sailed to succour the Assores, & recouered the Isle of S. Michael, except the castle. When the king of Spaine heard yt the king of Portugall was gone with a nauie towards ye Assores, he hasted the departure of his Admirall the Mar∣ques de Sante Cruz, commanding him not to tarrie for yt 19. ships, 2. galeons, 2. galleies, & 2. pinisses, which wer ging in Andolouzia, but presentlie to depart with the fleete yt hee had at Lisbon. The which the Marques did in such hast the 10. of Iulie, with 28. ships, & fiue smal pinasses, yt he  be∣hind him thrée ships ye should haue gone with him, because they could not be readie before ye next daie, & also by reason of ye foule wether an Argosie, wherin wer three companies of olde souldiours, & the Phisitions, Surgeons, & other offi∣cers, for the diseased & hurt, with their prouision of all things necessarie for that purpose, returned backe againe to Lishon, a leadging that their ship was in leake. But the rest of the Nauie the 22. daie of Iulie being Sundaie, approched néere vnto Villa Franca, a towne of 500. houses, in the Isle of S. Michael one of the Assores. The daie before their ariual at the Island, the Marques had dispatched two pinasses vnder the charge, of Aguirrei, the Capiaine of the aforesaid fiue pinasses, with letters vn∣to Ambrose Aguer, ye gouernour of the Isle of S. Michael, certefieng him how his maiesties nauy which he had brought
was verie strong, conteining 5500. souldiours, in which number was Don Lopes de Figueroa, with 1800. of the old souldiors of Flanders, ouer and aboue 200. Gentlemen, and perticular persons entertained with their aduantages, who came voluntarie to serue his maiestie. And that the nauie which was made readie at Caliz, (for the which they looked euerie houre) was of the number and quantitie aforesayd, with other fiue thousand souldiours, of whom fiue ensignes were of the Tierce of Flanders. And the Marques did desire the gouernour to send him such newes as he hadde of the French nauie, & whether they had passed that waies or not, and the number of their ships, because he was determined to goe seeke them, and to fight with them. And that he shuld said vnto Pisoto, if he chaunced to be there, that he shoulde make himselfe readie to followe him with the ships of his charge. Whilest the Marques laie at anker in the roade of Villa Franca, there did ariue to the Admirals ship one Carauel of the thrée that were left at Lisbon for to bring the horses, who gaue him to vnderstand, that the daie before there had ari∣ued at Villa Franca the thrée ships that had ben left at Lis∣bon, who departed from thence the next daie after the Mar∣ques, in companie with the same carauells. They reported also that the three shippes after they had fallen with Villa Franca, were forced backe againe into the sea, and that two of the carauels were taken by the enimie. The other with the horses belonging to the Generall of the field, and others, went back to the sea, being chased by a French ship. Wher∣vpon the Marques sent some perticular men to vnderstand somewhat of them of the Iland, who would not suffer them to come on land, but discharged their péeces at thē. But there was a Priest yt told them, yt the Iland was for his maiestie, & that he knew nothing of the French armie, others willed them to go to the Citie. The Marques vnderstanding what had passed, & learning by one of the pinasses yt had bene sent with Captain Aguirre, yt the other pinasse with the Captain was taken by a French ship, & other barkes, yt came frō the
land. He did then suspect yt the Iland had rebelled, & hauing sent for Don Lopes de Figueroa, General of the field, to con∣ferre with him about the landing of some good number of men, that they might haue spéech with them of Villa Fran∣ca, and likewise to take in fresh water, and hauing sent to the Captaines Michael Oquendo, and Rodrigo de Vargas, for to take notice in what place they were best to anker: in the meane time they that were in the top of the Admiral Galeon espied certaine ships néere to Ponta Delgada, wher∣abouts standeth the chiefe Citie of the Isle, and the Castle. Wherevpon the Marques supposing that those ships should bée of the enimies, he altered his determination, and made straight waie to Ponta Delgada, and by and by they discoue∣red mee ships, and then they perceiued that it was the nauie of Don Antonio (so the Spaniards do cal Antonie ye king of Portugal.) So our armie approching vnto the enimies, & ha∣uing now certaine knowledge of them, for yt they prepared themselues towards the sea, & perceiuing them to be about 60. ships, of great and small, the Marques called a counsell, & with the aduise of Don Pedro de Tolledo, Campe maister Generall, the Marques de Fauora, Don Pedro de Tassis, Comptroller generall, Don Francisco de Bouadilla, maister of the camp, & other Captaines & knights being called there∣vnto, they determined to present the battaile, & to sight with the enimie, who did the like, & put themselues in araie, & so they discharged a péece of ordenance towards vs in tokē of battaile. With that the marques commaunded a banner of defiance to be put forth, & shot off one peece of ordenance, and sent Captaine Marolin & Captaine Rodorigo de Vargas, to aduertise the whole nauie to set thēselues in order of battel, which was done in this maner: In the forefcont was a rank of ships & galeons, & on ye right hand of ye Admiral was placed the galeon S. Mattheo, wherein was the Generall of the field, & the comptroller generall, & on the left hand was the ships wherin went Don Francisco de Bouadilla the maister of the campe, and foure ships mo to be assistaunt: the ten Biskaines with ye other ships, in whom wer the Captains.
Michael de Oquendo, and Vilia Visiosa were placed in the rereward. And by reason that the ship wherein Don Chri∣stopher de Erasso went, had strained the head of her maine mast, by meanes whereof she could not beare her top saile, she was forced to staie behinde, and could not therefore take her place accordinglie, to the great griefe of the Marques to lacke his helpe at such a pinch. The Marques himselfe went in the galeon Saint Martin, which was Admirall of the fléete. He gaue this order for the battaile, that in the vpper∣most fight vpon the poope, should be 20. Gentlemen, & pisto∣lets, & 20. caliuers, & below all the Gentlemen of Portugal, (except sir Iames de Castro, who was vpon the poope) & low∣est of all should be for help & succour sir Antonie Pessoua, sir Lewes Osorio, sir Goston Ronkelio, Colonell Mandonario, Captaine Quessatha, & other foure pistolets, & vpon the hat∣ches of ye galcon 40. pistolets vpon either side vnder ye charge of Captaine Gamboa, néere to the chamber of the poope was the bodie of the gard with 40. souldiors, & most of them per∣ticular & speciall men, which had ben in office before vnder the charge of Augustine Deherrara, for to helpe and succour where should be most néede. In the stearne of the ship was Iohn Suffono, a Gentleman of Milan, and the Sergeants of the Captaines, Austen Deharrara and Gamboa with xv. pistolets and x caliuers: in the great top was the Sergeant Sir Frances Galeio with eight caliuers, and in the top of the trinket sixe, besides those that were in the small tops. Vnder the hatches where the great ordenance doth lie, were the Captaines, Sir Christopher Deaccouia & Scouetho, and Iohn Alter, & the sergeant Tauste, & Esquiuel, & with euerie péece of ordenance one gunner, & sixe men to helpe him, & eue∣rie one had an instrumēt called Hauspikes, with the muniti∣on yt was vpon the hatches was Marcelus Carraceolus: and like seruice was beneath. And for the kéeping of the gun∣pouder was Captaine Grimaldo appointed, with foure ma∣riners. He commanded also that there should stand hard by the sterne of the galeon, the great boate called the Salua, and foure small ones, for to carrie directions, and fill tubs with
water, and hogsheads in diuers places of the Galeon, and likewise to distribute pikes in conuenient places. He also charged the mariners to be in the shippes apparaile, and the Captaines Marolin, and Roger Deuargas (as sea men of great experience) to attend on the ordenance, and other ne∣cessaries. All this was executed very speadely, & with great chéerefulnes for all this was prouided before they approches vnto the Iland. This being done, with great noise of Fifes & drums, and their banners displayed, our nauie set foorth to assaile the enimies: who did the like in good array. But because the winde was calme, they could not fight that daye, but went to seaward. And yet the Marques could not vnder∣stand of the state of the Iland: but afterward within night arriued to the Admirals Galeon a Pinasse, wherein was Domingo de Adutriaga, maister of a shippe called the Ca∣telina. Who brought a letter from Don Iohn de Castilio, containing as foloweth. IN the armie of Don Anthonio, there are 58. shippes, of whome 28. be great shippes, and the rest small, and in them are 6000. Frenchmen. If our armie be not strong enough to fight with them, then if may draw nigh to the Castell, which is for the King. And I would wish you to haue a great regard to it, for if you should loose the vic∣torie, great inconuenience would ensue. Furthermore, the Maister, and his company declared, that Don Authonie with his armie, came to the Iland ye xv. day of Iuly, and the xvi. did set a land 3000. men, with whome Don Lorenco Noguera, with fure Ensignes of footemen did encounter, being in number about 500. men, and with 150. harquebu∣ziers taken out of the Biskaine shippes: who a little from the Citie did skirmish with the French armie, but being ouerpressed with number, were forced to retire to the Ca∣stell to Peter Pisoto, with the losse of tenne Castilians, and twelue Biskaines: Don Lorenco being hurt, whereof after he dyed. And in the Castell with Peter Pisoto, is the sonne of the gouernour Ambrose de Aguiar, and the Bishop, the
Corrigedor, & other 2. or 3. gentlemen, & all ye rest went out of the citie, some calling in Don Antonio, and that the soul∣diours of ye French army sacked the citie, & ye Don Antonio sent to the captaine Don Iohn de Castillio, willing him to yéeld vnto him the castel, knowing it to be his, and that he would giue him frée passage for him and his company, the which ing if he refused, that then he would bring aland seuen péees of ordenance from the shippes, and would bat∣ter the Castell: and moreouer, he gaue him to vnderstand that the army of Spaine would not come this yéere. To whome Don Iohn the gouernours sonne, and the Bishop & the Corrigeder made aunswere, yt the castel was the kings of Spaine, and that they would not yéeld it vnto him. The Marques did likewise vnderstand by the said Maister, that the Frenchmen the next day (hauing knowledge of the ap∣proch of our army) had embarked themselues in all hast, & that the two Galcons, and two great Carauels of Peter Pi∣soto, were ouerthrowen néere vnto the castel, & the French∣men tooke the 4. Biskaine ships, after that ye men were gone a land, and had withdrawen themselues into the castel. The Marques being enformed of all these things, wrote vnto the Captaine, and gouernour, & others in the castell by the sayd maister, encouraging & certifying them of the force of the kings army, not doubting but the next day to giue bat∣taile, and to haue the victorie, & that therewith they should hold themselues contented, as he himselfe was very ioyfull of the seruice which they had alreadie done to ye king, which he knew should not remaine vnrewarded. And with this answere they returned with the Pinasse to the Iland. The next day, being monday, & the 23. of Iuly, the two armies came to present battaile, the French armie hauing both the aduantage of the winde, & also of the Sunne, came to assaile our nauie, being diuided into thrée esquadrons, & made three seuerall attempts, and yet could put nothing in execution. And towards night the Spanish army making towards the sea, the French army placed ten ships alongst the Iland, thinking that night to haue gotten the winde of
vs, but by reason it was calme, they could not preuaile. The 24. day of Iuly, the Marques returned, approching néerer the French armie, who hauing the aduantage of the winde, gaue two seuerall attempts, and yet put neither in execution. Then the Marques perceuing that the course to∣wards the lande was not conuenient for him, he caused the armie to take the course towards the sea, thinking with him selfe that whilest his shippes were trimming of their sailes, that the enimie would assault them, hauing the winde for their purpose, which fell out accordingly, for one of ye Frēch Captaines, with seuen Galeons, came to assaile the Cap∣taine of the Spaniards, and the Galeon S. Matheo, but ap∣proching néere vnto them, did not board them, but dischar∣ged great quantitie of ordenance, against them, and likewise did the rest of the shippes against ours, of whom they were receaued accordingly, in so much that our Captain did shoot at them aboue 40. péeces, and also the Galeon S. Matheo, shot of many, as also did the ship of Don Christopher de Erasso, (who was now ioyned with the armie) and also the shippe of Don Francisco de Bouadilla, and Myguel de O∣quendo, and others, which was a pleasant sight to beholde how the pellets sang from either side. They did hit our Captaine with foure shot, one in the foresaile, an other in the shroudes, the thrid vppon an anker, the fourth on the shippes side, without doing any harme. They hit the Ga∣leon S. Mathco, with thrée shot, without doing any harme, no more dyd many other of their péeces, which dyd hit ma∣ny of our shippes. And againe, we might perccue that ma∣ny of our shotte lighted in the Galeons of the French∣men, but specially foure out of the Captaine, which made them to retire, whereby it appeared they had receaued some harme. There came in the French armie two captaine, & 2. Admiralls, & there was a small galeon, like a Patacha, being excelent good of saile, carrying a standard in the poope, which did not approch the fight, but kept a farre off, to beeholde what passed. There came to the number of fortie great Ships, and amonge them some were verie fin
Galleons, the rest were small Pinasses, dispersed round a∣bout the armie, two or thrée leagues off, for to discouer and to vnderstand of all things, and also two Saities of Mar∣seilles, very good of saile, and many other light boates with oares, by whome they dyd set the battaile in order & array, and direct things as time serued. The same daye at night the armies did seperate them∣selues, and the Marques determined at the going downe of the Moone to procure to get the winde of the French armie, and in the morning to assault them againe: which he dyd, so that the xxv. daye of Iuly, he found himselfe to winde∣ward of his enimies, & so sought to board them, but because his shippes were great and heauie of saile, he could not put in effect that which he purposed, but was forced to returne to the rescue of Don Christopher de Frasso, who was in some distresse in folowing the enimie thorough default of his maine mast: wherefore he gaue him a towe with his Captaine. This daye there was descried a great shippe of the enimies, which wanted her foremast, & other two ships, that did helpe her, but they not being able to performe it, she was forced to sinke. It was iudged that she hadde receued some harme by shotte, the day before. But memorandum, that of the ten Hulkes of the Spa∣nish nauie, there wanted two, which carried Almaines, and likewise wer wanting the thrée shippes that departed from Lisbon, after the Armado, so that the Marques had in his nauy no more then xxv. shippes with the two Galeons. The xxvi. of Iuly, the French came againe to assault the Spanish armie in very good order, and with a fauourable winde. The Marques did cause his ships to be placed in or∣der and array, although the Galeon Saint Mathew, was somewhat a sterne, which was some griefe to the Marques, doubing that the enimie might board her before she could conuemently be reskued: and so it fell out, for she was boar∣ded by two Galeons, a Captaine, and an Admirall, against whome she did defend her selfe very valiantly, being like∣wise assailed by two other shippes, who after they had dis∣charged
certaine ordenance at her, passed forwardes. At the same time came other 2. French ships vpon the Captaine, who beginning to fight with her, she gaue them two such welcomes with her ordenance and harquebusse shot, that one of them was ill to passe, and almost sunke: and so they retired hauing shot many péeces at the Captaine, & the Cap∣taine at them. At which time came the ship of Don Fran∣cisco de Bouadilla, who was néere the Captaine, who did likewise anoie the French men greatlie with their shot. All this while did the Admirall and vizeadmirall of the French armie fight with the Galeon Saint Matheo, who did defend her selfe, and offend her enimies valiane: he Camp maister General, Don Lopes de Figueroa, Don ∣dro de Tassis, ouerséer generall, with the rest of the Gentle∣men and souldiours that were in her, couragiouslie shoting at the enimies, both with great shot, harquebusse sho musket shot. The marques perceiuing that the Spanh nauie was too windward of the French, and séeing the di∣stresse that the Galeon Saint Mattheo was in, by reason of the two Frenchmen, he commanded the Captaine to turne towards the enimie, and so did Don Christopher de rasso, and the rest of the ships of the Spanish armie, and the ships of Miguel de Oquendo, Villia Viciosa, & other Bishaies, which were before the stearnmost, by changing of the wi were then the formost, who came and boorded the Admi∣rall of the French Nauie, who fought with the Galeon Saint Mattheo, and afterward came the shippe wherein went Michael de Venesa, who fought with the Captaine of France like a good Captaine, and so in lyke sort did the soul∣diours that were with him, and because his shippe was betwéene, the marques coulde not at that time boorde the Captaine of France, but passed forward. In the meane t the Admiral of France was in fight with the Galeon Saint Mattheo, and thrée shippes moe, who boorded her, Villia Viciosa béeing one of the thrée, & hauing boorded the French Admirall at the prowe, was slaine with many of his com∣panie, as shall be declared.
The ship of Oquendo did boord her a stearne, and did en∣ter his men into her, and began to sacke, and tooke foure pri∣soners and the ensignes. The battaile beganne now to in∣crease: with that came two other French shippes to rescue their Captain, & putting aboord her thrée hundred fresh men, she got from them. In the meane time the Marques gaue another charge on the enimie with much shot, and at the last boorded with the French Captaine prow to prowe, and so grapled together, where was a cruell fight on both sides, shooting the one at the other both with great shot and small, for the space of an houre, vntill shée yéelded, where were slaine aboue 300. French men, and the Gentlemen and souldiours that were in the two fights, did defend themselues valiantlie: so like∣wise did the two Captaines, Augustine Deharrara & Gam∣boa, and their lieuetenants. The Marques like a Generall, went through the fights, encouraging his people to the assal∣ting of the enimie, foreséeing and ordering all things néed∣full to be done. The artillerie both below & aloft did great good through the great diligence of those Captaines that had the charge thereof. The battaile betwéene the other ships did proceede, giuing and receiuing great charges one vpon the other. The battaile continued fiue houres, and at the last the enimie fled. Don Anthonio was departed in a small pinasse with another ship the night before the battel. Some ships were sunke, & some spoiled, hauing slaine all the men that were found in them, and some fled to other ships. And for that we could not tow their ships, the Marques comman∣ded that we should burne them, & sinke such as we could, as we had begun to doe. The Carauell with the horses that had bene taken was recouered. It is thought that there was of the enimies aboue 1200. slaine, drowned, and beheaded, besides many that were hurt of them ye escaped in the ships yt fled. There might haue ben taken many mo of their ships, if we had had time & marri∣ners sufficient for to haue towed them, but they were suffe∣red
to depart without men and spoiled: & it is certaine, that the Admirall which was left for half drowned, & other foure or fiue ships, more were cast awaie in the Isle of S. Micha∣el, and it is thought that other haue done the like in other places. The number of those that were slaine in the nauie of the Spaniards, was 224. men, and of those that were hurt 553. which is in all 777. Besides some that were burnt with wild fire, among whom was the comptroller generall, Sir Peter de Tassis in the face. The names of the principall men that came with Don An∣thonio, of whom some are prisoners, some were slaine,  some ranne awaie. Philip Strozzi Captaine Generall, was taken prisoner, and hurt with the shot of an harquebusse, wherof he died as soone as he came into the presence of the Marques. The Earle of Vimioso was prisoner, and hurt with an harquebusse shot, and thrust in with a sword, whereof he di∣ed in the Generals ship the daie after the battaile. The Countie Brisac, lieuetenant, some saie that he esca∣ped in a boate of his ship, other saie that he was slaine with a shot, the truth is not knowen. Monsieur de Piamount, maister of the campe Generall, was slaine in the battaile. Of the principal Captaines of the eight regiments that came in the armie (which was 6800. souldiours, accounting the aduenturers) some were slaine, and some fled awaie, The Lordes of Townes and Castles that were taken aliue. Monsieur de Bocamaior, Lord of Rousela. Monsieur Iohn Delatus, Lord of Heria. William de Sanclear, Lord of Sanclear. Lewes de Clen, Lord of Bronnes.
Peter de Oule, Lord of Quenes. Gilbert de Louel, Lord of Vuel. Peter de Bean. Monsieur de Gal, Lord of Gal. Monsieur de Gifford, Lord of Giffordel. Monsieur de la Onet, eldest sonne vnto the Lord of Gresoul. Edward de Langert, Lord of Piel. Fabio Gansete, sonne to the Lord of Gansete. Monsier de Vda, Lord of Vda. Monsieur Fransoius, Lord of Montilla. Monsieur Laquesbay, eldest sonne of the Lord of Biapolis. Monsieur Robert Debella, eldest sonne of the Lorde of Ve∣seola. Monsieur Guillam Mason, Lord of Falla. Monsieur Bigart de Piloart, Lord of Manterie. Monsieur Beltram de Amigat, Lord of Stituias. Monsieur Iailato, Lord of Sans. Monsieur Philip Mentado, Lord of Sabrussa. Monsieur Iohn de Bocca maior, Lord of Rosilla. Claudio de Pomolin, Lord of Popalin. Iacobo Lasarean, Lord of Lasserian. Monsieur Demondoc, Lord of Mondoc. The Gentlemen prisoners that were no Lordes of Townes nor Castles, were in number one and fiftie, and of marriners and common Souldiours thrée hundreth and thrée. The marques séeing that there was peace and amitie be∣tweene the king his maister and the French king, & know∣ing that those aduentures came onelie in the fauour of Don Antonio, Prior of Crato, with minde to rob his maiesties fléetes of both his Indies, and to make themselues Lords of his Islands and dominions, as they had begun in the Isle of S. Michael, & that their meaning was to doe other spoiles and piracies: in punishing of the fault and common offence committed by them against the publike peace, sworne, main∣tained, & kept, betwéene these two crownes, & their subiects, did declare all the prisoners to bée enimies of the common
quietnesse and good, troublers of the entercourses, fauourers of his maiesties rebelles: and that as such kinde of men, & publicke theeues, rouers and pyrates, the chiefe Iustice of the fléete did ordeine, that for the punishment of those & for an example to other in like cases: that the noblemen should be headded, and the rest should be hanged from xvii. yéeres vpwards. And this sentence being giuen, it was put in ex∣ecution, the first day of August of this present yéere 1582. Of this battaile thus we reade in the booke intituled the Explanation of the true and lawfull right of Antony the king of Portugall. When they were come vnto the Isle of Saint Micha∣ells, wherein was a garrison of 800. Castilians: the people of the Island vnderstanding that king Antonio was come, dyd with little or no a doe yéelde vnto him, for all the re∣sistance the Castilians could make to the contrarie: who then dispeiring, fled all into the castell. Within the which when they had held them about thrée dayes, the king of Ca∣stills nauie was descried, the Admirall whereof, was the Marques of Sancta Cruz, who brought an armie of nine or tenne thousand men. Thorough the occasion of comming of this nauie, the king and the rest that were with him must needes forsake the Island, and goe aboard their shippes, and prepare themselues to fight. Albeit in the meane time Stro∣ssi, and the Conestable (that was the Earle of Vimioso) & other of great auctoritie did verie earnestlie admonish and beséech the king that he would withdraw himselfe into the Isle of Tercera (which is the strongest of all the Aslores) least he should endanger his person in a doubtfull battell: séeing that vppon his safetie did depend the libertie not one∣ly of the kingedome of Portugall, but also of whole Chri∣stendome. But the king after he had a long time refused, yet at length yelded vnto them, and went to Tercera in a Pinasse, attended by his Procurator, Ed-ward de Cstro, and certaine other, leauing with the nauie the Conestable, with about two hundreth Portugalls, among whom ¦ry many were Gentlemen that had folowed the King
France. But the next day Strossi setting his nauie in aray, assailed the aduerse fleete of the Castillanes: & they fought very fiercely on both sides: and when that Strossi had now almost boarded the vizeadmirall of the Marques, whereof Lopes de Figueroa was Captaine, hauing slaine in that shippe about 600. Castilians: at last the marques assailed Strossi on the other side with a very mightie great and ve∣rie well appointed shippe called the Galeon San Martino, & did casely board & take him, because ther was no man that would succour him, besides the Comte de Brisacq, with two other ships, with whom he had fought verie valiantly, ha∣uing slaine many Castilians. Which Brisacq when he saw that he was wounded, & that he laboured in vaine, neither was succoured by his felowes as (he thought to haue bene) at length withdrew himselfe out of the fight, whereas in the meane time ye lord of Sansolenne, the Vizeadmiral of Strossi & the Lord of Fumey, who was Captaine ouer 5. ships, re∣fused to fight at all, alleaging that the winde was against them. Whervpon Brisacq as one now in despaire, returned into France with certaine ships, but Sansolenne and Fumei came with 20. ships into the Isle of Tercera vnto the kng, who when he vnderstood ye successe of the battaile, was ve∣ry sorowful (as he had good cause) and namely for the death of the Constable & Strossi, but anone after he dismissed thē, yet reteining still with him 2500. Frenchmen, yt he might be able to defend the Island against the inuasion of the Ca∣stilians, not taking it wel that Sansolenne and Fumey had so wretchedly forsaken Strossi, and the Constable. But the enimie, who had lost in that battaile about 2000. men, and those for the most part of the chiefe men yt he brought with him, durst attempt nothing against the Island of Tercera, but staying for, and taking with him the fléetes that about that time of the yéere doe vsually come out of the East, and west Indies, returned into Portugal with his nauie. The Marques recouered immediatly after this ouer∣throw the Isle of S. Michael: and reenforcing his power, wanne the next yéere the Tercera, and whatsoeuer else the
king of Portugall had in those parts. The Battaile of Langside in Scotland, fought betwen Iames Stuard Erle of Murray General of the for∣ces of Iames the sixt, and Gilespick Cambell Erle of Argile, Generall of the armie of Marie the late deposed Queene, the 13. of May. An. 1563. MArie, who being imprisoned in the castell of Lochleuin, had resigned the kingdome of Scotland vnto her sonne Iames the sixt, being not a yéere old, vnder the gouer∣ment of Iames Erle of Murraye, her base brother, made an escape out of the castel of Lochleuin, the fourth of May, and came the next day accom∣panied with a great traine vnto Hamilton, the which is a village eight miles from Glasquo, where then the Regent kept his Court. The brute of the Quéenes ariuall at Ha∣milton being spread abroade, many either that distrusted the kings partie as not strong enough, or had conceaued hope of getting grace with the Quéene, or else reposed con∣fidence in the memorie of their olde seruices, did part open∣ly shew themselues of her ction, and part secretly procu∣ring pardon for that they had done against her, remained with the Regent, expecting the euent of this new accident. But whereas the reuolt of other bred no great admiration, yet the departure of Robert Lord Boid, who vntil that day had gotten singular good opinion of constancie, gaue great occasion of diuers speeches: insomuch that it was sharply debated at the Counsell table before the Regent, whether they should continue still at Glasquo, or remoue to Ster∣ling, where the King was kept. Manie dyd vehemently counsaile them to depart thence, declaring that Hamilton, a great towne was néere, and the tenaunts of that whole mightie house of the Hamiltons, spre round about them, that there came aboute fiue hundreth Horsemen with the
Quéene, and many were said to be comming out of farther places and parts, but with the Regent were almost none but his owne householde, the rest being part fledde to the Quéene, and part by little & little slipped away, (all things being verie quiet) euerie man to his priuate businesse: and although the Citizens of Glasquo séemed faithfull enough, as they that had suffered many great wrongs at the hands of the Hamiltons when they ruled, yet the citie it selfe was a wast thing, nor populous for the greatnesse, easie to enter in all parts. Other reasoned on the contrarie part, that all things doe depend on their first beginnings, that their de∣parture would be infamous, and next coosen to flat running awaye, that suspition of feare was then vtterly to be shun∣ned, least they did encrease the courage of the enimies, and bring their friends out of hart: that they were néere neigh∣bours vnto the mightie families of the Cunigames, and the Semples: and on the other side to Lenneux, the kings pri∣uate patrimonie: that from thence those that were next would come within few houres, and the rest the next daye or at the farthest, within thrée dayes, that they would be a sufficient guard, namely, with the helpe of the citizens, vn∣till the succours farther off were come. This opinion pre∣uailed at the Councell table. The French Ambassadour went to and fro betwéene both parties, rather like a spye, then a peacemaker, as he pretended. For when he sawe at the first the forces at Glasquo small, and the power about Hamilton shewed greate, he vehemently encouraged the Quéene to giue battaile. Now had the Regent gathered together his friends out of the néerer parts, and looked for other out of Marchland and Lowthian. And when they wer come, being about 600. very choice men, he graunting them but one day to rest themselues, minded so march to Hamil∣ton, and out of hand to giue them battaile, if he could: for he thought delaye would be hurtfull to him and his, but profitable for the enimie, as whome the farthest parts of the kingdome did fauour. In the meane time he was aduertised ye next morning
betimes before daie, that the enimies were gathered toge∣ther from many places where they lodged, for they trusting in their number (for they had in armes aboue 6500. and they knew that the Regent had not full 4000) were determined for to march by Glasquo, and leauing the Quéene in the Castle of Dunbritton, at the pleasure either to sight or draw forth the warres: or if the Regent (which they hoped not) would méete them in the waie, to giue him battaile, neither did they doubt of the euent of the fight. But he that had re∣solued of himselfe to prouoke them to battaile, as soone as he could bring forth his men, stoode certaine houres in araie of battaile before the Citie, in the open field, in the waie that he thought they would march. But when he sawe that their army marched a long the farther side of the riuer, he straight waie vnderstanding their purpose, passed his footmen ouer the riuer by a bridge, and his horsemen by the foords, which were then frée of the tide of the Sea, and commanded them to march to Langside. That is a stréete vppon the riuer of Carth, through which their enimies their waie laie, seated at the foote of an hil, on the Northwest the East, & the North with a descent, but on other partes decreasing gentlie into a plaine. They hasted thether with so great spéed, that they had almost gotten the hill, before that their intent coulde be perceiued by the enimie, who also coucted that place, yea, and had the shorter waie. But two things happened ill for them, and well for vs: the first, that Gilespicke Cambel the Earle of Argile, who was Generall of the Quéenes armie, being taken with a sodaine paine had fallen downe into a sound, and by his fall staied the whole armie a while: the other was, that their armie being euer and anone downe in a bottome, could neuer sée at one time all the kings armie: and therefore they taking it to be small (as in truth it was) did both contemne it, and also the disaduantage of the place. At length when the Quéenes armie drew néere, and sawe that their enimie had gotten the place where they thought to haue lodged, they tooke another little hill ouer against it, and diuided their armie into two battailes. All the strength they
had they placed in their forward, wherewith if they coulde ouerthrowe the enimies battaile that stoode against it, they supposed that they should conquere the rest without fight, they being feared with the flight of their fellowes. The kings Chieftains had also diuided their armie into two bat∣tailes: in the battaile on the right hand were, Iames Doug∣lasse, the Earle of Morton, Robert Lord Semple, Alexander Lord Hume, Patricke Lord Lindsey, with euerie one his fol∣lowers, and in the left, Iohn, Alexander, William, Earles of Mar, Gleucarne, and Taich, and the Citizens of Glasquo: the harquebussiers kept the stréete below, and the gardems by the high waie. Whē both armies stood aranged, the Quéenes gunners being beaten frō their ground by the kings, aban∣doned the place: and on the contrarie side, the kings horse∣men being inferiour to the Quéenes by one halfe, were not able to abide the charge, but fled. And when the Quéenes horsmen had thus discomfited their counterpartie, they assai∣ed to mount the hill, that they might also disorder the ranges of the footmen, but being repelled by the kings archers, and a part of his horsemen, that had rallied and returned from their flight, they returned backe. In the meane time the left wing of the enimie dismarching into the high waie, downe a long where the hill descendeth into a valley, did although that they were galled by the harquebusses, yet béeing got∣ten out of that straight, spread forth their battailen. There the two esquadrons hauing before them on both sides a thicke trench of pikes, fought with such vaior on both sides for the space of halfe an houre, the victorie inclining to neither parte, that those that had broken their Pikes, dyd hurle their daggers, stones, and péeces of their Pikes, and finallie, whatsoeuer came to hand, at the heads of their eni∣mies. But when some of the hindermost rankes on the Kinges side fledde, (whether of feare or falsehoode, it is not well knowen) doubtlsse their flight hadde affrighted them that fought, but that the thicknesse of the rankes woulde not suffer them that were in the fore rankes to perceiue what was done in the hindermoste, and al∣so
those of the second battaile hauing marked the daun∣ger, and séeing no man comming against them, ioyned them selues with the auantgard by deflecting certaine of theyr bands by little and little, towards the right hand, with their ranges whole. When those on the aduerse part were not able to abide their charge, they being driuen back as it wer with a great ruine, ranne away, neither had the vanquished escaped without some notable losse, (séeing the hearts of ma∣ny were priuately incited by anger and hatred) if that the Regent sending out horsemen into all quartiers, had not commaunded that none of them should be slaine that fledde. The second battaile of the kings, that had stoode still vntill they sawe the discomfited enimie to flye in euerye quarter without order, and then at last turning themselues to pur∣sue them, that turned their backes loosed their rankes. The Quéene that had stoode almost a mile of to behold the fight, tooke her way towards England, with the horsemen of her part, that retired out of the battaile whole, but the rest ran euery man that way that would soonest bring him home. There dyed few in ye fight, moe being worne with weari∣nesse and wounds were found lying euery where along the countrie: the number of all slaine, was about 300. but the prisoners were moe. On the kings side were not many hurt and among them men in the chiefe range Alexander Lord Hume, and Andrew Stuart, one man onely was slaine: the rest of the armie except a few, horsemen that folowed the fliers farrre, went ioyfully to the towne, where after they had giuen thankes to God, who had giuen them almost an vnblouddie victorie, against farre greater forces then their own, they gratulating one an oth, went to dinner. This field was fought the xiii. of May, the eleuenth day after the Quéene escaped out of prison. The French Ambassadour who had stayed the euent of the battaile, and had in his con∣ceite promised assured victorie vnto the Quéene, being now defranded of his hope, cast vp his visard, and without once taking his leaue of the Regent, to whome he  presded to be sent, and taking such horses and guides as he could for soo∣nest
get, galoped towards England, but being robbed by the way, Iames Dowglasse the Lord of Drumlanrick, procured that he had that againe which he lost, for the honour that he bare to the name of an Ambassadour, although that he knew that he tooke part with his enimies. The Regent spent the rest of the daye of the battaile in taking view of the priso∣ners, some he let goe frée, some vpon suerties, the principall were kept still, and chiefely those of the familie of the Ham∣iltons, and dispersed into diuers prisons. The next daye the Regent went foorth with 500. horse, and tooke the abando∣ned Castells of Hamilton and Defran. The like terror for∣ced the Quéene to goe into England, either because she thought there was no place in that part of Scotland safe enough for her, or because she did little credit the fideli∣tie of Iohn Maxwell Lord Heris. FINIS.
