20491 99850550 15760
THE Secretary in Fashion OR, A Compendious and Refined way of Expression in all manner of LETTERS. COMPOSED IN FRENCH By P. St de la SERR. Historiographer of FRANCE And Translated into English, by JOHN MASSINER, Gent. LONDON: Printed by J. B. and S. B. for Godfrey Emerson, and are to be sold at his Shop in Little Brittain. 1640.
TO THE WORTHILY Admired for Learning and Good Parts, Mr. Tho: Berney, Gent. of Grays-Inn. SIR, I Thought my endeavours too poorly imploy∣ed, while they were restrain'd to the limits of a particular acknowledgement; wch forced me to comply with my ambitious humour, by mak∣ing this publick profession of my duty & observance. I may seem both Ignorant and Indiscreet to
promise any new thing in this fardell of Epistles to you, vvho are able to give lessons of Court∣ship and Civility to the most re∣fined Spirits of this age, yet I de∣serve pardon, if you consider that nothing is here but vvhat might either have bin written by you, or to you, and consequently de∣serves the approbation of the most malitious. For in the one your own Humanity, and in the other the Judgement of all the world is interessed: as is in all things that concerne your Par∣ticular, the repose, SIR, of Your most humble and most obe∣dient servant J. M.
TO MY LORD, THE Abbot of Dorak, one of his Maje∣sties Privie Counsellors, and Trea∣surer of the Holy Chappell at Paris. My Lord, THe Particular esteeme I have of your Merit, obli∣ged me to these Publick Proofes; being Ambitious the world should know, that though my inclinations be not strong enough to follow vertue, yet I never cease to build her Altars, in al places where I find her Image. To maintain (my Lord) that you are one of the most lively, the Eloquence of your actions surpassing that of my Discourse, has
already perswaded it to al the world, so that your Honesty having made it selfe known every where, I satisfie my selfe in praising you worthily, to declare your name, being one of the most accomplished Prelates of this Age. I speake not of those negotia∣tions of Importance which you have finished, to the Honour of the King, and Satisfaction of his Emminence who knew right well that the grea∣test Employments were under the reach of your Capacity. I wish with Passion, I had any in your service, wherby I might force you to beleeve that I am extreamly My Lord, Your most humble, and most faithfull servant, P. de La. Serre.
The Author to the Reader. HAving had notice given mee, that my Secretary of the Court, which I composed for a Di∣vertisement in my Youth, ran through the World in my Name, and with some kind of Approbation in strange Coun∣tries: as being 30 times Printed, since it was first published, and never falling into my hands to be corrected: I thought good to present thee with this new one, which is a Digested worke, and where thou shalt receive more satisfaction, as finding a lesse number of faults. It beares the Name of Secretary in Fashion, to the end that it may be alwayes in season, considering how va∣riable
the manner of Writing is. Receive it with as good a heart as I give it thee: and if it like thee not, learne charitably to hold thy Tongue, or else to reproach with a good grace; tis the best counsell I am a∣able to give thee.
Reader, I Here present thee with a Cornu∣copia of knowledge and Expressi∣on. If thou dost not receive it with an acknowledgement proportioned to the Worth of such a Gift, mayst thou acquire two Cornucopia's of Ignominy, to Adorne thy forehead, and bee condemned to the Reading of the English Se∣cretary, as long as thou livest. If the whole Mountaine of the Common-wealth (whereof thy selfe art a molehill,) were as sensible as thou oughtest to be, I assure my selfe, shee would bow her venerable knees, and doe mee Homage for that mighty Portion of Wit, and Courtshippe, whereof shee goes now to take Possession. But I see thee already blear-eyed with reading Mon∣sieur Balzaac, and the Packet of Letters; for∣give mee good Reader, I aske thee most humbly Mercy, and with much Resentment call backe my former Imprecation, since I perceive thee al∣ready exposed to a more rigorous Pennance, than
that which my Charity would have suffered my Justice to impose upon thee: For what mischeif could I have imagined (though I had beene in∣formed with the Soule of Phalaris his inginer) equall to the Malice of this which thou hast already incurred? in the one thou learnest no∣thing but to speake Baudy with a good Grace, in the other nothing but to blow a horne; Here thou suckest in the Principles of Atheisme, there of Ignorance; Here thou art instructed to Preach in an Epistle, there to Court thy Friend in a Sermon: This stuffs thy Memory with Stolne French, that with English not worth the Stea∣ling: The one Commands thee to Violate the Laws of all Ancient Rhetorique, the other to observe none. The one will give thee Rules how to speak Balzaac, (or) badly, the other like a Post (id est) nothing at all. The Consideration of this (Loving, Kind, Courteous Reader) did much precipitate my Vin∣dication of the Times from Error; or (as the Pure Hees and Shees of this Age say,) did even force my Spirit to reclaime the Idolatrous from adoring that Malicious Idoll the English Secretary, that Image which Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up, the Post with a Packet of Letters, and that most abhominable Baal, Balzaac: by divulging this Peece of Excellent Workmanship, (which the Gods themselves did hammer and frame in the Head of Monsieur La Serre;) by letting this Bird of Paradise
fly out of her Cage, that she might recreate Morta∣lity with the Charms of her Voyce, and resuscitate the Intombed Spirits of Men, from that Lea∣den sleep which the former Tarantulaes had throwne them into. Or as with most reason I may averre, by Publishing this new Ephimeri∣des to the World, which shall teach thee to know the Conjunctions of the Planets, or erring Stars; I meane the Connection of Wandring words and sentences, used, and abused by Men of all sorts ad Libitum. It will teach thee the rising and setting of the Sun, or Elevation and depression of Periods; The Ecclipses in writing, as to di∣stinguish amongst sounds, and to know when one obscures another, or at least renders it lesse a∣greeable. But if thou beest not yet Contented with this moderate touch of knowledge, it shall proceed farther, and open to thee a sluse of all o∣ther sublunary Sciences whatsoever. Where canst thou have better Philosophy than here, where it teacheth thee how the rude Matter of an Epistle is to be informed with the spritefull Vivacity of Phrases, and Apt Coherence of Periods? Where wilt thou prove an Arithmetitian, if not here, where thou art taught, that if thou add, or subtract but one word from the whole Number of an Epistle, thy Computation will prove false, and it utterly lose the Grace and Sweetnesse due unto it? If thou wouldst be instructed in the Tacticks, where wilt thou learne a more ex∣act way of ordering Men and disposing a Battle
than here, where one displaced, puts all the rest out of order? Humanity cannot invent a more compendious way of Short writing, since Steno∣graphy has here arrived to such Perfection, that when a Man has but writ his Name, hee has both Courted his Mistresse, Comforted the Sick, Defied an Enemy, and Obliged a Friend. Lo∣gick I am sure, is here in her Auge, since our Syllogismes are so powerfull, that except a Man would confesse himselfe rude, and unreasonable, (and consequently no Man) he can never de∣ny the Argument. What Rhetorick is more pleasing than this, where servants and Admi∣rers are acquired in every page? What Mu∣sick more Harmonious than where we are so ri∣gorous in teaching the true art of stopps, that when one only is escaped, the whole Aire is no∣thing but a Discord? I must confesse, our Gram∣mer is an Antipode to Lilly (though Infi∣nitely more Compleat,) for wee doe not decline Words, but only Obsolecies, and Barbarismes: nor have wee more than two Conjugations, viz. to doe you service, and to revenge my selfe; by which we Conjugate all our other Verbs and Nouns be they what they will. Behold Reader, beyond thy Expectation, an∣other Ars magna et Ultima, besides the Lul∣lian; another Panace or Curer of all De∣seases beside the Graecian; and another Castle of Knowledge beside Records Sphere; which if thou accept with a Willing mind, and good
Intention, Ile deifie thee; but if thou attempt upon it with unwashed hands, or a Prejudi∣cated Opinion, I defie thee; and so fare thee well. Thy Servant, J. M.
THE FIRST LETTERS OF COMPLEMENT. SIR, I Take such delight in rendring you my service, that I remaine alwayes the first satisfied though I acquit my selfe And that which makes mee so care∣full in seeking Occasions, is, that you should not reproach me to have o∣mitted any. Yet in this Sir I doe not implor your beleife, desiring so to let you see by Ef∣fects, rather then Words, that I am without Complement, Sir Your most humble servant.
Another upon the same Subject. SIR, I Defie you to accuse me of neglect in the performance of my Duty, the passion which I have to your Service being so violent, that it nourisheth in mee a continuall Care of seek∣ing Opportunities to make it knowne. To the furtherance of which, this Letter offerd it selfe most happily, having charge to assure you from my part, that of all the servants which your Merits have acquired you, I am Sir The most humble and most faithfull. SIR, I Am by so many obligations Yours, that the onely want of Occasions to give Testimony of it, breeds all my Discontents. Esteeming my selfe unfortunate in nothing so much, as that the Passion which carries me to your Ser∣vice, prooves as unprofitable as extreame. Which forceth me to have recourse to Intrea∣ties, beseeching you to honour me with your Commands, that (other meanes failing) my o∣bedience may oblige you to believe that I am Sir Your most humble servant.
Another upon the same. SIR, I Must discharge my heart in telling you that I honour you more then all the rest of the World. Tis true your desert imposed the necessity upon me, but it did not give me the inclination: though I beseech you to beleeve that I was very willing in the constraint, having suffer'd no other violence, then what my Rea∣son and Iudgement offer'd mee. You shall have daily new proofes by the Continuation of my Duty, and by the Quality which I beare Sir of Your most humble servant. Another upon the same subiect. SIR, IF you expect nothing but Complements from me, you shall never receive any, I am a Sworne enemy of Courtship and Civility towards persons whom I honour extreamely, as I doe you. It sufficing mee that I performe my Duty in their behalfe, and that I take care to do it with a good Grace. This is the Study in
which I practice my selfe, and I beseech you thinke that I will not loose the least occasion to witnesse it to you, because I finde my selfe much interessed in the Resolution which I have taken, to be all my life Sir Your most humble servant. Another upon the same. SIR, THough I have told you a thousand times by word of Mouth that I am your Ser∣vant, yet my Pen shall once agane as∣sure you of the sam, expecting till you oblige me, to more Eminent proofes; which I con∣jure you do to, & (if you be pleased) to prevent the occasion by some Command, that may sa∣tisfie my Impatience, to make you know and confesse at the same time, that you may have more powerfull, and more considerable Ser∣vants, but never Sir A more humble, or more faithfull.
Answers to the Letters of Complement. SIR, I Never made doubt of your Ci∣vility and Courtesie, but of my owne good fortune, in meeting with the meanes to require them. Yet I intreat you to be∣lieve, that hereafter I will im∣ploy all my cares to witnesse unto you my good affection, and if Ill meanes render them un∣profitable, I will dye for my owne satisfaction, Sir Your very humble Servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Esteeme to much the Honour of your Re∣membrance, not to desire the continuation, and withall to beseech you for some Em∣ployment, wherein I may witnesse the Passion which I have to your service. For which I will importune you hereafter, desiring by deeds
rather then words to let you see, that I am ex∣treamely, Sir Your most affectionate servant. Another Answer. SIR, THough this in some sort requite the fa∣vour of your remembrance, yet I can∣not cease to be indebted to you, when I consider, that your courtesie prevented my re∣spects; But I beseech you imagine, that for the Time to come, I will bee so carefull to disin∣gage my selfe, that you shall have greater cause to complaine of my importunity, then my silence: which I have resolved never to keepe, when your Interests oblige me to the contrary, as making Publike Profession to ap∣peare in all places Sir Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Will be so presumptuous (since you desire it) as to beleeve you love me; but upon con∣dition,
that you will likewise acknowledge the Passion, which I have to serve you. For as it onely makes mee merit the honour of your Friendship, so I shall be very glad, that you would everlastingly conserve the Remem∣brance of it. Continue then in loving mee as much as you please, and likewise esteeme in∣fallibly that I am, more then all the world be∣sides, Sir Your most humble Servant. Another Answer. SIR, THough I give you very humble thanks for the Honour of your Remembrance, yet I shall alwayes remaine Indebted to you, as making more account of the least of your favours, then all the respects I am able to render you. Continue onely in obliging mee of that fashion (though I be intirely yours al∣ready) and beleeve (if you please) that I shall never bee capable of other resentment, then which shall witnesse the quality that I beare Sir of Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, I Am not so unfortunate as I thought I was, since I hold some place still in your Memo∣ry. Yet the Griefe which I have, not to de∣serve this honour, has reduced my thoughts, to such a Moderation, that I am in doubt whe∣ther I should complaine or rejoyce I rmaines in you onely to allay the discontent of my Minde, by giving mee some Employment in your service, which may witnesse the Passion I have to maintaine the Quality Sir of Your very humble Servant. Letters to complaine of a Long Silence. SIR, THe Friendship and Service which heretofore I vowed you, force me at this present, to demand the Reason of your Silence. I doe not doubt but
alledge a sufficient excuse to authorize it, yet I beseech you thinke, that how lawfull soever it bee, I shall never leave off Complaining: you may pretend the want of Occasions, or the sud∣den Accident of some Sicknesse, (which never molested you except in thought) whereby to Iustifie your selfe against my Reproaches. But all this is not able to satisfie mee, confesse your fault; aske forgivenesse, and you goe a nearer way to work, that's the onely way to conserve eternally, Sir Your very humble servant. Another upon the same. SIR, I Shall breake with you at last, if you breake not silence, imagining that you love me but a little, since you have forgot me altoge∣ther. I beseech you deale more familiarly with me, if my friendship be any way considerable, or you esteeme mee worthy of yours. In the Humour I am now, I thinke you can no sooner blot me out of your Memory, then I can raze you out of my heart, without retaining any thing (by my good will) but the Quality only, Sir of Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, IF you have taken an oath to write no more to me, at least send mee the letters backe a∣gaine which I addressed to you, that I may still have the honour to receive something from your part. Silence is a sworne enemy of Friendship, which is the reason that mine re∣proaches you at this present, being not able to indure, that after so many protestations never to forget me, you should loose even the Me∣mory of having made them. You may change your Humour when you please, if you desire to renew the obligations Sir of Your most humble Servant, Another. SIR, IF I did not honour you extreamely, I could easily revenge my selfe of your forgetful∣nesse, by my silence; but the esteeme which I make of your deserts, together with an incli∣nation which carries me to your service, oblige
me to assure you still, that though you should forget me, even to my name, I would never change the Resolution which I have taken, to be all my life Sir Your most humble servant, M. Another. SIR, I Can endure no longer that you should for∣get a Person who honours you so extream∣ly as I doe. These three Months of your si∣lence I have kept my minde in the continuall fetters of grief, that I should loose the honour of your Remembrance; I beseech you doe me Justice, and let not all the World complaine with me, of the little esteeme you make Sir of Your most humble Servant. Another. SIR, DOe if you please, write no more to mee, your merit constraines mee to use you in another fashion. I can never weary
my selfe, in executing your Commands, and lesse in acquitting my selfe when Occasions are offer'd, yet I doe not desire that you should esteeme your selfe obliged to mee, for I satisfie my selfe alwayes the first, following my incli∣nation after I have honoured your vertue, be∣cause equally both the one and the other force me to carry, to my Grave, the Quality Sir of Your most humble Servant. Answers to the Letter Complai∣ning of Silence. SIR, YOu oblige mee with such a good Grace, in Complaining of mee, that I am constrained to give you thankes instead of reproaches. 'Tis not because I want lawfull excuses to authorize my Silence. But the Inte∣rest which you take in it, makes mee to con∣demne it, assuring you, that hereafter you shall accuse me of Importunity rather then neglect. 'Tis the Protestation Sir of Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, IT is not needfull to excuse my silence, since I still indure the Paine of it; by reason of a Sicknesse, which molests me continually. But though your Reproaches proceed from your Affection, yet I assure you they Interesse mine extreamely, being you doubt of the con∣tinuance of it. I beseech you thinke, that I am not of an humour to forget those whom I ho∣nour as I doe you, and that except I bee againe reduced to the extremity I was in before, I shall alwayes acquit my selfe of that which I owe you, In Quality Sir of Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, IF our reciprocall friendship could not bee conserved but by letters, my hand should bee alwayes upon the Paper, to give you
continually some new assurance or other; But knowing that she subsists of herselfe, through her own solidity, I contemne all the Paintings of Civility and Complement. How little know∣ledge soever you have of your owne Desert, or my Humour, you may easily know without being a Prophet the deare esteeme I make of you, and being knowledge has truth for her object, you are forced to beleeve that I am really Sir Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, YOur Complaints and Reproaches, are too agreeable to me, that I am forced to give you thanks, knowing they proceed from an excesse of affection, and zeale. 'Tis true I have beene silent too long, but I pray you beleeve, that the Misfortune which Im∣posed it upon me, hath given mee such a Pen∣nance, that I deserve Pardon, though it were the most enormious crime of the World. I will not now make a particular recitall of all the Accidents which have befallen me, for feare you should Iudge me as Importune in that, as in the other you esteem'd mee negligent: It
sufficeth me to put you in minde, that I am al∣wayes, what I alwayes was, Sir Your most humble Servant. Another Answer. SIR. YOU are too Iust to Condemne mee without hearing me speake. Tis true I have beene somewhat too long in ac∣quitting, by the ordinary Commerce of Let∣ters the debt which I owe you, but the Mis∣chance of the Prison where I am still, can tell you, that though my hands bee free, yet their liberty is altogether unprofitable to serve them in that which you desire. Content your selfe then (if you please) with the services I am able to render you, that is, in good will and thought: without accounting this for one, since tis both by hazard & an excesse of good Fortune, that I acquit my selfe of it. And beleeve assuredly, that into what extremity of adverse fortune soever I am reduced, I will alwayes conserve the passion I have to your Service, as being without Fiction Sir Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, I Would I were lest handed, that I might ac∣quit my selfe of the Service I owe you, be∣ing unfortunately lame of the right hand: which has obliged me to make use of a strange Penne, to excuse my silence, and to assure you, that though I serve my selfe of another mans endeavour in writing this Letter, yet 'tis my soule that conceived it, and my heart that gave the Dictamen, being very glad to witnesse un∣to you the Truth of my thoughts, touching the Resolution which I have taken to make my selfe remarqued in all places Sir Your most humble servant.
Letters of Thanksgiving. SIR, SInce it is your pleasure to adde dayly to the obligations of those who are most intirely yours; I am resolved to let you take your course, and bu∣sy my thoughts onely in see∣king occasions to revenge my selfe. And if my misfortune in this Pursuit continually render my cares unprofitable, yet for your satisfaction I shall alwayes have a good Will, and Passion to doe you Service, which I shall heartily of∣fer you up being Sir Your most humble servant. Another upon the same. SIR, I Doe not intend that these thanks which I give you for the favour wherewith you were pleased to honour me, should passe in
your opinion for an Acknowledgement: I re∣venge my selfe onely of your Civility, expe∣cting to meet with an occasion, wherein I may witnesse with Services rather then Words, that I am unfaignedly in heart, and soule Sir Your very humble servant. Another upon the same. SIR, I Confesse you have obliged mee with a ve∣ry good Grace, and so perfectly, that I shall remaine indebted to you all my life. I would to God some Occasion would offer it selfe, which I might imploy in your Service, thereby to witnesse, that as your favours have beene extreame, I will attempt all extreami∣ties to revenge my selfe. Those are no discour∣ses of Complement, my heart dictates to my Penne, all that my Penne writes to you, with assurance that I will not long unprofitably beare the Quality Sir of Your very humble servant.
Another. SIR, I Know not in what Tearmes, to give you Thanks, for the Favours which your Gene∣rous disposition has beene pleased to be stow upon mee. I am so unfortunate an Ora∣tor, that I am out of all hope to acquit my selfe, that way. It sufficeth me, to put you in minde of the Passion which I have to your Service, per∣swading my selfe, that the remembrance it will excitate in you shall supplicate for the default of my Capacity, and that Considering the Ardor of my Zeale, rather then the beauty of my Discourse, you will content your selfe with my Disability, and that I assure you once againe, how perfectly I am, Sir Your very humble servant. Another upon the same. SIR, IF I had beene more happy or more power∣full, I had already requited your favours instead of giving you thanks; but being unfortunate as I am, and in such a degree of
Impotency, I have nothing left but words, to send you, as an acknowledgement of your Deeds. Tis true, they are words most infallibly true, assuring you from my heart rather then my mouth, that I will carry to my Grave, the Quality Sir of Your most humble servant. Another. SIR, IF you expect Thanks worthy your favours, you shall never receive any of me. I am farre more fit to publish them, then requite them in the least respect, if the good desire I have to disingage my selfe, doe not passe for satisfaction: which is all that I can offer you in the state I finde my selfe at this present, besee∣ching you to beleeve, that if I were not op∣pressed with an extreame Misfortune, my Care and Paines should soone witnesse the Occasion which is offered me, to give Testi∣mony how much I am Sir Your most humble servant, M.
Answers to the Letters of Thanksgiving. SIR, YOur thankes have bought my ser∣vice at so deare a rate, that the sa∣tisfaction which before I received is utterly now taken from me. Keep your omplements then for some other, and remember to use more familiarly, Sir The most humble of all your servants. Another Answer. SIR, THere is farre more Honour, then Con∣tent in serving you, since by such ready acknowledgements, you hasten the sa∣tisfaction. The excesse of your Noblenesse, undoes me, not being able to endure thanks for the performance of my duty, and there∣fore since my indeavours in your behalfe can bee stiled no other, I beseech you to vary
your Tearmes, and to Consider me alwayes in the Quality I am Sir of Your most humble servant, Another Answer. SIR, I Complaine much of the Excesse of your Civility and Courtship, since our Recipro∣call friendship is therein greatly Interessed. you give me Thanks for the service which you desired of mee, as though I were not obliged to it of Necessity. Leave off that ill Custome if you Please, and know that the Language of Complements is unknowne to true friends, whereof I am one, and which is more, Sir Your most humble Servant.
Another Answer. SIR, YOur Complements have put me into a very ill humour; I cannot write to you, but in Choller, since you use mee as a stranger, like as appares by the super∣fluity of your Ceremonies and unprofitable Thanks. It seemes you have wholly forgot the absolute power that your Merit has obtain'd over me, which causes mee once againe to put you in minde, that you will be sooner weary in Commanding, then I in executing, as being unreservedly, Sir Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Send you backe your Thanks, to the End that you may make use of them, when you entertaine some person lesse endeared to your service then I am. One would thinke by reading your complements, that you Cog with me to gaine my Friendship. I pray Remember Sir, that I have wholly dedicated it to your
desert, and therefore, you are obliged hereaf∣ter to treat mee with lesse Civility, and more freedome, if you account mee into the num∣ber of your Servants, I being, Sir One of your most humble, and most faithfull Another Answer. SIR, YOur thanks have made mee resolve to doe that piece of Service over againe, Imagining that something was omit∣ted, since you goe about to put mee in minde of it, by your unnecessary Acknow∣ledgment. Sir you know that kinde of affecta∣tion is alwayes ill received in the familiar Commerce, of a true friendship, which I shall alwayes professe in your behalfe, and like∣wise that I am, Sir Your most humble Servant.
Letters of Intreaty. SIR, THe Report of your generous Disposition gives me the bold∣nesse, to implore your favour in the dispatch of a businesse, whose successe depends abso∣lutely on your Authority. Tis true I have not the Honour to bee knowne by you, but that being a particular Mifortune of Mine, I desire it may not serve as a pretence to the Refusall of my Demand: Assuring you, that I shall indeavour to make knowne by re-all service, rather then name, Sir Your most humble Servant, M. Another upon the same. SIR, I Could wish your Command had preven∣ted my Intreaties, that my observance might have merited of you the dispatch
of a businesse which presents it selfe. But being the occasion to Importune you, was offer'd, when I sought one to doe you service, I will force my selfe to beleeve that my good will may oblige you, not to refuse this courtesie Sir to Your most humble servant. Another upon the same. SIR, MY vowed Service and Friendship, give mee the freedome to Implore your fa∣vour, in behalfe of the Bearer of these Presents, I serve my selfe very boldly of the Power you have given me to imploy your In∣deavors in all sorts of encounters, but upon Condition that you will doe the same in all occasions that may offer themselves, wherein I may witnesse how much I am, Sir Your most humble servant. M.
Another. SIR, IF you make as great Account of my Intrea∣ty, as I doe of your commands, you will easily accord unto me this, which is, to su∣staine with your Authority, a businesse of Mine now in agitation, that it may bee deter∣mined to my advantage. I doe not doubt of your Power, and lesse of your Noblenesse, which forces me to beleeve that you will com∣ply with this Occasion offerd you, to oblige extreamely, Sir Your most humble servant. M. Another. SIR, IF you complaine of my Importunity, accuse your owne freenesse, for if you had beene lesse Generous, I had bin lesse bold. But be∣ing I know by Experience in what a high de∣gree Civility & Courtesie predominate in you, I am constrain'd to think, that my intreaty will not be inacceptable, which is, that you would
bee pleased to mollifie with your Eloquence, that harsh conceipt that Master N. has of mee. In this incounter you will oblige us both to∣gether, since giving him to understand my In∣nocence, hee will easily give place to reason. This favour in particular I hope from your Goodnesse, as you on the contrary may ex∣pect all sorts of Service from my Duty: In Quality Sir of Your most humble servant. M Another. SIR, THough I bee the most unprofitable of all your friends, yet I shall never faile to prove my selfe one of the most passio∣nate to your Service. The violence whereof causes me at this Present, to intreate you to ob∣lige me in such, or such an Encounter. All that I can say to you for the first acknowledge∣ment is, that I shall conserve Eternally the Memory of this favour, and if I be not able to meet with an Occasion to revenge my selfe,
that I shall carry the Sorrow of it into my Grave, together with the Quality Sir of Your most humble servant. M. Answers to the Letters of Intreaty. SIR, I Have done all that you desired of me, but with so much satis∣faction, and so little Paines, that I beseech you prepare some new commands, where∣by the passion I have to serve you, may not be left unprofitable, and you shall see by my observance, that I have no greater Pleasure in the World, then to make my selfe remarqued in all places, Sir Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, I Have many thankes to returne you for the happy imployment you gave mee in your service; I thinke all things fell out accor∣ding to your desire, which gave mee ample occasion to rejoyce, as participating in all things that concerne your particular. I beseech you doe me the favour, that I may never have occasion to doubt of it, since I professe my selfe as much as any man in the World, Sir Your most humble servant. M. Another Answer. SIR, I Could wish you had every day occasion to command my service, that I might conti∣nually have the Good fortune to produce new proofes of my obedience. I perfor∣med happily the last Commands wherewith you were pleased to honour mee, which gives me cause to believe that you will not long let me rest unprofitable, without giving me some other sort of imployment, wherein I may finde
more satisfaction, as prooving it more paine∣full. This I beseech you to doe, in quality Sir of Your most humble Servant, M. Another Answer. SIR, I Finde so much facility in the execution of the Command, which you imposed up∣on mee, that I am ashamed to reckon it in the number of services which I desire to render you: It being an Encounter of so little Importance, for my satisfaction and your In∣terest, that I beseech you give me some other Imployment, wherein I may witnesse accor∣ding to your Merit and my Affection how un∣faignedly I am Sir Your most humble Servant. M.
Another Answer. SIR, I Aske you pardon for the long time that I have spent in the executing your Com∣mands, not that I have beene negligent in employing my Cares, and Diligence, but be∣cause the successe consisting in a Strangers power, I could no sooner give you the Effects: yet let not the mishap of this delay, hinder you hereafter in using my Endeavours, since I am without reserve Sir Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, WHen you desire any service of me, I beseech you consider whether it be in my power or no, to the end that being unable to execute your Commands (as I am at this Present) I incurre not the hazard of your reproach. You may Expect new proofe (when you please) of the Passion which I have to serve you, since I no way desire to beare in vaine the Quality Sir of Your most humble Servant. M.
Other Answers of Excuse to the Letters of Intreaty. SIR, I Am more sorry then your selfe, that I am not able to effect your Commands: The duty which you expect, does not absolutely depend of mee, so that to render it worthily, I am to implore the favour of an other Man, who professeth to incline totally to the adverse par∣ty. Doe not thinke that I make these excuses to avoid the occasion, which presented it selfe for your service, but beleeve I beseech you, that in all other Encounters, I will Comport my selfe with so much passion, that you shall be forced to confesse I am unfaignedly, Sir Your most humble servant, M.
Another Answer. SIR, IF you knew in what disorder my Misfor∣tune causes me to write, (since I am not able to satisfie your desire) you would have pit∣ty on my Affliction, being it wholly proceeds from my Griefe, that the Power to doe you service is taken from mee. I speake this from my heart, and soule, and being the friendship I promised you taught mee the Language, I will constraine my selfe to beleeve, that it is Eloquent enough to perswade you, that the only want of ability, deprives mee at this Pre∣sent, of the Honour and Contentment, to wit∣nesse unto you how much I am Sir Your most humble servant. M.
Congratulatory Letters to a friend, of some Good Fortune happened to Him. SIR, IF you knew how excessively joyfull I was at the Newes of your good fortune, you would make a doubt whether your owne resentment might be e∣qualled to mine or no: truly Sir there could nothing be added to it, and be∣sides it proceeds wholly from the friendship that long agoe I vowed to your good nature, which is not vulgar, since it has your desert for the Object. I could say more if the Excesse of my Gladnesse would give me the freedome, wherefore for the Present I must suffice my selfe, that you remaine assured, how the Con∣tentment which I take can be equalled by no∣thing but the passion which I have to your ser∣vice, as being Sir Your very humble servant.
Another. SIR, THe newes of your Promotion into that Charg, which you wish'd for so long, have added such Contentment and Satisfaction to my thoughts, that I am able to expresse but one part of the Ioy which raignes in me. I trou∣ble not my selfe, to perswade you to it by a long discourse; your owne merit and our reci∣procall Friendship, (supplying the defect of my Eloquence) will give a farre better Testi∣mony then my pen is able, which has in charge at this present onely to put you in minde, that I am alwayes according to my wont Sir Your most humble Servant. Another upon the same. SIR, THe part which I alwayes tooke in your Interests, shall witnesse unto you at this Present, the excesse of my joy which I conceived at the newes of your Good For∣tune: & though I be not one of the first to con∣gratulate it with you, yet I am one of the most
sensible, in the common Contentment which possesseth the World. The diligence, or delay of a Post can advance, or diminish no mans duty in this kinde of encounter, since nothing but Zeale, and Affection are considerable, which gives mee great confidence at this Pre∣sent, as being more then any man in the world, Sir Your most humble Servant. Another. SIR, DOe not admire that I am one of the last, who congratulate with you, your good fortune: the joy which I conceived was so extreame, that it could afford mee no soo∣ner the Liberty to acquit my selfe. I know, the most o your friends have prevented me, but being their satisfaction is small, I doe not won∣der if their diligence be the greater. As for my part my idlenesse increaseth my Merit, since the stay and Protraction proceeded only from the excesse of the Gladnesse Sir of Your most humble servant.
Another. SIR, SInce you doubt not the Friendship which I have promised you, you will easily be∣leeve, that I was extreame sensible of the Good fortune which happen'd you of late, but I must tell you, that as your merit made mee foresee it in you long before it came, so I was not much astonished at the first recitall. I wish you daily the like, or greater advancements, being unable to acquit my selfe otherwise then by prayers of the great debt I owe you. Yet how unfortunate or unprofitable soever I be, doe not cease to continue me in the Number Sir of Your most obedient and faithfull servants, M. Another. SIR, YOu must imagine if you please, the re∣sentment which the Newes of your Good Fortune imprinted in me, since I am not able to expresse it as it is in it selfe. But if in this you have neede of any succour, your Me∣mory
may assist you by putting you in Minde, of the Passion which I have for your Service; 'tis that onely which caused the excesse of my Ioy, and to which you can adde nothing, but by honouring me with your Commands, since by that meanes my Obedience may give mee, the perfect Contentment of being able to testifie unto you how much I am Sir Your most humble servant, and most faithfull. Answers to the Letters of Congratulation. SIR, I Alwayes beleeved you were so Ge∣nerous, as to take part in whatsoe∣ver should concerne me, having be∣gun so strict a Commerce of Reci∣procall Friendship. And I perswade my selfe likewise, that you make no doubt of the Passi∣on which I have to doe you service (by which Meanes onely I am able to Merit the Effects of your Noblenesse.) Whereof you may bee as Confident, as of the most assured thing in the World, since I am in heart, and soule, Sir Your most humble servant, M.
Another Answer. SIR, SInce you take part in the good fortune which has befalne me, you must also par∣ticipate in the advantage of the new Cre∣dit which it has brought mee into. This I ad∣vertise you of, to the End that you let not any occasion slip, wherein you may procure new proofes of my Passion, nor forget this advice which I give you; since I shall dye of Impati∣ence, if I expect long, the opportunity to wit∣nesse unto you, how deepely I am Sir Your Servant, and Friend, M. Another Answer. SIR, I Am not to thank you for these new proofes of your Noblenesse which you have shown in my behalfe, because they are actions so proper to your Nature, that without them you could not possibly live. I must give you praises then, instead of thanks, and account my selfe happy, that I serve as an object, to your ver∣tuous
Inclinations, whereof I should become Envious, but that they do not admit any hopes of Imitation: and therefore I reserve admira∣tion only to contemplate them, in Quality Sir, of Your most humble Servant. M. Another. SIR, THe new assurances wch you have given me of your friendship in bearing part of my good fortune, have yeilded me much more satisfaction then my advancement it self, as preferring the Happinesse of your Affection before my owne particular; you have touched me so sensibly, in mingling my interests with your own, that I shall never loose the Remem∣brance of so great a favour: wishing that some occasion would offer it selfe whereby I might in some part merit it by the reality of my Ser∣vice, since I am, and will be, all my life, Sir, Your very humble servant. M.
Another Answer. SIR, YOu seeme to take pleasure in nothing else, but in giving me dayly new proofs of your friendship, as if I were able to conceive any doubt of it at all. I know that you could not be so noble as you are, ex∣cept you tooke part in the Content which I re∣ceive, for the happy successe, of my affaire. And besides making Profession to love mee, in that height as I honour you, I know there was necessity for your satisfaction, and that you should bee extreamely sensible of the good fortune, Sir of Your most humble Servant, M. Another Answer. SIR, I Began not to day to bee indebted to you for the free Testimonies of your friend∣ship, having given me so many proofes, that the disability to revenge my selfe, has made me ashamed of the Remembrance. But since
you partake of the joy which I receive for the gaining of my suit, I conjure you to serve your selfe without exception, of all the Advantages which I have got, if you would really have me beleeve, that you account me of the number of your best friends as well Sir as of Your most humble and most faithfull servants. Congratulatory Letters to a Person of Eminent Quality. MY LORD, THough I bee one of the last in Congratulating with your Lordship the New governe∣ment which the king has be∣stowed upon you; yet I can as∣sure your Lordship, that no Man forewent mee in witnessing the Resent∣ment of so publike a Ioy. And as this duty which I render you is valuable according to the greatnesse of my Zeale, and not of my Di∣ligence, so I thought that though it came something late, it would not be lesse Conside∣rable.
If I had had no other object but your Lordships good Fortune, I had prevented in this actiō, all that have now got the start of me; but taking nothing into my Consideration, ex∣cept your Desert & my Inclination to your ser∣vice, I gave way to my own desires rather then Custome, which is to make my selfe remarked every where in effect, rather than appearance, My Lord, Your most humble servant. M. Another. My Lord, I Could not be silent in the Acclamations of such an universall Gladnesse, being forced to ioyne my voice, to other Mens, in Publi∣shing our Commune Contentment touching the Mareschalship of France, wherewith the King has beene graciously pleased to honour you; This Action of Iustice is so highly appro∣ved by every Person, that your Enemies are constrained to condemne themselves to an e∣verlasting silence, being not able to open their Mouthes, but to their owne Confusion. Live then happily with this part of Good fortune which your merit first made you aspire to, and believe assuredly, that in the whole traine of your Excellencies servants, there shall be very few able to imitate me, in the resolution which I have taken, to carry to my grave, the Quality MY LORD, of Your most humble & most obedient Servant. M.
Letters to a Person of Note, acknowledging some notable favour received. My Lord, I Doe not render you this duty as thanks, for the favours which your Goodnesse has beene pleased to heape upon me, since their excesse force me to a silence, as taking from me all meanes to revenge my selfe. It sufficeth me you beleeve, that I will sooner loose my selfe, then the remembrance of your bounty. I know your Lordship satisfied your selfe first, every time you obliged me; but being I cannot doe so, what advantage soever I take, without ren∣dring you some service of consideration, I humbly beseech your Lordship to grant mee the Liberty to Importune you at all times to honour me with your Commands, to the End that by the Innocncy of my observance, you may be constraind to know, that if you bee ex∣treamely generous, I am no lesse sensible, nor no lesse, My Lord, Your most humble and most faithfull Servant. M.
Another. MY LORD, IF you expect thanks worthy of the Favours wherewith you have beene pleased to ho∣nour mee, I humbly beseech your Lordship to afford mee the tearmes that I may repeat them after you for your satisfaction. I confesse boldly my incapacity to expresse unto your Lordship the resentment which your obliga∣tions cause in mee, as well as my disabi∣lity in meeting with occasions to acquit my selfe. But being Generous actions carry their owne recompense along with them, all that I can doe, is to put your Lordship continually in minde of your Noblenesse, and to publish it in all Corners of the World, together with the Quality My Lord, of Your most humble and most obedient servant.
Letters to aske Pardon for a Fault Committed. SIR, IF the confession of my fault, can merit any Grace, I will expect it from your Bounty, not my Intention, because it is Innocent. Tis true I have lost your good Affection by reason of the Passage last night, but since I was surprized by an extre∣mitie of Anger, (which would not suffer mee to consider where I was) I leave the Iudge∣ment of my weaknesse to you, having whol∣ly condemned it my selfe. You know that our first motions are so soveraigne in their violence, that in contempt of reason they will undergoe no lawes but their owne; who should obtaine of you to consider that in the fault which I have committed, there was more contributed by nature, then my own free will; so that I knew not how to avoid it, I know at least how to repent my selfe, of which I as∣sure you most faithfully to the end, that my most humble intreaties for your pardon and
favour, may bee made more acceptable, and the rather because they proceed, Sir, from Your most humble servant. M. Another. SIR, I Have too great an opinion of your Piety to make doubt of the Pardon which I crave, for my fault committed last night, 'tis not that I feare the Innocence of my Intention is not able to justifie me, but because I would set my Minde in quiet, as I have already my Cōsci∣ence. This act of acknowledgement should serve you for a satisfaction, as it does me for a Pennance: putting you in minde of the Passi∣on which alwayes heretofore I have had to doe you service, and of the Profession which I have made, to beare in all places, the Quality, Sir, of Your most humble and most obedient Servant. M.
Letters Reproaching a friend for the Coldnesse of his Affection. SIR, IF I made not an extream ac∣count of your friendship, I would not have complain'd of your silence, nor that Coldnesse which you shew∣ed at our last meeting. I speake not this, because I would force your Love: but I should bee very glad you would acknowledge the Affection which I have vowed you, whereby you might bee obliged to doe me justice in honoring me with the like, yet I leave you the liberty to doe as you please, against my will, I say against my will, because I have taken Oath, to live and dye Sir Your most humble Servant, M.
Another. SIR, I Am constrain'd to put you in minde of those protestations of friendship which once you made mee, being I perceive that yours growes already weary of her won∣ted Constancy. You seeme to have forgot at the same time, both the esteeme which I make of your Desert, and the Passion which I have to your service. Sir you may change your hu∣mour when you please, if you would have me beleeve you are not fickle in your Promises, and that you know the Art to Conserve eter∣nally, those that Endeare themselves the most to you, as I doe, In Quality Sir of Your most humble servant,
Letters to complaine of Backe∣biting Speeches. SIR, TIs told mee that you maintain'd a Certaine discourse to my disadvan∣tage, I beseech you out of Charity repent your selfe in time, if you would not have mee constraine you to a more rigorous Pennance, I understand not Iesting, if I begin it not my selfe, wherefore correct your Pleadings, or I will cause you to loose both your suit and charges. I give you this faire war∣ning that you may have lesse cause to com∣plaine hereafter, and when I shall perceive you in as humble a submission as I expect, Ile then take it into my consideration whether I ought to be for the time to come, as hitherto I have beene Sir Your most humble servant. M.
Another upon the same. SIR, I Understand that when you have nothing else to doe, you take upon you to backbite, a Person very neare allied unto mee. 'Tis the worst trade and most dangerous that you can imploy your selfe in: but if your wine bee the cause of these extravagancies, I advise you to mingle it with water assoone as you can, o∣therwise I shall bee constrain'd to force you to such a long silence, that no man shall ever heare you speake hereafter. 'Tis the Charita∣ble advise, if you follow it, Sir of Your servant, M.
Answers to the Letters of Complaint. SIR, I Doe not write this letter to give you satisfaction, but to com∣ply with my owne Humour, in the Innocence I have alwayes lived; you are too blame to make those false reporters, my Iudges, from whose sentence I appeale as from an abuse, yet you may beleeve what you please, being you are unwilling to explicate your selfe any further. And if you be not satis∣fied with the Assurance I give, that I never dream'd of offending you, I leave you to faire Paper and Inke, wherby you may signifie unto me your minde, and Intention, whether good or bad I care not. It sufficeth me, that you call to remembrance the Name and Quality which I once bore Sir of Your most humble servant. M.
Another Answer. SIR, THose that told you I abused your kins∣woman abuse me, I know (without any Mans Intimation) the respect I owe to that sex: and what subject soever she had gi∣ven me, my reason should alwayes have for∣ced me to hold my Peace. As for the rest, know that wine never made me speake, and if you be so foolish as to beleeve it, I know a way to punish your folly, I tell you what I meane to doe, that you may have no pretence to say I surprize you unawares, at our next meeting, where I have good hope to make you feele how worthily I can Chastize, those that will not bee contented with reason, 'Tis the reso∣lution Sir of Your servant as much as you please. M.
Letters to Iustifie ones selfe of a Reproach. SIR, I Wonder greatly at the injustice you have done mee, being o∣therwise so reasonable as you are: you have condemned me upon the first report of my E∣nemies, without observing any other Formality then what your passion sug∣gested. I must tell you, you appeare something too violent in this Encounter, and the more, because you never seem'd to make doubt of the passion I had to serve you; I complaine then with reason, because your Reproaches are without reason, and beseech you take the Paines hereafter to ponder the informations which shall be made you of a businesse so Im∣portant as this, and particularly when it tou∣ches the Interest Sir of Your most humble servant, M.
Another. SIR, I Doe so highly approve of your Iudgement, that I begin to question my Innocence, since it has declared her culpable: yet I must assure you, with your Permission, that my Thoughts did never contribute any thing to the fault whereof you accuse me, and likewise condemne mee, without hearing me speake. But though my misfortune were alwayes such that you should never incline to doe mee rea∣son, yet my conscience should alwayes, that I may rest in Quiet, and peaceably possesse the Quality Sir of Your most humble servant. M.
Congratulatory Letters to a new Married Man. SIR, I Reioyce extreamely at the Happy election you have made of a wife, since I par∣ticipate with Civility in the satisfaction which you re∣ceive: being glad that you have now divided the pow∣er which you had acquired over my affecti∣ons, as honouring at this Present your deare halfe, with the same respects that heretofore I rendred to you onely. I will perswade my selfe, you will make no doubt of it, no more then of the Passion I have to your Service, In Quality Sir of Your most humble Servant, M.
Another upon the same. SIR, DOe not expect that I should formally congratulate with you the good-for∣tune of your Marriage, since I interesse my selfe in all your contentments. It sufficeth me to put you in minde, that your good and ill fortune, shall be the sole cause of all my joyes and discontents, as fully resolved to follow, your Resentments, in Quality Sir of Your most humble servant. M.
Answers to the Letters of Congratulation. SIR, I Alwayes beleev'd that you loved me so much as to par∣ticipate in my Content∣ments, they are effects of your good nature and no∣blenesse, to which I am ex∣treamely Obliged. But I can assure you, that in the Election I have made of a Wife, you have obtained a new ser∣vant, since she partakes already in the Passion, which I have to serve you, being Sir Your most humble Servant, M.
Another Answer. SIR, I Know you are so Generous that you Inter∣esse your selfe in all things which con∣cerne mee, but I am ashamed of receiving daily new proofes, since I cannot Encounter with a fit Occasion to revenge my selfe. All that I can say then is, that I shall have the same resentment in all affaires, which shall touch your Particular, as being by Inclination as well as reason, Sir Your most humble servant. M.
Letters of Protestation of Friendship. SIR, THough I have made a vow to bee your most perfect honou∣rer all my life, and not to re∣mit one poynt of the Passion which I have to doe you Ser∣vice, yet I shall never Content my selfe, except some occasion be offered very suddenly, whereby these Words may be chan∣ged into effects. 'Tis the onely Good Fortune which I expect with Impatience, being not a little grieved that I beare in vaine the Quality Sir of Your very humble servant.
Another. SIR, DOe not wonder if I importune you so often with my Letters, I have no grea∣ter pleasure in the World then to assure you of the esteeme I make of your friendship, and the eternity of minde. 'Tis true, these are but words, but being they are dictated by my heart, I am satisfied in acquitting my selfe of that which I owe you. If occasions to doe you seric would offer themselves as often as they doe, to write to you, I would give Testimony by my actions, rather then my Discourse, that I was never in Complement Sir Your most humble servant. Another. SIR, SInce my ill fortune deprives mee of occa∣sions to serve you, I must for my owne sa∣tisfaction witnesse unto you the Passion which predominates in me. I know your De∣sert and Condition have acquired you servants without number, but I can assure you with as
much ostentation, as Reason, that Ioyne them all together, I am Sir The most humble and most obedient. Another. SIR, THe inclination which I have to esteeme you more then all the World, will not suffer mee to let any opportunity slip▪ without giving you new assurances of this Truth. Not that I cease to bee in a continuall impatiency, of expecting occasions to give you more effectuall proofes, but because they be∣ing not dependant of my will, I satisfie my selfe, in letting you know that shee shall never force to other thing, then to make open pro∣fession of the Quality Sir of Your most humble servant.
Answers to the Letters Protesting Friendship. SIR, BE as frequent as you please in giving me new assurances of your friendship, all the proofes that you can have of mine, cannot render it more perfect then it is: being I can assure you, that if my in∣deavours could take effect, or my vowes ac∣complishment, you should not long account mee in the number of your unprofitable ser∣vants, though Sir of Your most obedient, and most faithfull.
Another Answer. SIR, I Will never refuse the Honour which you doe me in professing to love me extreame∣ly, but since I have no merit to oblige you thereunto I dare not publish my good fortune, iustly fearing to bee deprived of it every Mo∣ment. Not because I beleeve you will proove fickle, but reasonable, and that therefore your Reason may oblige you, to make me lose this good fortune, which mine onely and your Courtesie acquired me. But whatsoever hap∣pen I shall never be other Sir Then your most humble and most obedient servant Another Answer. SIR, THough I never made doubt of your friendship, yet I make such esteeme thereof, that you advance me to a new degree of Honour and delight, every time you take the Paines to give mee fresh assurances of it by your letters. 'Tis true, in this you doe but
assure mine, yet howsoever, the commerce of this kind of entertainment is so delightful, that if I did not apprehend I might be importune, I should write unto you by every opportunity that presented it selfe, being 'tis the onely con∣solation which I have in your absence, to put you in minde, that I will be eternally Sir Your most humble servant. M. Another Answer. SIR, FOR all you love me and esteeme me ne∣ver so much, you are still indebted to me, since my object is your desert: what proofes soever you give me of your friendship, they are not able to diminish the price of mine, being in a height of Perfection not to be valued. But if my misfortune nourish you in a continuall doubt, I will produce my advan∣tage when you produce your assurances: Desi∣ring nothing so much as to witnesse unto you by effects rather then words, that I am Sir Your most humble servant.
Letters to a Friend in favour of another. SIR, THe bearer of this Letter, a Gen∣tleman, and one of my very good friends, desiring that I would in∣treate you, (as I doe most hum∣bly,) to oblige him in a businesse whose successe depends wholly in your fa∣vour, I knew not how to refuse his merit and condition so poore a Demand: wherefore you shall oblige me extreamely, if you will be plea∣sed to imploy some part of your credit there∣in, without any other Consideration, but only that you were Requested Sir by one of Your most humble, and most obedient servants, M.
Another. SIR, YOur Desert, and Condition, have made you so Considerable and Necessary, that your friends are alwayes subject to importune you: and amongst the rest I at this Present, in favour of the Gentle∣man who beares this Letter: beseeching you, to support him with your credit, in a businesse of which hee will informe you. I shall account his obligations, into the Number of mine, and Testifie to you in my owne Particu∣lar, the Resentment which I shall conceive in Quality Sir Of Your most humble and most obedient servant. M.
Answers to the Letters of Favour. SIR, THis Gentleman in whose be∣halfe you tooke the Paines to write unto mee, will tell you by word of mouth, how faithfully I have served you, in obliging him. If you judge mee able to render you any other service, wherein I may finde more satisfaction, as prooving it more difficult, it stands upon no∣thing, but your selfe, to give mee the Employ∣ment, being very glad to witnesse unto you at all times how much I am Sir Your servant.
Another Answer. SIR, I Esteeme my selfe happy to have met with this little occasion, to doe you service by making your friends businesse (wherof you writ unto mee) bee determined to his advan¦tage. I imployed in it equally, both my Care and industry, not loosing one moment of time, to the end that I might thereby witnesse, in what esteeme I have the honour of your Com∣mands. You may give mee new ones when you please: if you desire new proofes of the Obe∣dience Sir of Your most humble, and most faithfull servant, M.
Letters complaining of the Absence of a Friend. SIR, THough true friendship bee in the Proofe of absence, yet yours is of so long continu∣ance, that I imagine you pur∣pose to cast me off, since you seeme to retire your affection thus by little and little. I speake confidently, because I feare extreamely, and you ought to pardon thi boldnesse and feare, since they proceed equally from the good inclination I have to your Service, and the great esteeme I make of your Friendship. Returne then quick∣ly, if you will free from sorrow and disquiet, Sir The most humble of all your servants and the most faithfull.
Another. SIR, I Can endure your absence no longer: you must of necessity shew your selfe oftner then you doe to your friend, for your owne honour, and my satisfaction: I say for your Ho∣nour, because it is thereby in Question, since you keepe your selfe so long retired in a place, of which even the Gazette never makes men∣tion. You must not give so much way to your humour, and inclination, that they interesse with them the Contentment, of all that love you. For my owne part, I am resolved to goe seeke you, if you returne not very soone, to which I adjure you, by all the Charmes of the Passion which I have to your service, as being Sir Your most humble Servant, M.
Answers to the Letters which com∣plain of Absence. SIR, YOu chide me with such a good grace, that I could wish to see you oftner in that humor, since it obliges me to beleeve that I am not altogether indifferent to you. 'Tis true, my absence hath been something long, but being my presence is unprofitable to my friends, by the disability I am in to serve them, I make the lesse account of my absence from the Court; Yet the only means to occasion my return, will be, if you testifie unto me that I can be usefull to you when I am there; which shall precipitate my haste, being in a firme resolution to render you all manner of Service, in quality Sir, of Your most humble and obedient servant, M.
Another Answer. SIR, MY pride will become insufferable, if you interesse your selfe often in the delay of my return. I wonder you can find me wanting at the Court where you have admirers without number; but if I could be perswaded that my absence did occa∣sion your disquiet, or that my presence could be necessary for your service, you should not be able to detain me from the Town, whither your Commands shall soon call me when you are pleased to expect proofes of my obedi∣ence, as being Sir, Your most humble servant, M. Letters to cleare our selfes of a false report. SIR, I Need not much eloquence to per∣swade my innocency touching the report which was made to you of late, since I will oblige my selfe to
make them confesse the truth publickly that have been too shamelesse to maintain the con∣trary in private. 'Tis a malice so ill contri∣ved, (though black as Hell) that I am perswa∣ded it will deceive it selfe. For what appea∣rance is there, that having received an infinity of favour from your goodnesse, I should so irreverently contemne a thousand other no∣ble qualities that elevate your esteem above the common? I beseech you beleeve that I shall be their admirers all my life, and a con∣tinuall flaile to the broachers of this Impo∣sture. I have no respect of persons when my Honor is questioned; I beare a sword to de∣fend it with the hazard of my life, which I esteem far lesse. But if this cannot give you satisfaction, let me know the name of the reporter, and I will make you sport in laying open the particulars of his knavery, and the sincerity of my innocency, which shall give you sufficient never to make doubt of the passion I have to serve you, as being Sir, Your most humble and obedient servant.
An other. SIR, IT is an easie matter for any Man to ac∣cuse me, but I defie all the World toge∣ther, to convince me in the least respect. Tis true, I could not speak in that Company, but some must heare me; but, be pleased to shew me my adversary, and Ile engage my self to make him signe me an acquittance of my innocency with his owne blood. I boast of nothing that I will not doe; for let me but know the broachers of that imposture: and I will easily let you know their malice, which shall force you to beleeve (as I most humbly intreat you) that I will sooner loose my life than the honour and stile of being Sir, Your most humble and most obedient servant, M. An other. SIR, I Will not justifie my selfe with words, of the aspersion laid upon me, desiring by ef∣fects to let you see my innocency as clear,
as the malice of those that would have blemi∣shed it, black and pernicious. I beseech you think that I shall never be able to forget the respect I owe you; and if any have the bold∣nesse to accuse me of it, my Sword shall im∣pose them a most rigorous pennance, since I profer to be alwayes what I alwayes was Sir, Your most humble Ser∣vant, M. Answers to the Letter of Justi∣fication. SIR, TIs true, I was told you abused mee behind my back; but since I never gave you cause, and on the other side your discretion being suffici∣ently knowne to me, I was not so much as tempted to give credit to it; you needed not then have justified your selfe of a fault where∣of I esteem'd you alwayes innocent. The re∣putation you bear in all places of the World, may seem as a judge to condemne your accu∣sers;
wherefore you may sleep in quiet, since I account my selfe disinteressed, and place me in the number Sir, of Your most humble, and most affectio∣nate servants. Another Answer. SIR, BEfore I can declare you guilty, you must confesse your self faulty with your own mouth; for the testimonies of all the World, cannot convince the good opinion I have of your integrity. Men may calumniate your reputation as much as they please, but I shall alwayes hold your accusers to be in the fault, since it is impossible I should lose the esteem which I conceive of your desert, be∣ing Sir, Your most humble servant.
Letters to a sick Friend. SIR, THe news of your sicknesse hath bred such a change in my health, that I may justly count my selfe in the number of those that are not well. Take courage then, if you will give it me; you know the intent I have in all things concer∣ning your particular. In a word, if you leave not your bed very suddenly, I shall be con∣strained to take it. These are the Protesta∣tions Sir, of Your very humble servant, M. Another. SIR, I Will not tell you how extreamely sensi∣ble the sorrowfull news of your sick∣nesse was to me; only I must put you in mind that your disease cannot chuse but be
very contagious, having infected one hither. I could wish, for your service and my content∣ment, that I were neare you; but my misfor∣tune is such, that it ties me to certain affaires in this Town, which by no meanes I am able to abandon. Yet all these obstacles shall not hinder me from acquitting my selfe of my duty, if you esteem me usefull to render you any manner of service, of which I give you most faithfull assurance, as protesting to be all my life, Sir, Your most humble servant, M. Answers to the Letters written to a sick Friend. SIR, IF I had sooner recovered my health, I had sooner returned you thanks for the resentment you wittnessed to have of my sicknes: but being it kept me very long, I was constrained to delay my acknowledge∣ment till this very present: though 'tis not from this encounter onely that I know how sensible you are of al things concerning your Friends, which makes you have them without
number; but I can assure you, that put them all together, I am Sir, The most obedient and most faithfull. An other Answer. SIR, AS soon as ever I was able to hold a pen, I served my self of the opportunity to render you thanks, for the consolation which you gave me, in the delightfull enter∣tainment of your letters. Yet, I pray you Sir, deprive me not of this contentment, if you would not have me sick againe. For I can assure you, tis a very great satisfaction to me to see my selfe honoured with the favour of your remembrance, in Quality Sir, of Your most humble servant, M.
Letters to demand the protection of a strange Prince. SIR, THough I have not the honour to be knowne to your Highnesse, yet the esteem that al the World makes of your Royall vertues, gave me the boldnesse most hum∣bly to beseech your Majestie to grant me protection within the Lands of your Obedience. I am not guilty of any crime that should make me blush; and if I have violated the Lawes of my owne Prince, it was but to obey the Law which Honour had imposed upon me before. This makes me expect from your Highnes bounty, al manner of assistance, since onely the profession of Souldier made me quit my owne Country. Your Highnesse will augment by this action the number of your Creatures, since thereby I shall vow my selfe to live and dye in quality of Your Highnesse Most humble servant, M.
Another. SIR, THe Bruit of your Highnesse renowne occasion'd my entrance into the Lands of your Obedience, not knowing where to find a more assured harbour in the World. I hope your Highnesse will not violate for me alone, the Lawes which your wisedome has already made in favour of distressed and guil∣ty persons; and though I be no otherwise than the right of Honour dos permit, yet I most humbly implore your Majesties pro∣tection as extreamly conducing to my repose and quiet. For my birth and condition, I thought it not necessary to reveale them, till your Highnesse command oblige me to it, be∣ing sufficient to give you assurance, that I have committed no crime whereof all men that make profession of Honour, may not be just∣ly accused and convicted together; But I will be all my life Your Highnesse Most humble, most obedient, and most ob∣liged servant, M.
Letters witnessing unto a Friend the con∣tentment we receive in serving him. SIR, I Should expresse but one part of my Contentment, though I should say in doing you service I receive all the satisfaction the World is able to afford; for your merit is so considerable, that there is no divertisment like the continuall action of executing your com∣mands. Doe not think that I complement, but beleeve infallibly that my heart, mouth, and pen, conspire together every time I give you assurance, as I doe now, that I am more than all the World. Sir, Your most humble servant. An other. SIR, YOu are so generous that you know by experience what contentment men receive in doing their friends service;
for my owne particular, I think nothing can be added to mine, such a sensible feeling I have of it every time you are pleased to honour me with your commands. I pray you then be not so sparing, since it is my whole delight, and since I shall importune you for nothing else, in the resolution I have taken, to beare be∣yond my grave, the Quality Sir, of Your most humble and most obedi∣ent servant. Another. SIR, I Never esteem'd my selfe happy till the day wherein you were pleased to give mee an employment for your service, as being the only thing in the world I aspir'd to with most passion. I would you were alwayes in th' hu∣mour to honour me with your commands, as I am alwayes to obey them, which you shall doe me a great favour to beleeve, and besides
that I am unfeignedly and without reserva∣tion Sir, Your most humble and most faithfull servant. Answers to the precedent Letters. SIR, EVery time you are pleased to give me sure testimonies of your friend∣ship, I find my selfe most power∣fully touched by my ordinary im∣patience, of incountring with some opportu∣nity to revenge my selfe; but since you are extreamly reasonable, I will force my selfe to beleeve, that you consider rather the price of my zeale, than the misfortune of my disabili∣ty, so that making no doubt of the passion I beare to your service, you will place mee al∣wayes in the rank Sir, of Your most obedient and most faithfull servants, M.
An other Answer. SIR, I Know 'tis your ordinary delight to ob∣lige all the World, without expecting as much as thanks; but I beseech you be∣leeve that I am too honestly envious of your noblenesse, that every time you are pleased to give me new proofes thereof, I live in all the tortures of the World, till I have encoun∣tred with the means of requiting it. And finding my selfe in that case at this present, I am forced to represent unto you my disquiet, that I may not be accused of ingratitude, and lesse of negligence, in seeking occasions to testifie unto you how perfectly I am Sir, Your most humble and obliged servant, M. An other Answer. SIR, 'TIs not enough to oblige continually your friends; friendship commands that you should serve your selfe of
them, in all kind of encounters; to which I conjure you, if you desire I should beleeve that you love me extreamely. I will never importune you with other things, in the grief I remain, to beare unprofitably, the Quality Sir, of Your most humble and obedient servant. Another Answer. SIR, IT would be very hard for me to expresse how strictly I am yours; for what proofes soever my obedience were able to give you, they could resent but one part of the passion which I have to your service, as being, inimitably Sir, Your most humble and faithfull servant. An other Answer. SIR, I Am resolved to beseech you would be pleased to honour mee continually with your commands, since you are pleased to produce continually new proofes of your
friendship. These shall be all the intreaties I will make you, to the end that my obedience may serve me for an occasion, in serving you according to the passion which raignes in me. And to witnesse unto you, that there be few in the World can vaunt with reason, that they are to that height as I am Sir, Your most humble and most obe∣dient servant. Another Answer. SIR, IT would be very hard for mee to reckon up the obligations which I have to you; You are too noble in all respects, (and especially when it stands upon the interests of your friends) that it is sufficiently seene you take great pleasure in having no equall. Yet I must tell you freely, that I am one of your Enviers, as well as of your Admirers, being Jealous of the continuall Generosity you exercise in my behalfe, not leaving mee so much leasure as to ruminate upon the means of acknowledgement. 'Tis my turne now to let you know, I am not insensible, and that if you be extreamly well skill'd in the
Art of obliging all the World, I am not al∣together ignorant of the Art of acquitting my selfe. I beseech you beleeve it, and that I am without Complement Sir, Your most humble servant, M. Another Answer. SIR, I Begin to grow weary of your favours; the disability in which I find my selfe, will not suffer me to receive any new one, for feare I should be constrain'd in the End to passe for Ungratefull. Wherefore except I en∣counter with some favourable occasion, wher∣in I may witnesse the Passion which I have to serve you, I will never adde any thing to this number of obligations. This is my Humor, my Resolution being to professe my selfe all my Life Sir, Your most humble servant, M.
THE SECOND PART OF The Secretarie in Fashion.
A Letter Consolatory to a Father upon the Death of his Sonne. SIR, THE sorrowfull newes of your Sonnes Death, touched mee very feelingly, and the more, because I had the honour of his acquaintance, and particu∣lar knowledge of his Deserts. The love which you have sustain'd, is very great I confesse; but you must likewise confesse that unavoydable evils, are to be endured with constancy. I speak not this to condemne your Sighes and Teares, for I doe willingly ap∣prove of them, yea, even in excesse: but to let you know, that after you have satisfied your humour, you must a little give place to rea∣son, being you shall receive as much glory in drying vp your Teares, as you did once plea∣sure in shedding them. I know your Sonne
was the onely Comfort which remained to you in this World, and that his presence meerly did make you live contented even amongst the peevishnesses of old age. But all this induceth mee to beleeve that God de∣prived you of him, for no other Reason, but onely to comfort you hereafter in himselfe, as being the onely Good which is subject to no Change. He calls himselfe a Jealous God; wonder not then if he be Jealous of the un∣measureable love you bore to your Childe. And if his Providence hath found a meanes to oblige you, in robbing you of an object which possest all your affections together, you on the other side are obliged this Day to make him the object of your Thanksgiving, and not of your Complaints. This is that which I expect at the hands of your Magna∣nimity, and soundnesse of Judgement; the weakenesse of mine, detaining mee from pas∣sing further, being assured that you are able your selfe to be your own Comforter. It sufficeth me that I acquit my selfe of my Du∣ty, in witnessing to you the griefe I conceive for your Misfortune, and the continuall care I shall have to blaze my selfe wheresoever I come, Sir, Your most humble servant.
The Answer. SIR, I Am obliged to you, for the charita∣ble counsell you were pleased to give me upon the Death of my Sonne: But suffer me to tell you (after my humble thanks) that my affliction is of such a Nature, that Death only is able to give me sa∣tisfaction, so that I find my selfe constrained to go seek my remedy in my Grave; and yet I doe not murmure against the providence of God; though I must assure you that without a particular Grace, and sensible miracle, I shall faint under the burden of my misfor∣tune. Yet I beseech you Sir, doe not deprive mee of the Comfor of your Letters, knowing I cannot enjoy the Happinesse of your Com∣pany: And above all things, remember me in your Prayers, since I expect no succour but from Heaven. I am ever Sir, Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, YOur deare Letter concerning the death of my Sonne, had much allayd my Greife, if my affliction had been ca∣pable of any Comfort; Yet I esteeme my self extreamly obliged to you for the part you seem to take in my Misfortune, in which you testifie that you are equally both of a Gene∣rous Disposition, and a Good Friend. Sir, the sorrow which oppresseth me, has left mee nothing but sighes and teares to offer you up in acknowledgement, it sufficeing mee (since it is true) that you beleeve I am and will be everlastingly Sir, Your very humble servant. Letters Consolatory to a Sonne, upon the Death of his Father. SIR, THad sooner condoled with you the losse of your Father, if I had sooner judged you capable of Consolation. I thought it fit to afford you some
time, to pay (with the abundance of your Teares) the debt you owed to Nature; but now having satisfied your selfe, by the pub∣like Testimony which you have given of your Sorrow, I come amongst others, to acquit my selfe of my obligation, and to perswade you to patience, assuring you that I am very sen∣sible of the excesse of your Affliction. I know you have practised that vertue in a thousand Encounters of Misfortune, which have made you able to give lessons to all the rest of the World; So that all I am to doe, is to put you in mind, that both you and I make all the haste possible after him whose absence we deplore with too much Lamentation; and that without a particular Favour of God Al∣mighty, we shall be even at his heeles, before we be worthily prepared for so great a Voy∣age. This I made bold to remember you of, and likewise that I am, as much as ever Sir, Your most humble servant, M. Another Letter. TIs not to Comfort you of the losse which you have sustained, that I put Pen to Paper, but rather to give Testi∣mony
of the Resentment which I feele, know∣ing the Ability of your judgement, and weak∣nesse of my owne. It sufficeth mee to repre∣sent unto you, that in the Necessity of dying or being born, Nature does oblige every man to goe the Way that is Marked out for him; Tis no matter how long and strong some men be, they all meet together at the Grave, and being arived there, none makes account of the Time which they imployed in going that Voyage. For our owne particulars, let us consider how many yeares we have already spent since we began it; and in this very Mo∣ment that you read this, we may propose to our selves the End of it, by the Imagina∣tion of a hidden death. As for your Father, he dyed but for himselfe, and has perhaps left you a while to play his Part here in this World, which ought in my opinion to leave you more Envy than Sorrow, knowing that he has already cast Anchor in that haven whe∣ther you tend with might and maine. I would say more, if I made no conscience to detaine your Eyes too long upon this Paper; you must give them yet a little time to sleepe, since your Griefe is just; in which I take a large Part, in Quality Sir, of Your most humble servant.
Another Letter. SIR, I Am too much your Servant, to remaine Dumbe, and Insensible, at the sorrowfull report of your Fathers death. These lines in acquitting me of what I owe you, wil testi∣fie unto you the Part I take in your affliction. I think it will be hard for you to comfort your selfe after such a Losse; but since God does never Afflict us above our force, let the force of your judgement work your Consola∣tion. The most sweet consideration you can have, is that you were witnesse of the last acti∣ons which your Father did, before his retreat, out of this World; which having either few or no examples, may be a sufficient cause of your Quiet, every time you consider their importance. Live honestly as he did, and dye in the same Manner; you are in the right way to the Place whither he is gone: and if he have anticipated you some few dayes, those will seeme but a Moment, when you are arived at the End. Solace your selfe then in his absence, since the innocency wherein you live, is an Infallible Assurance to you that you shall see him very suddenly. I will give you like undoubted Testimony of the
Passion which I have to your Service, when∣soever you please to honour mee with your Commands, as being Sir, Your most humble servant. Answers to the Letters of Conso∣lation. SIR, I Doe not excuse the Long time that I have staid in returning you thanks for the part which you did mee the Honour to take in my affliction; because the Griefe is still so sensible to mee, that I can∣not imploy my Spirit without Violence, in any other thoughts but those of my Mis∣fortune: Not that I remaine not entirely Resigned to the Wil of God, and fully Resol∣ved to Patience: but yet all this cannot hin∣der my Sorrow from Enjoying an absolute Possession of mee: and for an Encrease of Mischiefe, my griefe-sick Humour does ren∣der it so agreeable, that I have not so much Liberty as to Complaine, though it devour me by Little and Little. Yet I cease not to
be extreamly obliged to you, for your Pious and Charitable Counsells, which you were pleased to give mee, assureing you that I will take my ordinary Lessons of Comfort out of them. Notwithstanding, I must tell you with my ancient freedom, that as my Affliction comes from above, 'tis from thence onely that I expect a Remedy. How good a Physi∣tian soever Time be, I desire nothing of you but Prayers, intermingled with Commands; to the end that my obedience may make mee worthy the good opinion you have Sir, of Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Must confesse your Charitable letter did much comfort the losse which I lately sustained; and the more, because it gave Testimony of your feeling in my Affliction. In such accidents as these, I never find more Consolation, than to see my selfe lamented by my Friends; amongst whom since you pos∣sesse the first rank, I leave to your owne con∣sideration whether your Letter were agree∣able
to me, or no: Yet for all that, I cannot cease my Teares, my Sorrow increasing up∣on mee daily more and more, through the Remembrance of the Misfortune which was the cause of it. And truly after this Losse, I cannot apprehend any other; which might serve me for a very effectuall admonishment, if I were Capable of receiving any. I would say more, if my Teares did not blot out my Writing: Wherefore in briefe, I doe desire of you, that you would be pleased to Con∣serve me the Honour of your Remembrance, and adde not the Losse of your Friendship to this which I already sustaine; since I am with Passion Sir, Your most humble and most obliged servant. Letters Consolatory to a Husband upon the Death of his Wife. SIR, I Know not in what Tearmes to be∣gin to comfort you, your Losse appearing to mee so great, by rea∣son of the excesse of your Afflicti∣on,
and my Resentment, that I am farre more disposed to accompany your teares, than a∣ble any way to solace your Misery. You know Misfortune has taught mee by Expe∣rience to value a Discontent of that Nature, having heretofore shed teares for the same subject. So that representing to my selfe that which I have suffered in a like Incounter, I must needs tell you, you are not to expect your Remedy from any Place but Heaven. Though I deny not but Time may worke much upon that kind of Malady; yet the Terme is so long, that the little remainder of Quiet, which is left after the Purge of our discontent, stays not so long as to give us an absolute and full Possession of it. Where∣fore be assured, that God will not abandon you, if you adore his Providence with sub∣mission; a Meanes to which, is, if you Con∣sider that you are continually in Election to see your Wife againe, and sooner too than perhaps you imagine. Pardon mee Sir, for my freedome of speech; I cannot flatter you, being to that Point, as I am, Sir, Your most humble servant.
Another. SIR, THough I be not able to Comfort you in your Wifes death, yet it is suffici∣ent for my satisfaction, that I witnes unto you the great part which I take in your Affliction: onely I will put you in Minde, that in Sorrowfull Accidents, Patience is the cheif Remedy, after our Resignation to the Will of God. Our teares and Complaints are in vaine, since they doe but provoke Hea∣ven, in stead of appeasing it. When you e∣spoused that vertuous Lady, the Notary who passed the Contract of your Marriage, for∣got not to insert this Clause, that the survi∣vor should enjoy the rights of Widdowship. What reason have you then, to lament a Death which you foresaw so long since, as if you had been assured, when you tooke her, shee had not been subject to it? She preven∣ted you in an Inevitable Action; and perhaps it will not be much; Ten yeares more or lesse, are but an instant to that of Death; For which I would wish you prepare your selfe; what leasure soever you have, I can as∣sure you you will have very little spare time. But I must not incurre the Fault from which I promised to exempt my selfe. I aske you
Pardon, since my Crime is occasioned by my Zeale, as being Sir, Your most humble servant. Another. SIR, THe Friendship and service I vowed to you long agoe, have made mee so sen∣sible of the sorrowfull Newes of your Wifes death, that I stand in need of the Consolation which all the World does ad∣minister to you. Expect not then any Com∣fort from mee, being afflicted as I am. All that I can say to you, is, that your Wife dy∣ing in that innocency, in which shee alwayes lived, has left you in my Opinion a greater cause of Envy, than of Sorrow. Wherefore, I would not have you Dreame of any thing so much, as of following her; and since you are every houre hastening to your end, change the Nature of your teares, lamenting more that she has left you behind her, than that she is gone before you. This is all the Counsell I can give you, together with a new assurance that I will live and dye Sir, Your most humble servant.
Answers to the Precedent Letters. SIR, THE Griefe which I conceived for the losse of my Wife, would not permit mee sooner to render you thanks, for the pious resentment you witnesse in her behalfe. I always thought you would participate in my Misfortunes, because you did mee the Honour to love mee: And the rather because I knew you were in∣teressed in my Sorrow, as having lost a most humble Servant. Yet I remaine indebted to you for the Charitable care which you took in comforting mee, though it were in vaine, since I cannot so soone quit the memory of a Losse so important to my repose. Men may tell me as much as they please, that my Misery is without reliefe; 'tis because of that that I am void of Comfort. To cure it, is a work of the Hand of God; and all that Time and my Friends are able to contribute, does but serve to dispose the matter, which the Almighty must informe when he plea∣seth. Yet Sir, though my Misfortunes be in their Flood, they have not drowned the re∣spectfull
observance I alwayes used in your behalfe, as having made a vow to coffin up with my selfe the Quality Sir, of Your most faithfull servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Could heartily wish, that the Sorrow I conceive for my Wifes death, were capa∣ble of Consolation, that so I might make use of the Charitable precepts you were plea∣sed to give me, for which I render you most humble thanks: But truly Sir, my Affliction is so great, that if God doe not soone play the Physitian, I can expect remedy from no∣thing but death. So that how constantly soe∣ver I beare my Misfortune, the very Sorrow wherewith it is accompanied, will thrust me by little and little into my Grave. Not that I have not wholly resigned my selfe to the will of God, but because being not able to make this Resignation in all points absolute, the remainder of my Liberty serves to no other end but to torment me: Make your
Prayers to Heaven for me, that it would please to conduct mee suddenly into that ha∣ven of Quiet where you now are: I expect of your devotion, this favour from the Di∣vine goodnesse, as you ohght to expect all manner of service from the friendship I have vowed to you, as being with Passion Sir, Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Can thank you for nothing but your good will which you witnessed to me, in those wholesome counsels you were pleased to give me touching the Losse which I have late∣ly sustain'd; For how powerfull soever your reasons be, they can never lessen my sorrow, and much lesse be able to heale it. Those that see my Misfortune, consider it but as an ac∣cident that arrives every day, and which tor∣ments at the same time an infinite number of Husbands: but if they could penetrate into the bottome of my Soule, that they might know the just cause of my continual lamenta∣tions, the wisest of them would be constraind to approve the Eternity of my complaints,
since they would know thereby how hopelesse they are of cure. 'Tis true there is nothing else now able to give me satisfaction, which makes me find some kind of Comfort in the shortning of my dayes, since I solace my selfe in my departure, knowing it tends to the ac∣complishment of my Griefe. Youle tell me perhaps I speak not like a Christian; I am one howsoever; but the Affliction to which I have abandond my selfe, will not suffer me to enjoy any other Light, than that which shows the way to my Grave. I returne to the obligation wherein I am bound to you for the Honour of your Remembrance and charitable admonitions, and to witnesse unto you the Resentment they have left in me in Quality Sir, of Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Confesse the Admonitions which you u∣sed in the last letter wherewith you were pleased to honour mee, touching the losse
which I have sustained of late, by the Death of my Wife, were so Ponderous, that I could not chuse but receive thereby great Consola∣tion. 'Tis needfull (as you say very well) that our first lesson of Constancy, should be the resignation of our wils to God: and that al the Study which we are to imploy therein, should be but to perfect that Action. I acknowledge it very willingly; the experience which I have learn'd, will suffer mee to make no further doubt. For God laid the Affliction upon me, and he himselfe is my Comforter. His Justice punished me, but his Goodnesse has made me find so much sweetnes in my Misery, that in stead of Complaints, I am bound to render him Everlasting Thanksgiving. How∣soever, continue me the Favour of your good Counsels, with the Honour of your Friend∣ship, and beleeve if you please, that I will be all my life, Sir, Your most humble and most obedi∣ent servant.
Consolatory Letters to a Lady or Gentlewo∣man upon her Husbands Death. MADAM, I Had no sooner heard the sorrowfull newes of your Husbands death, but I put Pen to paper, to witnesse unto you at the same time, both the Sorrow which I conceive, and the Resolution which I have taken to die in your Ladyships service. If I thought my selfe able to comfort you, I would do my endeavour most freely; but the Remembrance of your Vertue forbids mee, since it alone is sufficient to give you the Lessons, which it made you practice hereto∣fore, in other encounters of Misfortune. Tis true, this is more penetrating than all the rest; therefore your Constancy should employ all her Endeavours to surmount your Griefe: and since Grace onely can give us the greatest part of our force, you have more (in my opi∣nion) to hope for than to feare, in this Com∣bate. What if Heaven be provoked against us; it never afrights us with the noyse of his Thunder, but it rejoyceth us very suddenly with the cleare shining light of his Sunnes beames. But if you be pressed with impatience
in this Surprisall of Sorrow, dry up your teares, cease the continuation of your Sighs, you shall find the Soveraigne Remedy of all your Ills, in the practice of these actions. Mine shall be alwaies directed to your Ho∣nour and Service, as being from my heart ra∣ther than Mouth, Madam, Your most humble servant, M. Another. MADAM, I Find in my selfe a greater disposition to lament with you the losse which you have sustained, than I judge my selfe able to give you comfort. For if you be deprived of a Husband whom you loved intirely, I am rob∣bed of a Friend for whom I would have ad∣ventured a thousand Lives. Truly Madam, I am so wholly taken up in my own Sighes, and teares, that I cannot think of yours, but in some intermediating Houres, be they never so extreame. So that in stead of giving you Comfort, I am more like to perswade you to render your Complaints Everlasting. You may seek an other Husband to a faire purpose,
the World is too narrow to find his Equall. And for my selfe, I may truly say, the mould of my old Friend being broken, I should spend my Travaile in vaine, if I went about to parallell him amongst my new ones. Let us then solace our selves in our affliction Ma∣dam, since it is extreame: the Extremity of it will soone teach us the way to our Graves where wee shall find a Remedy for our ills. If it be lawfull to love perfectly, no man wil hinder us to lament without cease, since con∣tinuall tears are the Testimonies of a Per∣fect Love. In the case I am in at this pre∣sent, I am able to give you no other advice; yet if God give you the Grace to despise my Counsell, I shall never reproach you for it, but rather beseech you that you would make your Prayers to God, for my like happinesse, and to beleeve that if I be extreamly afflicted, I am no lesse Madam, Your most humble servant. Another. MADAM, HAving given you a thousand Testimo∣nies of the particular esteem I made of your Husband, I hope you will
not now doubt of the Resentment which re∣maines to mee for his Losse. These lines notwithstanding shal give you a new assurance of it, and likewise of the good will I have to doe you service. If I were capable of giving Consolation, I would begin with my selfe, being sensibly touched with the same affliction which torments you. But I leave that care to your Judgment and Vertue, con∣sidering that the strength of the one will sup∣ply my weaknesse, and the precepts of the other will exceed all the Counsell and advice I can impart to you. Besides knowing you to be wholly resigned to the Will of God, that Resignation will be the soveraigne remedy of your distresse. The Heavens doe alwayes af∣ford us Comfort for the ills they send us; but they expect submission, to make us wor∣thy of that favour which I hope you are al∣ready in state to obtaine, it being the only Meanes to live at Quiet in the middle of Distresses; For my part, I will alwayes in∣teresse my selfe in yours, as being with Passion the same I alwayes was, Madam, Your most humble and most obedient servant.
Answers to the precedent Letters. SIR, I Beleeve the Losse I sustained in the death of my late Husband, does touch you very sensibly, since in your own particular you are robbed of a most real friend, and faithfull Servant: but for as my own in∣terest, my Affliction is so great, that if God do not comfort mee very suddenly, I shall die very suddenly of Griefe. You may judge by the state I am in at this present, what Com∣fort I can expect from my Misery; for, as my Fortune and Happinesse are equally buried in my Husbands Grave, except he revive, I shall never be able to revive out of the Grave of Sadnesse, and Discontent. All that I have re∣solved in this extremity, is, to resigne my selfe totally to the Will of God; and since your Prayers may be favourable to me in that behalf, I beseech you for their continuation, for which I shall be indebted to you all my life, and in Quality Sir, of Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, THrough my Teares, I read the Com∣fortable Letter which you did me the Honour to write unto me, touching the Death of my late Husband; and the little space which I employed in drying them up, gave me time to render you thanks. I resol∣ved to have writ more at large, when I took Pen in hand; but the sorrow which I endure, will scarce give mee liberty to assure you that I am Sir, Your most humble servant. A Letter from a Widdow, certifying a friend of her Husbands Death. SIR, THis Sorrowfull Letter shall inculcate nothing but death into your memory, assuring you that you have lost a most reall admirer, and faithfull servant, in the
Person of my Husband. Pardon me if I say no more; the Pen fals out of my Hand, and my teares blot out my writing. I am the most afflicted Woman in the World, Sir, and Your most humble servant. A Letter from a Husband to his Wife, com∣forting her upon the Death of their Son. WIFE, IT is with an extreame Sorrow that I am constrain'd to trouble your Quiet at this present with newes which at the first view wil be able to beare you into your Accustomed extremity, if it be not supported by the Resignation of your will to God. But knowing that you are al∣wayes disposed to undergoe the Lawes of his Providence, I take the boldnesse to let you know that that very Providence of God, has sounded a retreat out of this World, to our eldest sonne. This Accident, how new and strange soever it seeme, must not soe strictly seize upon you, that you murmur against the
Author. You must resist the attempts of Sor∣row by my example; and after you have shed some Teares, which the Quality of Mother will constraine you to, you must adore (in drying them up) the Omnipotency of him that gave the blow; To the end that he re∣double not his Wrath, in depriving us of the Comfort which as yet remaines with us. Doe not think that I am insensible at this Misfor∣tune; it touched me to the Quick; and the more, because I am constrained to partake it with you. But since God has ordaind us to this Affliction, we ought to witnesse by the Mode∣ration of our Complaints, that there is no excesse in his Chastisment. I leave the thought of all these Considerations to your self, with assurance that I remaine, Deare Wife, Your most faithfull Husband.
LOVE LETTERS upon all sorts of Subjects. And First of Presentation of Service. MADAM, THE inclination which I have to esteeme you more than all the rest of the World, obliged mee at this Present, to offer your La∣dyship my most humble Service: And to assure you, that if you be pleased therewith, I shall never change the Resolution, to be all my life Madam, Your most humble and most obedient servant.
Another. MADAM, I Should not take the Liberty to let you know how extreamly I honour you, if the Absolute power of your Beauty did not force me to it. Which relating unto you the violence it useth in my behalfe, will easily (I hope) obtaine Pardon for my Presump∣tion. My desire in this is no other but onely to know whether you be pleased I should Everlastingly beare the Quality Madam, of Your most humble and most obe∣dient servant, M. Another. MADAM, I Could no longer conceale the Resolution which I have taken, to serve you all my life, and beare the Character of your love eternally, if my Service and Love bee agreeable to you. You may signifie it to me, when you please, that I may have the Honor,
and Satisfaction to beare in Publick every where the Quality Madam, of Your most humble and most obedi∣ent servant, M. Another. MADAM, I Must of necessity for my owne Quiet de∣clare the desire which I have, to love, and serve you, if you Judge mee worthy so great an honour. Your merit obliged mee, and my Inclination constrained mee to it. I expect only to know your will, that I may perfect my determination of professing pub∣lickly the stile Madam, of Your most obedient servant.
Answers to the Precedent Letters. SIR, I Am much obliged to you for the good will you witnesse in my behalfe: but I have no other Liberty left mee, ex∣cept to give you thanks, as I doe very hum∣bly: assuring you that I will conserve your Remembrance for an acknowledgement, in Quality Sir, of Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Have nothing but thanks to offer up to you for the Honour you were pleased to doe mee in your last Letters. And though they be ordinary effects of your Civility, rather then Proofes of your love, yet I cannot chuse but be extreamly obliged
to you, which I beseech you beleeve, and like∣wise that I am Sir, Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Doe not excuse my selfe of not answer∣ing your last letter, because my Wil does so absolutely depend of my Parents incli∣nation, that you are to learne of them, that which you desire to know of mee. Yet your good will shall oblige mee to be in acknow∣ledgement, all my life, Sir, Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, YOu know that in the state I am, I must neither accept nor refuse the Offers which you make me, contenting my selfe to witnesse unto you the Resentment
which they left in mee, with assurance that I honour so much the Merit of your Mistresse that I shall alwayes preferre it before the Condition Sir, of Your most humble servant, Letters to demand an Answer. MADAM, YOur Silence nourisheth a Continu∣all doubt in mee, whether my Ser∣vice be acceptable or noe. You may Resolve me when you please by some short Answer, if you Judge me worthy the favour and Quality Madam, of Your most humble, and most obe∣dient servant.
Another. MADAM, IF you knew with what impatience I expect the favour of your Reply, I assure my selfe your Charity would oblige you, to set my Mind at Quiet; But as that is an Ho∣nour, which I must expect from your Good∣nesse, rather than the Passion I have to your Service (not knowing whether it be agreea∣ble to you or no) I must have recourse to prayers, beseeching you very humbly to vouchsafe an Answer, which may authorize the Quality, I beare▪ Madam, of Your most humble and most obe∣dient servant. Another. MADAM, THe Resolution I have taken to serve you all my life, does too far interesse my Repose, not to desire your Plea∣sure in that respect, I hope for this favour from your Goodnesse, as you ought to expect
from my duty, all manner of observance; being desirous to live and die, if you bee pleased, Madam, Your most humble, and most obe∣dient servant. Another. MADAM, THis Letter is so Curious to learn newes of her former Companion, that shee would needs be gone in that Pursuit, al∣most against my wil. Let me know then if you please whether the first was acceptable or no, to the end that either I may continue you my service, or cease to be further importune. These are the most humble prayers Madam, of Your most obedient ser∣vant, M.
Answers to the Precedent Letters. SIR, I Took the Liberty to write unto you, but not to resolve you in your re∣quest. You know the Quality of Daughter does so subject mee, that I cannot violate the Respect I owe unto my Parents; yet I confesse my selfe much indebt∣ed to your good Nature, being Sir, Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Was resolved to keep silence, not know∣ing what answer to give you; but since you require a letter, this shall tell you, that I have no other Resolution than to honour you as your Merit does oblige me: And that in requitall of your Civility, I shall make my selfe accounted in all places Sir, Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, I Send you this Letter, because you desire it, but it is only to assure you of the small ability I have to satisfie your request: You know you are to adresse your selfe to others then to me. Yet I beseech you beleeve that I esteem my selfe much Honoured in the testimony of your Affection, being Sir, Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Am obliged to you for two letters, but I must tell you for answer, that you are to expect no more from me, having no other liberty, but this only which I take to as∣sure you of it. I speak not this because I re∣ject the Honour you are pleased to doe mee, but because being extreamly sensible as I am, the Quality of Daughter affords me no more power, to publish the stile. Sir, of Your most humble servant.
Letters upon the absence of ones Mistresse. MADAM, HAving given you such absolute proofs of Love, as I have done, I hope you will make no doubt of the griefe which your Absence causeth in mee: You can scarce beleeve the one, without give∣ing credit to the other; and this is the thing which gives me some kind of Comfort in my Affliction. If I durst presume to supplicate for your Returne, I would doe it with as much earnestnesse, as a Sick man would implore the presence of his Physitian; since I can as∣sure you, yours is as necessary for my repose, having vowed to live and die Madam, Your most humble and most obe∣dient servant, M.
Another. MADAM, IF you knew, how sensible I were of your Absence, you would scarce be able to de∣fend your selfe against the attempts of Pittie, how cruell soever you were by Nature. I suffer a Torment whose report only would force my Enemies to compassion, and yet can hardly beleeve that you regard it, being farre from imagining you are touched by it, in the least respect. But since you were borne into the World for no other end, than to be ad∣mired, and I to endure all manner of miserie, I must expect no Remedy but from Patience, and the Consideration of the Quality which I beare Madam, of Your most humble and most obe∣dient servant, M. Another to the same Purpose. MADAM, I Have led so sorrowfull a Life, since the Day of your Departure, that if I should recount it to the most insensible soules of
the World, 'tis credible they would be mo∣ved to Compassion. Yet I doe not desire to stirre up that Passion in you, sufficing my selfe that you take notice of it, to the End that you make no doubt of my Love, and lesse of my Constancy. I must tell you then, that having lost both my appetite and repose, I passe over whole daies without eating, and whole Nights without sleep. I may seeke Contentment to a faire Purpose in the Con∣versation of my Friends, but I can find it on∣ly in Solitude, where my thoughts as ingeni∣ous as your selfe to increase my Affliction, represent nothing to mee but your Cruelty. Judge now if I be not one of the most wretch∣ed Lovers in the World. Yet my Conso∣lation is in this, that I suffer all these Af∣flictions for the most worthy Subject living, and for whom I would loose a Thousand Lives, as being Madam, Your most humble servant, and most faithfull Lover. Another MADAM, IF my Life be considerable to you, re∣turne very quickly, that I may be cured of a mortall sicknesse, which has surpri∣zed
me by reason of your Absence. You ought to bee carefull in conserving mee, in the Passion which I have to your Service, know∣ing there be few in the World can give so good a Testimony of your worth, to which long agoe I dedicated my selfe Madam, A Most humble and obedient servant. Answers to the Precedent Letters. SIR, LOves diseases are so easie to cure, that I never spend my Charity upon such persons. If you be surprized with that kind of Malady, my Ab∣sence (whereof you complaine) will soone afford you a Remedy: but if that should not prove as I expect, then (to your owne advan∣tage) the truth of your Affection wil appear by the continuance of your Constancy, which shall render me, as far as Liberty permits Sir, Your most humble servant.
Another Answer. SIR, YOu know I am not accustomed to cre∣dit, the Complaints of Lovers, be∣cause they dye so often in word and Appearance, that the report of their Affli∣ctions does now passe for a Fable. This I give you assurance of, and likewise that I am, Sir, Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, I Beleeve you suffer lesse paine, than you have taken to describe, that which you say my Absence produceth in you. My beau∣ty I am sure, cannot cause either affliction or sorrow in any Man. So that if you conti∣nue your Complaints, I shall bee forced to begin my Reproaches; Cease then your dis∣course of Sorrows, and Griefs, and Sighes, and Lamentations, 'tis a Language that Mo∣lests
mee extreamly, and which makes mee speak thus freely to you, in Quality Sir, of Your most humble servant. Other more obliging Answers to the Precedent Letters. SIR, I Am sensible of the affliction, which my absence causeth in you, but as it is unavoidable in the Condition I am in, you must of necessity re∣solve to be patient, since it is the only Remedy of your Ill. Doe not undertake a Journey to see me, but expect some occasion or other, which will soone offer it selfe. Comfort your thoughts with this hope, and the rather be∣cause I will partake in the Sweetnesse of it. What need you feare? know you not, that if you love me extreamly, I will revenge my self with the same weapon? and if you be constant I wil loose my life rather than my Resolution to dye Sir, Your most humble and most faithfull servant.
Another Answer. SIR, IF I had the power to comfort you with my Presence, you should soone see mee where my Letter is now. But being un∣der the Subjection of a Father and Mother, who give mee not so much as the Liberty to write to you, all that I can doe is to steale it, to comfort you with the Hopes of my Re∣turne. Beleeve mee Sir, I wish for it with Passion, since I am to that Point Sir, Your most humble servant. Letters protesting Love and Fidelity. MADAM, I Am constrain'd to tell you, that of all the Persons in the World you are she only whom I affect most entire∣ly; These are no Discourses of Comple∣ment, my Soule expressing all her thoughts with the same Innocence that my Mind con∣ceived them, having no other object but your desert only. If you make doubt of this truth,
serve your selfe of that absolute power which you have acquired over mee, to oblige my Endeavours to all manner of proofes. My Honour, and Life, are both at your disposure; I will hazard the one and other, when you please, either for your Service, or Con∣tentment; since it interesseth my Quiet, that I be eternally Madam, Your most humble and most obedient, and most faithfull servant. Another. MADAM, THough I should say that you are the only object of my Respect, and Af∣fection, I should represent but one part of the Esteeme which I make of your desert: for I find you raigning so absolutely in my Soule, that I have no liberty left mee, but only to publish in al places where I come, that I am Madam, Your most humble, most obedient and most faithfull servant, and subject, M.
Answers to the Precedent Letters. SIR, THe Lovers of this Age, are so ac∣customed to divulge their Constan∣cy and Affection in all places, that they are as far from perswading the beleefe of it to others, as they are from the true feeling themselves. What paines you take in seeking to give me assurance that you love me! I am so farre from giving credit to the least syllable of those discourses made to my Advantage, that it is a great trouble to mee to heare them, being fully satisfied if you love mee in that height that I honour you, since I am Sir, Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, YOu are too eloquent to be Amorus; a Passion so extreame as that which you feigne in my behalfe, could never bee
able to expresse it self, but in feeble tearmes. Which forces me to a beleife that you im∣ployed more time in Composing that pretty Letter, than ever you did in the Sufferings of Love. But howsoever, your deceit is not so unpleasing to me that I cease to be obliged to your care in turning it to my Advantage, which I shall alwayes receive, when you are pleased to reckon me in the Number Sir, of Your most humble servants. Letters Complaining of a Neglect. MADAM, I Am Constrained to say that I am most unfortunate, since three years service could never obtaine of you to grant they were pleasing or agree∣able. Truly, though that recompence (as proceeding from you) be of an infinite value; yet me thinks the effects of so many dutifull regards, might have merited some small ac∣knowledgment of your Civility. But since I have already learned my lesson of Love, I
am sufficiently instructed in suffering: fee∣ding my thoughts with the Comfort of this Consideration, that 'tis You are my Mistresse, and I Madam, Your most humble and most obe∣dient servant. Another upon the Same. MADAM, I Should never have conceived, that since you are publickly honoured by all the World, and perfectly by mee, you would have recompenced my Respects with Con∣tempt, and my Love with Hatred. 'Tis true, the Slavery wherein I am tied, forbids me to demand a reason for what you doe. Yet my Prison allowes me this Liberty, to tell you that you are too rigorous to be so beautifull: and that except you change this severe Hu∣mour, wherewith you tyrannize over mee, you will run the hazard to lose Madam, The most humble, and most obedient of all your servants.
Answers to the Precedent Letters. SIR, I Wonder you should Complaine of my Neglect, having alwayes had E∣steeme for your Desert. 'Tis true, my austere Humour has oftentimes gi∣ven you subject to greive; but, I beseech you think I was never guilty, but in appearance only, of that which you accuse me, being alwayes inclined to nourish a good opinion of your Merit, in Quality Sir, of Your most humble servant. Another Answer. SIR, YOu have no pretence to divulge mee the most cruell and disdainfull Wo∣man alive: for when you maintaine
such discourses, those that know my disposi∣tion, will easily know you are in Anger; o∣therwise neither could they excuse your hu∣mour, nor I your misbeleife. If my actions had merited the proofe of your Study, you would have had a better opinion of my incli∣nation, since the first time that I have had the Honour to practice you; but such is my misfortune, that all my Endeavours are not able to nourish in you a good Con∣ceit Sir, of Your most humble servant. Letters Complaining of Inconstancy. MADAM, I Never thought that after so ma∣ny protestations of Fidelity, you would have lost even the remem∣brance of having made them. Hereafter, Frailty shal not be e∣steem'd an adjunct of Humanity, since in
yours you are most inhumane, having there∣by exposed to the utmost perill one of your most faithfull Admirers. But live conten∣ted in your new Conquest, and know that of all the Servants whom your Ficklenesse shall acquire you, you will never find any that will equall my Affection, or be to that point that I have been Madam, Your most humble, and most obe∣dient servant. Another. MADAM, I Must let you know that your Inconstan∣cy has provoked in mee more Pitty, then it has procured me ill, being willing to lose the Possession of that to day, which I could not maintaine till to morrow. I say Pitty, because I have some respect to your Honour, which is more interessed in that Action than my Contentment. I pray God this Lightnesse may give you as much Satis∣faction, as it caused you blame, in the Eye
of the World. I shall alwayes be glad of any good Fortune that shall happen you, as making profession to be still Madam, Your most humble, and most obedi∣ent servant. Answers to these kind of Letters. SIR, I Shall receive Praise rather than Reproach, from all that know the Reason of my Change; for I was obliged to it in so many respects, that the least of them, will sufficiently accuse you, for having condemned mee. I will give you an account of this Action when you please, and when you are truly informed how things passed, I will have no other Judge but your self, what interest, soever you pretend to have in the Suit. 'Tis from the Part Sir, of Your most humble servant.
Another. SIR, IF you knew with what violence I was con∣strain'd to this Mutation, I make no doubt but you would esteeme me far more wor∣thy Praise, than Reproach. Imagine the power of a Tyrannicall Father towards his Daughter under his obedience: Shee may weep her fill, he bathes himselfe with joy in her teares; her Sorrowes, and Lamentations doe but increase his fury. This is the case I am in at this present. I leave to your selfe to Consider what I am able to doe against so strong an Enemy. The only consideration which remaines to mee, is, that if I have lost the Quality of your Mistresse, yet I will con∣serve everlastingly Sir, That of Your most humble servant.
A Letter to demand the Picture of ones Mistresse. MADAM, I Hope you will grant mee this humble intreaty, which is, to give me your Picture, knowing I value the Originall more than all other things in the World; That beautifull Substance, whose Features, and Graces you animate with so much sweetnesse, appeared in my sight so a∣dorable, that I long extreamly after the Sha∣dow. You may give Comfort to this impa∣tience of mine when you please, by granting mee the expectation of that favour: Which I will place in the Rank of the greatest Feli∣cities which ever can happen me, since it gives mee the noblest meanes of Testifying the Resentment which I have, in Quality Madam, of Your most obedient ser∣vant.
An Answer to this Letter. SIR, YOur intreaty is so obliging, that I am forced to grant it, being glad you should have often before your Eyes the Image of her that ho∣nours you extreamly. You will doe mee a favour to beleeve it, and likewise that I am Sir, Your most humble servant. A Letter to demand a Mistres her Haire. MADAM, I Hope you will not wonder, if having enjoyed so sweet a Servitude, I seek after new chaines, by demanding a Bracelet of your Haire. To tell you how highly I shall esteem this favour, I must have recourse either to your Merit, or my owne Love for expression, and being you have perfect knowledge of them both, I leave the Consideration to your selfe, together with
that of the Passion which I have to your Service, as being more than Ever Madam, Your most humble and most obedi∣ent servant. A Favourable Answer to this Letter. SIR, YOur Merit is of so powerfull a perswasion that I am forced to grant you your request: I will not oblige you to silence, know∣ing that your Discretion has al∣ready prevented my Desires. 'Tis sufficient to put you in mind, that as these favours are not Vulgar, so they require a secrecy of Faith in the Receivers. I hope you will keep it Inviolably, while you Remember that I am Sir, Your most humble servant. FINIS.
