24512 S118896 99854103 19510
A GOLDEN BELL. AND A POMGRANATE. A Sermon Preached, at the Visita∣tion in Canterbury. 7. of Aprill. 1624. By Mr. ALEXANDER VDNY, Bachelor in Diuinitie, Chaplaine to his Maiestie in Ordinary, and Minister of Han∣king in Kent. Labour till I come. LVKE 19.13. GREGO. lib. 2. Epist. 39. Quod prfecto negotium, tunc vere s agi, si viuendo & loquendo proxium . LONDON, Printed by A. M. and I. N. for▪ Anthony Vphill, and are to be sold at the signe of the white Lyon, in Pauls Church-yard. 1625.
REVERENDISSIMO PATRI ET DOMINO, SVO VNICE, COLENDO GEORGIO CANTV∣ariensi Archiepiscopo totius Angli Primati. QVas animi Dono faetus (Amplissime Praesul) Pignora perpetui Debita amoris erunt. Tu modo quae voueo, facili cape munera Dextra, Nil meruere vltra, in meliora forent. Celsitudini vestrae Humillime addictus. ALEXANDER VDNEYVS.
A GOLDEN BELL, AND A POMGRANATE. COL. 4.17. And say to Archippus, the Ministerie which thou hast receiued of the Lord, see that thou fulfill it. GReat is the Mysterie of godlinesse, which is, God is manifest in the flesh1. Tim. 3.16., Great, because the Myste∣rie hid since the beginning of the World, and from all Ages; but now is made manifest vnto his SaintsCol. 1.26. Luke 24..: This manifestation was and is by the Spirit in the Word; then opened hee their vnderstan∣ding, that they might vnderstand the Scriptures, which is a Lanthorne vnto our feet, & a light vnto our pathesPsal. 119.105.; with∣out this light, we dwell in the land of the shadow of death,Mat. 4.16. both in sinne and ignorance; therefore Paul saith, awake thou that sleepest, and stand vp from the dead, and Christ shall giue thee lightEphes. 5.14.; This light doeth shine to him, whose name is in the white stone, which no man knoweth, sauing hee that receiueth itReu. 2 17.; This knowledge is giuen to him, that can take the little booke out of the Angels hand, and eate it vp, hereby able to Prophesie among the people, and Nations, and Tongues, and to many KingsReu. 10.11.; For this
cause it is, that Dauid prayeth, open mine eies,Psal. 119.18. that I may see the wonders of thy Law. Therefore it is the Commandement of the chiefe A∣postle of our profession, and Bishop of our soules the Lord Iesus (beloued in him)1. Pet. 2.2. that wee should search the Scrip∣tures for his Testimonie, and our owne saluationIohn 39.5. Non repostores aut serriui colo∣sos vel super∣stitsos mur∣murateres, sed ram hu∣mlem & vni∣r cognoscendae & ample an∣de veritatis cupidaeus. Mui lus in 5. Ioh.: wee should not then negligently, or superstitiously search the Scriptures to cauell thereby, but with a holy, and humble desire, to know and embrace the simple trueth And now being my course to Preach at this time, before this solemne assembly, and publike Conuocation of the Ministerie, I haue sought, and red in the Booke of the Lord, where I might finde a Text, short, sententious, and sitting, principally for the Ministeri, exhorting all in a word, and euery one as it were by his owne name, to holy, and full knowledge, faith, and diligence in his vocati∣on, and I haue found these words,  Holi∣nesse to the LordExod 2.. Kodeth la Ie∣houah agias∣era urion., which was grauen on the high Priests Miter, as signets are grauen▪ for in the man of God, what is required but Holinesse in spirit, in soule, in speach, in acti∣on, in all things, Holinesse to the Lord, and vpon the bri∣dels of the horses, holinesse to the Lord, yea, the very pots in Ierusalem and Iudah, shall be holinesse vnto the Lord of hostes,Zach. 14. . 1. holinesse is Christs marke, like the signe Thau, vpon the foreheads of them that mourne, for the abomina∣tions, that he done in the middest of the Citieach. 8.4.. And I haue found a line, and a golden reed, wherewith I intend to mete the Temple of God, and to measure the Citie withallReuel. 11.  1.15. The lnes were lled hacte idda suu mensores.. In the Epistle to the Collossians these words, (And say to Archippus) for as the first Scripture comprehended all the worke of the Ministerie in one word, Holinesse; so this Text, comprehends the same in one word, of power, and authoritie, commanding euery one, in one, fulfill this dispensation of God, which is giuen me vnto you ward, to fulfill the word of GodCol. 1.5.. For what is it, to bee a good Minister of the Lord, but to fulfill, and end perfectly, the worke of ministration, and dispensation of the Gospel of his graces, that wee may bee
bold before God, and man, Angels, and our conscience,Micha 3.8. with Micha to say, I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of iudgement, and of strength, to declare vnto Iacob his transgression, and to the house of Israel their sinne;Act. 23.. And with Paul, I haue liued in all good conscience before God, vntill this day, that we may all say so, I say, O generation, see ye the word of the LordIere. 2.31.. The holy and perfect worke of the Ministerie,Holinesse. and maner thereof, are by these two Scriptures comprehended in two words, Holinesse, and Fulnesse, or Holy Fulnesse, or Full Holinesse; would y then desire a better Scripture for this time, which may bee called the Ministers Text, then one of those two, or both in one, making so sweete an harmonie, like two parts of Musicke set together, to praise the Lord, in whom dwelleth all fulnesse, whereupon I shall descant God willing, according to the commandment of Scrip∣ture, without any discord; and that it may found also well in your eares, as it did to the Collossians, and their Mini∣sters, let mee craue of you, as hee of them, that ye would pray for mee, that God would open vnto mee the doore of vtterance, that I may speake the Mysterie of Christ fully. The Apostle hauing laide downe the foundation of Chri∣stian religion, by Christ in his person and office,Cohesion. Colo. 1.14. Colo. 2.1. whereby we are reconsciled, then hee doeth diswade from Eronious Doctrine, hee doeth exhort vnto Christian conuersation,Colo. 3.1.2. that wee set our affections on things which are aboue, and hauing added salutations to his friends in loue, in the end doeth exhort the Collossians, that they should admonish Archippus to be faithfull in the worke of the Lord. The argument of this Text, is this; in a short summe,  Paul and Timothy, after Epaphras his declaration, what state and condition the Collossians and their Ministers were in, in respect of Christian Religion, writ their admoniti∣on, and exhortation from Rome, to them both, that they should stand fast, and grow still in the knowledge, and vse of the Gospel against all corruption, to the Ministerie indi∣rectly, and to all vnder the name of one, that the Collossi∣ans earnestly, and yet gentlely in these words, admonish
Archippus to hold his eye, and his hand, vpon the Ministra∣tion of the Gospel faithfully towards them, which he hath receiued of the Lord, a worthy thing, in credit whereof he must giue an account as Minister, by whom they must grow from faith, to faith, who hath called him, and giuen him an eye to see, and a hand to feele, and who will reward him according to his seruice, Damnation, or Saluation. Two parts of this TtThe order and method of this Text, is in too princi∣pall parts. First an admonition. Secondly, the reason of the same. 1. Admoni∣tion.The admonition that Archippus, and in him other Mi∣nisters of the Citie, bee wise, and faithfull in doing their office, in testifying the Gospel of Gods grace fully. 2. Reason.The reason, because the Lord Iesus hath made him a Minister and disposer of the same, to whom hee must giue an account of his Ministration, and bee rewarded accor∣dingly. In the admo∣ntion there is sie partiularsIn the admonition, wee haue sixe grounds to consider: First, who giueth it, Paul, and Timothie by writing, Epa∣phras being priuie to the same, whom they commend as faithfull: Chap. 4.13. and the Collossians by the word, at their commandement. Secondly, who is the person admonished, Archippus, one of the ordinary Ministers, resident among them. Thirdly, what is the manner of the admonition, not seuere, albeit seuere, but gentle, short, and publike. Fourthly, what time this admonishion was giuen, when false teachers entered in amongst them, and therefore had neede. Fiftly, what things are principally required, wisedome, and strength, with vse and practise, of both Seeing, and feeling. Sixtly, who are Messengers, and what is their credit, Tichicus, and Onessimus, their credit is to declare Pauls estate, and to know theirs, and to comfort their Ministers, and people in the Lord. Chap. 4.7, 8, 9. In the reason, euery word containes a most strong and
mighty argument, arguing the faithfull execution of the Ministerie in the right manner, all worthy by themselues to be remembred; in generall is this; If Archippus be allowed, to haue committed vnto him in credit, the ministration of the Gospel of Gods grace vnto his Church; vpon condition, that beholding, and fulfilling the same, to receiue an euerlasting crowne of glo∣ry, if not, to haue no part with him; then he must See, and fulfill his ministration. But hee is allowed of the Lord,The summe of the reason. to haue committed vn∣to him, the ministration of Gods grace to his Church; vp∣on condition, that seeing, and fulfilling his Ministerie, to re∣ceiue an euerlasting Crowne of Glory, if not, to haue no part with him; therefore Archippus must See, and fulfill his ministration fully. The particular arguments are these.The particu∣lars are sixe, First, the consideration of Archippus, his insufficiencie,  in him the receiuer. Secondly, the authoritie of the Lord, the deliuerer. Thirdly, the incomprehensible worthinesse, of the glo∣rious  Gospel, the thing receiued, whereof he is a Minister. Fourthly, the word of office, ministration, or dispen∣sation. Fiftly, the consideration of the Church, bought with the  blood of Iesus, to the which hee must Minister, and dispose the secrets of the Gospel. Sixtly, the reward of his ministration, at the Lords hand,  Saluation, or Perdition, according as hee doeth Minister, Well, or Ill: This is the sum & order of this Text, short, but full of matter; ye see the interpretation, and vse doeth fol∣low these things, in this maner parted, & gathered together orderly, and shortly must be laide open againe, before our eyes, in the light of the Sunne of righteousnesse, which o∣therwayes cannot bee seene, nor handled, that we may se, and handle the same, take for nought, and without money. The Lord open our eyes to See, and strengthen our hands to feele the dispensation of the Gospel of Christ, whereof we are Ministers.
Tse ence.Paul was at this time in Rome an old man, and in bands, which commendes his admonition the more, and had not visited them of Collosse, and Laodicea; which makes him the more carefull of them. Chap. 2.1. And namely, praying for them continually: verse 3. and in writing to them, and their Ministers in doing their dutie towards God, and one another; It is profitable for vs to consider Pauls age, and that which is more, his bonds and captiui∣ti Ch ists prisoner; for in the next verse, he bids remem∣ber his bonds, and he requests Philemon to receiue Onossi∣mus againe, because it is old Paul, and Christs prisoner that exhorteth him. Hereby wee learne, what Ministers are most sitting to exhort and admonish others, to behold, and fulfill their Ministerie, viz. they that are carefll, zealous, deuout, old, graue, constant vnto bonds, suffering as well the heate, as the cold of the day, in the labour of the Lords vine∣yarde. Certainely, the Church is more bound to Pauls bonds, then to his libertie; not onely in respect of his writing, but also in respect of the example of his famous bonds, euen in Cesaeres Pallace, and all other places, which made many of brethr n in the Lord,Phil. 1.1. to preach the Gospel boldly. Paul ioyneth with him Timothie, a man greatly com∣mended in the Scriptures, and not to bee despised for his youth; Epaphras was priuie to this admonition, being re∣sident in the Citie, to the end it might be the more willing∣ly obeyed, being by many, and that so worthily, giuen first in writing, and then in words by his owne congregation. Here we may learne he more, and the more worthy they bee that admonish the greater is their admonition, and ought to be the more acceptable, such as is the admonition of a generall Assembly, Snod, Presbterie, or as by this Visitation. Of Cosi.Moreouer, it is the Collossians, that must giue this admo∣nition to their Minister, that they may bee faithfull in the ministration of the Gopel towardes them: Collosse is a Citie of Phrigia, not farre from Ladicus, and Hierapolis,
and therefore, Epaphras might the more conueniently de∣clare his loue, for all three. In that the Collossians are required to admonish their  owne Minister, to bee diligent in his calling, giueth thus to learne. First, as there should bee knowledge in the Priests lipes, and practise in his hands, so there should bee zeale in the peoples hearts, to seeke it at his mouth, and if he be negli∣gent, to desire him to be diligent in the worke of the Lord: but alas, if wee haue an euill will to preach,Note. they haue a worse will o heare; for they thinke God is beholding to them, if they come to the Sermon in the forenoone, albeit they serue the deuill in the afternoone, and all the weeke following. Secondly,Deut. 17.1. the people must not contend with their Mini∣ster, for reproouing of them for their sinnes;Hos. 4.4. like the people that reprooued, and contended with the Priest of God,1. Sam. 8.7. therefore God said vnto Samuel, they haue not cast thee a∣way, but they haue cast me away: Therefore Moses saith,Exod. 16.1. the Lord hath heard your murmurings which ye murmure against him; therefore Moses saith, Korah,Num 16.11. verse 33. 2. King. 2.14. 2. Chro. 26.12 thou and thy company are gathered against the Lord, and in the end were swallowed vp quicke into hell: two Beares came out of the Forrest, and slew fourtie and two children that mocked Elisha; so was the Captaines with their fifties, de∣stroyed with fire from the heauens: and while King Vz∣ziah was wroth with the Priests, the Lord strooke him with Leprosie: This example of the Collossians admonishing their Ministers, makes against the flockes, that thinke it is not good manners to admonish their Pastors, and yet they are not scrupulus, to traduce him behind his backe to others. Thirdly,  why Paul writ not directly to Archippus him∣selfe, to behold, and fulfill his Ministerie, as hee did at the same time to him and Philemon, about a matter of lesse mo∣ment; namely, the receiuing againe of Onessimus,The reason. bearer hereof, because of their faith, loue, ordr, and stedfastnesse in all good workes: as Chap. 1.4. and 2. chap. 5. Moreouer,  the admonition of his owne Congregation
would preuaile with him, and that Pastor, and flocke, might mutually admonish one another, as they must pray one for another, proceeding of loue. Fourthly, who should exhort the Minister to doe his ministration, not the confused multitude, but the most godly, and most learned. Fiftly, perseuerance in the Gospel, and vse thereof is re∣quired in Priest, and People, the Collossians had truely heard, and learned the grace of God, yet Paul, and Timo∣thie, and Epaphras, ceased not to pray for them, and ex∣horted them, to require Archippus, to bee diligent in his Ministerie: other vertues without perseuerance, auaileth nothing. Sixtly, the greater perrill the people are in, being drawen away as a prey; like as the Collossians were at this time:Numb. 8.24. Chap. 2.8. The more carefull the Minister must bee, Ad militandum militiam in Ministeri, like the Leuites in the Ministerie of the Tabernacle; but wee are most carelesse in the greatest danger, who seeth not, but we see not. Seuenthly, the necessitie of the Ministerie, in all the fulnesse thereof; the Collossians had the Scriptures of the old and new Testaments exstant, this Epistle, and that from Laodicea, which they are commanded to read, and cause to be read vnto others; Yet they must say to Archippus, See and fulfill thy ministration: would to God, this admoniti∣on were taken to heart, in these dayes wherein we liue. . The person admonished.Now wee come to the second point, to wit, who is the Person admonished, that is Archippus, a Phrigian, an or∣dinary Minister among the Collossians, and Pauls fellow-labourer. Vpon this we worke first, that particular admonition of Ministers is needfull, that they that doe well, may better doe, and they that doe euill, may amend; for the Haruest is great, and besides that, the labourers are few, and amongst these few, there bee few faithfull, beholding, and fulfilling their Ministerie. Secondly, as there is nothing hid, that shall not bee re∣uealed,
but more the neglect of dutie in the Ministerie, Paul was in Italy, at Rome in prison, Archippus in Phrigia, at Collosse, so great a space of Sea and Land betwixt; yet Paul knew that Archippus had neede of this admoniti∣on, a Minister is like a Citie vpon a hill, and like a can∣dle in a candlesticke, and as Plato saith, Trueth, the daughter of God, and of Time, hath sworne to detect all vice and sinne, and specially in the Ministerie, who are neg∣ligent in the ministration, which they haue receiued of the Lord. Now followeth the third point to be considered,The third point in the admonition. Wherein is three things. and that is the forme, and manner of this admonition. First, short; secondly, gentle; thirdly, publike: Short, because a word to a wiseman is sufficient, few things are be remembred, hee referres the particular admonition, to the Epistle written from Laodicca, that is, the first to Ti∣mothie, which he commanded them to read, and leaues the ample declaration thereof to the Collossians. Secondly, Gentle, because hee did well: for they that  doe not well, must bee commanded with authoritie; Paul be-sought Timothie,1. Tim. 1.3. but Timothie, must command with power, and reprooue them that haue need of seueritie. Thirdly, Publike,Tims 2.3.15. because it must be read in the Church of Collosse, and Laodicca, verse 16. Wee obserue, if Ar∣chippus, Timothie, and Titus, receiued publike admoni∣tion, and willingly learned: it becommeth vs much more, who liue in this last declining age of the World, where the power of the Gospel is almost turned to the libertie of sinne. Fourthly, Paul sent this admonition with Tichicus,The fourth point in the admonition. a faithfull Minister, and fellow seruant in the Lord, and Ones∣simus a beloued brother to comfort their hearts, and to de∣clare his estate, and to know theirs, as in all his Epistles he chuseth godly, and honest messengers. First, obserue prayer, writing, and liuely voyce, is too  little to strengthen vs in trouble. Secondly, that wee giue not so much, as the bearing, or  carrying of Holy things vnto dogs, and swine, as woefull
exsperience doeth let vs see this day, yet precious are they vnto God, and must be in our eyes whose they are. The fift ad∣monition.Ftly, what time this admonition was giuen, when false teachers were entered in amongst them: as the 2. Chap. 8. verse. By this is a true Minister knowne, if hee be faith∣full in the greatest danger, when Gods people are like to be carried into captiuitie, either of the body or mind. I pray God make vs thus faithfull, for I feare the time is at hand, that a faithfull Minister shall be knowne from an hireling. The fift point in two parts.Now followeth the last thing in the admonition, in two words, behold, and fulfill, which are actions of the eye, and hand, of the body properly two members, principally in Gods house: Ministers, and Pastors, Ciuill, and Ecclesi∣asticall, must bee whole, sound, and able, the eye, and the hand; the eye to see, and foresee, what things are profi∣table, and what are hurtfull for the flocke, the arme to saue and defend the same, for they that want them, or haue them vnable, or mutilate, are vnmeete for the office of mini∣stration, defending, or gouerning of others; but these are borrowed and translated wordes, from the body to the minde; by the eye is vnderstood wisedome, and know∣ledge; by the arme, might, strength, and power; in the same sense it is taken. Zach. 11.17. O ioll shepheard that leaueth the flocke,Zach. 11.17. the sword shall bee vpon his arme, and vpon his right eye; his arme shall bee dried, and his right eye shall be vtterly darkened; Archippus thn is ad∣monished by Paul, Timothie and his flocke, that he be faith∣full in his calling, with the power of godly wisdome, which he hath now receiued of the Lord. To see, it is taken foure wayes.By seeing, is vnderstood foure things. First, we see by our fleshly eyes. 2 Cor. 4.18. Secondly, to see, is to vnderstand, for Christ saw the  thoughts of his enemies, and Paul saith, behold the good∣nesse and sueritie of God. Rom. 11.22. Thirdly, to see, is taken for exsperience. Psal. 77. The waters saw thee. Mal. 3. Fourthly, to see, is to be watching & carefull. Mar. 13.36. The reason why Paul vseth these words, of the eye,
arme, and hand, seeing, and fulfilling,The reason why the A∣postle vseth these figura∣tiue words. when they would haue any thing well done: Is, because we remember bet∣ter the things we see, then the things we heare, and because the sight is more diuine, and likest to the vnderstanding, and when both our eye, and hand, are vpon our worke together, it prospers and proceedes well. But that wee may see,The sense of seeing excel∣leth all the rest in sixe degree. by this borrowed speech which is worthy to bee considered, what excellent practise, and vse of wisedome, and strength is required in a Minister of the Gospel; and that this admonition may bee the better im∣printed in our mindes, which for our mindes sake is writ∣ten; let vs consider, that the sense of seeing, is the most no∣ble of all our wits, and senses, which outwardly perceiue, and how? euen by the true triall of our owne exsperience, and vse of our outward senses; and therefore the Lord de∣sired Thomas who was hard of beliefe, to see, and handle his wounds, and print of the miles; consider thou that the sight excelleth all our other senses, in sixe seuerall causes, or de∣grees. Musculi in oculi,Galen. sunt sex secundum vtrunque oculo∣rum habentes, substractam pinguedinem quibus, actus commo∣tionis spiritus commissus est, perficientis motus etus, per ipsos facti sunt autem, vt facile circumducantur oculi, quando vo∣lumus hue mouere. First, that our sight perceiueth things farre off. Secondly, and more of them. Thirdly, and more exquisitely. Fourthly, and more swiftly. Fiftly, and vnder no difference. Sixtly, and more diuinely. 1. Farther off, because we see the starres of heauen. 2. Many things, because there is nothing almost, that wants light, & colour; which are the first obiects of the eie. 3. More exquisitely, because there is no sense, that per∣ceiues to little, and so small differences of things. 4. Swift, or sooner, because we see onely incontinent; wee hezie not, before the sound come to our eares; and smell not, but by blowing out and in our breath. 5. Manifest differences, as all kinde of colours, and
a he fiue common sensible things, Magnitudo, immerus, motus, quies, forma, which it attaines vnto perfectly, for the hand or feeling, attaines not vnto them so perfectly; for the hand discenres them onely in darkenesse, when we may not see them with our eyes; but when wee may see them, the hand or feeling, is content with it owne obiects, as ca∣lidum, frigidum, humidum, siccum, graue, leue, molle, durum, lentum fragile, leue, asperum; when the eye and the hand worke together, it deceiues all the common sensible things, either onely, or chiefely. 6. More diuinely, because it feeles no paine, nor labour in seeing, and onely is like the vnderstanding of the minde; what subtill and deceitfull things are these? But yet as Saint Augustine,Confessionem lib. 11. cap. 22. disputing of the spaces of time, and great∣ly prizing, and praysing God, saith, Vsitata & abdita, vsuall, and yet hid things, therefore we should all pray with him, Per Christum obsecro Noli claudere, wee vse them continual∣ly, but know not how, the greater part; but if wee knew, we would remember this admonition the better, and praise the Lord the more; the eye of the minde is knowledge, and the hand practise. 1. The eyes.The eye of the mortall body seeth farre off, and shall the eye of the immortall soule bee purblinde, that it cannot see farre off? 2. The minde.The eye of the mortall body, seeth all things almost, be∣cause God hath giuen all things almost, light, and colour to bee seene; and shall the eye of the immortall soule see nothing, or few things of many, all visible by light, with∣out change of darkenesse, and colour without blot of staining? The eye of the mortall body, seeth exquisitely, there is not so small, or so little a thing, but the eye seeth it; and shall the eye of the immortall soule see but with a glime∣ring, as in a glasse, the great and exquisite things of God? The eye of the mortall body, discernes all things, and markes their differences, and diuersitie knowne; and shall the eye of the immortall soule bee confounded, and not di∣scerne things that differ one from another? Phil. 1.10.
The eye of the mortall body is not pained, nor pi∣ning in seeing, and shall the eye of the immortall soule thinke it a paine and labour to see, till there bo¦no more time to see in? the eye of the immortall bo∣dy hath many things to see, that it helpes the hand whē it may not feele, albeit the sense of seeing be most excellent, yet there is some defect to bee noted of in our sight; for when the thing wee see is opposed to our sight directly, then the qualitie of that commeth vpon the lynes falling into the Center of our eyes,Note. the which lynes all directly from euery part, maketh vp one Pyramides, Cuius conus est in pupills, & basis in re visa ex quo pates, quod talis Pyramis ex parteres in so habet latitudinem, ex parte vero occuli artitudinem: euen so when wee doe contemplate on heauenly things, wee cannot comprehend them, by reason of weakenesse. Therefore God said vnto Moses, thou shalt see my back parts, but my face thou canst not see and liue: in the sight of the face, Noticia est perfecta, but in seeing the backe parts, our knowledge is but modica & confusa, our knowledge is but in part & con∣fused; therefore a distance must bee from our sight, Secundum aliquam proportionem intra quam non subquali∣ter, sed magis et minus videtur secundum modum distan∣tiae: vnto the Saints heauenly things are occuli propin∣qui, to the wicked remoti, as the Glutton saw Laza∣rus a farre off. Secondly, the Hand hath many things to handle, we heard that it helpes the Eye in darkenesse, when it may not see; and shall the Eye and Hand of the im∣mortall Soule, be against other, or not helpe one a∣nother in neede, in one thing only needfull, the com∣mon saluation of soule and body eternally. Is not the Soule more worth then the Body? Is not the sight of the Soule more worth then the sight of the Body? Is not spirituall things more worth then bodily
things? if the Eye of the Body bee so excellent, and the more if it be ioyned with the hand, how excellent is the Eye of the Soule, well exercised together in the worke of the Ministery, and of our owne saluation? If naturall gifts bee so excellent,What is requi∣red of the hand. how excellent are the diuine gifts of Gods holy Spirit? What shall all the outward senses profit vs? If the windowes of the Soule be blind, what shall the knowledge of God and of his Creatures profit the soule if there bee no practise, but to be beaten with many stripes? doth not the saluation of the body depend vpon the saluati∣on of the soule? doth not all the stedfast standing of e∣ternitie, depend vpon a moment of transitory; time well spent, in knowledge, and doing the will of the Lord? and namely to vs of the Ministery, that must thereby saue our selues and others; must our eye bee tyed to see, and our hand to fill the ministration we haue receiued of the Lord; what shall wee doe then to obey this admonition? behold with our eies, fill with our hands, the ministery we haue receiued of the Lord; ioyne practise and vse, with knowledge and strength continually, we must neuer turne our eie from our worke to behold vanitie, with Lots wife; but like Paul, haue our eyes on the worke before, and not on things behind; we must not take our hand from our worke till it bee full and compleate like Bazaleel and Aholiab building the Tabernacle that did not take away eye,Numb. 3.24. hand, or foote, till the Tabernacle was en∣ded▪ the Leuits are compared to Souldiers seruing as in warfare in the Ministery,Sam. 1.9 9. that they might see, and fulfill the same; the Prophets were named Seers, from seeing, and Gods, from doing the worke of the Lord; Isaiah was made a Watchman,Isai. 31.6. Isai. 62 6. Isai. 27.6.12.6 to tell the things that they should see, concerning the destruction of Baby∣lon, and to stand continually vpon his watch Tower, both day and night, and did see but the figures of the
armies, whereby Cyrus, and Darius ouercame Babylon, how much more, must we stand on our watch towre, to see Babylon fall, that Romish idoll; enemie vnto Christ, and the children of God, gathered together in the holy Citie.Exod. 31.1. Moses must behold the forme of the Taber∣nacle, and to whom it is to be committed; and like Ze∣rubabel, his beholding, till the last stone bee laid in the second Temple. In despite of enemies,Zach. 4.9. Genes. 41.41. shall Ioseph be∣hold and see, that blacke polluted Countrie of igno∣rance, and fore-see, as hee did, what things were profi∣table, and what were hurtfull: and shall not wee behold, and fulfill the Ministration of the Holy, and lightsome Land of Iudah, od dwelling in the middest thereof.Zach. 2.11.12. The Lord speaking after the manner of men, declares that his Church is euer before his eyes, watching, and looking vpon it, and in this respect, it is sweete vnto vs, and in this place he commands, that it should neuer bee out of our sight; like Paul in spirit at Collosse, in Phrigia beholding their ordour: Chap. 2.3. Albeit, in body in Italy, at Rome in bonds;Isai. 21.21. O Lord I how sweete a sight should it be vnto vs, sleeping, and waking, when we see the image, and care of Gods holy Church before our eyes, in her garments of beautie; the glory of the Lord shining vpon her, rather then in her mourning weed, co∣uered with the thicke cloud of his wrath: O Lord God, if we would see, and fill our Ministerie, how might the Church bee edified, and her enemies destroyed? like Moab dispairing of their men and gods. Thus much for the admonition in generall: the Lord open our eyes to see, and our hands to fill the Ministration, which wee haue receiued of the Lord The reason followeth in these words: Which thou hast receiued of the Lord. The Lord Iesus, the Authour of the glorious Gospel,Sixe points in the reason. hath opened thine eyes, and silled thee with his holy Spirit, and committed vnto thee a part of the worke of
his Ministerie, and grathering together of his Saints; vpon condition, that beholding, and fulfilling the same, thou mayest receiue an euerlasting Crowne of Glory, if not, to be banished from his presence for euer; there∣fore see, and fulfill thy Ministerie. The generall reason, is full of singular arguments, all arguing, and proouing necessarily our faithfulnesse, in the worke of the Ministerie. The arguments are sixe. The first, is the insufficiencie of Archippus himselfe, to whom this worke is committed;1. Tim. 1.12. Thou  but an carthen vessell, vnable of thy selfe to thinke a good thought, and yet allowed, and put in credite, and made powerfull by the grace of God in thee, then stirre vp, and neglect not the gift that is in thee; but see, and consider, fulfill, an lend thy Ministration: Paul thankes the Lord, that hee made him strong, and put him in the Ministerie;Amos 7.1, 14, 15, 16, 17. Amos considering that it was not him∣selfe, nor of mans institution that hee Prophesied, but of the Lord that had taken him from the sheepe; Was bold to see, and fulfill his Ministerie, in despight of all his enemies at Bethel, in the Kings Chappell. Secondly, the power and authoritie of the cheife Pastor, and Authour of this Gospel and Ministration, is the Lord Iesus, who is Prince, and Goernor of his Church, in whom all the fulnesse of the God-head dwel∣leth fully: The good shepheard that knoweth all things, hath put the Archippus in the Ministerie, albeit, not immediatly, but meiatly, by the ordination of the Church: Paul vses this argument to mooue Timothie to bee faithfull, as wee should all bee, because the Lord Iesus is the Authour thereof; therefore let vs see, and fulfill our Ministration, which wee haue receiued of the Lord. Thirdly, the excellent worthinesse of that so preci∣ous a thing put in his hand to bee kept,2. Tim. 1.14. that is the glo∣rious
Gospel of the blessed God; thou has receiued this great Mysterie of godlinesse, and the Gospel of Gods grace, to declare it perfectly, and fully to the world But let v see, and consider the glory of the Gospel, by Pauls owne comparison of a treasure; and Dauids golden treasure: Gold hath sixe properties, wherefore the word of God is compared to it. First, gold of all other mettélles, hath not onely a  sweete smell, but pleasant in taste, and cordiall;Gold compa∣red to the Gospel in sue properties. euen so the word of God is sweeter then the hony, or the hony combe. Secondly, gold taketh no soile, neither doeth it foule  any thing, for it is fatnesse that defileth, and s burnt,2. Cor. 4.7. Psal. 19.72. 1. Pet. 1.7. Pro. 8.10.15. as all that are mixed therewith: so Gods word is pu∣rer then th gold, seuen times tried in the fire, and makes our soulos cleane from the staine of sinne. Thirdly, gold is the heauiest of all mettalles, so the  word is of most weight, yea, all the world is lighter then vanitie, in respect of this our glorious Gospel, whereof we are now Ministers Fourthly and fiftly gold, is itenisissimum; & tenacissi∣mum,  most thine, and most tough,Isai. 40.5. and therefore is drawne in greatest length, and in greatest breadth; so Gods Word, is as long, and as broad, as Eternitie it selfe. Lastly, gold is not consumed by fire, yea, although it  be melted with lead many dayes, because it hath no fat∣nesse to burne; so Gods word, is able to abide any fiery triall, and not to bee consumed; but notwithstanding, all this excellencie of gold, and although it were seuen∣tie sue times tried in the furnesse, yea, that it is lesse thou nothing in respect of Gods words; for lay quicke-siluer vpon gold, and it will breake it all in peices, but it is not so with Gods word, no slippery sliding, earthly stinking wisedome, or preceptes of men; shall haue any strength against it, albeit they prooue themselues from
time to time, cunning, and craftie Alchimistes in this be∣halfe, in melting brimstone with it, which in deede consumeth gold into drosse; consider then, the ine∣steemable worthinesse of the Treasure, which is the Gospel of Gods grace, and thou shalt neuer cease to see, and fill, the Ministration, and dispensation of this glad tidings of saluation. Paul knowing the greatnesse of this worke, and the worth of it, did en∣deuour himselfe to fill the same, for hee ioynes these thre arguments together. 1. It is allowed of God, that the Gospel should bee committed vnto vs; so wee speake not as they that please men, but God, which approoueth our hearts, for exhortation was not by disceit.1. Thes. .1. 4, 5, 6. 2. Nor by vncleannesse. 3. No by guile, but as we are allowed of God. 4. Arment. Math. 24 50.The fourth argument in this reason, is the word Mini∣stration, thus amplified in the 1. Cor. 9.16. to the 24. The vocation of Pastors, is a seruice, and a stewardship, wherein wisedome, and faithfulnesse is required; Ar∣chippus is as Christs serua t, and steward of his Mini∣sterie, working with him in his husbandry, with feare and trembling, doing the will of the Lord, not with eye seruice,Zach. 3.9. although with eye seruice; for God seeth perfect∣ly, with the al-seeing eyes of his prouidence, but cheife∣ly his holy Church, which is euer before his eyes; and therefore thou must doe in thy Ministerie, as alwayes in the presence of the Lord, and this dutie is taught vs by our name: for wee read in a dialogue where it is de∣manded, who excelleth in feeding a stocke of sheepe? Answere is made,Plato in Mi∣nist. Note Psal. 21.1, 2.  a shepheard, for the name is taken from the office, hee therefore that fulfilleth not the one, cannot challeng the other; and the necessitie of this consequent, was to Dauid an occation of great comfort, for calling him his shepheard, hee triumphes in it, and giues a reason, why hee can lacke nothings
God will seed him in greene pastures: therefore Christ saith to Peter, feede my sheepe; whereupon Saint Bernard saith, Pasc mente, pasce ore, pasce opere, feede with prayer, feede with preaching, feede with a good life, these doe well together, but being a sunder profi∣teth little. The fift argument,S. Argument. is the consideration of the Church of Christ, bought with his owne blood, where∣of thou art made a Minister, for slocke, and ouerseer, Church, and Ministerie, are relatiues:Act. 20.28. Archippus thou art Pastor ouer the slocke, and Minister of the Congre∣gation, therefore see and fulfill thy Ministerie:Colos. 1.25. Paul vseth the same reason in his admonition to the Ministers of Ephesus face to face, and he puts all these reasons to∣gether in his owne person, saying, whereof I am a Mi∣nister, to wit, of the Church, according to the dispen∣sation of God, which is giuen to mee, to you ward, to fulfill the Word of God, euen the Mysterie hid since the beginning of the world, yea,1. Thes. 2.8. we must loose our liues for our slockes, if that the Lord bring vs to that Christi∣an triall. The sixt and last particular argument,6. Argument is the reward to them that haue receiued this Ministration, honour, or dishonour, saluation, or perdition, according as we see, and not see, fulfill, or not fulfill the same in the right manner, which doing, the reward shall bee the Crowne of glory: This argument is not expressed, but vnder∣stood; for Paul seemes in this short admonition, to cōmend the Epistle written from Ladicea, & commnds the Collossians and Archippus, to read the verse before my Text, vnderstāding namely, the first Epistle to Timo∣thie, where in all the duties of Pastors are laid opē. This argument made Paul say, woe vnto mee, if I preach not the Gospel: if glory bee an argument to mooue seruants to bee faithfull; much more vs of the Ministerie; if it doe mooue all Christians to be faithfull, and to be where
Christ is, how much more, should it mooue the Mini∣sterie to bee faithfull in their calling, for it shall bee no∣thing at the day of iudgement,Collos. 3.25. Iohn 12.26. albeit, some haue prea∣ched and cast out diuels in the name of Christ, except it be done in the right manner fully. In a word then, wouldst be a Minister of Christ, then thou must first see farre off, and see all things, see exqui∣sitely, see incontinent, see and discerne all things: See diuine without paine; and that which is more, the eye must see thy selfe and God that is inuisible, thy hand must handle all things, and trie all things with the touch∣stone of trueth, and hold fast that which is good because the Lord holdeth the Saints,Reuel. .1. like the Startes in his right hand. Archippus must then see, and fulfill his Ministerie, because hee is made sufficient of the Lord, as a Minister to manifest the secrets of Gos Kingdome, and that in great wisedome, and faithfulnesse; and if he see, and ful∣fill his Ministerie, the Lord will bee with him, here and hence foorth hee shall be with the Lord for euer: this is Pauls admonition to Archippus and all Ministers, let this admonition and reason thereof, bee as a stoneth be∣twixt our eyes, like the precepts of the Law, let it bee written in capitall letters, that a man that runneth by may read it;A. 2.2. like Abakes vision, let it bee written as deepe as wickednesse was written, with the penne of Irone,Isa. 5, 10, 11. and point of a Diamond vpon the tables of the Iewes hearts, and hornes of their Altars: Let vs consi∣der what ioy, or sorrow, shall be at the last day, and till that day come, Gods mercie is vpon good Ministers, seeing, and fulfilling their Ministerie, and Gods iudge∣ments vpon idoll shepheards,Hebr. 11.17. theeues, and murtherers, robbers, and hielings, and negligent Ministers, with darkened eyes, and withered hands, without Ministrati∣on, and if they haue it, it were better for them to bee without it; if wee did consider these things sincerely,
would we not behold & fill our ministerie better then we doe, albeit many doe well: Would we faint or be broken with euils as the originall word signifieth, proceeding of the people, or of our selues; the people are commanded to obey vs that watch ouer their souls,1 Thess. 5.13. which were good for both; ye are commanded to giue vs double honour, but yee giue vs not single; yee are commanded to reuerence our persons for our workes∣sake, but wee are contemned; and some are respected, not so much for their workes, as for their personage sake. The people should haue order and discipline,Coloss. 2.5. like the Collossians, for the which Paul reioyceth to behold their order, and stedfast faith in Christ;Note. but some haue no order, but doe refuse wholesome doctrine: Yet we must not faint, Tu, ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito, what, shall wee giue ouer, for the euels that pro∣ceede of our selues, against our selues? albeit wee are cast downe, yet wee perish not: In all these a afflicti∣ons, wee must be more then conquerours, for euerie∣where wee must beare about, the dying of our Lord Iesus Christ, that the life also of Iesus, may be made manifest in our mortall bodies, as the Poet saith, Sepe Jouis telo quercus adusta viret. Would the Priests of Bethel,Ovid. Tris. lib. 4. Eleg. 9. in the Kings Chappell and house of the Kingdome, labour to bring Amos in disgrace, would wicked Shemaiah call Ieremie a rauer,Ierem. 29. or one out of his wits; shall wee by euill example, cause the people to contemne the seruice of God; like the sonnes of hell?1 Sam. 2.17.24. shall wee let the false Apostles ex∣cell vs, for Labour, Learning, Zeale, Free-preaching, Grace of speech, Diligence in season and out of sea∣son? Wherefore should the Ministerie, which is greater then greatnesse it selfe, appeare vnto vs, as little as Zoar vnto Lot, and yet his great place of refuge? Who would make account of honour,Note. or dis∣honour, honour, life, or death, pouertie, or riches, so that
wee may see, and fill, our Ministrie with ioy. Thus beloued, I haue run ouer the interpretation of this text brifely, with the language of Canan, with some intermixed obseruations: And fearing, my for∣mer interpretation should seeme somewhat obscure, I will now drawe to a populer exhortation, which is most conunient for these times wherein we line; where there is moe knowledge then sanctification. According to my ordinary forme, I shall first gather a generall obseruation. Secondly, I shall st downe three positiue groundes of Diuinitie, asing from my text, for information of your vnderstanding. Thirdly, I shall come to the doctrine, which shall be done in forme of proposition only. The Ministrie that Paul requireth Archippus to see, and fill,Actes 20.24. is euen the same he speakes of, where he takes this admonition vnto himselfe; But I passe not at all, neither is my life deare vnto me, so that I may fulfill my course with ioy, and the Ministration I haue receiued of the Lord Iesus, to testifie the Gospell of the Grace of God. Generall Ob∣seruations.Two things then, according to Pauls owne example this admonition requires in Archippus, and all Mini∣sters in their Ministrie, the worke doe, and the right manner of doing; the worke, to testifie the Gospell of Gods grace:1 Cor. 2.13. The right manner is in two poynts, first, the speech, next, the affection of the minde; whence e proceds,1. Cor. 4.19, 20 speech, not in the words of mans wisdome, but in the wisdome of the holy Ghost, comparing spiri∣tuall things,1 Thes 2.5. with spirituall things; not in swallowing speeches,2 Tim 1.3. but in spirituall power, to speake not as they that please men,2 Pet. 1.1. but God that trieth the hearts, not in sostie ll fables, but in wholsome words; for this cause, Paul desires the Collossians to pray for him, that God wold open vnto him the doore of speech and vtterance. Cor. 2.2.The generall disposition of the mind, is, that we lay
aside all desire and shew, of humane wisdome and pur∣pose, only to reioyce in the knowledge of Christ cru∣cified. The particular affections of the minde, are comman∣ded, 1. Pet. 5.2, 3. Care of the flocke, willingnesse, and readinesse of mind, desire by example to edifie, bold∣nesse of heart, confidence in God, loue of Christ and his Sheepe: to giue freely without respect of silthy lu∣cre; with losse of life to perseuere vnto the end, to ap∣prooue our Ministery vnto Christ to our conscience, and vnto the conscience of the flocke. The Prophets and Apostles put these Precepts in vse and practise: for Paul and his fellowes in affection and good will to∣wards them, they preach to vs not onely to deliuer vnto them the Gospell of God, but their owne liues also.1 Cor. 9.16. This patterne for speach and affection Paul committed to Timothie. The Leuites in their Ministery,2 Cor. 4.1. which were to serue the Priest in the Tabernacle,2 Tim. 1.1 and to beare the same from place to place, which lasted but for a while, had Ouerseers and Watchmen, Numb. 8.26. that they might see and fill their Ministery: the Leuites had fiue yeares Apprentiship, when they came first to serue; but when they came to fiue and twentie yeares of age, they were numbred with the rest, and were bound but to soru till thirtie yeares onely. Then they must begin to execute their Office fully,2 Sam. 3.1, 3. that they might see and fill their Ministerie. The Priestes and Prophets had their celles neere vnto the Tabernacle, that they might see and fill their Ministery: but yet the Leuites must not looke vpon the holy things, before the Priest had consecrated them, vnder the paine of death: but Archippus must vncouer and behold the holy things of God,Tremel. in Numb. 5.20. and cause others o behold them also, vnder paine of death. Must his eye bee satisfied with seeing, and his hand with filling his Ministery. I thinke not. Must we forget Saint Cyprians admonition, Sit Lectio assidua vel
oratio, be euer reading or praying? Must not hee haue his eye, looking vpon Pauls paterne to Timothy, Of wholesome wordes with faith and loue in Iesus Christ. The Prophets that were called Seers, from seeing, had not the light and sight to see and handle as we: for J∣saiah prophesied that the Sunne should bee made seuen times brighter; which is now in the Christian Church fulfilled, which Sunne shall neuer goe downe: how must we see, how must wee fill the ministration of things so excellent and visible, that euen the difficulties and mag∣nificence are publike? praised be the name of our God for the same continually. Three groūds of diuinitie.Now I come to the positiue grounds of Diuinitie, and then to the Doctrine briefly. Cui.We haue heere three things to marke: first, Cui, to whom is this Ministery giuen and concredite, to dispose oft fully. In qua.Secondly, in qua, wherein this Ministery doth consist, and the limits of it. A quo.Thirdly, a quo, from whom is this our Ministery. Je is, saith the Text from the Lord. Fyhe 4..This Ministery was giuen to man: for when God a∣scended vpon hye, hee led captiuitie captiue, and gaue gifts vnto man, and that to foure sorts of men: First, Prophets. 2. Euangelists. 3. Apostles. 4. Pastors and Ministers now vnder the Gospell, which shall continue vnto the end. I thought to haue stood vpon this last Or∣der. I psse them ouer. The second thing is, to see wherein this Ministery con∣sists; you heard it was in seeing and filling, that is, know∣ledge and practise. First, thu must know God, Creator of all things. 2 Christ s Rdeemer. 3. The Holy ghost as Sntifier, both in essence,1 antae. face, and ttrbutes; Quantae maie∣stati vt timea, quamae dignitates vt adores, quanta be∣ satis vt in se speres.
Secondly,Know thy selfe in three things. thou must know thy selfe to bee a good Christian, and first quantae fragilitatis, Secondly, quan∣ta vilitatis. Thirdly, quantae Iniquitatis: Thou must al∣so be learned, which learning must haue these vertues. First, Sapientia coniunctiua: Secondly,Sixe things. Iustitia distribu∣tius: Thirdly, Patientia charitatiua: Fourthly, Peni∣tentia sanetiua: Fiftly, Temperantia regulatiua: Sixt∣ly, Perseuerantia perfectiua: Thou must also be a good Minister, for if thou bee not a good Christian first,Math. 6.8. Act. 15.9. thou shalt neuer be a good Minister of the Gospell, which is thy ministration; to be a good Pastor thou must bee able to stand before God; now there is no standing before God, but in purity of heart; marke then that the heart is onely purified by faith;To stand be∣fore God. there∣fore thou must labour by sense & feeling to know the course of Gods dealing with thy self, for if thou canst not preach by experience, thou shalt neuer preach with power, fo the conuersion of Gods people. The second thing thou must doe,Nam secunda capacitatem, audientiū, de∣cenda sunt a∣lia, & proun∣d & subtilia, &  pa∣na, & sim∣pli. is to present thy worke before God: First, thou must know the nature of people, if they bee in the Family of Faith or not: Secondly, if they be ignorant with knowledge, as He∣reticks, thy dut is told then in the third to Titus: If they bee Apostes, thy duty is tod thee in the person of Himineus and Philetus, to these extreamities: Fourthly, if they bee simple and ignorant, then thou must be, first meeke, secondly gentle, thirdly patient; so thou must bee all to all men,Gregor plo∣  . 9. that thou mayest win some to Christ: therefroe Gregory salth, alliter monendi sunt proterui, at qu alliter pusillanimus, the one in seue∣rity, the other in iudgement. The third things is this, that wee mst know our Ministerie to be worke, for when we know the dis∣position of nn thu we must work and labou  our Ministery accordingy: That this oat Ministery is a worke, Paal saith,1 The . W beseech you brethren to know them
which labour among you, and are ouer you in the Lord. Our worke in two things. 1 Tim 3.17. The descripti∣on of a good minister. Iohn. 7.16. 1 Cor 11.23. Ier. 14.1. To rule well three things. Ier. 1.17. 1 King. 22.14.This worke is in two things, First doctrine; Seond∣ly gouernement, Let the Elders that rule well bee coun∣ted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the Word and doctrine: So, to be a good workman, is to rule, & to labour well in the Word, and not to preach our selues, but Christ Iesus the Lord. To rule in the Lord thou must doe three things; first thou must deliuer nothing but that thou hast receiued of the Lord, for Christ saith, my doctrine is not mine, but his that sent mee. Secondly, thou must deliuer his whole message, with-holding nthing; therefore God saith to Jeremie, Speake vnto them, all that I command thee, be not dismaied at their faces, least I confound thee before them. Thirdly, in deliuering his mssage as Gods Word, therefore Peter saith,2 Pet. 4 21. If any man speaks let him speake as the Orracles of God: to doe this, is first required gra∣uitie, as Titus 2.17. Secondly, Authority. Tit. 2.25. Thirdly, Sinceritie: therefore Saint Paul saith, for we are not as many,2 Cor. 2.17. which corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speake we in Christ. A quo.The third generall point is, to know from whom we haue this ministration, my Text saith, it is from the Lord: Let vs first consider if this power bee from the Father only, or the Sonne only, or from the Holy Ghost,Christ Lord of his Church. or from all conioynctiue; that this Ministery is not from the Father as Creator, neither from the Son as ab aterno cum Patre, or the Holy Ghost; but this our Ministery vnder the Gospell is only from Christ,Isa. 9.6.7. as redeemer of the World, God and Man, manifest in the flsh: for this Isaiah saith of the increase of his go∣uernment and peace there shall be no end;Lk. 1.11.32.1. more parti∣cularly see Luke, who saith and he shall raigne ouer thee
house of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome shall be no end:Ioh. 18. therefore hee saith, my Kingdome is not in this world, thereby signifying vnto vs the spirituall gouernement that is in Christ and his members the Church, to the end of the world. In this Monarchie of Christ, consider these things;9 Points to be considered in Christs Mo∣narchiall go∣uernement. First, his Throane; Secondly, his Kingdome, wherein yee shall see the King in his Kingdome; Thirdly, yee shall see his enemies; Fourthly, his Subiects; Fiftly, his Lawes; Sixtly, his Authoritie; Seuenthly, the place of his Kingdome; Eightly, the difference be∣twixt his Kingdome, and the Kingdoms of this world, the last point is of the continuance of Christs King∣dome. First then wee haue to consider these two generall grounds: First, temporall gouernours haue the custo∣dy of externall conctiue iurisdiction, and matters be∣longing thereto. The second is, that the power of the Church is im∣mediately from Christ the Mediatour, giuen vnto all,  by ordination; this is confessed not only by some of vs, but by the Fathers and Popish writers also. Bona∣uenture in 4. sent. d. 17.9.1. August Triumphus lib. de potest Eccles. Ioh. Gerson lib. de potest. Eccles. Consid. 1. Cardinall Cusanus l b. de Cathol. 2 Cap 13. Cardinall Cantarenus tract de Eccles. potest. pontificis Be. lib. 4. de Rom. pont. Cap. 22. First then we haue to consider,The nature of Christs King∣dome. what this Throne is; Secondly who hath it; Thirdly, who giues it to Christ the Lord. First, this Throne is the Throne of Dauid, not that materiall Throne, wherein Dauid fate in Iudgement, but a Typicall Throne; for Dauid himselfe was a Figure of the Messias, King of the Church, but they shall serue the Lord,Ier. 30 9. Ezec. 34.23.24 and Dauid their King: Dauids Kingdome was a Figure of Christs Kingdome, which was reuealed by his Law from hea∣uen,
and not by men; much more then is there a full reuelation of Christs gouernment;Hose  4. Note. Hose. 9.7. for as none had power to giue Lawes to Dauid, much lesse hath any man power to giue Lawes to Christ, to rule his King∣dome: Who shall learne him wisedome?Col. 1.16. it is to pull from his Throne, by the imperfection of his Lawes; he is King ouer all by Creation,Psal. 27.5. but King of Dauids Throne by donation: to make this plaine, the King∣dome of God is taken for the vniuersall gouernment ouer all his Creatures;Mat. 18.17. the Kingdome of God in par∣ticular▪Act 14.16. is that manner of gouernement which the Fa∣ther vseth by the Son in the flesh, towards his Church, in gathering together of his Saints, fully by his blood and spirit,1 Tim. 4 14. defendeth his Church, and subdueth all his enemies: this Kingdome is distinguished in two sorts of gouernement, the one is in the Kingdome of grace, the other in the Kingdom of glory; In the first, it is by his word and spirit; in the other we shall haue imme∣diate glory: in the Kingdome of grace wee shall haue our coniunction with the Father through the Sonne, by faith wrought by the spirit in the Word, and Sacra∣ments, as the instruments thereof,Ephes 1.1. 1 Iohn 3.2. Heb. 20.23. Col 3.3. and discipline, which is the band and hedge about the Vineyeard, giuen by the King to his Church, in the Kingdome of Glory we shall haue communion with God, by the essentiall word. This matter I thought to haue stood vpon, by reason it hath not bin handled by many, which wold take me many Sermons to vnforld;This matter shall be hand∣led elsewhere. therefore seeing the time hath ouertaken me, Ile leaue this matter to your fur∣ther consideration: And now to the Doctrine. The Apostle in the former voise, inioyneth the rea∣ding of this Epistle, that it should bee read in the Church of Colosse and Laodicea, yet here he addes, that Archippus must bee put in mind of his duty, that hee should seq, and fulfill his Ministery, by his diligence in practise and preaching the word of the Lord.
Whereupon I gather this first ground of doctrine;2 Doctr. to wit, that howsoeuer the Scriptures of God e to be read by thy selfe, or others; yet the reading of them is ot sufficient to cast downe the proud inded, or to informe the ignorant,rea hing was the practise of all the st  of the atais. or to comfort the troubled conscience: but if wee would profit by th Word, it must bee taught, preached, and expounded by liuely voice in the publike Ministery. Therefore let no m n thinke that Reading is sufficient in this great worke; for Christ was offended to see the people without a Shepheard,Aug de Doct. Christ. and yet wee cannot say but they had the Law and the Prophets read amongst them: and if it ha been sufficient to haue the Law of God read,Math. 9 6. Acts 13. why did not the Iewes know and beleeue in Christ, whom they had crucified:Not. for Moses and the Scriptures did testifie, that Christ was to come, .39. which Christ con∣firmeth. This was the forme of old: for the Law was not onely read but expounded to the p ople.Nehem. .. Aug Cntess. lib. . cap. 13. This wee may see cleare in Saint Augustine, who comming to heare Saint Ambrose preach, not for the trueth sake, yet by Saint Ambrose preaching hee was conuerted to the trueth, as hee doth confesse, Ad eum autem ducebar abs te nesciens, vt per cum ad te sciens du∣ceret. The reason of the Doctrine is,Ratio. Rom. 10.14. because the Lord hath appointed the preaching of the Gosp ll, to be the meanes of our saluation. Marke then, as wee must haue faith, which commeth by preaching: so must our faith bee grounded on the true sense and meaning of the same. Philip said to the Eunuch,Actes 8.3 2.35. Vnderstandest thou what thou readest? And how can I except some man should guide mee? Then Philp opened his mouth, and beganne at the same Scripture, and preached vnto him Jesus. The Word must bee applyed with power,Hebr. 4.12. for it is quicke and powerfull, and sharper then any two edged sword, and doth discerne of the thoughts and intentions of
the heart.Deut. 17.11. Therefore Moses sayeth, According to the Sentence of the Law which they shall teach thee, thou shalt doe. The vse of this Doctrine, is to reprooue those that thinke reading of Scripture to bee sufficient.If reading bee suffcent, then why did Christ close the book and make ap∣plication at Nazareth? Luke 4.0, 28. 1 Cor. 14.13. If this o∣pinion bee in a Minister, it is a token, thou neuer didst see nor fill thy Ministery, but is stone blinde. If this opinion bee in you that are the people, it is a token you are yet in the way of Reprobation, because you can∣not abide your sinnes ripped vp, and your consciences awakened from the sleepe of sinne. Therefore Paul sayeth, If thou pray with the Spirit, thou must pray with vnderstanding also. Let vs marke one thing, albeit thou haue neuer so great learning, yet thou mayest bee ouertaken with passions and infirmities, and then of thy selfe thou shalt not bee able to see the danger, with∣out it bee tolde thee by others. Did not Dauid know hee had committed murther, and yet the child of God, yet hee did not rise from his securitie, vntill Nathan did apply the Sword of the Word to his sleeping con∣science,Note saying, Thou art the man. By this wee may see how needfull it is to haue Ministers, not onely to reade, but to apply the Word with power to the consci∣ences of men and women; and especially at this time, and in this dead age wherein we liue. I told you in the opening vp of this Text by way of obseruation, that the people should admonish the Pa∣stor of his duetie; but now Paul giueth the admoni∣tion himselfe. Whereupon I gather this second ground of Do∣ctrine: Wee see then, albeit Ministers haue power and authoritie in the Church of God; notwithstanding if they be negligent, they must be put in mind and admo∣nished of their duty, for their places doth not exempt them from other mens ouersight, and charitable ad∣monition,1 Tim  which most bee done in lou▪ Therefore
Paul saith, rebuke not an Elder but reproue him as a Fa∣ther: assure thy selfe▪ whatsoeuer be thy dignity in the Church, I say to thee in the name of Christ,Note. that no place of dignity or honour, worldly, should hiner thee in the worke of the ministerie; all antiquitie be∣fore corruption entred in, doth cleere this point. The reason is, because our nature being corrupted,  and thereby subiect to sinne, the best being guilty of this hath neede of admonition. Secondly, the Authority of the Minister from God,  is one ouer all, and therefore all in one, and one in all should admonish one another, to bee faithfull in the worke of the Lord. The vse in a word, is to exhort those whom God  hath placed in his Ministery, that ye would be carefull to remoue this ill, in thinking your selues to be aboue your brethren, yea albeit your gifts or place carrie you out in it; boast not, it may be God will take both from you, to thy shame and sorrow. Secondly, I request you in the feare of God, that  your loue to Christ and his Church would appere, not only to hold out, and put out the ignorant; but that yee would see and marke those that walke inordinate∣ly amongst vs;Note and that yee would haue the courage of the Apostles, of making election of Mathias in the place of Judas; and that yee would thrust to the doore the prophane Sonnes of Eli, that makes the sacrifice and seruice of God to be contemned, and had in derisi∣on daily, as wofull experience doth let vs see, that wil see, the Lord amend it. The Apostle desires the Colossians to admonish Ar∣chippus, that he take heede to the Ministerie that hee fulfill it, and leaue no part thereof vnperformed. Whereupon I gather this third ground of doctrine,3 Doctrine that it is not sufficient for a Minister to beginne, and continue in doing some part of his Calling; but hee
must accomplish all things belonging to the same: he must not only Reade but preach, and Catechise, yet liue without blame in this present world,2 Tim. 4. which Saint Gregory saith, we performe, if by our preaching and liuing we gaine the soules of men;Ezech. 34.6. if wee rebuke and reproue, such as are obstinate; if we comfort the peni∣tent;Iohn. 17.9. if we strengthen the weake; heale the infirme; bind vp the broken; seeke what is lost; and bring a∣gaine what was driuen away;Ephes. 3.14. by example of the good Sheapheard: as we must be the mouth of God to speak to the people,Rom. 1.9. so must we be the peoples mouth to pray vnto the Lord; example we haue of this in Christ, al∣beit Lord of all power, and had power to make his Preaching profitable; yet he prayes to his Father for himselfe and his people; Tm. 1.3. thus did Paul bend his knees for the Ephesians, for the Romans, yea night and day did he pray for his Scholler Timothy. First, the reason is, because the Lord will not haue a lame sacrifice, for it is abomination vnto him. Secondly, there is a curse pronounced against him that doth the worke of the Lord negligently. VThe vse is, to reproue those Ministers that are neg∣ligent in any part of their calling; some doe preach and liue well; some well, and are not able to preach; some liue absent for their pleasure, when they haue suf∣ficient meanes to liue by their Ministerie; some place ohers for them,Vde . but often it falls out as it did with the Iewes, that when Moses was with the Lord, Aaron suffered the people to commit Idolatrie, ere he retur∣ned bcke againe; some so liue, as not hauing respect to God nor man, o their Calling, and yet can speake and prate, a if here were some goodnesse in them: it may be said of them, a Plutarch tells a story of an old man amongst the Grecians at the Games of O∣lympus, and finding no place or fauour amongst them, went to the Lademonians, where he found things to
his minde; the old man cries out, all the Grecians doe know what is honest, but the Lacedemonians only practise: we sometimes proue Grecians,Ier. 2.8. and the peo∣ple practise: for God saith, they that should minister the Law know not; we are the Salt of the Earth, yet not sauorie; the light of the World, yet darkenesse: Seneca saith,Epist. 37 make choice of such a Teacher as thou mayst admire, more hauing seene him, then when thou hast heard him; for as a Godly life doth perswade the people vnto good;Lib. past. Greg. so an euill life perswadeth the peo∣ple to euill: therefore Gregory saith, there is no man more dangerous in the Church, then he tht liues lewd∣ly and carries a name of sanctity;Agustine. therefore Augustine saith, Omnis qui ml viuit in conspectam corum quibus propositus est, quantum in ipso est occidit. Amongst all the dangers of the world, what is in more danger then the soule, yea what is more precious then the same? yea all the world is nothing to the soules halth: this should moue vs to faithfulnesse in our Calling, which if we doe,1 Pet 3.4. God shall giue vs an incorruptible Crowne of glory. Now the argument the Apostle would haue to bee vsed to perswade Archippus to fulfill his Ministery, is, because hee hath receiued from the Lord:4 Doctrine. hence I ga∣ther this fourth ground of Doctrine. It should be a powerfull and very effectuall argument, to moue a Minister to be faithfull in his Calling, in that we haue it from God, and not from man; therefore Paul saith,1 Timo. 1.2 1. I thanke him that hath made me strong, that is, Christ Ie∣sus, for he counted me faithfull, and put me in his seruice. The reason of this Doctrine is,Ratio. that wee hauing re∣ceiued this Ministery from the Lord, therefore the Lord wil vphold vs in all temptations that may befall vs, in body or soule:I. 1.19. What made Michaiah so confi∣dent with Ahab, Ieremy so plaine with Amos; So powerfull Iohn the Baptist, and all true Ministers,
bold onely, because wee haue this our Ministerie from the Lord. But it may be demaunded, How shall we know, that we haue receiued this o Ministery from the Lord. Fist, if the Lord hath giuen the competent measure of gifts fi for th work of the Ministery. Secondly, vpon triall and examination, if thou bee foun i for that Office, bee appoynted thereto by the Church, to serue in the worke of the Lord. Three things are ired in a MinisterThirdly, vpon the faithfull discharge of thy dutie, ac∣cording to the dispensation bestowed vpon thee, the Lod ge a blessing vpon thy labour, hauing withall a testimony in thy conscience that God hath sent thee, as∣sure thy selfe thou art the Messenger of God. Vs.The vse is to teach vs, that no man should vndertake the Office of a Minister, except it bee giuen him from the Lord: therefore euery one of you trie your selues in your giftes and conuersation, then iudge of thy selfe accordingly; if thou be sent to preach boldly the Word of truth,Rom. 10.13. or if thou preach to the world for thy selfe, thou art a hyreling, and not sent of God. Secondly, the Ministery is Gods, and not mans: if thou hast not this assurance of God, thou hast no war∣rant that God will blesse thee in thy Ministery, but thou must looke for double torment in hell. 5. Dcts.The Text sayth, that we haue this our Ministery from the Lord; then let vs learne this last ground of Do∣ctrine, that Ministers haue no bilitie or strength of themselues to performe the worke of the Lord in their Ministeriall Function, C. 3.. except it bee giuen them of the Lord. Therefore Paul saith, that of our selues we are not sufficient to thinke any thing of our selues, as of our selues, but our sufficiency is of God, who hath made vs able Ministers.ys. Ho. 6. Whereupon Chrysostome saith, Quid est  fecit vs nos prestare possimus ciqua mu∣nere gerendo essciremur accommods. Therefore Christ
saith, Without mee yee can doe nothing.Iohn 15.. Paul tooke more paines then others in executing his Ministerie,  and yet hee saith, It is not I, but the grace of God that is in mee. For this cause hee speakes more inde∣finitely of all Ministers, That it is neither hee that planteth, nor hee that watereth,1 Cor. 15.10. but God that giueth the increase. The reason is, in that the worke of the Ministery is a diuine worke, and Ministers are but men; and there∣fore▪ Paul sayth, who are sufficient for these things. This difficultie is in respect of the worke, and secondly, of the persons who are deputed to that worke. The Fun∣ction of a Minister is to quicken such as are dead in sinne, to raise vp such as are fallen, to comfort those that are troubled in conscience, to strengthen the weake, to encourage the faint-hearted, to confound the obsti∣nate; all which are aboue humane strength, yea,Actes 4.15. Exod. 3.4. Ierem. 1.6. Ionah 1.3. Math. 4.1. Zach. 3.1. more then flesh and blood can doe, and yet subiect to the like common passions as other men are: In consideration whereof many haue sought to giue ouer their Ministe∣ry, because Ministers are opposed by Sathan, and this profane world. The vse of the former Doctrine is diuers,Vsus. and first to mooue and incite all people to pray for the Mini∣stery: for without Gods blessing they are able to doe nothing, but mightie through God,2 Cor. 10.4, 5. to the pulling downe of strong holds, casting downe imaginations, and euery high thing, that exalteth it selfe against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuitie euery thought to the obedience of Christ. Secondly,Math. 9.37, 38 to pray that the Lord would send out faithfull Labourers into this his Haruest, for the in∣gathering of his Saints, vnto the great day of the Lord: and therefore the Lord saith, The haruest truely is plen∣teous, but the Labourers are few, at least, few faithfull:Actes 12.5. pray ye therefore the Lord of the haruest that he would send forth Labourers into his haruest.
The second vse is, to teach you who haue giftes or a∣bilitie,2. Vsus. not to bee insolent to presume aboue your bre∣thren;1 Cor. 4.7. for thou hast nothing whi h thou hast not recei∣ued of the Lord. Now it thou didest receiue it, why doest thou glory, as thou did'est not receiue i. Bre∣thren,3. Epistle of Iohn 9.10. doe not follow the example of Diotrephes, who loeth to haue prheminence amongst the brethren and doth not receiue them, and forbiddeth them that would, and casteth them out of the Church. Then wee see that this excellent worke is not committed to Ministers for th owne take onely, not for their honour, their wealth to exalt them, but that wee bee diligent in the worke of the Lord. 3. Vsu. Eph 6.20. Luke 10.16 1 Cor 4 13. 1 Sam.  7.The third vse is, to teach you that are the people, to learne you to respect the Ministers of God; for we are Christs Ambassadors: for wee exhort you in Christes stead, end your iudgement, them that are worldly min∣ded people: let not your respect bee to the Ministery for any earthly prerogatiue, as honour, wealth, dignity, friendship, but respect vs for our Master the Lord Iesus, and our works sake; for it is the power of God to salua∣tion to all them that beleeue. 4. Vsu.The last vse is to all in generall; Let the world iudge of vs as it will, notwithstanding we must haue our eyes fixed on ou Master that sent vs; let the excellencie of the one, and the dignitie of the other, swallow vp all ignominy and iniury the world can lay against vs; and that we may be able so to doe, let vs alwayes be diligent in praying for the assistance of Gods Spirit, that we may fulfill our course with ioy. Exhortation.Now to draw to a conclusion, I exhort you all, but especially I direct my speach to you in the Ministerie, that in the feare and loue yee haue to Iesus your Lord, who sent you, yee would endeuour your selues, that all your exhortations and preaching to others, be written downe in the lynes of your owne life, that men seeing
your good workes, may glorifie your heauenly Fa∣ther; for we must haue two sorts of garments a Brest-plate and an Ephod; the one shewes,Exod. 28.4. tha thou must haue knowledge; the other, that thou must haue Con∣science to doe: and in this Brest-plate must not only be written Ʋrim, that is, Light; but also Thummim,Exod. 8.10. which is perfection; n t only light of direction, but a paterne of good workes; as the Snuffers were made of Gold, so we must not only shine our selues, but purge others: we must not only haue Belles,Exod. 25.38. but Pomgraners: also, we must not onely say wll, but do well; as the Pillers of the Taberna le, ouerlaid with Gold, but inward of Shittim wood:Exod. 39.. therefore Isaiah saith, we must lift vp our voice like a Trumpet, for hee winds it with his mouth,Is. 3.1. and holds it with his hand; we must not only Preach but practise, then wee lift vp our voice like a Trumpet, if wee doe not see this, and fulfill our Ministery: What shall wee say when the Prophets, Apostles, Fathers, yea all the faithfull Pastors, present their flocks before the Lord Iesus, at the last iudgement: who is to bee blamed thinke you, that there is a negligent Minister?A good Pa∣stor, hath the  of e∣dificatin. Act. 17.. Is the fault in Laick Patrons, which Father Lattimer did see and reproue in his daies? or is it Nabals in the congregation that will not helpe faithfull Mini∣sters to liue, or is the fault in the Clearg, by giuing ordination to the vnworthy? or as Patrons for their friends, as the verse saith. Mos est Prelatis prebendas non dari gratis, Sed bene nummatis vel eorum sanguine natis. Or is the cause in the People that will not obey, Sonne of man thou must cry, if they heare or heare not;Isa. 5.11. Ier. 5 7. Ezech. 23.9. re∣proue the Drunkard with Isaiah, the Adulterer with Ieremiah, the Swearer with EZekiel, the Vsurer with
Moses the Hypocrite with Christ,Leui. 25.36. the prophane world with John, and with Peter, let all know there shall be a Iudgement, that the people may turne from their e∣uill wayes; this must not be done without sense, fee∣ling, or motion; vsing Doctrine without application, Application without zeale, like a man without a soule; or as an Image on a wall: If thus wee doe, it is an e∣uident token that some are ignorant,We must not feare as Ezech. 3.8.9. and cannot po∣werfully preach; being ignorant, some are so negli∣gent in their Ministery and will not; some are so feare∣full to offend their Benefactors,Note and dare not; some are so wicked, and should not; alas, a guiltie Conscience staies the power of our Ministery, and therefore the people are not conuerted: for this cause the Lord saith to wicked Ministers,Ie 23.22. If yee had stood in my counsell, then should yee haue turned my people from their euill waies: therefore Brethren, wee may blame our selues, that neither our persons, nor our calling is regarded,Cuus vita a∣spicitur resta vt  predi∣catio contami∣natur. but abused and d sgraced; and thought to bee the off scouring of the world, and refuse of man∣kind; and by our vnfaithfull walking in our Calling, God hath iustly made vs base, and vile, and contemp∣tible in the sight of the people; for wee are called the troublers of the State, as Ahab did Flias, a troubler of Israel; but on the other part, are wee faithfull in our Calling, tht thought bs in our persons? poore be our liuings, and dispsed in this world; yet the Lord from w we  our Mnistery, shall reuenge our cause to is glory and our comfort, and their cil∣sting sorrow: therefore l t v reu all offence on our part that we preach not sauat on to oth rs, and damn o to n selues; for as a de Plicals the ppe to hear, but h ate nothing in selfe Siegre∣tants accedat aegretus, si carboni extincto, adijiator rbo extinctas, vel si aeto praesictatur caecus, what shall they profit one another? Praetes mortem, ciuerem fa∣mum,
foneam; therefore Gregory saith, complaining of himselfe, Vsurpaus mihi, cotis officium qui frrum reddit acntum, cum sit in lis ad secundum, l'ule brum depinxe hominem, Preor s aliosque redigo ed perfectionis littus qui ad huc verr in delictorum finelibus: who then is to be repoued? the Ignorant, Negligent, Timotus, Couetous, Prophane Pastors; but especially those that appeare to be tarres,Reu. 13.3.4. who are drawne from Hea∣uen and cast vnto the Earth, by that great red Dra∣gon; this did appeare to be a wonder in Heauen,Note. but it is no wonder now vpon Earth; I say then with Saint Bernard to ugenius, Mostrosa res est gradus sum∣mes, & animus ifimus, sedes prima, & vita Ima,Bernard lib 2. de considerat lingua magni loqua & manus otrosa. Sermo multus, & fructus nullus, vult grauis, & actus leuis, caput canum, & corvanum, faci rugosa, & lingua nugosa, ingens au∣thoritas, & nutan stabilitas. I cannot passe by you that are our flock, there is not only amongst you, Foxes, yea little ones, who maketh their profession of the Gospell, a shelter and couer to their hypocrisie; who serue the Gospell so farre as the Gospell may serue your turne, for the accomplishing of your worldly pleasures: there is also Wolues among you, in sheeps cloathing, who kill their Shepherds,Quo hierophy∣phyco notatur hereticos sub iten solen∣dit a principi∣b quod si ado∣lesi etur graetus∣uterit it fu∣tutum in em∣tui facilius Ie∣suitae suffca∣buntur. Isa. 50.14.15. wounding them in their good name opprobriously, in their bodies dan¦gerously, in their state, iniuriously, renting both their persons, and their Parsonages from them; for now Religion is hated amongst many, true Godlines despised, zeale abhored, sincerity scoffed at, vpright∣nesse loathed, and almost all good men had in derision. And therefore we may say that Iudgement is turned away backeward, and Iustice standeth afarre, for Truth is fane in the streete, and Equitie cannot enter; and hee that departeth from euill maketh himselfe a prey; yet the Lord saw it, and was angry.
Albeit yee will doe no duetie, neither for our Ma∣ster nor message sake, yea, hardly for your owne salua∣tion,2 Cor. 3.11, 2. yet wee knowing the terrour of the Lord, w pr∣swade men, and beeing Ambassadour for Christ, as though Christ did beseech you by vs, wee pray you in Christs stead, that yee bee reconciled vnto God. For this cause Saint Augustine saith, That the Word of God must bee to the faithfull, Tanquam piss hamus ca∣pit, quando capitur; yee must, vese topposcis, as Nineueh repented at Ionas Sermon. Marie sate all the night at Christs feet,Acts 17. hearing the Word▪ Yee should say with the good Athenians, Let vs heare thee of this matter againe: And with the conuerted Christians, who being pricked in their hearts, sayd,Actes .7. What shall wee doe men and brethren? I say vnto you, as Peter vnto them, I pray God it may worke the like effect, Repent and bee baptized, in the Name of Iesus Christ, for the remis∣sion of sinnes, and yee shall receiue the gifts of the Ho∣ly Ghost. This if you doe, how beautifull vpon the Mountaines will the feete of them bee that bringeth glad tidings vnto you. And then at the last day of ac∣count, wee shall say with our Master the Lord Iesus, in great ioy, Those that thou hast giuen mee, I haue kept them, and none of them is lost. Then wee shall shine as the brightnesse of the Firmament; and they that turne many vnto righteousnesse,Iohn 17.12. as the Starres for euer and euer. If thus wee would shine, obey Pauls Exhor∣tation, that seeing wee haue this our Ministerie as wee haue receiued mercie, we faint not, but hauing cast from vs the cloakes of shame,Dan 1.. not walking in crafti∣nesse, or hnling the Word of God deceitfully, but in manifestation of the truth, commending our selues to euery mans conscience,2 Cor. 4 1, 2. in the sight of God. Seeing then that both Pastour and people doe looke for the Kingdome of Heauen, where shall bee one Fold, and
one Sheepheard. Let vs all labour for the testimonie of a good Conscience, and Christian resolution: In life, or death, and glorie with Paul, saying,2 Tim. 4.6, 7, 8. I haue fought a good fight, and am now readie to bee offe∣red, and the time of my departure is at hand. I haue finished my course. I haue kept the faith. Henceforth there is layd vp for mee a Crowne of Righteousnesse, which the Lord, the righteous Iudge shall giue mee at that day, and not to mee onely,1 Thess. 5.23. but to them also that loues his appearance. And that both Pastour and peo∣ple may bee partaker of this ioy vnspeakable and glo∣rious, I bid you farewell in the Lord: and I pray with Paul, that the very God of Peace sanctifie you whol∣ly; and I pray God, your whole Spirit, and Soule, and Body, bee preserued blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all ho∣nour, glorie, and praise, both now, and for euer and euer. Amen. FINIS
