6170.7 22864391 25822
The most wonderfull and true storie, of a certaine Witch named Alse Gooderige of Stapen hill, who was arraigned and conuicted at Darbie at the Assises there. As also a true report of the strange torments of Thomas Darling, a boy of thirteene yeres of age, that was pos∣sessed by the Deuill, with his horrible fittes and terri∣ble Apparitions by him vttered at Burton vpon Trent in the Countie of Stafford, and of his maruel∣lous deliuerance. Printed at London for I. O. 1597.
To the Reader. TIme hath proued that by experience (Chri∣stian Reader) which S. Iohn by the spirit of Prophecie foreshewed; The Diuel (saith he) hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time: for this Prophecie is fulfilled, not only in the outragious fury that Sathan vseth in raising persecution against Gods Saints, by his mischieuous instruments, & corrupting mens minds by his wicked suggestions, but also in tyrannizing, according to his limited power ouer them by torments. This first kind of cruelty the former Ages haue felt whē the third part of the Sunne, and the Moone, and the Stars were smitten by the Roman Dra∣gon, and stinged by the Turkish scorpions, and other lo∣custs of the like stamp: the other maner of villany hath shewed her fruites too plentifully in this our age in the cooling of Charitie, & quenching of the Spirit, that our Sauiours Prophecie (which cannot be farre off) may be fulfilled, When the Sonne of man commeth, shal he find faith on the earth? And this last kind of tiranny is too aparant amongest other instances, in the pittifull vexing of this poore distressed child: And as the Holie-ghost hath left such conflicts for the spiritual warfare of his children, so hath he not left them without weapōs to withstand the fury of their enemies▪ for in temporal persecutions & af∣flictions they haue Patience for their buckler, that they may learne to say of them with Iob, Blessed be the name of the Lord▪ and in all maner of temptations of Sathan, they haue the whole armor of God, yea and those weapons that are able to ouerthrow the Diuels strongest holdes, as shal well appeare euen in this small Treatise. Concer∣ning the strangenesse thereof, it is left to thy considera∣tion (gentle Reader) and for the trueth of it, if it should
be called in question, as not vnlike▪ (for the abundaunce of false and friuolous deuises, broched in these dayes, a thing much to be lamented, do oft times abridge trueth of her credit) besides that for the particulars, a hundred more witnesses might be produced, than are here inser∣ted, and diuers of them of good woorth and credite, the matter it selfe is well knowne to the right Honourable sir Edmund Anderson Knight, Lord chiefe Iustice of the common plees, as being voluntarily confessed to him by the Witch, who was vpon the same arraigned and con∣uicted before his H. at Darby, and therfore is not light∣ly to be excepted against. Besides also, that it was com∣piled by a priuate Christian & man of trade, who being with the boy almost in all his fits, did both take notes at the present of all that was doone and spoken, and con∣ferred also afterward with the witnesses of best iudge∣ment and credit, that he might be sure of that which hee had set downe. In a worde, I thinke there can scarcely be any instance shewed (the holy Scriptures excepted) whereby both the peeuish opinion, that there are no wi∣ches, and the Popish assertion that only their priests can dispossesse, may be better controlled than by this. The first kind of people, I rather thinke are to be pittied, than confuted, daily experience crying out against their fol∣lie. The other may heereby see their too peremptorie conclusions ouerthrowne, since he whose aduise & help was vsed in this matter, is very well knowne to bee a faithfull preacher of the Gospel, and so consequently an enemy to Poperie; wishing thee therefore so to regarde it as for the trueth and weight thereof it shal deserue, and to reape such fruit by it, as being well regarded it may yeelde, I bid thee farewell in Christ. I. D.
AA A report of the torments and de∣liueraunce of Thomas Darling, (a Boy of thir∣teene yeares of age) that was possessed by Sa∣than, at Burton vpon Trent. VPon Saterday (being the xxvii. of Februarie) Robert Toone (dwelling in Burton vpon Trēt in the Countie of Stafford, Un∣cle to this Thomas Darling) go∣ing to Winsell Wood (which is distant from Burton about half a myle) to hunt the hare, took the Boy with him; and being carnest in following his gaine, lost him: who (after he had a while wandred vp & downe, and could not finde his Uncle) returned home to his vncles house, where he soiourned. Being come home, he wexed heauie, and afterward grew to be verie sicke, vomiting & casting vp what he had eaten at dinner: and so was got to bed. The next morning hee had sore fits, with extreame vomitings, that all which sawe him, iudged it to bee some strange ague. In the time of this extremitie in these hys fits, he would manie times poynt with his hand, saying; Looke where greene Angels stand in the window, and not long after would often complaine, that a green Cat trou∣bled him: which thing was iudged by his friends to pro∣ceede of lightnes in his head; manie other things fell out also in these times worthie the noting, whereof (in respect of the vnexpected euent) there was no note kept. His sicki∣nes
wexing more vehement, his Aunt went to a Phisition with his vrine: who said he saw no signes of anie natural disease in the Child, vnles it were the wormes. His sick∣nes still increasing (notwithstanding anie thing prescribed or ministred) she went againe with his vrine to the Phisi∣tion; who iudged as before, saying further, he doubted that the Childe was be witched: which shee (holding incredi∣ble) imparted it to no bodie; rather imagining it to bee (though some strange, yet) a naturall disease: as diuers also iudged it to bee the Falling sicknes, by reason that it was no continuall distemperature, but came by fits, with sodaine staring, striuing and strugling verie siercely, and falling downe with sore vomits; also it tooke awaye the vse of his legs, so that he was faine to bee carried vp and downe, saue in his fits, for then hee was nimble inough. How hee spent the time betweene his fits, it is woorth the obseruing; his exercises were such as might well haue be∣seemed one of riper yeares; wherein he shewed the frutes of his education, which was religious and godly. With those that were good Christians he tooke great pleasure to▪ conferre; to whom he would siguiste his daily expectation of death, and his resolute readinesse to leaue the World, and to be with Christ: and all his loue to the world, he said extended thus farre, that (if God had so been pleased) he might haue liued to be a preacher to thunder out the threa∣tenings of Gods word, against sinne and all abhominati∣ons, wherewith these dayes doo abound. In these fits and such like speeches, he continued till Mid-lent Sunday, be∣ing the xxi. of March. That day (besides that his wonted fit tooke him) he began in other and more strange manner to bee vexed: for hee sweyed downs as one in a swound. Foorth with they tooke him vp, and layd him vpon a bed: where (hauing layne some smal space) he arose vp sodain∣ly, striuing and strugling in such sort, that it was enough for two or three to hold him. Then fell hee sodainly vpon
his backe, and (lying in such manner) raysed vp his leggs one after the other so stifly, that the standers by could not ow them in the hamme: and thus continuing a whyle with greeuous roaring, at last he raysed himselfe vp on his feete and his head, his belly standing vp much aboue hys head or feete, continuing so a little space he fell downe vp∣on his backe groning verie pittifully. Then rising vp, he ran round on his hands and his feete, keeping a certaine compasse: after that striuing and strugling with groning, he fel a vomiting, and then comming to himselfe, saide, the Lordes name bee praised. This was the first fit that hee had; and after this maner was hee ordinarily handled du∣ring the time of his possession (saue that hee did seldome runne round in that manner that is aforesaid:) which be∣ing thus ended, he fell vpon his knees sodainely to pray∣er, and that so pithily that the standers by wondered there∣at, as much as they did at his strange visitation, beeing no lesse comforted by the one, than they were before greeued at the other. The next day bee hadde many fittes, in the whith hee woulde often point at a greene Catte that troubled him, and still intreated his friends that were preitut to pray for him. Betweene his fittes he requested them to reade the scriptures, which when they could not doe for weeping to behold his miserie, they sent (at the boyes request) for one Iesse Bee that doth dwell in Burton vpon Trent, who tooke the notes of the whole matter, and him the Boy af∣ter some speeches intreated to read where he would: who read the xi. Chapter according to Sa. Iohn, till hee came to the fourth verse, at which time the Boye was ouerthro∣wen into a fit like the fntes ī which hes lasted common∣ly about halfe a quarter of an houre: Iesse continued rea∣ding the xi. xii. and xiii. of Iohns Gospell, and the first & second of the Reuelation. During which time, his fitts continued one in the necke of another.
Which ending with a vomit, hee vsed to saye The Lordes name bee praised: and manie times, Lord Iesu receiue my soule. When Iesse either ceased to speake of anie comfor∣table matter, or to read the scriptures, the Boy was qui∣et from his fits: but when he was so religiously occupied, they came thicke vpon him; which Iesse Bee considering and obseruing, told the Boyes Aunt he suspected that the Boy was be witched. Upon which occasion, (though she doubted of the matter) she told him as before, both her go∣ing to the Phisition and the Phisitions iudgement concer∣ning the Boyes sicknesse, which he ouer-hearing, yet said nothing. The next morning, he said vnto the maide that made him readie, I heard my Aunt tell Iesse Bee, that I was bewitched: the same Saterday that my sicknes tooke me, I lost my Uncle in the Wood, and in the Coppice I met a little old woman; she had a gray gown with a black fringe about the cape, a broad thrumd hat, and three warts on her face: I haue seene her begging at our doore, as for her name I know it not, but by sight I can know her againe. As I passed by her in the Coppice, I chanced (a∣gainst my will) to let a scape; which shee taking in anger sayd, Gyp with a mischiefe, and fart with a bell: I wil goe to heauen, and thou shalt goe to hell; and forth with she stooped to the ground. I stood still and looked at her, viewing euerie part of her, meruailing what shee stooped for; so I came home, and she went to Winsell. Hereup∣on a more vehement suspition arising some iudged it to be the Witch of Stapen-hill: others▪ because she was olde and went little abroad, rather thought it to be Alice Goo∣deridge her daughter, who was had in great suspition of manie to be a dooer in those diuellish practices, as after∣ward it proued. Thus the boyes fits continued daily from the 23 of March till the eight of Aprill, to the great trou∣ble of his Aunt in looking to him▪ and attending on such as came to see him, whereof manie were of verie good ac∣count.
When in his fittes hee was depriued of the vse of speach, hee would make signes of praying, with folded hands, sometime lifting them vp, and sometime striking them vpon his breast: oft times also in these fits, he wold sodainly and amazedly open his eyes, stating and shriking most pittifully, clapping both his hands vpon his face, not being able to indure the sight of such fearfull obiects as he beheld. On this manner was he tormented in the day, and had reasonable good rest in the night, except through some fearfull dreames; whereunto he was much subiect. Being asked if hee could remember what hee did when hee made such signes? He answered, that somtimes he prayed, and somtimes the Cattossed him vp & downe in a string. And thus for a good space he could remember, & readily make relation of his troubles. The Thursdaye before Caster (beeing the 8. of Aprill) there came to see the Boye Mistresse Walkeden of Clif∣ton his Grandmother, and Mistres Saunders his Aunt; to whom when it was told what the Boy sayd conterning the meeting of a woman in the wood, Mistres Walkeden (vpon the Witches cursing, the Boyes sodaine sicknes, his strange handling, & the Phisitions iudgement) thoght it more than probable that the Boy was bewitched: and by the markes that he had taken, perceiued that it was Alice Gooderidge which had thus bewitched him; yet making conscience to accuse her till it appeared vpon sure proofe, sent for her into the Towne to talke with her priuately. When (with much adoe) she was came, they brought her into the chamber where the Bay was; at which time, the Boy fell sodainly into a maruellous sore fit: which being ended, Mistres Walkeden asked her if she knew that boy? She answered she knew him not. Manie other questions were asked; but in vaine, for she would not confesse anye thing. Some of the standers by, perswaded the Boye to serateh her: which he did vpon the face, and the back of the
hands, so that ye blood came out apace: she stroked the back of her hand vpon the child, saying; take blood enough child, God helpe thee. To whom the Boy answered; praye for thy selfe, thy prayer can do mee no good. Here by the way touching this vse of scratching the witch: thogh it be com∣monly receiued as an approued meanes to discry ye witch, and procure case to the bewitched; yet seeing that neither by anie naturall cause, or supernaturall warrant of Gods word it hath anie such vertue giuen vnto it; it is to be re∣ceaued amongst the witchcrafts, whereof there bee great store vsed in our Land, to the great dishonor of God. But to our matter. When Robert Toone the Boyes Uncle and his Schoolmaster saw that mistres Walkeden could nothing preuaile with this bad woman, they took her aside; to whom (after many questions) she granted, that she was in the Wood that Saturday which the Boy spake of, and that she saw no boy but Sherrats boye. Further they de∣manded of her when she receiued the Communion? She sayd, a twelue month agoe. And asking what she receiued? She answered, her damnation. They asked her whether she knew what she said? She answered againe, what shuld I receiue but my damnation? They caused her to say the Lords Praier and the Creed, which she huddled vp wyth much adoo: but when she came to these words in ye Lords Praier, And lead vs not into temptation; and in the Creed either to Iesus Christ, The Holy Ghost, or The Catholicke Church, she would not say anie of those words. After these examinations, she departed to her owne house. The next day he had manie sore fits; in the which because he would clap his hands on his face, and shrike pittifully, they asked him the reason thereof at the end of his fit? He answered that the greene Cat which hee saw had eyes like flames of fire; and that caused him thus fearfully to hide his eyes: & that his paine (which he indured) was very greeuous, like the pricking▪ with daggers or stinging of Bees, which cau∣sed
his crying. As this his vexatiō moued many that came to see him to shed teares, so did it not a little greeue hys Uncle Toone; who seeing these fits to increase, thought it good that the Witch were brought before a Iustice: and so went with Iesse Bee (the 10. of Aprill) before M. Tho: Graysley Esquire and Iustice of Peace, crauing his Pre∣cept to that purpose: which he granted, & directed it to the Constable of Stapen-hill, to bring both this Alice Goo∣deridge (which was almost 60. yeres of age) and old Eli∣zabeth Wright also, mother to this, Alice; who had bin 4 or 5. times before him on suspition of many such crimes. The Precept thus graunted forth, they were brought be∣fore Ma: Graysley; to whom shee would confesse nothing, saue that she met a Boy (which she thought to be Sherats boy, who had broken her a basket full of egges) in Abels Cloase, and (sayd shee) if my wordes did him anie hurt, I am sorry: but that word Bell shee did not remember that she vsed. The next morning when the Boy should rise, his shirt was knit on diuers knots betwixt his legs: and bee∣ing asked how that came? He said be could not tell. All that day he continued in senseles fits▪ with grieuous groa∣ning and fearfull skreaming, crying out; looke where the Witch standeth with three warts vpon her face. The next morning (being Saturday) about six of the Clocke (at which time, his Keepers thinking not the ho∣wer of his sits to be come, tooke no great care of looking to him) he was vpon the sodaine throwne vnder the bedde, crying fearfully; Flames of fire flames of fire. Forth∣with he got vpon the bed, being fearfull and amazed in his countenance. About foure of the clocke (at which tyme his fittes were wont to leaue him) they did now take him in wonderfull fierce manner till midnight, with greater extremitie than at anie time before, hauing sildome more intermission than to vomit and saye (as it was his vsuall manner in most extreamities). The Lord bee praysed. In
these fits he shriked pittifully and fearfully, desiring them to take away the blacke Cat. Both now, and most times be made signes of prayer with folded hands, striking vpon his breast. The 14. of April Sir Humphrey Ferrers and Master Graysley met at Robert Toones, who caused thether to bee brought Elizabeth Wright and Alice Gooderidge, together with her husband and daughter. Master Grays∣ley (after some questions concerning his fits) commanded that the Bible should be deliuered into the boyes handes; who began to read the first Chap. of S. Iohns Gospel, till he came to the 4. verse: at which place (when he read) hee was ouerthrowne into a most cruell Fit. Presently after which, the old woman Eliza. Wright came into Robert Toones house; which so soone as M. Graysley vnderstood, he caused her to be broght into the parlor where the Child was: but she was verie vnwilling to come in, crying, A∣las that euer I was borne, what shall I doo▪ M. Grays∣ley spake loud to her, asking if she could do the boy anye good▪ She answered that her daughter had that at home, that she should doo good with. He caused her (with much adoo) to looke vpon the boy: which as soone as euer shee did, he fell into a strange and cruell fit: Lying vppon hys backe, his eyes standing staring open in fearfull manner, his teeth set in his head, his armes clapped close to his sides, and all the parts of his bodie quaking verie fearful∣ly. M. Graysley bad her kneele downe and pray for him; which shee did, but so as no bodie could vnderstand what she sayd. Whilest she prayed, the fit continued, and there∣fore they thrust her out of doores; which beeing done, the boyes fit ended presently. S. Humphrey and M. Grays∣ley agreed, that certaine women should search the mother & the daughter seuerally, to see if they could finde any such marks on them, as are vsually found on witches. The old woman they stript & found behind her right sholder a thing
much like the vdder of an ewe that giueth sucke with two teates, like vnto two great wartes, the one behinde vnder her armehle, the other a handfull off towardes the top of her shoulder: which when they had found, they put on her cloths againe, leauing the place bare, that it might be seen both of sir Humfrey, maister Graisley, and diuers others of good worth, as indeede it was. They bade her say the Lords prayer, which she hudled vp after her manner leau∣ing out these wordes still vnsaide, And leade vs not into temptation: being then demanded how long she had those teates, she aunswered she was borne so. Then did they search Alice Gooderige, and found vpon her belly, a hole of the bignesse of two pence, fresh and bloudy, as though some great wart had beene cut off the place. The Iusti∣ces examined her concerning the bewitching of the Boy, but she would confesse nothing. Then sir Humfrey tooke her to the boy, and asked him whether this were shee that thus bewitched him: he answered that it was surely shee: then did sir Humfrey did him scratch her, which when the boy offered to do, his hand was presently benummed and pluckt to his side, and he tormented in euery part: foure se¦uerall times he assaied to do this, but stil with like succes; he was bidden to lay his hand on the standers by, which he did without difficultie. Then proceeded they in examining her concerning her hurt: she said that she went to fetch alit∣tle meale on Easter euen foorth of the chamber, and com∣ming downe a ladder, her foote slipped, and she hauing a knife in her hand, thrust herselfe into the bellie: they asked the iudgement of a Surgeon, whose aunswere was, that it was like to haue beene so a long time, for it was not feste∣red, and seemed to be sucken. Sir Humfrey charged her with Witchcraft about one Michaels Cow: which Cow when shee brake all thinges that they tied her in, ranne to this Alice Gooderige her house, scraping at the walls and windowes to haue come in: her olde mother Eliza∣beth
Wright, tooke vpon her to help; vpon condition that she might haue a peny to bestow vpon her god, and so she came to the mans house kneeled downe before the Cow, crossed her with a sticke in the forehead, and prayed to her god, since which time the Cow continued wel. With this she was vrged by the Iustices, and with the hurt vppon her bellie, howe it coulde be so, and her clohes not cutte, whereto she made shifting answers, to no purpose. Then put they her aside, and examined Oliuer Gooderidge her husband, and her daughter also, who were found to disa∣gree in their tales concerning that matter: whereupon sir Humfrey committed her to Darbie Gaole, but dismissed her mother. The next day the boy had a very greeuous fit, in which lying still a while, hee beganne to throw vp both his feete sodainely, beating them against the ground with great vehemencie, and at length being in a traunce, he spake say∣ing, Doost thou say thou art my god, and that I am thy sonne▪ Auoyde Sathan, there is no God saue the Lord of hosts. Pawzing a while, at last he said againe, And woul∣dest thou haue me worship a moulten calfe? I will wor∣ship nothing but the Lord God, and him only wil I serue. Againe being silent awhile, he saide; Wilt thou giue mee three townes if I will worship thee▪ Auoyde Sathan, it is written, I shall worship the Lord God onely. And dost thou say▪ that if I wil not worship thee, thou wilt torment me three times more; if thou torment me three hundred times, yet canst thou not touch my soule. After this hee was tormented three seuerall times ouer euery part of his body, which being ended, he desired to go to the windowe, to refresh himselfe, being hote and faint: there he praysed God for his mercies, telling them that stoode by, If Sa∣than came againe, hee would aske him many questions, and charge him with many things, for he remembred what he had spoken aswel as any that was present: hauing thus
rested about a quarter of an houre, hee was throwne into two seuerall fittes, matchable with the former in crueltie, and at the last spake saying, I charge thee by the liuing God to tell me who sent thee. Doost thou tell me thy mi∣stris sent thee? What is thy mistris name? Doost thou say thou wilt not tell mee before to morrow? And why I pray thee wilt thou not? Dost thou say thou wilt torment me twice more? Do thy woorst, my hope is in the liuing God, and he will deliuer me out of thy hands: hauing spo∣ken these words he was cast into two seuerall fittes like to the former; which being ended, he desired the standers by to ioyne with him in humble and heartie prayer, and so fell vpon his knees, praising God, for that he had somewhat reuealed his enemie Sathan vnto him, and beseeching him to continue his goodnesse in manifesting him more plain∣ly. The standers by askt him what he heard & saw in these sharp conflicts (for they neither saw nor heard any thing, but him replying & answering) he told them that the great Cat tossed him vp and downe in a string, and that a thing spake to him with a voice small and shrill. The next daie about nine of the clocke he was cast into a greeuous fitte, and being cast vpon his backe, was bereft of al vse of anie part of his bodie, and at the length spake saying: Doost thou say I am thy sonne? I am none of thine, I am the poore seruant of the Lord of hostes: and pauzing a while, he said, Dost thou offer me a kingdome, if I will worship thee▪ I will none of thy kingdome, for it is but earthly. The Lord hath reserued for me a kingdome in heauen. I charge thee thou diuell, In the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy▪ ghost to tel me what is thy name. Dost thou tell me that thy name is Wrythe? I charge thee tell me, what is thy mistresse name▪ Dost thou say a∣none? thou hast alwayes bene a liar, and the father of lies, and doost thou say, that vnlesse I will ship thee thou wilt torment mee three times more than thou diddest
before, if thou torment me 3000. times more, my faith is so strong, that I will worship none but the liuing God. These wordes being finished, he was cast into three seue∣rall fittes, with all the former torments, drawing toge∣ther his ioynts and sinews, and writhing him, with tossing and turning him very round most pittifully; these fits and speeches continued about halfe an houre. After this, hee was cast into another fit, his eies closed vp, his legges lif∣ted vp as stiffe as stakes, and al his senses taken from him; which fit ceasing, he was well, till twelue of the clocke at noone, and then was cast into another fit, lying flat vppon his backe, and lifting his feete vp: at last he saide, Doost thou say thou wilt giue me a pallace, aud make me a king if I will worship thee? Auoyde Sathan, I will worship the Lord onely. Doost thou say thou wilt mittigate my torments, if I will worship thee? Auoyde Sathan, I will worship none, saue onely the Lord God my Sauiour, my sanctister and redeemer. Doost thou say, that if I will not worship thee, thou wilt torment me thrice? Do thy worst Sathan, my faith standeth sure with my God, at whose hands I looke for succour. Hauing vttered these and some other such wordes, hee was cast into three seuerall cruell fittes; after the which he had rest till two of the clocke, at which time there came diuers worshipfull personages, of purpose to behold the maner of the childes so strange vex∣ing; they caused him to reade vpon the bible, which caused Sathan to rage, so that he was cast into a fit terribly tor∣mented and vexed, as that it did much humble the behold∣ers, and mooue them to commiseration and pittie, for the childes so distressed estate. While these things hapned, it was reported, that the old witch Elizabeth Wright was in the towne, a thing somewhat rare; for it is thought, that (except at the time of her former examination) shee was not so farre in halfe a yere before: presently they sent for her.
In the meane season came in maister Bagot the yonger of Blithfield, wishing to be an eie witnes of these strange reports, requesting the boy to take the Bible and reade, he being unwilling to reade himselfe, wished Iesse Bee to do so much, which he did▪ and when he came to the 4. verse of the 1. chapter of S. Iohns gospel in these words, In it was life, and the life was the light of the world, the boy was ouerthrowne into a fit. About the end of which it was said that the witch was come, whome before they had sent for, so that she was presently brought in, and stript by certaine women, that they might see her suspected place: whilest they stripped her, she cursed the daie of her birth, making great outcries, and vsing bitter speeches against all that offered to accuse her. And being asked who brought her to Burton? she said, the diuell: being asked diuers questions she liked not, she would answere she did not heare. Much adoo they had to get her to come neare the boy, or to looke on him: and it had bin good for him if shee had neuer come at him, for so soone as she kneeled downe by him, and cast her eies vpon him, he was sodainely taken with such a ve∣hement fit, as before he had vpon the like occasion: This was more greeuous than manie other; he lay vppon his backe, altogether depriued of the vse both of his members and senses; except his eies, for they stoode wide open ve∣ry fearefull to the beholders: and all the partes of his bo∣die did quake and shake like Aspen leaues. Whilest shee was vpon her knees at her diuellish praiers, the child was greeuously tormented, therefore they thrust her out of the doores. Which being done, he recouered himselfe, and his fit ended he said; The Lord be praised: Mistris Dethicke also of New-hall came in to beholde with others these strange sights, at whose request, when Iesse Bee read the first chapter of the gospel after S. Iohn▪ and came to the 4. verse, the boy was cast into a fit like to those which before he had vpon the like occasion.
In these his sittes, as also in those that he had after, hee could neither conceale what he said, or what Sathan saide to him. The next morning he had two fits betwixt 8. and 12. of the clocke, at which time Maister Graisly came a∣gaine to see the child, and whilest he was there, there came in two men of Stapen hil, neere neighbors to Alice Goo∣derige, who said they came from Darbie, and were intre∣ted by her to tel Robert Toone, that if he would be good to her, she would reueale the whole trueth of the matter: and further, they offred him their company thither on mun∣day, which was agreed vpon by the aduise of M▪ Graisly. But newes came, that there was one which being skilful in discerning of witches had bin with Alice Gooderidge at Darbie, and affirmed flatly that she was a witch, offer∣ing to make open triall of it, and to cure the boy. This of∣fer Rob. Toone accepting of very willingly, a time was appointed for this mans comming thither. But to returne to the boy: about xi. of the clocke, he had a sore fit, with the increase of torments groaning very greeuously, and skree∣king very pitifully, and being cast vpon his backe with his legs throwne out (as commonly he was) at the last hee ve∣tered these words; Dost thou say that I am thy Champi∣on? I wil be none of thy champion, I am the seruant of the Lord of hosts. What offerest thou me a bag of mony, if I wil worship thee? Auoyde Sathan, I wil none of thy mo∣ny, the Lord in heauen hath mony enough in store for me. And dost thou say thou wilt torment me twice more grie∣uously than before? Do thy worst Sathan, my trust is in the Lord God. Dost thou say thy Mistris will haue it so? I charge thee in the name of the father, &c. to tel me what thy mistris name is. Dost thou say thou wilt not reueale thy mistris? with that Sathan tormented him againe, the which going away with a vomit, his mother began to cō∣fort him, exhorting him to put his trust in God: to whome he said, My whole trust is in him; for the Lord hath my e∣nemy
in a chaine, and keepeth him in a compasse, which he shall not passe. And hauing remained well about halfe an houre, he was againe pittifully tormented, and at the last spake these wordes: Doost thou say thou wilt giue mee whatsoeuer I will aske thee if I will be thy Champion? I defie thee, and all that thou offerest me, I will be none of thy champion. I charge thee in the name of the liuing God to tell mee what thy Mistresse name is. Saiest thou that thy Mistris hath giuen thee a drop of her bloud to thy dinner, and that therefore thou wilt tel no tales of her? And doost thou say my faith is but weake? Sathan, it is too strong for thee to ouerthrowe. Doost thou saie thou wilt torment me worse than euer thou hast done? Do thou thy worst, my trust is in the Lord my God. Forthwith he was pittifully tormented: after which being asked what he saw he answered, the greene Cat (as he vsually told them) as∣king angerly▪ did not you see her? Oh quoth hee this hath beene a greeuous torment to me.▪ This ended, he desired being hot and faint with the extremitie of his torments, to be carried to the window to take the aire: where whilest he sate, there came in one, whose name Ile passe ouer in si∣lence; and being a stranger, beganne to examine the boy concerning poeticall and other schoole points; the boy was wearie of his companie and conference, (as indeed he had great reason, being vnfit for such an occasion) and desired to be carried into another chamber, the which was imme∣diately done. But this supposed friend followed him, and renued his former speeches, vttering also an oth that grie∣ued the boy exceedingly. The mother vnderstanding it, came and asked what the stranger said to him that so trou∣bled him? (for he wept pitifully) The partie himselfe an∣swered before the boy, I spake no hurt to him. No (quod the child) you bade me I should not dissemble, saying that there was no witches: also you asked of me if I thought there were a god? God blesse me fro such cōforters: I pray
you al pray for me that the Lord would deliuer mee from this temptation: at which wordes speaking hee was ouer∣throwne into a cruell fit; which beeing ended, that man which thought there was no witches departed. But mai∣ster Eccarshall the Pastor of Burton being present staies still comforting the boy and his sorrowfull mother, per∣swading him that if Sathan spake to him again he should not answer him, because he was a liar, and indeuoured by his wordes to make the boy beleeue him; these things en∣ded about two of the clocke, hee remained well till foure: then was he ouerthrowne into foure seuerall fits one pre∣sently after another; the last wherof was most intolerable, tossing and tormenting him very pittifully, it seemed by his lookes and gestures that the euill spirit spake; but be∣cause of maister Eccarsalles aduise, he kept a discontented silence, as he told afterward to his mother, but she adui∣sed him, that if it should speake againe, he should not feare or forbeare to answer it. About this time some meate was prepared for him, but before he could take it, he was ouer∣throwne into a crueil fit, wherein after that Sathan had shewed a while his rage, he spake saying: Dost thou saie that I shall worship thee? I wil worship the Lord of hosts onlie, I charge thee▪ In the name of the father, of the sonne &c. to tell me what thy name is. Doost thou say thou wile not tel me before to morrow? Thou art a liar, I haue euer found thee so, and I will not beleeue thee. Dost thou saie thou wilt torment me far more grieuously than euer thou hast done? I care not for al that thou caust do vnto me: In the Lord is my trust, who will deliuer mee when his good pleasure is: presently Sathan tormented him according to his wonted maner. After that fit was ended, and he had a while bin quiet, Iesse Bee persuaded him to be coragious, to take vnto him the shield of faith, and to offer Sathan the combate. The childe finding himselfe strong in the Lord (whose assistance he had before obtained in his former
conflicts) condiscended to his motion: so Iesse read the first chapt. according to S. Iohn till he came to the 9. ver. That light was the true light, &c. at which words he was ouer∣throwne into a meruailous sore Fit; which vexed and tor∣mented him in euerie part of his bodie: which being end∣ed, Iesle asked him if he should read agaiue? The boy an∣swered cherefully, read on in Gods name: so he read til he came to the 13. verse Which were borne not of blood, &c. At these words he was throwne into grieuous torments, like to the former: which ended, Iesse asked if he should read still? The boy answered, proceed in the name of God. Then read he the 14 ver. The same Word became flesh▪ &c. At which words he was tormented the third time; yet not so vehemently as before. He proceeding forward read till be came to the 17 ver. The law was giuen by Moses, grace and truth came by Iesus Christ▪ Foorthwith he fell into the fourth fit, the feeblest of anie he yet▪ had; sathan no doubt finding his force quatling, and his fierie darts quenched. So Ieste read on, the Child cheerfully & attentiuely hear∣kening till he had finished the chapter without anie trouble to him. The next day (among other fits) he had one much more vehement than the rest, his torments being increased and his strength so great, that two strong men were not a∣ble to rule him. After this fit Iesse Bee said; Come Tho∣mas, shall we prouoke him to battell? To whom the child answered▪ yes verie willingly. So they looked for the Bi∣ble, but the boyes Uncle had taken it to the Church. Then did the Boy desire Iesse to resolue him in this doubt, whe∣ther it were hurtfull for one to eate or drinke before hee re∣ceiue the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Being satis∣fied concerning this Point, and casting downe his head to call to remembrance some thing else wherof doubted doubted▪ he was on the sodaine ouerthrowne into a grieuous fit, groa∣ning and skreaming most pittifully, turning as round on all foure, as a pigge on a spit; and sodainly▪ (doe what the
keepers could) he leaped vp to the top of the bed, catching hold on the testern with his hands & hanging by his armes notwithstanding his eyes were cloased vp: & being in this case, he said; dost than say I shall hear newes within these 2. or 3. dayes? I pray God it be good newes. He was at last cast into a traunce, vttering diuers such comfortable speeches, as in other his traunces he did. This day there came one to them, hauing been (of her owne accord) wyth widdow Worthington the good Witch of Hoppers (as they call her) and told them, she said the Boy was bewit∣ched; yet help him she could not, except his mother or some of his neerest frends came vnto her. The same answer was giuen by a Witch about Couentrey to another, looking for some helpe in the boyes behalfe. But the mother of the Childe (detesting the diuells helpe) thanked those two for their kindnes towards hir, but sharply reprooued them for attempting a thing so vnlawfull. After these fits, he rested reasonable quiet til the next day: when as about one a clock (seeming verie well) he rceiued some meate. But Sathan shewed himselfe to be a right sathan, euen a sore enemie to the Childe, (enuying the good of his bodie, when he saw himselfe vnable to hurt his soule) did let his digesting of it (as manie times hee did) by casting him presently into di∣uers fits; which as (vsually all his fits did) lasting about halfe a quarter of an hower, ended with a vomit. Manie that were Beholders of the Childes torments, little ho∣ped that euer he could haue liued or recouered. But God be praised, that Sathans power is limitted by him who is Lord both of life and death. ▪When these Conflicts were ended, Iesse Bee said vnto him, Thomas shall wee take the Sword with two edges, and bid Sathan the Battayle? The Boye (beeing well acquaynted with the phrase) answered; If you will read, I will gladly heare. So he read the first Chapter of S. Iohns Gospell▪ which whilest he was reading▪ the childe
was ouerthrowne into three Fittes. After these Fits, he was verie cheerfull, and desirous to haue the Booke, that hee might read himselfe: which hee did. And when hee came at the fifth verse of the first Chapter of the Reue∣lation (for that Chapter he read) he was ouerthrowne in∣to a cruell Fitte: which beeing ended, hee gaue the Booke to Iesse Bee, intreating him carnestly to read on forward. So Iesse Bee finished the Chapter, and read also the se∣cond and was neuer (in reading them▪ with anye more of the Boies fits) interrupted. Upon the one aud twentieth of Aprill, though betwixt nine of the Clocke in the Morning, and two in the After∣noone hee had tenne Fittes, yet the last of them was most extreame; in the middest of it hee would open his eyes a∣mazedly, and presently clap both his hands vppon them, beeing ouerthrowne into most violent torments through∣out all the parts of his bodie; and beeing cast vppon hys backe, he threwe foorth his legges fiercely, beating them against the ground vehemently: and after that lying in a quiet traunce, hee opened his mouth, saying; Dost thou saye that thou wilt giue mee a Crowne, if I will worship thee? I regard thee not nor thy Crowne; for the Lorde hath reserued a Crowne of righteousnesse for mee in Hea∣uen. Then (pausing awhile▪) hee spake again saying; Dost thou saye thou wilt giue mee Townes and Countreyes, if I will worship thee? Away Sathan away, thou art a lyar, and the Father of lyes; I will not beleeue thee: a∣way. Foorthwith his mouth was cloased vp, and hys teeth set fast in his head, insomuch that hee laboured to haue opened them with his owne hands, but he could not; yet when hee had remayned awhile thus, the Lord (by his almightie power) opened his mouth, and he boldly sayd; I charge thee (Sathan) in the name of the Father and of the Sonne.
At which word his mouth was fast closed againe, yet was it not long before the Lorde (by his power) opened it a∣gaine. So he proceeded, saying; I charge thee tell mee what is thy mistres name? Saist thou thou wilt not? and doost thou say thou wilt torment me ten times more? No sooner wer these words spoken, but he was tormented a∣boue measure. Next day betwixt ten and one of the clock, he had two ordinarie fits, and at the loose of those, one ex∣traordinarie; in the which beeing ouerthrowne vppon his back, with his accustomed torments, he vttred these words Wouldll thou haue me worship thee, thou liar, thou wick∣ed wretch? thou art the father of all lies. I charge thee get from me, away, away. These words he vttred disdain∣fully, shaking his hands at him. And after he had paused a while, he said, Dost thou promise me all my desire▪ If I will worship thee? Ah wicked tempter, I charge shee in the name of the Father, &c. to tell me thy Mistres name? These words he vttred with an interrupted voyce: but re∣peated them presently verie couragiously: saying also, And dost thou say thy Mistres hath giuen thee a draught of her blood? I am glad of it: for then shall I knowe her short∣ly. And dost thou say thou wilt torment me twice more? At these words he was cast into two sore fits; so that sathan kept promise with him. His torments caused him skreame verie lowd and groane pittifully, slinging out his hands as though he fought with sathan▪ and stamping fiercely, as if he trode him vnder foote. This combat ended, he lay stil a∣bout a quarter of an houre, & then hauing been a while tor∣mented, lying on his backe, he said; Dost thou say because I vex thy mistres thou wilt torment mee more? Which words being spoke, he was cast into such torments, as wer grieuous to the beholders. And hauing ouercome the ex∣tremitie of the same, he spake (with his eyes shut) saying; What, doost thou saye I shall worship thee▪ thou hast no faith sathan, I will fight with thee with the word of the
euerliuing god, Auoid, auoid; I charge thee in gods name to get thee hence. Again after more fits he said; what, dost thou say thou wilt make mee as strong as a Giant, and as rich as the greatest Potentate in ye world, if I will worship thee? the Lord my God can make me strong, & giue mee all good things. Hauing paused a litle, be spake again, say∣ing; dost thou say if I wil not worship thee thou wilt make me a four-footed beast? that lieth not in thy power, since God hath made me a reasonable creature: my faith sathan is strong. And, doost thou say thou wilt torment mee grie∣uously for thy mistres sake? Forthwith he was grieuous∣ly tormented, crying out, A beare, a beare: his mouth was stretched out, and he rored fiercely like a beare, crying out, he teareth me, he teareth me. These torments ended, he lay amazedly, with the sweat running downe his face. Being againe tormented, hee spake saying; wilt thou giue mee a land full of all frutes if I will worship thee? the Lord in heauen hath goods enough for me: thou didst send a be are thy helhound to torment me: thou didst tell mee I should heare newes within 2. or 3. daies; dost thou say thy mistres hath commanded thee not to be an hower from tormenting me, because I vex her? is that thy newes? At these words he was presently cast into grieuous torments, starting a∣mazedly and crying out; Flames of fire, flames of consu∣ming fire: he threw away all things he could finde by gro∣ping (for his eyes were shut) and wownd himselfe close in the bed clothes. Scarcely had these torments an end, but o∣thers began; wherein being grieuously afflicted, he cryed out, A fierie dragon, a fierie dragon. These torments con∣tinuing, hee said; now thou foule fiend, now thou shewest thy self in thy likenes. Presently he strooke both his hands vpon his face, shriking and crying fearfully, A flye, a flye. Being asked what he had seene in these conflicts? hee an∣swered, manie & fearfull things, but remembred them not; neither could tell he spake, thogh he cald to minde a thing
spake to him. The 24 day about 11▪ of the clock he fell in to an extreame fit, which sooke him pittiully in all parts of his bodie, making him to are like a beare. Being asked after the fit what he had seene? he answered a great beare came roaring vpon him. Foure fits more he had before 4. of the clocke; at which time Ma. Edw: Cockin came into the house, and finding him well, bade him read the 12. of Iohn: which he did, till he came to the 15. verse I am glad for your sakes, that &c and then was he cast into a fit pre∣sently. Upon this there came in another, disiring to see the like triall: so the Boy read till he came to the 25▪ ve. I am the resurrection &c. at which words he was againe ouer∣throwne. This desire that manie had to haue the boy read, that they might see him in his fits, sauoud but of a temp∣ting curiositie, and is not warrantable. But to goe on. The Boyes torments continuing, Rob: Toone being al∣together without hope of his recouerie; both because the Witch confessed nothing, and the man that promised help failed, whereat he greeued exceedingly. Manie perswaded him to send to diuers Witches, which he refused; but hys wife purposed to attempt it, and sent for a messenger, who had before been imployed by others in the like busines. He found the Boy in a fit when hee came; and thereupon vtte∣red these words; who would suffer him to lye thus; & not seeke anie helpe hee could get? Whereuntoo, an honest man (not acquainted with their purpose) answered; To seeke helpe at a Witch, is wicked and dangerous. The messenger was pricked in conscience with his speech, and would not goe. Ro: Toone was not a litle glad they were stopped in so vnlawfull an enterprise. This day also ano∣ther had been with widdow Worthington the Witch of Hoppers, (vnknowen to the Boyes Frends▪ and brought this aunswere; that vnlesse the Boye and his Frends be∣leeued her, she could do him no good: which thing they de∣tested.
The sixe and twentieth of Aprill (after nine fittes in the morning) about one of the clocke he was ouerthrowne into a verie sore Fitte, and in the same was greeuouslye vexed and tormented. At the last hee spake thus; What doost thou saye, if I will worship thee, thou wilt make me a God: but if I will not, thou wilt make me a toad? It lieth not in thy power sathan to make me what thou wilt; but in the power of my Creator. And doost thou say thou wilt torment me twice? do thy worst, the Lord is my trust, and I know he can and wil deliuer me. Being then sodain∣ly tormented, he did struggle most fiercely, roaring fearful∣ly like a beare, crying A beare, a beare; and by and by, A dragon, a dragon. After this, he was quiet about a quar∣ter of an hower and then (vpon the sodaine) fell into the like torments, and spake (as before) saying; dost thou say thou hast brought mee good newes? I praye God it bee. And doost thou say if I will curse God, thou wilt releease me of all my paynes and tormentes? What Sathan, wouldest thou haue mee curse my Creatour, which spared not to send his onely begotten Sonne Iesus Christ out of his bosome, to shed his most precious Blood for my Sins? Ah wicked Tempter, I charge thee in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, to tell me what is thy mistres name? Doost thou saye, thy mistresse hath rewarded thee, and therefore thou wilt torment mee more than euer thou diddest? I care not for thee a Strawe: what sathan, seek not to insult in thy subtile cruelties: for the Lord will release mee from thee when his god wil and pleasure is; and so (with some more torments) this Fit ended. The next day he came that promised to cure the Boy, and to prooue her plainly (which was had in suspition) to be a Witch. He wished Robert Toone onely to procure him a warrant to fetch her from the Gaole: promising, as hee hated all Coniuration and Inchauntment, so it should
bee manifest what course hee tooke for effecting those mat∣ters. This daye and both the next he had manie sore fits. Upon the last of April, beeween 9. and 3 in the afternoone he had 14 fits At this time the witches libertie being pro∣cured, she came to Towne, and was brought to the Boye: to whom she said, God helpe thee my childe; whereuppon he was presently cast into most strange torments, differing both in manner and crueltie from the former. Three strong men could hardly hold him, he was so strong; he shriked pi∣tifully, blearing out the tung, and hauing his neck so wry∣then, that his face seemed to stand backward. This pitifull spectacle did wring manie teares from the beholders. So from 3. till 9. at night he had 27. of these torments; & then they left him quaking and meruailously dismayed. These fits being layd to the Witches charge: she answered, that she indeed did vex the childe, but if they would forgiue her, it should cease. Two or three went to Stapen-hill to see what the olde woman did this while; suspecting she had a hand herein: when they came thether, they found her on her knees; praying (no doubt) to the diuell. Upon the first of May, about 7. in the morning, he was cast into a fit. This was the daye wherein the Cunning man would make the Witch confesse, and a sennight after cure the Boy: so hee sent for her from the Towne Hal to Rob: Toones, where manie worshipful Personages were readie to see proofe of his skill. Being brought they laboured to make her con∣fesse voluntarily: to whom she answered, this was ye first that euer she committed; and if they would procure her li∣bertie, shee offered to confesse all the truth freely. Pre∣sently her speech was interrupted, so that shee could not speake▪ but she praied them to forgiue her. Then the man seeing this would not preuaile, fell to triall of his conclusi∣on: hee put a paire of new shooes on her feete, setting her close to the fire, till the shooes being extreame hot, might constrayne her thorough increase of the paine to confesse.
This was his ridiculous practise, she being throghly hea∣ted desired a release and she would disclose al; which gran∣ted, she confessed nothing. Being therefore threatned more sharply, she offered to reueale all priuatly to mistresse De∣thicke, and going with her into a parlour; when she began to speake her winde was stopped, so as shee could not say any thing, but, I pray you forgiue me. By this it was xi. of the clocke, and the boy had had 8. fits, and was brought into the parlour where she was, who said, Thomas, I pray you forgiue mee, and be good to mee. At which words hee fell into a maruellous sore fit. After which, the companie continued threatning and persuading hir, but al she would say▪ was, she was sorie for him, for she mistooke him, thin∣king him to be Sherrats boy, thinking to haue bin reuen∣ged on him for breaking her egges. When they saw they could preuaile no more, they sent her againe to the Hall, and the company departed: after which the boy had 8. fits. The next morning went Ierome Horabin, Edward Weightman, mistris Caldwall with other to heare what confession she would make. At whose comming she spake thus; I met the boy in the wood, the first saterday in Lent, and passing by me, he called me witch of Stapen hil: vnto whom I said, Euery boy doth call me witch, but did I e∣uer make thy arse to itch? Further shee saide, I pray you get help for the boy, for Gods sake get help for the boy. A∣gaine she said, God giue mee grace to confesse the trueth. And when she would haue spoken on, she said, I cannot, I cannot, my winde is stopped: Mistris Caldwall asked her if shee would be prayed for? Yes (quoth she) I pray you desire M. Eccarsall to pray for me, that the Lord would o∣pen my hart, that I may speake the truth. The 3. of Maie in the morning, Rob. Toone, Edw. Weightman, Rich▪ Teate and others, went againe to examine the witch, who confessed to them saying: The first satterday in Leut to∣ward euening I met the boy in the wood, and he called me
witch of Stapen hil: and I saide againe, euerie boy dooth call me witch, but did I euer make thy arse to itch? foorth∣with I stouped to the ground, and the Diuell appeared to me in likenesse of a little partie-colored dog red and white, and I called him Minny, seeing that euerie boy calleth mee witch, therefore goe thy waies and torment this boy in euerie part of his bodie at thine owne pleasure, foorth∣with I strained euerie part of my bodie, enforcing my selfe to vomit, saying; After this sort, vexe euerie part of him. Further (said she) the dog followed the boy to Burton, and as I returned from Winsell (whither I went to buie a groates worth of egges) he met me againe, telling me he had fulfilled my request, and at my yards end he departed from me; since when he hath bin diuers times with mee at Darbie Gaole, and these two nights at Burton Hall, and continually he scratcheth my head, & scrapeth in the straw. Againe she said, the boy will not mend except you seek for help: you may haue help enough: she would haue spoken further, but something stopped her throat, and shee saide, come out thou foule serpent. From 8. til 2 the boy had 12 sore fits with pitiful groaning: at 3 came M. Hildersham of Ashby de la Zouch▪ with diuers other godly ministers M. Hildersham after that by certaine questions, hee had made triall of the boys faith, said openly, that howsoeuer the Papists boasted much of the power their priests had to cast out diuells, and the simple euerie where noted it as a great discredit to the Ministers of the Gospel, that they do want this power, yet did he professe there was no such gift in them, that thogh the Lord oft in these daies, by the prai∣ers of the faithful casts eut diuels, yet could he not assure them to cure him. To holde this faith of myracles to re∣mainestill in the church, is an opinion dangerous. That seeing to be passessed is but a temporall correction, & such as whereby both the glorie of God and the saluation of the partie may be furthered, it can not without sinne be abso∣lutely
prayed against: al which notwithstanding, that there is a good vse of praier in such a case, and of fasting also, to procure that the iudgement may be sanctified to the behol∣ders, and the possessed himselfe; yea to obtain that he may be deliuered also from it, if the Lord see it be best for his owne glorie. In which perswasion, hee being the mouth of the rest, they all prayed, during which time the childe was not interrupted. Whereas Alice Gooderige said her familiar was like one William Gregories dog of Stapenhill, there arose a rumor, his dog was her familiar: wherefore hee with his neighbour maister Coxe went the next day to examin her concerning this report; and she saide, my diuel (I say) was like your dog. Now out vpon thee (saide Gregorie) and departed: she being further examined, saide she had her fa∣miliar of her mother. The sixt of Maie hee had xii. fits in the forenoone, and x. in the afternoone; these last were as greeuous as anie before. After one of them taking the chamber pot, he started sodainely saying, looke where a man commeth out of the chamber pot. In another fitte he cried out, Flames of fire, flames of fire: and in another he said, I see the heauens open. In the most of these fits hee bleared out his tongue very blacke, hauing his face wry∣then towards his backe, groaning and shriking lamenta∣bly; being asked if he remembred what was done; he said, it seemd to him he was wroong and tossed vp and downe▪ af∣ter these fits he remained wel til next morning. On friday he was by 7 a clocke cast into a fit; but about 8 he fell into maruellous strange torments, both for continuance and extraordinary cruelty, his tong thrust out of his head, his mouth drawn awry, first toward one eare, then to another; his face very strangely disfigured. In his extreamitie he made signes to the standers by to pray; and himselfe by fol∣ded hands and other gestures, gaue testimony that the spi∣rit of God was mightily laboring against his infirmities.
By and by his eies opened, & what euer he catcht he (as it seemd) threw it against sathan, and strait they being shut vp again, so that he could not open them with his fingers, which he indeuoured, his mouth was opened, & he said, O pray pray, neuer more need to pray; so the company ioynd in humble & harty praier: but he hearing them not (thogh they praied lowd) saide; whie do you not pray? Presently his mouth being shut, and his teeth set fast in his head, he stampt (as it were) in triumph of Sathan, and lifting his hands towards heauen, stroke them with reuerence on his breast. Sathans raging against him did increase in such maner as caused the beholders to shead tears abundantly, for they could no sooner imagin a ceasing, but strait his fit began againe: and this conflict lasted long, in which space, he oft vttered these words; do what thou canst sathan, this shal doe thee no good: Is it so? and such like. And after obtaining the vse of his tung, he proceeded saying, Auoyde sathan, I haue vpon my head the helmet of saluation, and I am girded about with trueth. Iesus Christ hath shead water and bloud for my sins, & I sweat but water. O Lord thy apostles were whipt & scourged for thy trueth, & they departed, reioycing that they were accounted woorthy to suffer for thy names sake. And now (O Lorde) I reioyce that thou accountest me woorthie to suffer these cruell tor∣ments. Presently he fel into torment againe; at the last ly∣ing on his backe quietly, he desired the standers by to sing the sixt psalme, and so they did, he singing with them verie cheerefully. While they were singing, he oft was inter∣rupted and ioynd with them againe toward the ende: ha∣uing laine in a trance, so that they could scarcely perceiue anie motion, he said; I see the heauens open, hearken, I heare a heauenlie noise, and lying still a while, he met with them at the 10. ver. And now my foes, that (qd he) is sathan and so continued singing til the psalme was ended: all the psalme throgh he sweat exceedingly, & dried his face as if
he had not bin in his fit. After this, he desired them to pray for him whilst he lay down & slept, and so fell into a trance; hauing laine stil a while, he fel to quaking & starting feare∣fully saying: Dost thou say my sinnes are great▪ Sathan? The Lamb of God hath taken them awaie: diuers other interrupted speeches he vttered, and slumbered againe. At length he cried out, Wild horses, wild horses; they teare me, they teare me; and then was he tormented ouer al the partes of his bodie. After that he slept somewhat slumbe∣ringly, hauing a most heauenly and ioyfull vision. When he awaked he looked cheerefully: and being asked what he saw in these trances, he could not call anie thing to minde. This daie he was cast into seuen cruel fits exceeding all he had before: for besides that his mouth was drawen a∣wrie, and he in euerie part vexed, his shoulder bones were thrust out of ioynt, with other torments most lamentable: thus they ended, for he remained til xi. a clocke grieuously vexed, and almost without intermission. In these his tor∣ments, being (for the most part) senslesse, he vsed to vtter diuers interrupted speeches, some fearefull, others com∣fortable; the standers by beeing requested of him, to sing psalmes and pray, be many times had his eares shut, and his mouth stopt, so that he could neither heare  speake, yet he would ioine with them in praier and singing so long as he could without interruption. When he was fully re∣couered, he looked very cheerefully, giuing God thankes for his assistance: they asked him many questions concern∣ing his trances, but he could remember nothing that was done. On the nineteenth day of Maie he fell into trances mixed with torments, in which as hee suffered grieuous paines, so did he vtter many strange speeches, somtime he was so wrested, that no beholder thought it possible for him to liue; sometime he lay so stil, that there scarce appea∣red any signe of life in him. After he had laine a while in a trance he saide; Mr▪ Sauiour Christ Iesus was tempted.
and why then should not I bee so? Pawzing a while hee said, I heare a voyce from heauen, the Lorde speaketh to me: and pawzing againe, he held vp his handes (his eies being fast closed) and saide, Looke where my brother Iob is. Then opened he his eies, but his mouth was fast shut: he would haue opened it with his handes, but could not: Then pawzing a little, he said, no, no, I will not. The Lord hath flatly forbidden it in his word: so lying a while he saide, heauen openeth, heauen openeth, I must goe the∣ther: then clapping his hands for ioy he said, I see Christ Iesus my Sauiour, his face shineth as the Sunne in his strength, I will goe salute him, and indeede he did rise go∣ing apace, with such strength, that his keepers could scar∣sly stay him: presently he fell a trembling and stamping, crying, a dog, a dog, for Gods sake take away this dog▪ away with this filthy dog that came out of hell: and after a pittifull skreaming he saide; Oh Maister Hildersham. I thought he would haue torne me in peeces, preach iudg∣ment against all sinners, flames of fire, flames of fire; See Maister Hildersham, preach and teach, Oh fast and pray night and day. After these speeches, he clapt his handes, looking cheerefully, though his eies were closed, saying: Christ Iesus my Sauior commeth clothed in purple; then seemed he (by his gestures) to imbrace him, saying: Holy is thy name; thy name (Lorde Iesus) is to be exalted for euermore, I haue seene such sights, O Lord Iesus blesse me from them. Presently he was ouertaken againe with feare, saying: Doost thou say this is the bottomlesse pitte where the damned be? Maister Hildersham, we had need to pray, O preach and pray: strait after he looked cheere∣fully euen with admiration, saying: Thy name O Lorde Iesus is to be exalted aboue all things, thy name is to bee blessed for euer. Lying a while in a trance, he clapped his handes saying, Oh, oh, Christ Iesus my sauior and his A∣postles: Then seemed hee to embrace the Apostles, and
worship our Sauiour saying, O Lorde Iesus thou suffe∣redst for my sake; thy name be praised, yea, I say from my heart, thy name be praised. By and by turning his head, he pointed saying, Looke where Iudas is frying in torments. After this he fell againe into a traunce, and lay as hee had bin dead, but spake fearefully thus; Ah looke in this place of torments where drunkards are hanged by the throats, swearers and filthie talkers by their tongues: and hauing spoken of other torments for other sins, he saide, O great iudgements, great iudgements, which wordes he vttered so wofully, as if he had beene in the iawes of hell; and on the contrary, so comfortably, as if he had beene in heauen. After this falling into a traunce, hee started sodainely and saide, Yonder comes mother Redde Cap, looke how they beate her braines out, see what it is to be a witch: see how the toades gnaw the flesh from her bones. O pray, pray, looke what wailing, and weeping, and gnashing of teeth yonder is: Lord shew vs thy mercie; take me by the hand Maister Hildersham▪ and let vs goe to heauen: thus this fit ended after halfe an houre; being asked what he had bin doing, he answered, he had beene▪ sleeping, for he remem∣bred nothing. Hauing beene well about a quarter of an houre, be fell into a quiet traunce, and at length saide: O Maister Hildersham, looke where Gods chariot is come to fetch you and me, see how God loueth vs: by and by he beganne to quake, and cried; Lo, lo, the greene Cat comes out of hell: then falling into a quiet trance, he saide, looke where the 7 churches be, and presently he skritched saying; Lo, lo, 7 vgly diuells, looke, they goe downe to the bot∣tomlesse pit. Pauzing againe he faith, See see how many kings and rich men go to hel, euen they that were so braue, and fared so daintily, and were so stowt. After this hee fell into a trance, saying; come M. Hildersham, the Lord bids vs come, let vs go, and so he went on, and could hardly be staid: but straitway his ioy turnd into heauines, for he see∣med
to haue bodily combats with his spirituall enemie▪ These fits ended he remained well a quarter of an houre: then fal∣ling into a sodaine trance, he said with trembling; Ha, ha, ha, I tolde you of this before, that after ioy commēth sor∣row. Looke you how I am tormented. O that I could see my sauiour Christ Iesus. Foorthwith hee arose clapping his hands with great ioy, and saide; Looke where he com∣meth, thy name be praised, thy name be praised. Anone he had a comfortable vision of the day of iudgement; crying▪ alowd, The trumpets sound, see fee, the graues open, the dead arise, and al men come to iudgement; harke how the Angells cry, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth. Then pauzing a little he saide, Looke looke how the wic∣ked slie away like a flocke of doues, yet see a flame of fire ouertaketh them. After much varietie of fits he cried; a fie∣rie Dragon, a fierie Dragon teareth me in peeces, oh hee teares me, he teares me: and with these torments did this fit end betweene twelue and one. About three hee fell into a trance and torments like the former: for after he had spo∣ken fearefully of the torments of the damned, he burst into pittifull speeches quaking saide; Looke where seuen di∣uels are, looke where a roaring lion is. Then he fel into a quiet trance, and foorth with clapped his hands, saying; I see a milke white doue flying towards me▪ see where my Sauior commeth, his face shineth as the Sunne. These wordes vttered, he was againe terrified, and so with some more torments and trances this fit ended. The two daies following he had many fits and some trances, vttering the like speeches as before. The xii. of Maie he was remoued from his vncle M. Saunders house at Caldwall being 3. miles distant, where he had sixe fits. From the 13. to the 23. he was handled after his accustomed maner. The 23 of Maie, he was cast into eighteene fits worse than the for∣mer; for his shoulder bones were thrust out of ioynt, his mouth drawne awrie; and amongst other complaints, hee
cried out of his legs, saying they thrust pinnes into them. And this is worthie the obseruation, that commonly (vp∣pon the Sabboth) when the boy was remembred by prai∣er in godly Assemblies, Sathan did shewe his extremest crueltie. The 24. and 25. he was tormented much like the day before. The 26. he was assaulted more fiercely, both in respect of the number and qualitie of his fits & tor∣ments, in which he did oftentimes crie out, saying; Looke where sathan commeth from vnder the bed: & oftentimes Thunder, thunder; Lightening, lightening; Flames of fire, flames of consuming fire; A beare, a beare; A dra∣gon, a dragon; looke where sathan comes downe ye chun∣ney, looke, looke; for Gods sake take me from him. And thus in these terrible fits this daye passed. The next daye there came one Iohn Dorell (a faithfull Preacher of the Word) to him; who seeing him in diuers of his fits, assu∣red his Frends and him he was possessed with an vnclean spirit: telling him (out of S. Iames 4 chapt. vers. 7.) that the onely way for his deliuerance was to resist sathan; in which if he failed, he shuld sin against God: because it was a breach of a Commandement, Resist the diuell▪ &c. That for his further incouragement, he had a promise of victo∣rie, in that it is said, he will or shall flee; That by the diuel is not to be vnderstood onely the temptations of the diuel, but euen sathans verie person. And proceeding to confirme the Childes faith in this Resistance, he afterwards exhor∣ted his Parents and the whole Familie to prepare them∣selues against the next day to that holy exercise of Prayer and Fasting; alledging (to put by all doubts) the words of Christ, This kinde goeth not out but by Praier & Fast∣ing. Wheretoo they being verie willing importuned Iohn Dorell for his presence and assistance. To which he aun∣swered, his assistaunce in Praier and Fasting they should haue, but not his presence, as well to auoide note of vaine∣glorie, as also for he saw no such necessitie by reason of the
Childes strme faith: neuertheles giuing them order for their Exercise, and appointing them the helpe of a Booke called The Enemie of Securitie, & putting them in good comfort, he foretold them what interruptions were likely to follow by the Euemies rage: and (saith he) when you shall see these things come to passe (which indeede fell out accordingly) then know ye for certaintie as he is possessed (which his Frendes at Cawdwall stoode in doubt of), so looke that deliuerance is at the doore; and therefore fame not in the mid-way. Thus he departed. The next day, the Family with some others in the feare of God being toge∣ther, the holy Exercise of Praier and Fasting was taken in hand: and (after some Praier vsed for the assistaunce of Gods Spirite, and praying for the remission of sinnes) he was verie grieuously and often tormented; & (by meanes of his fits and torments) much interrupted therein, spend∣ing much time about the same. A Praier against the temp∣tations of Sathan was vsed; and in the beginning thereof he was presently taken with a dumb fit: and comming to himselfe, he began to pray againe; and his fits came again and againe so oft as he came to anie substantial Poynt. Af∣ter a while he fell into a trance, and at length a small voite came from him saying; Brother Glassap, we cannot pre∣uaile, his faith is so strong, and they fast and pray, and a Preacher prayeth as fast as they. After these words, he fell into a fit, and so into a trance, a voyce beeing heard frō him (big & hollow) saying; Brother Radulphus, I wil goe vnto my master Belzebub, and he shall dubble their tungs. Then beginning againe to pray, hee fell into a fit, and after into a trance: afterward comming to himself, he poynted towards the chimney, saying; Loe where Belze∣bub standeth, & the witch by him. I charge thee in ye name of the Father the Sonne and the Holy Ghost, to tell mee whether this hee shee that did be witch mee or no? Doost thou say it was shee? Now the Lord (I beseech him) for∣giue
her, & I forgiue her. Further he said; I charge thee in the name of the Father the Sonne and the Holy Ghost to get thee from me, & come no more at me: for it is writ∣ten, Resist the diuell, and hee will flye from thee: and pre∣sently he sayd; He is gone, he is gone. Then prayed he a∣gaine, and (at the third word) was throwne into a fit and a Traunce: whērein a voyce was heard from him (hys mouth being wyde op̄en, as still it was when these voyces were vttered) saying; Radulphus, Belzebub can doo no good, his head is stroken off with a word: but I wyll goe fetch the flying Eagle and his flock. Presently af∣ter these words, he fell into another fit and a traunce: and (lying so) sayd; I see an Angell in the windowe, like a milke white Doue, sent from the Lord to bee with mee to comfort and assist vs: but that is nothing in respect of the Lord himselfe. Then (beginning to pray againe) he fell into a Fitte and a Traunce: in the which one of the olde voyces was heard from him, saying; We cannot preuayle, let vs goe out of him, and enter into some of these heere. This voyce came twice, and it made the Standers by afrayde. Then (reading againe) bee fell into a Traunce: and the former voyce was heard from him, speaking verie hollow∣ly (as both those vnnaturall voyces not vttered by hym∣selfe were) and saying; I would they were all gone but one that is among them: and then wee should doo well inough. Then hee read againe, and (beeing cast into a trauce) one of those voyces was heard, saying; There is a Wo∣man earnest at prayer, get her away▪ One in the Com∣panie (called Iohn Alsop) aunswered alowd and sayde; Wee cannot spare her: yet did none of them all that were there know that shee was praying; till (looking backe) they saw her earnestly at prayer in a corner being behynde them.
Beginning againe to read, hee was sodainly cast into a traunce, and a voyce was heard which sayd; He shall bee tormented till to morow at night, do God & you what you can: but Sathan was prooued a liar. Recouering, & reading againe, he was againe snatched into his traunce, the voyce beeing heard againe, saying; Wee cannot pre∣uaile, wee cannot preuaile, their Church increaseth: at which time came in two to ioyne in Praier with yt Com∣panie. After this, reading againe, he fell into a traunce, and a voyce was heard from him saying; Here commeth one of my people: with that they looked back, and were ware of a man of bad life comming into the parlor; and albeit the Boy was in his fit, yet he made signes with his hand to the Companie to get him away; which one of them perceiuing did for Presently he awaked and read, and was interrupted by a trance, wherein a voyce said; Teare the booke, teare the booke: and with that (although his eyes were closed) he snatched at the Booke (which one had in his hand) and tare foorth one leafe of it: which thing also from that time till two of the clocke, he attempted in euerie of his fits; & being restrained (by reason that one held the Booke, and another his hands) hee would bite strike and spurne them with his feete at the beginning of his fits: wherein he was farre stronger than he was wont, and his torments more exceeding in greatnes & number. Betweene 8 in the mor∣ning and 2 in the afternoon his countenance was strange∣ly disfigured, his mouth set wide open, & sometime drawne awrie, his face turned backward, and his armes and shol∣ders thrust out of ioynt: in which time he had one fitt and trance, wherein a voyce sayd; Wee cannot preuaile, for they will not be holpen with Witches. Brother Radul∣phus we cannot preuaile: let vs goe to our mistres and torment her, I haue had a draught of her blood to day, Forthwith it ceased, and straight waies he was in a trance againe, and a small voyce was heard, saying; I will stop
thy mouth▪ I will stop thy mouth: at which instaut hee was so stopped in his throate, that the Companie thought he had been strangled. In another fit, a voyce said; Your praiers preuaile not, they are not heard. Wherunto M. Rampam (Schoolmaster of Burton) replied; Thou art a liar sathan, for it is written: Wheresoeuer two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the middest of them, &c. About two of the clocke hee had a meruailous strange fit, tormenting him most pittifully: in the ende whereof he strained to cast with great vehemencie, and got vp some fleame and choller; at which time, if he were pos∣sessed with two spirites, (as it is probable he was) one of them went out of him. So from 2. till 4. his fits continued but decreasing in strength, and beeing without speeches. About 3. the Companie perceiuing him to bee faint, per∣swaded him to eate somewhat to refresh him: which he did (hauing touched neither meate nor drinke of all the whole day before): but before & after his meate he said the Lords Praier, and other Praiets in the Booke (which hee before had assaied to read and could not) without anie interrupti∣on. About 6, a clocke (being carried on his Keepers back, for he had no vse of his legs of three months before) his fit came vpon him verie sodainly, & he cried out like a beare. The standers by betooke themselues to Praier. During this fit hee had manie miserable torments, causing him to roare and shrike extreamly. Many such senslesse trances on this daye of his deliueraunce he had, as yeelded no signe of life, saue that his heart might be discerned to pant a little. At last (being laid vpon his bed) anone hee began to heaue and lift vehemently at his stomacke, and getting vp some fleame and choller, (poynting with his finger and follow∣ing with his eyes) hee said; Looke, looke, see you not the Mouse that is gone out of my mouth: and so poynted after it vnto the furthest part of the parlor. Then hee fell into a quiet trance; which ended, he was well till 7. a clocke: at
which time he and 2. or 3. more went to supper: and as he sate at the table he fell into a trance, and was thence caried to bed; as he lay there, a Uoice was heard, saying; My Son arise vp and walke, the euill spirit is gone from thee; arise and walke. Upon this accident his Keeper said; let vs see if he can goe betwixt vs. But he answered no; I can goe of my selfe. I thanke God: and so (standing on his feete) went presently forward without anie difficultie. And con∣sidering with himselfe this blessed change of his miserable estate, (of his owne accord) he fell flat vppon the ground, giuing God thankes for his wonderfull deliueraunce; and that in such excellent manner, as was to bee admired in a childe. But no doubt, the same Spirite which armed hym with faith and patience in the time of his torments, instru∣cted him how to giue thankes and pray. Being thus fully recouered, he went presently into the towne, that it might appeare what Iesus had done for him, to the praise of his glorie, and admitation of those that had, been acquainted with his meruailous visitation. The next morning Robert Toone went to the Gaole, and demanded of the Witch how she did? O master quoth she, neuer worse i for I haue had such an Ague this night, that I had thought my ioints would haue been torn in sun∣der. They that dwelt by the prison, could▪ not sleepe for the noyse that was there that night; so that it is like the di∣uell was as good as his word, when he said he would tor∣ment her. After he was thus meruailously deliuered, he stayd the next day at Cawdwall, & from thence went to his grand∣fathers M. Walkedens at Clifton; whether the aforesaid Iohn Dorell repaired vnto him, and counselled him to be now most heedfull, least the vncleane spirit returning, and his heart emptie of faith, bring 7 worse than himself with him, as our Sauior expresseth; assuring himselfe Sathan would striue to repossesse him.
Iohn Dorell departing, the Boy abode at Clifton till the 5. of Iune, which day he returned to Burton. There the 6. day (beeing the Sabaoth) and the 7. hee spent in religious excrecise. The 8 the went to Schoole, from whence sathan had long kept him. In the afternoone sitting at his book, he said vnto his fellowes; if you will goe with me into the Church-yard, I will show you a strange thing. Where∣vpon they went into the Schoole Porch, (which their Ma∣ster disliked not, because they had their Bookes in theyr hands) where after he had walked a while, hee sate downe and said he was wearie, and presently complained of one of his legs▪ euen crying out: which his Master hearing, came to him; and remembring his former trialls, prayed, moo∣uing the Childe to say after him, O Lord for Iesus Christes sake haue mercie vpon me. But he most cried, O my legs, my legs. Here is to bee noted, that how euer sathan gree∣uously assaulted him, yet did he not once torment him, be∣cause he was not (as before) in him which also some of the Boyes words confirmed. Being brought home to his Uncles, (manie following and flocking after him) hee groaned pittifully, crying also, Daggers, daggers: and at length he said (with a fearfull countenance) I am afraid of Sathan. The companie did incourage and comfort him against such temptations, per∣swading him to prayer; which thing he perfourmed wyth great difficultie, crying as before O my legs, O my legs. They being instant vpon him to pray, he poynted with his finger saying; What woman is that which standeth there: Still they vrged him with praier: and while they expected it▪ he said; what a thundring is here? I cannot abide this thundring. Then fell he into a trance, and hauing layne a while, a voyce was heard from him saying; He fel a little and I caught him. By and by awaking hee rose vp ama∣zedly and said; Where am I▪ I was euen now in the schoole? but they told him what had happened, so he came
down from his bed; and feeling himselfe well, he prayed & read a chapter quietly, and so remained well all that night. The next morning the Boyes Uncle thought it verie con∣uenient to labor by Praier to remooue this heauie displea∣sure of God, and the danger of these temptations, where∣with the Boy began agains to be assaulted: & to that end sent for two of his neighbors, & spent an houre in praier & reading the Scriptures. At last as the Boy was reading, be stopt, saying; what woman is that which stands there▪ They perswaded him to goe on, and not regard the illusi∣ons of sathan. So he read on, and was presently cast into a trance: and after he had laine a while said; Behold I see a Lambe, hearke what the Lambe saith; Thou didst fall & he caught thee: feare not, the Lord is thy buckler and defen∣der. After this hee read on, and within a little space fell a∣gaine into a quiet traunce, saying; Dost thou say if I wil worship thee, thou wilt make me vnderstand the secrets of all mens hearts? Anoyd Sathan, it is hid from thee: the Lord onely is the searcher of the hearts and reynes. Then did he read againe, and foorthwith was cast into a traunce, saying; What faire woman is this, that is so gorgeously apparailed? Dost thou say thou wilt giue her mee if I wil worship thee? Auyod Sathan, I neither care for her nor thee: the Lord is my comfort, and him onely will I wor∣ship: the Lamb and the Doue desire not to be worshipped, but thou alwaie desirest worship. Againe he read & fell in a trance, saying; Doost thou saye if I will sweare an oath thou wilt giue me a hundred pounds? Auoyd sathan. wouldst thou haue me take Gods name in vaine? I wyll not. He read againe, aud at the third word was snatched into his trance, saying; wouldst thou giue me a bag full of gold and siluer, if I will neuer read nor pray vnto God a∣nie more? Auoyd sathan, I neither regard thy gold nor sil∣uer; the Lord and his Word is better to mee than all the gold and siluer in the world.
They offered him the booke againe, and he falles present∣ly into a traunce, saying; wouldst thou haue mee teare the booke? I will not teare it doe what thou caust: wilt thou teare him in peeces that continueth reading? (he meant Richard Teate, who read forward when the boy was in∣terrupted.) Sathan thou canst not touch him, the Lorde will not suffer thee to hurt a haire of his head. Hee was strait after these wordes snatched into his trance, and said▪ Dost thou bid me open my mouth? what if I do open my mouth? dost thou say thou wilt enter into me? Auoyde sa∣than, thou canst not enter into me, except the Lorde giue thee leaue; and I trust hee will not. Againe after this hee falleth into a traunce saying, come maister Hildersham, let vs sixe goe to heauen: at which time there were iust six in the parlour. Then fell he againe before hee could reade two wordes into a trance, and said; what Sathan, wouldst thou haue me become a traitor? God defend. These words proceeded from him with great vehemencie and earnest∣nesse of spirite. Then pawsing a while he saieth againe, Doost thou say, that when I am asleepe thou wilt plucke out my throat? I care not for thee; thou canst not touch a haire of my head, except God giue thee leaue. Againe, be∣ing in a traunce hee saide; doost thou say thou wilt set the house on fire and burne vs all? do thy worst, Sathan, thou canst not touch our soules. Then he read againe, and at the second word started amazedly, saying; looke where the Beare commeth, looke looke, do you not see how he com∣meth against vs with open mouth? harke how he roareth, then saide he, Auoyde Sathan, and get thee hence: yea, I charge thee in the name of the euerliuing God to get thee hence. They offer him the booke againe, and he read not three wordes, but he was ouertaken with a quiet traunce; wherein lying a while, hee saide, Oh I see a milke white Doue: the Doue saith, Feare not, you shall haue better newes. Againe he beganne to reade, and againe hee was
snatched into his trance, and saide, Dost thou say the Lord hath giuen thee leaue to enter into mee. Auoyde Sathan thou art a liar, I know he will not suffer thee to enter in∣to me. Againe, after he offered to reade, he was cast into a trance, and lying very quietly he saieth: hearke ho, looke what a faire Doue is there: the Doue saith the diuell v∣seth enemies towards me: hearke hearke what the Doue saith, thou hast an enemie heere vpon earth, that saith thou art a dissembler, he shall frie in hell torments, thine eies shall see his iudgements, for his sinnes doe smoake vp in∣to the elements, and do pierce the heauens. Then pawzing againe a while he saith, harke what the Doue saith, wher∣soeuer the glorie of God is shewed, there is alwayes some enemies to resist it. He beganne to reade againe, but at the third word fell into a traunce saying: what, doost thou say thou wilt torment me? doost thou say thou wilt carry me into a wood, and cast me out at the window? My Redee∣mer liueth, the Lorde of hostes is his name, I feare thee not; remember that Sathan; and pawzing a while he saith, M. Hildersham, see see how the world passeth away▪ yea it must passe away, it hasteth on apace. Then beginnes he to reade againe, and at the third word is cast into a trance, & at length he saith, See what a little of Gods word doth, how it chaseth him away: see see how Sathan flieth away. Againe being about to reade, he started sodainely, and said this booke is a flame of fire, and presently hee fell into a trance, saying, Wouldst thou haue me teare the Booke? Auoyde Sathan, I will not teare it. Then lying stil and pawzing a while he saide at length; Looke where the doue commeth, harke what the doue saith, The Lord thy God hath tied thy enimy Sathan fast in a chaine, vnles thou fall againe, he shall neuer tempt thee, hold fast and forget not: the childe continued his speech saying: O Lambe of God that takest away the sinnes of the world, thy name be prai∣sed, thy name be magnified and extolled for euermore.
Forthwith he opened his eies, and taking the Booke, he read very cheerefully a good space. Then did hee aud all the companie ioyning with him humble themselues be∣fore the Lord God, glorifying and praising his holy name, for his comfortable presence, & gracious assistance in this myraculous worke▪ and so hauing continued in prayer a good while, the boy at last arose, finding the doues words true, and himselfe very well, both in mind and bodie, and so (thankes be to God) he hath remained euer since, which the Lord continue to his owne glorie, the ioy of the godly, and the childes comforte, Amen. Now the Witch is dead, had she liued, she should haue bin executed. FINIS. Shortly you shall haue the true storie come foorth of those seuen in Lancashire that were posses∣sed with vncleane spirites. and all seuen deliue∣red at one time by this man. LABORE ET CONSTANTIA printer's or publisher's device Printed at London for Iohn Oxenbridge dwelling in Paules Churchyard at the signe of the Parrot. 1597.
