7064 S117136 99852351 17667
A True report of a most famous Victorie or Romane fact, atchieued by a certaine vessell, called the blacke Galley of Dort, vpon the thirtieth day of Nouember last, 1600. VVhich at that time tooke the Ad∣mirall of the Citie of Antwerpe, with seuen other shippes, all well furnished with mu∣nition for warre. Imprinted at London for Cuthbert Burby: And are to be sold at his shop adioyning to the Royall Exchange. 1600.
A true report of a most famous vic∣torie, atchieued by a certain vessell, called the black Galley of Dort, vpon the 30. day of Nouember last, 1600 which at that time tooke the Admirall of the Citie of Antwerpe, with seuen other shippes, all well furnished with munition for warre. COnsidering the Lordes the generall Estates of Hol∣land and Sealand, haue thought good to cause to be made and appoynted a Galley, to the ende that therewith, and with the ayde of some ships of war, they may hinder the Gal∣lies of the Sluce, the which do daily cōmit great spoyle on the sea: so it is, that by the consent of the Lords the Generall Estates, there hath beene made and appoynted at Dort, a certaine Galley being well prouided, with all manner of munition seruing to the warre, and also well furnished with great Ordinance. This Galley was called the blacke Galley of Dort, the which being wel manned with men of warre of Dort afore∣sayd, was set forth towards Sealand, to the ende there to conuoy the Marchants shippes, which are to passe to∣wards England, Fraunce, Scotland, and East Freesland, or to any other places.
Immediately after, it happened that this aforesayde black Gallie being at sea, and seeing three Gallyes of the Sluce which had taken a shippe, which was compassed betwéene two Gallies, being determined to carrie the same into the Hauen of the Sluce, the sayde blacke Galley hindred them of their purpose, and came presently in all haste to helpe the same shippe, discharging her Ordinance very vehe∣mently at one of the sayde Gallyes, so that shee did al∣most vtterly spoyle the same, and made her gladde to slippe away. Then with all haste following the other two Gal∣lies which had taken the ship, shee so discharged her Ordi∣nance at them, that they were constrained to leaue the shippe, and saue themselues: so that the sayd Galley of Dort did release the shippe, and the thrée Gallies fledde a∣way into the Sluce: howbeit, they were verie much enda∣maged by the shot of the blacke Galley. 1600. betwéene the nine & twentie, and thirtie dayes of the moneth of Nouember, the sayde blacke Galley of Dort, with three or 4. Sloopes which were with her, vn∣dertooke a woorthie fact before the Citie of Antwerpe, where they with a stout enterprise seysed on the Admiralles shippe, which was well appoynted with Ordinance, hauing in her sixteene brasse péeces, and tenne iron cast péeces of ordinance, with certaine stone cast peeces, which Ordi∣nance lay thrée rowes high: and the sayde Admiralles ship is of the burden of about ninetie lasts, being so fayre a ship, that there is none like the same in all Holland and Sealand. Likewise they tooke also the shippe of Brussell, in the which were foure brasse peeces of Ordinance, with the shippe of Mechelen, containing foure brasse peeces: and moreouer, fiue conuoy shippes, containing euerie of them foure péeces of Ordinance, which 8. shippes appoynted as aforesaide, were taken by the sayde blacke Galley, with thrée or foure Sloopes which were with her, they being in daunger of
their liues: for when they passed by Oordam, those of the Sconce thought them to bee Sloops, which carried muni∣tion and prouant toward Hulst in Flanders, but they were other Sloops, which they had not expected: but because they tooke them to bee friendes, those of Oordam did not discharge their Ordinance at them. And our Galley being past the Sconce, they presently aboarded the Admirall. The Mari∣ners whereof, some were slain, and some leapt ouer-boord and were drowned, except two boyes, which they brought with them. Thus happened it with the sayde shippe the Admirall, and with the shippe of Brussell, the ship of Mechelen, and the fiue other conuoy shippes, the which were brought to Flu∣shing, where they lie together. The Burgars of Antwerpe were verie fearefull, and did shut their gates, without ope∣ning them againe in two dayes, kéeping careful watch, fea∣ring they were betrayed. In this worthie victorie, they got the sayde fayre shippe of the Admiralles, the ship of Brussell, and the sayde shippe of Mechelen, and the sayd fiue conuoy shippes, in which eight shippes were fiftie foure peeces of Ordinance, besides certaine stone peeces, which were in the Admiralles. And this is the Galley, whereof men did often talke, saying that it would prooue lost labour for this countrey: but it hath appeared to the contrarie, by this worthie fact happened, as is aforesayd. This worthie victorie haue those of the blacke Galley obtained, with small losse of their men, to witte, there were slaine in the winning of these eight ships foure of our men, and sixe were hurt. Whatsoeuer they now are doing, with the helpe of God, the time will make manifest. FINIS.
MAny at the first with the Galley did flout, And sayd it was a foolish thing without doubt: But hee is a foole that a thing will blame, E're men haue giuen it any name. Therefore I haue tearmed this a Romane fact, Because I esteeme it to be a worthie act. A wise man doth passe his iudgement after the conclusion: But the foole will bring vs all in confusion.
