9403.4 S1955 22935320 25943
ANNO. XXXII. HENRICI OCTAVI. ❧ THE SVBSIDYE OF THE TEMPORALTIE. THE KYNGES most louyng subiectes in this present parli∣ament assembled, louyngly callyng to theyr remembraunce, the innumerable benefites and goodnes, which they alwais haue founde in the kynges moste royall maiestie, theyr natu∣rall and moste drad soueraygne lorde, reignynge ouer them the space of .XXXI. yeres fulle and more, durynge the whiche they haue welthyly lyued, and prosperousely contynued vnder his maiestie, well de∣fended, gouerned, and mainteyned from and agaynst all maner of enmies, to theyr no lyttell suretie wealth quiete and rest: howe his highnes also by the inestimable grace that god hath gyuen hym, & his onely high prudence wysedom and study, hath brought his said true subiectes out of all blynd∣nes and ignorance into the true and perfyte knowlege of almighty god, by his most holy word: Thabolyshing also of the byshop of Rome & his vsur∣ped auctoritie, by whose subtyl imagination, practise, inuentions and deui∣ses, excedyng summes of money haue wont daily and yerely to be conueyed out of this realme for payment of byshops bulles, breues, and dispensati∣ons, and the money cōmonly called Peterpence, with vntrue & fayned par∣dons, by the whiche and dyuers other lyke, and the gatherers of the same, beinge no small numbre (specially of pardoners) the kinges louyng subiec∣tes haue bene greatly heretofore disceyued spoyled and hindred: wherof by his princely policie and wysedome they be delyuered and laufully dischar∣ged. Consyderynge also the excedynge great costes charges and expences that his highnes hath susteyned in and aboute the repression of the greate late rebellion in Lyncolne shire, and the north partes of this realme: what yerely costes and charges also his maiestie is at, and of longe tyme hath bene, for and about the establyshynge of thre presidentes and discrete seue∣rall counselles, as well in the marches of Wales, and the shires thervnto adioynynge, as in the northe and weste partes of this Realme: By reason wherof his trewe subiectes poore and ryche without tracte of tyme, or any greate charges or expences, haue vndelayed Iustyce dayely admynystred vnto them. Further the greate and excedynge charges also his highnesse was at, the yere laste paste, in and for the preparation of an armye by the sea, ryggynge vyctualynge and settynge forwarde his maiesties na∣uye of shippes with artyllerye, and other habyllementes of warre, for the defence of his sayde louynge subiectes, and his realme, agaynste suche ennemyes as than meued the pretensed inuasyon into the same, and vtter destruction therof. Moreouer, the greatte and mooste extreme charges, co∣stes and expences his maiestie hath susteyned, and contyneweth dayelye, in edifyenge, newe makynge, buyldynge, fortyfyenge, and preparynge, as well of the townes, Castelles, and fortresses of Calays, Guysnes, Ruys∣banke, and Hammes, Barwyke, Carlyle, and other fortresses, sette and
beinge nere vnto the borders of Scotlande, as the Castelles, Blocke-howses and Fortresses newelye made edyfyed and buylded in the downes at Douer, Folkeston, Rye, Chalshotspoynte, the Cowe vnderwighte, two Bulwarkes aboue Grauesende, one Bulwarke at Higham, two other bul∣warkes on Essex side, that is to say, thone at Tilbury, and the other ouer a∣gaynste Grauesend, with diuerse other at Plymmouth, Dartmouthe, Fal∣mouthe, Fawey, the Torrebay, Portlande, and other: And the great char∣ges that his highnes must continually sustayne in and aboute the muny∣tynge, and fortifieng of the sayd Castelles, fortresses, and bulwarkes with all maner of habylementes of warre, with the great yerely and contynuall charges, for thengarnishynge of the same with captaynes, lieutenauntes, porters, souldiours, gunners, and men of warre for the sure defence therof. The greate costes also and expences by his maiesty susteyned in and about the makynge of the hauen at Douer, a singular welthe surety commodyty and profytte to the hole realme, and the preseruation of the Nauye of the same. Fynally the longe and continuall charges and expences his maiestie hath had and continuallye doth susteyne in and aboute the mayntenaunce of an armye for the defence of his ennemyes within his dominion of Ire∣lande, and for the conducyng and bringing the same to good rule order and cyuyle subiection; as well for the vtilitie and prosperyte of his trewe and louynge subiectes of this Realme, as for the suretie of the same. All why∣che, with many other notable thynges done by his maiestie for theyr sure∣tie, peace, quiete, preseruation, wealth, commodytie, and other excedynge benefactes, whiche were verye longe and tedyouse herein to be rehersed, they welle considered, coulde neuer haue bene done compassed nor perfec∣ted withoute meruailous intollerable costes, charges, and expences. Therfore thoughe they recken theym selfes farre vnable, and of smalle power to doo any thynge, that myghte be gratefulle to soo noble a prince and soueraygne, that hath soo benygnelye haboundauntlye, gracyous∣lye and polytykely, declared his vertue, greate goodnesse, and magny∣tude towardes theym, as theyr hartes wolde serue, yf theyr powers were accordynge to the same: Yet to the intente, his maiestie maye perceyue theyr louynge myndes, good wylles, and towardenesse, to be suche as canne not forgette his highnesse greatte goodnesse soo haboundauntelye shewed for theyr wealthe, suretye, and quyetenesse, they of theyr owne free wylles, lyberalytie, and assente, lyke trewe, naturalle, faythefulle, and mooste louynge subiectes, of singular loue, zeale, and obedyence they owe towardes the kynges maiestie, theyr mooste dradde soueraygne and most benygne lorde and kynge, myndynge to supporte and beare with hym, after theyr symple powers, somme what towardes the alleuiation of his sayde greatte and mooste excedynge charges and expences, they haue of one hole assente and agreemente, with the consente of the lordes spyry∣tuall and temporalle in the sayde parlyamente also assembled, and by au∣ctoritie of the same, gyuen and graunted vnto the kynges hyghenesse,
towardes his foresayde greate costes and inestimable charges, foure hole xv. and .x. to be had payd taken and leuyed of the mouable goodes, cattel∣les, and other thynges vsuall to suche .xv. and .x. to be contributorye and chargeable within the shyres cyties boroughes and townes, and other places of this his realme, in maner and fourme afore tyme vsed (excepte the summe of .xxiiii. M. li. therof fully be deducted, that is to saye .vi. thou∣sande pounde of eyther of the hole .xv. and .x. of ye summe that a .xv. and x. atteyneth vnto, in reliefe comforte and discharge of the poore townes ci∣ties and boroughes of this his sayde realme wasted desolate or destroyed, or ouer greatly empoueryshed, or els to suche .xv. or .x. ouer greatly char∣ged: the same summe of .xxiiii. M. li. of the sayd foure hole .xv. and .x. that is to say, seuerally for euery of the sayd .xv. & .x. vi. M. li. after such rate as was afore this tyme made vnto euery shyre to be deuyded, in suche maner and fourme as heretofore for one hole .xv. and .x. was had and diuided, the sayde foure hole .xv. and .x. (the exceptions and deductions aforesayde thervpon had) to be payde in maner and fourme folowynge. That is to saye: The fyrste hole .xv. and .x. to be payed to his hyghnes in the receipte of his Eschequier, the .iiii. daye of February next commynge. The seconde hole .xv. and .x. to be payde to his sayd hyghnes, at the receipte of his Es∣chequire, the .iiii. daye of February in the yere of oure lorde god that shall be .M. v. xli. The thyrde hole .xv. and .x. to be payde vnto his hyghnes at the sayd receypte of his Eschequier in the fourthe daye of Februarye than nexte folowynge. And the fourth hole .xv. and .x. to be payde to his sayde hyghnes at the sayde receyt of his foresayde Eschequire the fourth daye of February, in the yere of oure lorde god, that shall be a thousande fyue hun¦dred forty and thre. ¶ And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesayd, that the knyghtes elected and retourned of and for the shyres within this realme, for this pre¦sent parlyamente, citezens of cyties, and burgeys of boroughes and tow∣nes, where collectours haue bene vsed to be named and appoynted for the collection of any .xv. and .x. before this tyme graunted, shall name and ap∣poynte yerely sufficient and able persones for the collection of the said .xv. and .x. in euerye of the sayde shyres cyties boroughes and townes. And also suche personne or personnes, soo by theym to be named and ap∣poynted for the collection of the sayde .xv. and tenthe, shall seuerallye ap∣poynte and allotte in to hundredes, rapes, wapentakes, Cyties, Bo∣roughes, and townes. And alsoo the sayde personnes soo named and appoynted for the collection of the same .xv. and .x. shall be charged and chargeable vpon his or theyr accompte or accomptes in the Eschequire to be made, with all suche summe or summes of moneye, as the hundredes, rapes, wapentakes, cyties, boroughes, and townes, where he or they shall soo happen to be appoynted, amounte vnto, and of no more summe or summes: And vppon the payemente of suche summes of money, as he shall be charged with, shall be dyscharged, and haue his Quietus est,
the none accomptynge, or none paymente of any other his felowes, or the insufficiency of them not withstandyng. And the names and surnames of euery of the sayd collectours for the sayd .xv. and .x. to gyther with ye place allotted to theyr collection and charge, the sayde knyghtes, cytisens, and burgesis for the shyre cytie and boroughe, wherof they be elected named and retourned, shall certifie euery yere before the kynge in his chauncerye yerely at the vtas of saynt Iohan Baptist ensuing. And yf default of any such certifyenge be had or made: than the lorde Chauncellour for the tyme beynge, shall name and appoynte collectours for the collection of the same hole foure .xv. and .x. in maner and fourme as the sayde knyghtes of the shyre shulde haue done, and as afore tyme haue ben vsed, the whiche sayde collectours and euery of them, shall haue lyke allowaunce vpon theyr ac∣comptes for theyr fees wages and rewardes for the collection of the sayde xv. and .x. in as large maner and fourme as anye collectour or collectours of .xv. and .x. haue had at any season in tyme paste. And also that no collec∣tour that shall be named and charged for the collection of any of the sayde xv. and .x. shall be made collectour, or charged with any of the resydue of the sayde .xv. and .x. And that the barons of the Eschequyre for the tyme beynge, shall and maye from tyme to tyme awarde suche processes for the spedy payment therof, agaynst the collectour and collectours of the same, as by theyr discretions shall be thought conuenient. ¶ And because the sayde .xv. and .x. graunted as is aforesayde, extendeth but to a small summe of moneye towardes, the recompense of the charges of oure sayde soueraygne lorde, before this tyme susteyned in his moste royall affaires for the commen wealth of this realme, as is afore rehersed, his sayde louynge commons, haue graunted vnto the same oure soue∣raygne lorde, by the auctoritie of this present parlyamente, a yearely sub∣sidy, by the space of two yeares, nowe nexte ensewynge, to be taxed, sette, le∣uyed, and payde of euery personne, of what estate or degree he be of, ac∣cordynge to the tenoure of this acte, in maner and fourme folowynge. That is to saye, of euerye personne borne vnder the kynges obeysaunce, and chargeable to this subsydye, for euerye pounde yearelye durynge of the sayde two yeares, that the same personne, or anye other to his vse, haue in fee symple, fee tayle, terme of lyfe, terme of yeares, by exe∣cution, by warde, by copye of courte Rolle, or at wylle, any honours, ca∣stelles, manours, landes, tenementes, rente, seruyce, hereditamentes, an∣nuyties, fees, corrodyes, or profyttes of the true iuste and clere yearelye value of .xx. li. or aboue, eche of the sayde two yeares (landes and tene∣mentes chargeable to the dysme of the clergye onely except) .xii. d. And of euerye alyen or straunger borne out of the kynges obeysaunce, as well de∣nysen, as other, for euery pounde yearely in eyther of the sayd two yeares, that the same alyen or straunger, or any other to his vse hath in fourme be¦fore sayd, in landes tenementes, & other the premisses, of the clere yerelye value of .xx. s. or aboue (excepte before excepted) .ii.s. And of euery person
borne vnder the kynges obeysaunce, yerely duringe euery of the sayd two yeres for euery pounde as well in coyne, & the value of euery pounde that any such person hath of his owne, or to any other vse, as also plate, stocke of marchandise, all maner of cornes and blade seuered from the grounde, housholde stuffe, and of all other goodes moueable, aswell within this re∣alme as without, and of all such summes of money, that to hym is owyng, wherof he trusteth in his conscience surely to be payde (excepte and of the premisses deducted suche summes of moneye as he oweth, and in his con∣science truelye entendeth to paye. And excepte also the apparell of all per∣sonnes belongynge to theyr bodyes, sauynge iewelles, golde, syluer, stone, and other) .vi. pence. So that all the foresayd substaunce, coynes, debtes, plate, goodes, and catalles, and other the premysses, extende and be to the value of .xx. pounde sterlynges, or aboue (excepte before excepted.) And of euerye alyen and straunger borne oute of the kynges obeyssaunce, as well denisen as other, inhabiting within this realme, yearely durynge eyther of the sayde two yeres, for euery pounde that he hathe in coyne, and the value of euerye pounde in plate cornes graynes and blades of cornes seuered from the grounde, marchaundyse, householde stuffe, or other goo∣des, iewelles, or catalles mouable, as is before sayde, as well within this realme as withoute, and of all summes of moneye, that to hym is owynge, whereof he trusteth in his conscience surelye to be payde (excepte and of the premysses deducted suche summes of money as he oweth, and in his conscience entendeth truelye to paye .xii. pence. Soo that all the same substaunce, coignes, dettes and plate, goodes, and catalles, and other the premysses, extende to the value of twentye shyllynges sterlyng, or aboue. ¶ And it is further enacted, by auctoritie of this presente parlyamente, that euerye suche personne, as well suche as be borne vnder the kynges obeysaunce, as euerye other personne straunger borne, inhabytynge within this realme, whiche at the tyme of the sayde assessynge or taxa∣tion, yearelye to be hadde or made, shall be oute of this realme, and shall haue goodes or catalles, landes, or tenementes, fees, or annuities, or o∣ther yerely profyttes within this realme, shall be charged for the same, by the certificat of the inhabitauntes of the partyes, where suche goodes, ca∣talles, landes, tenementes, or other the premysses than shall be, or in suche other place, where suche personne or his factour, deputie, or attourneye, shall haue his mooste resorte vnto, within this realme, in lyke manner as yf the same personne were or hadde bene at the tyme of the assessynge within thys realme, abydynge, or dwellynge. And that all coygne, plate, goodes, and cattalles, beynge in the rule and custodye of anye personne or personnes, to the vse of any other personne within age, or of full age, or to the vse of anye corporation, fraternitie, guylde, mysterye, or anye commynaltye, beynge corporate, or not corporate, be and shall be rated, sette, and charged, by reasone of thys acte, as the value
certifyed by the presenters of that certificat, to be sworne in euery of ye sayd two yeares .xii.d. of the pounde. So that the same goodes be of the value of .xx. li. or aboue: and the summes as afore is rehersed, taxed, to be leuyed and taken of them that shall haue suche goodes in custodye, or otherwyse charged as afore is rehersed, the same personne to be discharged agaynste hym or them, that shall haue them at the tyme of the deliuery therof, or at his otherwyse departure frō the custody or possession of the same, all goo∣des, cattals, iewels, and ornamentes of churches or chapels, and all other thynges ordeyned for the honour and seruyce of almightye God, alwayes of and for any charge to the sayd subsidie forprised and except. The which sayd subsidy in & for euery of the sayd two yeres, as is aforesayd, shalbe as∣sessed, leuyed, taken, and payde of euery person chargeable to the same sub¦sidy graunted by this acte, according and after the rate of such yerely sub∣stance and value of landes, tenementes, and other the premysses, goodes, and cattals, as euery person so to be charged, shall be of, at the tyme of the sayd yerely assessyng or taxation, vpon hym to be made, and in none other wyse. And the sayd subsidye shall be yerely taxed, assessed, and rated, accor∣dyng to this acte in euery shyre, ryddynge, lathe, wapentake, rape, cytie, bo¦rough, towne, and euery other place, within euery of the sayde two yeres, betwene the fyrste daye of Septembre, and the .xx. daye of October. And the sayd summes of euery shyre ryddyng cytie towne, or other place afore∣sayd, of and for the sayd subsidy to be taxed and rated yerely by commissio∣ners of and to the same lymitted, or two of them at the leste, with the na∣mes of the hyghe collectours, shall be certifyed into the kynges eschequer euery of the sayd two yeres, before the .xvi. daye of Nouembre, & the sayde summes, in maner and fourme before sayd taxed, shalbe yerely payde into the kynges receyte of his escheker, at Westmynster, to the vse of our sayde soueraygne lorde, euery of the sayd two yeres before the .vi. day of Februa∣ry yerely, durynge the sayd .ii. yeres. And the summes abouesayd, of & for the sayd subsidy yerely taxed sette asked demanded taken gathered leuyed and payd vnto the vse of our sayd soueraygne lorde, in forme beforesayde, as well within the liberties franchises sayntuaries auncient demayn, and other what so euer place exempte or not exempt, as without: Except suche shyres places and persones as shalbe forprised in & by this acte: any graūt chartre vse or libertie by reason of any letters patentes, or otherwyse pri∣uileged prescription, allowaunce of the same, or what so euer other matter of discharge heretofore to the contrary had made graunted vsed or obtey∣ned, not withstandynge. ¶ Prouyded alwaye, that the assessynge, leuyenge, and gatheryng of the sayd subsidy, or any part therof in any libertie or fraunchyse, be not in any wyse hereafter preiudiciall or hurtfull to any of the lordes of the said liber¦ties or fraunchises, of for or cōcerning theyr sayd liberties or fraunchyses. ¶ And furthermore be it enacted, that for the assessynge and orderynge of the sayd subsidy yerely durynge the said two yeres, to be duely had, that
the lorde Chancellour of England, lorde Treasorer of England, the lorde President of the kynges most honorable councell, & the lorde Priuy seale, for the tyme beynge, or two of them at the least, wherof the lorde Chauncel¦lour of England for the tyme beynge to be one of them, shall & maye name and appoynt of and for euery shyre and ryddynge within this realme, and also of & for euery of the cyties of London, Couentry, Chestre, new Salis∣burye, Canterburye, Norwych, Bristowe, Wourcester, yorke, Lyncolne, Bathe, Exceter, Hereforde, and Rochester, and for euerye of the townes of Southampton, Leicester, Shoresbury, Notingham, Kingston vpō Hull, Oxeforde, newe Wyndesore, Gloucestre, Colchestre, great yarmouth, Io∣peswich, Northampton and Derby, and of and for the borough of South werke, & ysle of Wyght, such certayn number of persons, as to them shall be thought conuenient of euery of the same shyres, ryddynges, lathes, wa¦pentakes rapes cyties boroughes, and euerye other place, and ysle of Wyght, as of other inhabitauntes of ye same shyres ryddynges lathes wa¦pentakes rapes cyties townes boroughes & ysle, to be commissioners with in the sayd shyres ryddynges wapentakes lathes rapes cyties townes bo∣roughes and ysle, wherof they be inhabitauntes in the same, and of & for the honorable housholdes of the kynge our souerayne lorde, the queene, & the prince, certayne of the head officers of the same to be commissioners of the same housholdes, in what shyre or other place, ye sayd housholdes shall then happen to be: And the lorde Chauncellour and other with hym afore named, in lyke maner maye name & appoynt of euery other cytie borough or towne corporat, not beyng before expressed .vi. v. iiii. iii. or .ii. of the head officers, and other sad and honest inhabitauntes of euery of the sayd other cyties boroughes and townes corporate, accordinge to the number & mul∣titude of people beyng in the same, the which persons, yf any such be there vnto named of the sayd inhabitauntes of the sayde cyties boroughes and townes corporat, not expressed before by name, shall be ioyned and put as commissioners with the persons named for such shyres and ryddynges as the sayd cyties boroughes & townes corporate, not expresly before named, be set and haue theyr beynge, which persons so named for and of the sayde cyties boroughes & townes corporat, not before named expresly, by reason of theyr dwellynge in the same, shall not take vpon them, ne none of them to put any part of theyr cōmission in execution for the premysses, out of the sayd cytie borough or towne corporate, wherin they beyng so named onely for the same, be dwellynge: & also not to execute the sayd cōmission, within the cytie borough or towne corporat where they be so dwelling, but ioyntly with two at the least of the other commissioners within ye shyre ryddynge and in that commission where they be so dwellynge, at such dayes & tymes as the sayd other commissioners for the same shyre & ryddynge shall there vnto lymit & appoint within the same cytie or towne corporat, wherof they so be, and not out of such cytie or towne, & in that maner to be aydyng and assystynge with the sayde other commissioners, in & for the good execution
of the effect of theyr sayd commission, vpon payne of euery of the sayd com¦missioners so named, for euery such cytie borough & towne corporat, being not before expressed by name, to make such fyne as ye sayde other cōmissio∣ners in the cōmission of & for the sayde shyre ryddynge named, or foure of them at the least, shall by theyr discretions sette & certifye in to the kynges Eschequer, there to be leuyed vnto the vse of our souerayn lord the kynge, in lyke maner as such or lyke summes had ben sette and rated vpon euery such person for the sayd subsidy, the which commissioners so named of and for the said cyties boroughes and townes, not before specially named, and onely put in the sayd cōmission by reason of theyr dwellynges in the same, shall not haue any parte of the portion of the fees or rewardes for the com¦missioners and theyr clerkes in this acte afterwarde especifyed. And yt the Chauncellour of Englande for the tyme beyng, shall make & directe oute of the court of the Chauncery, vnder the kynges greate seale, seuerall com¦missions, that is to saye, to euery shyre, riddyng, lathes, wapentakes, rape, cytie, towne, boroughe, ysle and housholdes, vnto such persone or persons, as by his discretion & other with hym afore named, in lyke maner & forme as afore is rehersed, shalbe thought sufficient for the sessynge & leueyng of the same subsidy in all shyres and places, according to the true meanynge of this acte, which commissions shalbe yerely directed and deliuered to the sayd commissioners, or to one of them, before the .vi. day of August: And to euery of the sayd commissioners .x. cedules, conteyning in them the tenour of this acte, shalbe affiled, by the which commission, the commissioners in euery suche commission named accordynge to this acte, & euery number of them vnto two of them at the least, shall haue full power and auctority, to put the effecte of the sayd acte in execution: And by auctority of this act af¦ter suche commission to them directed, maye yerely, durynge the sayd two yeres, by theyr assentes and agrementes, seuer them selues for the executiō of theyr commission in hundredes, lathes, wardes, rapes, wapentakes, townes, parishes, and other places within the lymittes of theyr sayde com∣mission, in such forme as to them shall seme expedient to be ordered, & be∣twene them to be communed and agreed, vpon whiche seueraunce euerye persone of this present parlyament that shalbe commissioner, shalbe assig∣ned in the hundred where he dwelleth in place by theyr commission. ¶ Prouyded alwaye, that no personne be or shall be assygned anye com∣missioner, to & for the execution of this presente acte, but onely in the shere where he dwelleth and inhabiteth. And that no person, beynge assigned to the contrary hereof, in any wyse shall put in execution the effect of this act, or any parte therof. ¶ And it is enacted by auctoritie of this present parlyament, that the cō∣missioners and euery of them, whiche shall be named lymitted & assigned, according to this act to be cōmissioners in euery shyre, rydding, lathes, wa¦pentakes, rapes, cytie, towne, borough, ysle, & in ye sayd housholdes, or any other place, and none other, shal truely effectually and diligently for theyr
partes execute the effecte of this present acte, accordyng to the tenour ther of in euery behalfe: and none otherwyse by any other meanes, without o∣mission, fauour, drede, malyce, or any other thinge to be attempted or done by them or any of them to the contrarye hereof. And the sayde commissio∣ners, and euerye nombre of them vnto two of them at the leste, and none other for the execution of the same commission & acte, shall yerely duringe the sayd two yeres betwene the fyrst daye of September and the .xx. daye of October, after cōmissions delyuered to them in fourme aboue sayd, di∣rect theyr seuerall or iont precept vnto .viii. vi. v. iii. ii. or mo, as for the nō∣bre of the inhabitantes shalbe requisite, of the most substanciall discrete & honest persons inhabitantes, by the sayde cōmissioners, or two of them at the leste to be named, of and in hundredes lathes rapes wapentakes ward parishe towne or other place, as well within the libertie frāches sanctuary as without, within the limittes of the shyres, riddynges, lathes, wapenta∣kes, rapes, cyties, townes, boroughes or yle aforesayd, & other places with in the limites of theyr commissions, and to the constables, subconstables, baylyffes, and other lyke officers or ministers of euery of the sayd hundre∣des, townes, wardes, lathes, wapentakes, lathes, parishes, and other pla∣ces before sayd, as to the sayd commissioners of euery nombre of them, vn∣to two of them by theyr discretion in diuision, shall seme expedient, as by the maner and vse of that parties shall be requisite, straytelye by the same precepte chargynge and commaunding the same inhabitaūtes constables and other officers aforesayd, to whome suche precepte shalbe so directed, to appere in theyr propre persons before the sayd cōmissioners, or suche nom∣bre of them, as they shall diuyde them selfes, vnto two of them at the leste, at certayne dayes and places by the sayd cōmissioners, or euery nombre of them, vnto two of them at the least, within cytie boroughes or towne cor∣porate, or without, in any other place as is aforesayd, by theyr discretions to be lymited, there to do and accomplyshe all that to them on the parte of oure soueraygne lorde the kynge shalbe inioyned touching this acte. Com¦maunding further by the same precept, that he to whose handes such pre∣cepte shall come, shall shewe or delyuer the same to the other inhabitantes or officers named in the same. And that none of them fayle to accomplyshe the same vpon payne of .xl.s. ¶ And it is ordeyned by the sayd auctoritie of this parlyamente, that the sayd day and place prefixed and limitted in the sayd preceptes, euery of the commissioners then beynge within the shyre, and hauyng no sufficient ex∣cuse for his abscense, shall at the sayd daye and place prefixed, for that part whervnto he was limitted, appere in his propre person, and there the same commissioners beyng present, or two of them at the least, shall call or cause to be called before them, the sayd inhabitauntes and officers, to whō they haue directed theyr sayd preceptes, & which had in commaundement there to appere by the sayd precept of the sayd cōmissioners. And yf any so war∣ned make default, onles he shall then be letted by syckenes or lefull excuse
and that lette then to be wytnessed by the othes of two credible persons, or yf any so appering, refuse to be sworne in fourme folowing, to forfait .xl.s. and so at euery day, at any tyme during the sayd two yeres prefixed for the same cause, vnto the tyme the nomber of euery suche place haue appered & certified in forme vnder writtē. And euery of them so makynge default, or refusyng to be sworne, to forfayt .xl.s, and vpon the same apparaunce had, one of the most substanciall inhabitantes or officer so there being warned & apperyng before the sayd cōmissioners, shalbe sworne yerely during the sayd .ii. yeres vpon a boke after this forme opēlye before the cōmissioners. ¶ I shall truly inquire with my felowes yt shalbe charged with me, of the hundred, wapentake, warde, towne, or other place, of the best and most va∣lue of the substaunce of euery person, dwellyng or abydyng within the ly∣mittes of the places, that I and my felowes shalbe charged with, and of other, which shal haue his or their most resort vnto any of the same places & chargeable with any summe of money, by this acte of the sayd subsidy, & of all other articles that I shalbe charged with, touching the sayd act, and according to the entent of the same, and thervpon as nere as shall come to my knowledge truly present & certify before you the names and surnames substaunce and values of euery of them, aswell of landes tenementes and other hereditamentes possessions and profites recited in the sayde acte, as of goodes & catals, and euery of them chargeable by the sayd act, without concelement fauour loue affection drede fere or malice, so helpe me god & the contentes of this boke. And euery other persone that shall appere there yerely by the sayd preceptes, shall make lyke othe: & vpon the othe so taken as is before said by thinhabitauntes and officers of euery hundred warde wapentake towne or other place, the sayd commissioners shall yerely opē∣ly there rede or cause to be red vnto them the sayde rates, & openly declare theffect of their charge vnto them, in what maner & forme they ought and shulde make their certificates, accordynge to the rates & summes therof a∣bouesayd, and of all maner of persons aswell of alyens and straungers in¦habited within this realm, as of such as be borne wtin the kinges obeisāce chargeable to this acte, & of the possessions goodes & catels of fraternities guyldes, and other as is abouesayd, and of persones beinge in the parties or beyonde the see, hauinge goodes or catelles landes or tenemētes within this realme as is before sayd, and of all goodes being in custody to the vse of any other as is abouesayd. By the whiche information & shewynge the sayd persones shall haue such playn knowledge of the true entent of this present act, and of the maner of theyr certificat, that the same persons shall haue no reasonable cause to excuse them by ignoraūce, and after such othe and the statute of the sayd subsidy, & the maner of the sayde certificat to be made in writyng, conteynyng the names and surnames of euery persone, and whether he be borne without the kynges obeysaunce, & the beste value of euery person in euery degree, aswell of yerely value of landes and tene∣mentes, as suche lyke possessions and profittes, as the value of goodes &
cattalles, and in euery thynge to theyr sayd certificat requisyte and necessa∣ry to them declared, the sayde commissioners there being, shall by their di∣scretions appoint and lymit vnto the saide persons, an other day and place to appere afore the said commissioners, and chargyng the said persons that they in the meane tyme shall make dylygent inquirie of the premisses, and then there euery of them vpon peyne of .xx.s. to appere at the sayd new pre∣fixed day and place, there to certify vnto the saide cōmissioners in writing, according to their said charge, and accordyng to the trew entent of the sayd graunte of Subsidy, and as to them in maner afore said hath then ben she∣wed and declared by the commissioners, at whiche day and place so to them prefyxed, if any of the sayde persons make default, or appere, and refuse to make the said certificat: that then euery of them so offending to forfait .xl.s. excepte onely a reasonable excuse for his default, by reason of sykenes, or o∣therwyse by the othes of two credible persons ther witnessed be had. And of suche as appere redy to make certificat as is aforesayd, the sayd commissi∣oners there being, shal take and receyue the same certifycat, and euery part therof, and the names, values, and substaunce of euery person so certified, and if the same commissioners see cause reasonable, they shall examine the sayd presenters therof. And there vpon the same commissioners at the sayd dayes and places, by their agrement amonge themselfes, shall yerely du∣rynge the sayde two yeres, openly there prefyx other dayes or day, at a cer∣taine place or places, within the limites of their cōmission, by their discreti∣on for their further proceding to the said yerely assessing of the said subsidy, and there vpon at the sayd day of the sayd certificat, as is beforesayd taken, the same commissioners shall make their precept or preceptes to the consta∣bles, subconstables, baylyffes, or other offycers of suche hundredes wapen∣takes townes or other places aforesayd, as the same commissioners shal be of, comprisynge and conteinyng in the same precept, the names and surna∣mes of all persons presented before them in the sayd certificates, of whome the sayd commissioners, or two of them at the least, shal then haue vehemēt suspect to be of more and greatter value or substaunce in landes tenements goodes cattalles, or summes of money owyng to them, or other substaunce beforesayd, then vpon suche person or persons shalbe certified. Comman∣dinge the same constables, bayliffes, and other offycers, to whome such pre∣cept shalbe directed, to warne such persons, whose names shalbe comprised in the said precept, at their mansions, or to their persons, that the same per∣sons named in suche preceptes and euery of them, shall personally appere before the said commissioners, at the same new prefixed day and place, dais and places ther to be sworne and examined by the sayd commissyoners, of their substance and value, and summes of money owing to them, and other what so euer matter concerning the premisses, or any of them, according to this acte. At which day and place so prefixed, the sayde commissioners then there beynge, or two of them at the least, shal cause to be called the said per∣sons whose names shalbe comprised in the said precept, as it is before sayd,
for theyr examination. And if any of those {per}sons, as is before said, to be exa¦mined, which at any tyme after the warning, & before the prefixed day shall be within such place, where he may haue knowlege of his sayd apparāce to be made, make defaut & appere not, onles a resonable cause, or els a resona¦ble excuse, by the othes of two credible persons, before the said cōmissioners be alleged for his discharge: that then euery of them so makyng defaulte, to be taxed and charged with and at the double summes of the rate, that he shulde or ought to haue ben sette at, for and after the best valu of his sub∣stance, vpon him certified, if he had appered, by discretion of the commissi∣oners there being. And in lyke maner if any of them suspected, as is before sayd, appere and refuse to be sworne in fourme folowyng, than euery suche offendoure to be taxed and charged, with and at the double sūme of the rate that he shuld or ought to haue ben set at, for and after the best value of his substaunce vpon him certified, by the sayd persons that made the certificat as is before sayd, by the discretions of the commissioners there then being. And euery of the persons so there apperyng, whose names shal be expressed in the sayd precept, and in whom any vehement suspecte was or shal be had in fourme aboue sayd, shall openly there be sworne in this maner. ¶ I shal faythfully truely and playnly, accordyng to my knowledg, shew vnto you the kynges commissioners, and to other by you assigned, the best and greatest value or aboue, with all myne yerely profyttes in landes tene∣mentes rentes or suche other lyke possessions, yerely profit for fees, and the best and greatest value of al my goodes and cattalles, and summes of mo∣ney to me owynge, accordynge to the graunte of this acte of Subsidy, and truely aunswere to that I shall be examined of, touchynge the premisses, without coueyn or deceypt, so helpe me god and the holy contentes of this boke. ¶ AND if any person that shulde appere be excused in fourme before said by wytnes of credible persons, the same persons shalbe examined by their othes of his or their value and substaunce so lackyng and excused, and by the best of that certificat or knowledge, or of the other fyrst certifycat vpon hym or them made, the same person so lackynge and excused of his appa∣raunce be set and rated by the sayde commissioners, or other wyse to be sette and rated in this case, as shall seme best by the discretions of the sayd com∣missioners. ¶ AND EVERY spirituall person yerely durynge the sayde .ii. yeres, shalbe rated and sette accordynge to the rate aboue sayd, of and for euery pounde, that the same spirituall person, or any other to his vse hathe, by discente, bargayne, or purchase, in fee symple, fee tayle, terme of yeres, ex∣ecution, by warde, by copy of courte rolle, in any maner landes, tenemen∣tes, rentes, seruyces, or heredytamentes, after the trew, iuste, and clere yerely value thereof in fourme aboue remembred: so that it extende to the value of twentye pounde or aboue. And if any maner of personne, cer∣tyfyed or rated at any maner of value, offer hym selfe to be sworne and exa∣myned
by his othe at any of the sayd prefixed days, & do swere for his dys∣charge in that he is certified aboue his value or substance, so that he come before the extretes of the sayd assessyng (as shalbe afterwarde declared) be deliuered by the sayd cōmissioners into the kynges Escheker, the same per∣son shalbe receyued and his othe taken. And all persons soo offeryng them selfes to be sworne, and al other sworne and examined at callyng by the said cōmissioners as is abouesayde, shalbe rated and charged, accordyng to the value and substance shewed by his or their dysposition, or his or their othes made at the tyme of their examination, & none otherwise. And all persones set rated & taxed as is beforesaid, shalbe bounden and charged by the same. And the summe or summes vpon hym set to be due towardes the payement of the subsidie, and to be leuied as hereafter shalbe specified. ¶ And it is also enacted by the sayd auctoritie, that euery person yerely du∣ryng the sayd two yeres, as is aforsayd, be rated taxed and set, and the sūme on hym set to be leuyed in suche place, where he at the tyme of the said certi∣ficat to be made, shal kepe his house or dwellyng, or where he than shall be moste conuersant abydyng or resiant, or shall haue his most resort, & shalbe best knowen at the tyme of the sayd certificat to be made, and no where els. And yf any person chargeable to this act at the tyme of the said assessyng, happen to be out of this realme, or far from the place, where he shalbe kno∣wen: than he to be set where he was laste abyding in this realme, and beste knowen, and after the substance value and other profites of euery persone knowen by the examinatiō certificat, or other maner of wise, as is aforsaid, the sayd commissioners .vi. v. .iiii. iii. or .ii. of them, shall yerely duryng the sayd two yeres, after the rate aforesayd, sette and taxe euery persone accor∣dyng to the rate of the substaunce value of landes goodes and other pro∣fites, wherby the greatest and most summe, according to his most substance by reason of this act, ought or may be set or taxed. ¶ Prouyded alway, that no person that shalbe taxed for payement of this subsidy, for and after the yerely valu of his lādes tenementes or other real possessions or profites in any of the sayde two yeres, be set or taxed for his goodes and cattalles, and other moueable substance in eyther of the sayde two yeres, and he that shall be taxed or charged for the same for his goodes cattalles or other mouables, in eyther of the sayde two yeres, shall not be charged taxed or chargeable for his lande or other reall possessions or pro∣fytes in either of the sayd two yeres: nor that any person to be double char¦ged for the sayd subsidy, neyther set or taxed at seuerall places by reason of this acte, any thyng in this present acte conteyned not withstandyng. ¶ And that it be ordeyned by the said auctorite of this present parliament, that no person hauyng two mansyons or two places to resorte vnto, or cal∣lyng hym selfe householde seruaunt, or waytynge seruaunt to the kynges hyghnesse, the Queene, the Prynce, or other lorde or lady, mayster or may∣stresse, be excused vppon his sayenge from the taxe of the sayde yerely sub∣sydye, in neyther of the places where he maye be sette, onelesse he bryng a
certificat in wrytynge frome the commyssyoners, where that he is so sette in dede at oone place. And yf any happen to be sette in two places vppon certifycat thereof made, the beste and mooste summe vppon hym soo taxed to be taken and abyde, and the other to be dyscharged: So that the same certifycat of his assessynge and paymente be made thereof in wrytynge vnder the seales of the commyssyoners, or two of theym: whyche certifi∣cat soo made, shall be at all tymes suffycient dyscharge for hym, as welle agaynste any collectour, that shall demaunde the same vppon hym rated or taxed, as agaynst the kynge, and all other personnes. And yf any per∣sonne that oughte to be sette by reason of his remouynge or resortynge to two places, or by reason of his sayenge, that he is elles where taxed, or by reason of any priuyledge by his dwellynge or abydynge in any place, not beynge foreprysed in this acte, or anye other wyse, by his coueyn or crafte, happen to escape from the yerely sessynge and be not sette, and that proued by presentment and examination, or infourmation before any two of the sayde commyssioners, or the barons of the kynges Eschequyre, or two Iustyces of the peace of that countreye, where suche personne dwelleth: than euery personne, that by suche meanes or otherwyse, wylfullye by co∣ueyn shall happen to escape from the assessynge of the sayde Subsydye, or any of theym, and not be rated taxed and sette, shall be charged vpon the knowledge and profe therof with and at the double value, that he shulde or ought to haue bene sette at before, accordynge to his hauour, the same double to be leuied gathered and payde of his goodes and cattalles, lan∣des and tenementes, towardes the sayde subsydye, and further to be puny∣shed by the dyscretions of the Barons, Iustyces, or Commyssyoners, be∣fore whome he shall be conuycted for his offence and deceypte in that be∣halfe. And that euery commyssyoner assygned and deputed accordynge to this acte for thordynge of this subsydye, dwellynge within the precincte and lymytte of his commission, for his owne substance in landes and goo∣des shall be valued and rated yerelye, durynge the sayde two yeres, by the examynation of foure thre or two other commyssyoners of the sayd shyre, ryddynge, lathe, wapentake, rape, cytie, boroughe, or towne corporate, or other place, where the same commyssyoner so dwelleth or kepeth his house, and after suche value and rate of hym knowen, the same commyssyoner so dwellynge within the lymytte of his commyssion, to be yerely set and taxed by the other sayde commyssyoners, and as welle the same vppon hym selfe taxed, as the summes made by the presenters sworne, as is afore sayde, shall be wrytten and sette in the extreates, thereof to be made with other in∣habytauntes of that parties, and soo to be gathered and leuyed in lyke maner as it oughte or shoulde haue bene, yf the sayde commyssyoner had not bene in the commyssyon of the place, where he soo dwelleth. And that all personnes of the estate of a Baron or Barons, and euerye astate a∣boue, shall be examyned and charged of theyr freeholde and valewes, as is aforesayde, before the Chauncelloure, Treasourer of Englande,
and lord preuy seale, for the tyme beyng, or other persons by ye kynges au∣ctoritie to be limitted yerely duringe the sayd two yeres, & they to be char∣ged after the fourme of the sayd graunte, accordinge to theyr examination aforesayd. And the sommes vpō them set, with ye names of the collectours appointed for gathering & payeng for the same, be extreted delyuered and certified at dayes & places aboue specifyed by the sayd chauncellour, trea∣sourer and lorde preuy seale, for the tyme beyng, or such other persones as shalbe lymitted by the kynges highnes, and after the taxes and assesses of the said sommes vpon and by the said examination & certificat, as is afore sayd made, the sayd comissioners or two of them at the leste, yerelye within thre wekes nexte ensuynge the feast of saynt Michaell by ye writing extre∣ted of the sayd taxe therof, vnder the seales and signes manuell of two of the sayd cōmissioners at the lest to be made, shalbe deliuered vnto sufficiēt & substanciall inhabitantes cōstables subcōstables baylyffes or other offi∣cers ioyntely of hūdredes townes parishes & other places afore sayd with in their limites, or to other sufficient persons inhabitātes of ye same onely, by the discretion of the same cōmissioners, and as the place or parties shal require, aswell the particular names and surnames as the remembrāce of all sommes of money taxed & set of and vpon euery person aswell man as woman chargeable to this acte, householder & all other inhabitantes and dwellers within the sayd paryshe townes and places cōtributaries to this subsidy, by auctoritie of which wryting or estrete so delyuered, the sayd of∣ficers or other persons so named and deputed seuerally, shal haue full po∣wer and auctoritie, immediatly after the delyuery of the sayd wrytynge or estrete, to demand leuy & gather of euery person therin specified, ye somme or sommes in ye same wryting or ertrete cōprised, & for none paymēt therof to distrayne the same person or {per}sons so beyng behynde by theyr goodes & cattalles, and the distresse so takē to kepe by the space of .viii. dayes, at the costes & charges of the owner therof. And yf the sayde owner do not paye such sōme of money as shalbe taxed by this act, within the same .viii. daies than the sayde distresse to be appreised by .iiii. iii. or .ii. of thenhabitantes where such distresse is takē & solde, for the paymēt of the sayd money. And the ouerplus cōming of ye sale therof, yf any be, to be immediatlye restored to ye owner of the same distres. Which sayde officers & other persons so de∣puted to aske take gather & leuy ye sayd sōmes, shall answere & be charged for their portiōs only to them assigned & limited to be gathered leuied & cō¦prised in the sayd wryting or extrete to them as is before said deliuered vn¦to thuse of our souerayn lord the kyng, & the sayd somme in that wrytinge or extreate cōprised, to paye vnto the hygh collectours or collectour of that place, for the collection of the same, in maner and fourme vnder wrytten, thervnto to be named and deputed, and the same inhabitātes and officers so gathering the same particular sommes, for theyr collection therof shall retayne for euery .xx.s. so by them receyued & paid .ii.d. that to be allowed at the paymēt of their collectiō by them to be made to the hygh collectour.
¶ And further be it enacted by the sayd auctoritie of this present parlya∣ment, that the sayde cōmissioners or the more part of thē, as shall take vpō them the execution and busynes of the sayd cōmission, shall yerely duryng the sayd .ii. yeres, name certayne sufficient & hable persons, seuerally by dis¦cretions of the same cōmissioners, in shyres riddinges lathes wapentakes rapes cities townes corporate and other what so euer places, aswel within places priuileged as withoute, not beyng forprised in this acte, to be hygh collectours, & haue the collection and recept of the said sommes, set and le∣uiable within the precinct limites & boundes where they shalbe so lymited to gather & receyue: to euery of the whiche collectours so seuerally named, the sayd cōmissioners or two of them at the lest yerely during the said two yeres, within thre wekes next after the sayd hole some of the sayd subsidye be set by all the limites of their commission, or in such limites as the same hygh collectors shalbe seuerally so assigned, shall vnder their seales & sig∣nes manuel delyuer one extreat in parchemēt to euery of ye same collectors comprising in it the names of all such persones as were assygned to leuye the sayd particulars, & the sommes of euery hundred wapentake towne or other place aforesayd, accordinge to the extreate so first therof, as is before sayd, delyuered, & as the collectour so to be assigned shalbe charged with, euenly concordant and agreyng vnto the hole somme, cōprised, in the sayd particular estrete lymited to his collectiō, as is beforesaid. And euery such collectour, so yerely deputed, hauing the sayd extrete in parchemēt, as is a∣fore sayd, shall haue auctoritie by this acte, yerely during the sayd two ye∣res, to appoynte dayes and places within the circuite of his collection, for the paymēt of the sayd subsidy to hym to be made. And therof to gyue war¦nyng by proclamatiō or otherwyse, to all the sayd constables or other per∣sons or inhabitātes hauing ye charge of ye said particular collectiō within ye hundredes parishes townes or other places by him or thē limited, to make paymēt for their said particular collectiō of euery sōme as to thē shall ap∣pertayne. And yf at the sayd daye & place so lymited & prefixed, by the sayd collectors, the sayd cōstables officers or other persons or inhabitantes as is before said, for the said particular collectiō appointed & assigned within such hundred citie towne or other place, do not pay vnto ye said collectours ye sōme within their seuerall hūdredes townes parishes & other places due & cōprised in the sayd estretes therof to them deliuered by the said cōmissio¦ners or some of them, as it is afore sayde, or so moch therof as they haue or myght by any meane receyue, the said .ii. d. for the said particular collectiō as is beforesaid, alwayes to be therof alowed, except, that than it shalbe le∣full to the sayd hygh collectours, and euery of them, & to theyr assygnes, to distrayne euery of the sayd constables, officers and other inhabitantes for their said seuerall & particular collectiō of the sayd sommes cōprised in the said estrete & writing therof to thē & euery of thē, as is before expressed, de∣liuered, or for as much of ye same somme, as so than shall happen to be ga∣thered leuied & behind vnpaid, by the goodes & cattals of euery of them so
beynge behynde, and the distresses so taken to be kept appreised and solde, as is aforesayd, & therof to take & leuy the somme so thā being behynd vn∣payd, & the ouerplus commynge of the sale of the sayd distresses, yf any be to be restored and delyuered vnto the owner in fourme aboue remembred. ¶ Prouyded alwaye, that no persone inhabited in any cytie boroughe or towne corporat, shalbe compelled to be assessour or collectour of or for any parte of the sayd subsidy, in any place or places oute of the cytie boroughe or towne corporate, where he dwelleth. ¶ And it is also by the said auctoritie enacted, that yf any inhabitāt or of¦ficer or what so euer other person or persons, charged to or for the collecti∣on or receipt of any part or portion of the sayd subsidye, in any of the sayde two yeres, by any maner of meane according to this acte, or any persone or persons for themselfes, or as keper gardien deputie factor or attorney of & for any other person or persons of any goodes & catals, & the owner therof at the tyme of the said assessinge to be made, being out of this realme, or in any other parties not knowen, or of & for the goodes & catals of any other person or persons of any fraternitie guyld mistery or other what so euer cō¦minaltie being incorporat, or not incorporat, & all persons hauing in theyr rule gouernāce or custody any goodes or catals at the tyme of the said as∣sessing, or any of them to be made, or whiche for any cause for & by collectiō or for hym felfe, or for any other, or by reason that he hath the rule gouer∣nance or custody of any goodes or cattals of any other person or persons, fraternitie or guyld, or any such other lyke, or as factour deputie or attur∣neye, or for any person shalbe taxed valued rated or set to any sōme or som∣mes by reason of this acte, & after the taxation & assessing vpon any suche persone or persons shalbe charged with the receipt of the same, happen to dye or departe from the place, where he was so taxed and set, or his goodes and cattals be so eloyned, or in such priuy and couert maner kept, that the sayd person or persons charhed with the same by estretes or other wryting from two of the sayd commissioners as is afore sayd, can ne maye leuy the same somme or sommes, comprised in their charge by distresse within the limites of theyr collection, as is before sayd, or can not sell such distresse or distresses as be taken for any of the said yerely paymentes before the tyme limitted, the hygh collectours for his paymēt to be made in the kynges re∣ceyte, than vpon relation therof made, with due examination by the othe of such person or persons as shalbe charged with & for the receipt or collec¦tion of the same, before two of the cōmissioners, where such person or per∣sons, or other as is afore said, theyr goodes or catals were set or taxed, and vpō playn certificat therof made into the kinges eschequire by the sayd .ii. cōmissioners, aswell of the dwellyng place names & summes of ye sayd per¦sons, of whom the sayd sommes can not be leuyed & had, as is beforesayd, than aswell the sayde constables and other inhabitauntes appoynted for the particular collection agaynst the hygh collectours, as the hygh collec∣tour vpō his accompt in the said escheker to be discharged therof, & proces
to be made for the kynge out of the same escheker, by the discretions of the barons of the same eschequire, agaynst such personne, his heyres or execu∣tours, so beyng behynde with his paymēt. And ouer that the same two cō∣missioners, to whom any such declaratiō of the premisses shall be made in fourme abouesayd, fro tyme to tyme shall haue full power & auctoritie du∣ryng the sayd two yeres, to direct their precept or preceptes vnto the sayde person or persons charged with any somme, of for & vpon any such person or persons, or other, as is abouesayd, or to any sheryffe stuarde baylyffe, or other whatsoeuer officer minister person or persons of such place or places where any such person or persons, so owynge such somme or sommes, shall haue landes or tenemētes or other hereditamētes, or reall possessions goo∣des or catals, wherby any such person or persons so indebted, his heires ex¦ecutours or assignes, or other hauinge the custody gouernaunce or dispo∣sition of any goodes catals landes or tenementes, whiche ought or maye by this acte lefully be distrayned or taken frō the same, haue or shall haue goodes catals landes tenemētes or other possessions, wherof suche somme or sommes which by any person or persons, maye or ought to be leuyed, be it within the lymytte of such cōmission, where such persone or persons was or were taxed or without, in any place within this realme of Englande, by which precept as well suche person or persons as shall be charged to leuye such money as the officers of the place or places, where such distresse maye be taken, shall haue full power and auctoritie to distrayne euery suche per∣son indebted charged or chargeable by this acte, or his executours or admi¦nistratours of his goodes & cattals his gardiennes factours deputies les∣sees or fermers and assignes: & all other persons, by whose handes, or oute of whose landes any such person shuld haue rent fee annuitie, or any other profyt, or which at the tyme of the sayd assessynges shall haue goodes & cat¦tals, or any other moueable of any such person or persons beyng indebted or owynge suche somme, & the distresses so taken cause to be kepte apprised and solde, in lyke maner and forme as is before sayd, for the distresses to be taken vpon persons to be taxed to the sayd subsidy, and beyng sufficient to distrayne within the limites of the collectours inhabitantes or other offi∣cers charged with and for the same sommes soo vppon them to be taxed. And yf any suche dystresse for none payemente happen to be taken oute of the lymytte of the personnes charged and assygned to leuye the same, the personne so charged for the leuye of euerye suche somme, by dystresse, shall perceyue and take of the same distresse, for the laboure of euery personne, goynge for the execution thereof, for euerye myle that any suche personne soo laboureth for the same two pence, and euerye farmour, tenaunt, gar∣dien factour, or other what so euer personne distrayneth or oterwyse char∣ged for payement of anye suche somme or sommes, or any other summe, by reason of this acte, shall be of suche somme or sommes of hym or them soo leuyed or taken, dyscharged and acquyted at his nexte daye of payemente of the same, or at the delyuery of such goodes and cattalles, as he that is
so distrayned hadde in his custody or gouernaunce, agaynste hym or them that shall be so taxed and sette, anye graunte or wryttinge obligatorie, or other what soo euer matter to the contrarye made heretofore not with∣standynge. ¶ And yf suche personne, that shulde be so dystrayned, haue no landes nor tenementes sufficient, wherby he or his tenauntes and farmours may be dystrayned, or haue eloyned alyened or hydde his goodes and cattalles wherby he shulde or myght be distrayned, in suche maner that suche goo∣des and cattalles shall not be knowen nor founde, soo that the summe of or by hym to be payde in the sayde fourme, shall ne can be conueniently le∣uyed, than vppon relation therof vnto two of the commissioners, where suche persone or personnes was taxed and set, by the othes of hym or them that shall be so charged with the leuye and payment of that summe or sum¦mes, the said commissioners shall make a precept in suche maner as is be∣foresayde, for to attache take and arreste the bodye of suche persone or per∣sons, that ought to paye the sayde summes, and by this acte shall be char∣ged with and for the same summe or summes, and them so taken saufely to kepe in prison within the shyre or other places, where any suche persone or persones shalbe taken or attached, there to remayn without bayle or main prise vnto he haue paid the summe or summes, that such person or persons for hym selfe, or for anye other by this acte ought to be charged with, and also for the fees of euery such arreste to him or them that shall execute such precepte .xx.d. And that euery officer, vnto whome suche precept shalbe di∣rected, do his true diligence to execute the same vpon euery persone, so be∣ynge indebted, vpon peyne to forfayt to our said souerayn lorde the kynge for euerye defaute in that behalfe .xx.s. And that no keper of anye gaole, from his gaole suffer any suche persone to go at large by lettynge to bayle or otherwyse to departe oute of prysone, before he haue payde his sayde debte, and the sayd .xx.d. for the sayd arrest, vpon peyne to forfayte to oure sayd soueraygne lorde .xl.s. And the same Gaoler to paye vnto oure sayde souerayn lorde the double summe as well of the rate, at which the sayd per¦sone so enprisoned was taxed at, as of the sayde .xx.d. for the fees, and lyke processe & remedy in lyke forme shalbe granted by euery two cōmissioners, at lyke informatiō of euery person or {per}sons, being charged with any sōme of money for any other person or persons by reason of the said subsidy, eue¦ry of the sayd two yeres, & not therof paid, but wilfully withdrawen, ne the same leuiable within ye limit, where such {per}son was thervnto taxed. And yf the sōme or sōmes being behind vnpaid by any {per}son or {per}sons, as is before sayd, be leuyed and gathered by force of the sayd processe to be made by the sayd two cōmissioners, or yf in defaut, or for lacke of payment thereof, the person or persons, so owynge the sayd somme or sommes of money, by pro∣cesse of the same cōmissioners to be made, as is before sayd, be cōmytted to prison, in fourme aboue remembred, than the sayd two cōmissioners, whi∣che shal award such processe, shal make certificat in ye sayd escheker of that
that shall be done in the premysses in the terme next folowyng, after suche summe or summes of money so behynde shalbe leuyed & gathered, or such person or persons for none payment of the same committed to prison. And yf it happen any of the sayd collectours soo to be assygned, or any mayre, sheryffe, stuarde, constable, the hed boroughes, householder, bailiffe, or any other officer or minister, or other what so euer person or persons, to disobey the sayd commissioners or any of them, in the reasonable request to them made by the sayd commissioners for the yerelye execution of theyr sayd cō∣mission, duringe the sayde two yeres: or yf any of the officers or other per∣sones do refuse that to them shal apperteyne or belonge to do, by reason of any precepte to hym or them to be directed, or any reasonable commaunde¦ment instance or requeste touchinge the premisses, or other defaulte in any apperance, or collection to make: or yf any person beynge suspecte as is a∣foresayd, do refuse to be examined, according to this acte; approued by exa∣mination before the sayd commissioners, or two of them, or wol not appere before the same commissioners, vpon warnyng to hym made, or els make resistence or rescue vpon any distresse vpon hym to be taken, for any parcel of the sayde subsidye, or commyt any mysbehauoure in any maner of wyse cōtrary to this acte, or commit any wylfull omission, or other what so euer wylfull none doinge or misdoinge contrarye to the tenour of this acte or graunt, the sayd commissioners & euery nombre of them vnto two of them at the leste, vppon probable knowledge of any suche mysdemeanours had by information or examination do set vpon euery suche offender for euery such offence in name of fyue by the same offender to be forfaited .xx.s. or vn¦der, by the discretion of the sayd commissioners. And further the sayd com¦missioners and euery nombre of them, vnto two of them at the leste, haue auctoritie by this present parlyament, to punyshe euery such offendour by enprisonment, there to remayne and to be deliuered by theyr discretion, as shall seme to them conuenient the sayd fynes, yf any such be, to be certified by the sayd commissioners, that so assessed the same, into the sayde kynges Eschequire, there to be leuyed and payd by the collectours of that parties for the sayd subsidy, returned into the sayd Escheker, to be therewith char∣ged with the payment of the sayd subsidy, in such maner as yf the sayd fy∣nes had ben set and taxed vpon the sayd offenders for the sayd subsidy. ¶ It is also enacted by the sayd auctoritie of this present parlyamēt, that euery of the said hygh collectours, which shall accompt for any part of the sayd subsidy in the kynges eschequer, vpon theyr seuerall sayd accomptes to be yelden, shall be allowed yerelye durynge the sayd two yeres for euery pound limitted to his collectiō, wherof any such collectour shalbe charged and yelde accompt .vi. d. as parcell of theyr sayd charge, that is to say .ii. d. therof for such persons as then haue had the particular collectiō in ye tow∣nes and other places, as is aforesayd, specified in his collection, and other ii.d. therof euery of the same chiefe collectours there accomptāt to receyue to theyr owne vse, for theyr labour and charge in and about the premysses
and .ii.d. residue to be delyuered and payd by the sayd collectours so being therof allowed, to such of the commissioners, as shall take vpon them the busynes & labour for and about the premisses, that is to saye, euery collec∣tour to paye that commissioner or commissioners, which had the orderyng and wrytinges for the sayd subsidy, where ye sayd collectour or collectours had theyr collection, for expense of the sayd commissioners, so takyng vpō them the sayd busynes and labour of theyr clerkes wrytynge the sayd pre∣ceptes and estretes for the sayd collections: the same last .ii.d. to be diuided among the sayd commissioners, hauyng regarde to the labor and busynes takē by them, and theyr sayd clerkes in and about the premysses, for which part so to the sayd commissioners attaynynge, the sayd commissioners .vi. v. iiii. iii. or .ii. and euery of them iontlye and seuerally for his or their sayd part, may haue his remedy agaynst ye sayd collectour or collectours, which therof be or might haue ben allowed by action of debte, in which the defen¦daūt shal not wage his lawe, neyther protection nor essoyne to be allowed. And that no person nowe beyng of the number of the company of this pre¦sent parlyament, nor any cōmissioner shall be named or assigned to be any collectour subcollectour or presenter of the said subsidy, or of any part ther¦of, nor no commissioner shall be compelled to make any presentment or cer¦tificat, other then in to the kynges eschequer, of for or concerning the sayd subsidy or any part therof, in any of the sayd two yeres. And lykewyse that none other person, that shall be named or assigned to be cōmissioner in any place, to & for the execution of this acte of subsidye, in any of the sayde two yeres, be or shalbe assigned or named hed collectour in any of the sayd two yeres of the sayd subsidy, neyther of any parte therof. And that euery such person or persons which shalbe named and appoynted as is before sayd to be hed collectours, in and for one of the sayd two yeres, shall not be cōpel∣led to be collectour in the seconde yere of the same two yeres. And the sayd collectours whiche shall be assygned and named for the sayde subsidies, or for any parte thereof, and euery of them, be & shalbe acquited and dischar∣ged of all maner of fees rewardes, and of euery other charge in the kinges eschequer or els where of them, or any of them, by reason of that collection payment or accomptes, or any thing concerning the same to be asked. And after the taxyng and assessyng of the sayd yerely subsidy, as is before sayd, had and made, and the sayd estretes therof in parchemēt vnto the sayd col∣lectours in maner and fourme before rehersed deliuered, the sayd commis∣sioners, which shall take vpon them thexecution of this acte within the ly∣mittes of theyr commission, by theyr agrement, shall haue metinges togy∣ther, at which metinge euery of the sayd commissioners, whiche then shall haue taken vpon them the executiō of any parte of the sayd cōmission, shal by hymselfe or his sufficient deputy, truly certifie and bring forth vnto the other commissioners, named in the same commission, the certificat and pre¦sentement made afore him and such other commissioners as were limitted with him in one limite, so that the same certificates may be accompted and
caste with the other certyfycates of the other lymyttes within the same commission. And than the sayd commissioners and euery nombre of them vnto two at ye leste, yf they be in lyfe, or theyr executors or administratours of theyr goodes, yf they be than dead, shall iontlye & seuerally as they were diuided within theyr lymittes, vnder theyr seales yearely duryng the sayd two yeares, by theyr discrecions make one or seuerall wrytinges indented, conteyning in it aswell the names of the sayd collectours, by the sayd com¦missioners for such collection and accompte in the exchequire and paymēt in the sayde receypte deputed or assigned, as the grosse and seuerall som∣mes writen vnto euery suche collectour to receyue the sayde subsidye, and also all fynes amerciamentes and other forfaytures, yf any such by reason of this acte happen to be within the precincte and limitte of theyr commis∣sion, to be certified into the kynges exchequire by the sayd commissioners yerely durynge the sayde .ii. yeres, by the sayd .xvi. daye of Nouembre: In whiche wrytinge or wrytinges indented, so to be certified, shalbe playnlye declared and expressed, aswell the hole & entiere somme and sommes of the sayde subsidye seuerallye lymitted to the collection of the sayd collectours, as the names of the said collectours seuerally deputed and assygned to the collection of the sayd sommes, so that none of the sayde collectours so cer∣tified in the sayde exchequire, shall be compelled there to accompte or to be charged but onely to and for the somme lymitted to his collection, and not to or for any somme limited to the collection of his felowes, but that euery of thē shalbe seuerally charged for theyr partes lymitted to theyr collectiō. And yf the sayde commissioners ioyned in one commission, amonge them selfes in that matter can not agree, or yf any of them be not redy or refuse to make certificat with thother of the same cōmissioners, that than ye same commissioners maye make seuerall indētures in forme afore sayd, of theyr seuerall limittes or separations of collectours, within the limittes of their commission vpon and in the hundredes wardes wapentakes lathes rapes tithinges or such like diuisiōs within their said seueral limits of their said commissiō as the places there shall require to be seuered and deuided, and as to the same commissioners shall seme to make their diuisions of their limittes or collections for the seuerall charges of the collectours, so that alwaye one collectour shall be charged, and accompte for his parte to hym to be lymytted onely by hym selfe, and not for any some limitted to ye parte of any of his felowes, and the charge of euery of the same collectours to be sette and certifyed seuerallye vpon them, and euery suche collectour vpon his accompty and payement of the sommes of money, lymitted within his collection, to be seuerally by hym selfe acquited and discharged in the sayd exchequire, and not to be charged for any portion of any other collectours. And yf any commissioners after he hath taken certificates of them that (as is afore sayde) shall before anye suche commissioner be examyned, and the sommes rated and set, and the bokes and wrytynges therof beinge in his hādes, or yf any collectour or other person charged with any receyt of any
parte of any of the sayd subsidy, or any other person taxed or otherwyse by this acte charged with & for any parcelles of the sayd subsidy, or with any other sommes or fyne amerciament penalty or other forfayture, happen to dye before such cōmissioner collectour, or other what so euer person or per∣sons haue executed accomplyshed satisfyed or sufficiētly discharged it, that to euery such person shall apperteyne or belonge to do, accordinge to this acte, then the sayd executours and heyres of euery such persone, & all other seased of any landes or tenemētes, that any such person beyng charged by this acte, & decessing before he be discharged therof, or any other to his vse onely had of estate of inheritance, at the tyme that such person was named commissioner collectour, or in any otherwyse charged with & for any man∣ner of thyng to be done satisfyed or payd by reason of this acte, & all those that haue in theyr possessions or hādes any goodes or cattalles, that were to any such persone at the tyme of his death, or landes or tenementes that were the same persons at ye tyme that he was, as is afore sayd, charged by this acte, shall be by the same charged to do & accomplysh in euery case, as the same person so beyng charged shulde haue done, and myght haue bene compelled to do, if he had ben in playne lyfe, after such rate of the landes & goodes of the sayd cōmissioner or collectour as the party shall haue in his handes. And yf the same cōmissioners for causes reasonable them mouing shall thynke not cōuenient to ioyne in one certificat, as is before sayd, then the sayd person or persons yt shall first ioyne together, or he that shall fyrst sole certify the sayd wrytinges indented as is afore sayd, shall certify ye na¦mes of all the cōmissioners of that cōmission, whervpon such wryting shal be there then to be certified with the diuisions of ye hundredes, wapētakes wardes tithynges or other place to and among such commissioners of the same commission, with the names of the same commissioners, where suche separations or diuision shall be, with the grosse sommes of money, as well of and for the sayd subsidy taxed or set of or within the sayd hūdredes war∣des wapentakes, or other places to hym or them diuided or assigned, that shall so certify the sayd fyrst writing, as of fynes amerciamētes penalities and other forfaytures, yf any happen to be within the same limittes, wher of the sayd writyng shall be so certified, and after such one wryting inden∣ted, which (as is aforesayd) shall be certifyed, and not conteyn in it the hole and full sommes set and taxed within the limittes of the same commission: the other commissioners of the same, euery of the sayd .ii. yeres, at the sayd xvi. day of Nouēbre yerely, or within .iiii. dayes then next immediatly fo∣lowing, shall certify in to the sayd eschequer by their writing or wrytinges indented to be made, as is afore sayde, the grosse sommes set & taxed with∣in the places to them limitted for the sayd subsidye, and other fynes amer∣ciamētes penalities & forfaytures, with the names of the hundredes war∣des wapentakes and other places to them assigned, or els by the sayd wry∣tyng indented to certify at the sayd place, by the sayd .xvi. day of Nouēbre, or within .iiii. dayes nexte folowynge, reasonable causes for theyr excuses,
why they may not make such certificat, of and for the said subsidy, with fi∣nes amerciamentes penalities and other forfaytures growen or set by rea¦son of the causes of theyr lettes, or of theyr non certifieng as is abouesaid, or elles in defaut therof proces to be made oute of the kynges eschequer agaynst the sayd commissioners and euery of them, not makyng certificat as is afore sayde, by the discretion of the barones of the sayd eschequer. ¶ And be it enacted by the kynge our souerayn lorde, by the assent of the lordes spirituall and temporall, and the commons in this present parlya∣ment assembled, and by the auctoritie of the same, that aswell all such per∣sons as shall haue any collection or receipt of the sayd subsidy, or any part therof, at the receiptes of the kyng our souerayne lorde of his eschequer, or els where in any other place or places within this realme of England, as all other the kinges subiectes, shall at all & euery tyme hereafter frō hense forth, and from the feast of the purification of our Lady next ensuyng, by the space of one hole yere then nexte folowynge, take and not refuse in any payment any ducates, corownes, crusades, or any other gold coyned in the parties beyonde the see, bearinge theyr true wayght according to such va∣lue as was lymytted by the last proclamatiō therof made the .xxvii. day of March, in the .xxx. yere of the reygne of our said souerain lord ye king. And yf any person hereafter that shall haue the receit, or any collectiō of ye sayd subsidy or any part therof, to the vse of our sayd soueraygne lord the king, at ye recept of his eschequer, or els where in any shyre, riddyng, cytie, towne, or other place, do refuse or denye to take in payment of the sayd subsidy, or any parte or parcell therof, golde, grotes, halfe grotes, or penies, or any of thē, yf any refusell of any such goldes grotes half grotes or penies, or any of them be had in the sayd receipt or els where, contrarye to the proclama∣tion therof made as is afore sayd, and that proued by wytnes, informatiō, or examination, or otherwyse, before the kynges iustices of eyther bench, or before the barōs of his eschequer, or any of them: or yf such refusell of any such goldes grotes halfe grotes or penies, or of any of them be had by any collectour or other person hauing the gathering of the sayd subsidy, or any parte therof in any shyre rydding cytie towne or other place, & that the re∣fusell as is afore sayd, be proued by wytnes, information, examination, or otherwyse, before any iustices of peace sheryffe mayre bayliffe or other hed officer of that shyre riddyng cytie towne or other place, where such refusell is had: then the persone or persons that so offered and tended the sayd gol∣des grotes halfe grotes or penies, or any of them, that shall be so refused, shall be of that somme so tended and refused, quyte & dyscharged by this acte agaynst our souerayn lorde the king, and the other person or persons that refused the same, in lyke maner as yf he had paid the same goldes gro¦tes halfe grotes or penies, or any of them so refused in dede, withoute any byll tayll or other discharge therof to be had or shewed, and the sayd recey∣uour collector or other person, that shall refuse the sayd goldes grotes half grotes or penies or any of them, shalbe charged with the summe so by him
refused, to and agaynst our sayd soueraygne lorde, in lyke fourme as yf he had receyued the same somme in dede. And that all and euery other person and persones shall receyue and take the sayd goldes grotes halfe grotes, penies, or any of them, after the rates and value before rehersed, & as the sayde goldes grotes halfe grotes and penies, or any of them be coyned for and nowe currant, as well of and by the officers of oure sayde soueraygne lorde, as of euery other persone or persons in all receiptes and paymentes from hense forth to be made or had, vpon peyne of imprisonment of euery personne refusynge suche goldes grotes halfe grotes or penies, or any of them, or otherwyse to be punyshed by the discretion of the iustices of peace mayres sheryffes baylyffes, or other head officers of euerye shyre cytie bo∣rough or towne within this realme. ¶ And be it further enacted by the auctoritie aforesayd, that euery alyen and straunger borne oute of the kynges obeysaunce, inhabitynge within this realme, which at the tyme of the sayd fyrst assessyng to be made, shall be of the age of .xii. yeres, or aboue, not hauynge goodes or cattalles to the sayde value of .xx.s. shall paye .iiii. d. to be assessed by the sayd assessours, & by them to be certifyed vnto the sayde commissioners and to be streated in to the eschequier, and to the sayd collectours by the sayd commissioners to be delyuered, and the same to be collected and gathered by the sayd collec∣tours, in euery shyre cytie borough towne and other place, in suche maner and fourme, to euerye purpose and entente, as afore is lymitted and decla-clared for the subsidy aboue sayde, and the same foure pence to be payde in the kynges eschequer, to the kynges vse, afore the .viii. daye of Februarye next comming. And that euery person and persons, with whom such alyen or straunger shall happen to be dwellyng at the tyme of the assessyng and taxation of the same within this realme, shalbe charged and chargeable to the paymente of the sayd .iiii.d. ¶ And it is also enacted by the auctoritie aforesayd, that euery suche per∣sone so to be named collectour, for any of the sayd .xv. and .x. shall haue lan¦des tenementes or other hereditamentes of an estate of inheritance of the clere yerely value of .x. li. or aboue, or elles in coyne plate housholde stuffe, marchandyse or other substance to the value of an .C. markes, to his owne vse and behoue, or aboue. And yf it shall so happen, that there shalbe no such person, of the sayd yerely value of landes, or of the sayd value of goo∣des, as afore is sayd, within any suche shyre cytie borough or towne, where suche collectour or collectours haue ben vsed to be named: than the sayde knyghtes of the shyres cytizens of cyties, and burgeses of boroughes and townes where that shall so happen, shall name and appoynt for the sayde collection, of euery of the sayd hole .xv. and .x. such persons and persons as be and shall be of the best and most value in landes or goodes, at the tyme of the nomination of the sayd collectour and collectours within any suche shyre cytie borough or towne, wherby the kynges maiestie shall and maye be the better answered and payd in his sayd receipte.
¶ Prouyded alwayes, that this acte of subsidye, ne anye clause or ar∣ticle therin conteyned, do extende to charge the goodes of any orphante or orphantes borne vnder the kynges obeysaunce, in anye other maner and fourme, then as the goodes and substaunce of euery other personne borne vnder the kynges obeysaunce, be chargeable vnto this acte of subsidye: this acte of subsidy, or anye article therin conteyned, to the contrarye not withstandynge. ¶ Prouyded also that this graunt of subsidy, nor any other thing therin conteyned, do in any wyse extende to charge the inhabitauntes and dwel∣lers within Irelande, Wales, Calyce, Hammes, Guysnes, and the mar∣ches of the same, Iernesey and Garnesey, or any of them, of for or concer∣nynge any manours landes tenementes, or other possessions, goodes, cat∣telles, or other mouable substaunce, which the sayd inhabitauntes or dwel¦lers, or any other to theyr vse haue within Irelan, Wales, Calyce, Ham∣mes, Guysnes, or other marches of the same, Iernesey and Garnesey, or in any of them, of for any concernynge any fees or wages, whiche any of the sayd inhabitauntes or dwellers haue of oure soueraygne lorde the kynge, for theyr attendaunce and doynge seruyce to out sayd soueraygne lorde in Irelande, Wales, Calyce, Hammes, Guysnes, & the marches of the same, Garnesey and Iernesey, or in any of them: any thynge in this present acte to the contrarye not withstandynge. ¶ Prouyded also that the sayd graunt of subsidye, in fourme afore sayde, to be taxed and leuyed, nor the sayd subsidy nor any part therof, in any ma∣ner of wyse extended or be preiudiciall or hurtfull to the inhabitauntes or resiauntes at this present tyme within the .v. portes corporate or vnited to the same .v. portes, or to any of the same .v. portes, of or for any part or par¦cell of the sayd sommes graunted in this present parlyament, of the sayde inhabitantes nowe resiauntes, or any of them to be taxed set asked leuyed or payde, but that the sayd inhabitauntes & nowe resiantes of the sayd .v. portes and theyr membres, & euery of them, be & shalbe of & from the sayde graunt and payment of the sayd subsidy, and of & from euery parte & par∣cell of the same acquited & discharged: anye matter or what so euer other thynge in this present acte made or had to the contrary not withstanding. ¶ Prouyded also that this present acte of subsidye, ne anye other thynge therin comprised, extende to any of the englysh inhabitauntes or resiantes in any of the Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland the towne of Barwike, and the byshoprycke of Durram, nor to any of thē, of to or for the sayd taxynge leuyeng gatheryng or payment: but that the englyshe inhabitauntes of the sayd counties byshoprycke towne and eue∣ry of them, shall be of and from the sayd subsidy, and of euery parcell ther∣of vtterly acquyted and discharged: any thynge in this present acte before rehersed to the contrary not withstandynge. ¶ Prouyded that all letters patentes graunted by the kynges hygh∣nesse, or any of his moste noble progenitours, to any cyties, boroughes, or
townes within this realme, of any maner lyberties pryuiledges or exemp∣tions from the burdeyne and charge of any suche grauntes of .XV. X. and Subsydyes, whyche be at this present tyme in force and vaylable, shall re∣mayne good and effectuall to the sayde cyties borowghes and townes here after, accordynge to the purportes thereof, thoughe the inhabytauntes of the same, shall vpon the great and weyghty consyderations of the kyn∣ges maiesties greatte and inestymable charges before expressed, be for this graunte charged and contrybutorye in lyke ma∣ner and sorte, as all other cyties, borowghes, and townes, whyche be not in any wyse so pryuyle∣ged, or from suche grauntes of .XV. X. and Subsydies exempted. ❧ GOD SAVE THE KYNG. ¶ Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. CVM priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum.
