A174 12016532 52538
An Account from PARIS of the ARTICLES Of PEACE concluded betwixt the Two Crownes of FRANCE And SPAINE. THE Articles of the Peace signed by the King of Spain, ever since the 17th Currt in Spanish, were received by an Express; and at the same time that they were received in France, the King of Spain received them Signed by the King in French. The Cardinall gave them to the Marquis Pimentel to explain them, and he gave him them again the ninteenth. They are Signed by the two Kings, and two Ministers of State. The Articles are, That we restore to the King of Spain Mortara, Valentia, and all that was taken from him in Italy, Rosas in Catalonia, Graveling, La Bassee, Montmedy, and Thionville. Arras remains in our hands, and they give us Cambray, the County of Artois, Perpignan, and the County of Roussillon, as a Dowry to the Infanta in Marriage to our King. The Duke of Guize is to go into Spain to fetch the Infanta; and the Interview of both the Kings and both the Queens is to be at Bayonne, where the King intends to go very shortly, with all his Court. The Cardinall hath dispatched away two Posts, one to his Holiness, and the other to the Prince of Conde, to give notice of what is past. The Peace is to be published, as is believed, the first of May, between both the Armies. The Prince of Conde hath sent a Blanck to the King, to fill as he shall please, demanding nothing of him but his favour: he is to remain three years without returning to the Court, during which time he may stay at Rocroy, Catelet, or at Anjou. In the mean time, he shall enjoy his Revenue according to appointment. The Duke of Enguien his son returns to Paris, to continue his Exercises, Lodgings are preparing for him at the house of Monsieur de Menoult. It is reported, that he hath sent to Complement Madamoi∣selle Hortance, Niece to the Cardinall. The King gives him the Survivancy and Revenue of his father's Offices. The English are comprized in the Peace. The Spaniard consents, that we should redeem or regain Dunkirk, which probably may be done, in consideration of a Million of Mony to defray their charges. The Marquis of Piementel is within few daies to take upon him the quality of Ambassadour. The Duke of Lorrain is also set at liberty, and his Country is to be restored wholly to him, excepting Nancy, which we are to keep yet six years. The Letters from Bayonne of the 19th Currt do certifie the arrivall of the Plate-Fleet at St. Andre in Gallicia, being in number fifty Gallions. Yesterday departed hence an Express to the Emperour, to communicate these Articles to him from the King. FINIS.
