a246 12930579 95651
AN ACCOUNT Of the Behaviour of HENRY WELLER, JOHN RALPH, CLEMENT SNELL, JOSEPH RUMNEY, MATTHEW SMITH, RALPH COOK, in Newgate. Since their CONDEMNATION. With Seasonable Advice to all Condemned Prisoners; Published by their earnest Request and Desire. AS God himself is a Compound of all that is good: And that it is most evident that he is filled up with goodness by his extent of Mercy and favour to poor Creatures that have ill deserved it at his Hands, the nature of whose Crimes being of the deepest Dye, and at∣tended with the greatest aggravations. Witness Manasseh, Mary Mag∣dalen, the Thief upon the Cross, and many others: The consideration whereof, should work tenderness and pity in all our Hearts towards those poor Creatures; that notwithstanding the repeated instances of Divine Justice and displeasure from time to time, yet being hardened in sin take no warning, till they deservedly bring themselves to a shame∣ful and ignominious Death; The following advice and directions to poor Condemned Prisoners was written in Love and Pity to their Souls, and by the earnest request of these Six Persons abovementioned, to whom we hope God hath in much mercy given to see the horrible nature of those sins for which they justly suffer: very much bewailing the nature of their Crimes, and the aggravating circumstances that did attend them; Henry Weller in particular greatly Condemning himself, and saying, that his sins were greater than the rest, because Committed against great Light and Knowledge. They were the more earnest to have this published; because as they said, It might not only by the Blessing of God do good to their own Souls, but that it might be seasonable to all others hereafter, whose Crimes makes them obnoxious to the same fate. 1. I beseech you consider the time past, and the manner of your life. How many Days, Weeks, Months, and Years are passed over your Heads, in which you have had no regard to the glory of God, nor the salvation of your pretious souls, but have taken pleasure in unrighteous∣ness, to the displeasing of a glorious God, and the destroying of your own Souls.
2. Consider and call to mind the several sorts of wickness you have been guilty of, and have repeated many times over in the practice of them, viz. Lying, Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Breach of the Lords Day, and rejecting the means of Grace, besides those abominable Crimes you are Condemned for by the Laws of the Land. 3. Consider that all of these sins or any of them, are damning to those that are guilty of them, and therefore though some of you may plead that you are not actually guilty of all kind of wickedness, yet your State is bad enough, for it is written, be that breaketh the Law of God in one point, is guilty of all. 4. Consider that it is much more your work, and will be more pro∣fitable for your Soul, to lay to Heart what you are guilty of, than to please your selves with what you are not actually guilty of, for as much as the forbearance of some sins is not enough to save you, but to be charged of, as guilty of, in any sin is enough to damn you. 5. Consider that your wicked Life and Conversation is contrary to, and hath been in opposition of the good word of God, the instructions of Relations and Friends, the teachings of your own Conscience, and good Laws of the Land, besides the many warnings you have had from many that have gone before you, who have been brought to sorrow and shame by their wickedness, in ending their Days to the great Grief of their dearest Friends. 6. Consider that it is the great Mercy of God to you, in forbearing of you so long; forasmuch as he might in Justice a sent you to Hell long agoe, if he had dealt with you according to your Deserts, and so in stead of having an oportunity to Weep and Pray to God, now you might have been in the Tormenting Flames, out of which there is no delive∣rance. 7. Consider that the time past cannot be Recalled, not a Year, not a Month, not a Day, no not one Hour, and the time you have to Live is very short, and therefore you ought so to number your days, as to apply your hearts to true Wisdom, which is to fear the Lord, for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, and the true fear of God is to hate Sin. O Remember that Eternity dependeth upon this little opportuni∣ty and therefore take heed you do not loose any Moment of it, for the good of your Pretious Souls. 8. Consider that sin hath bern the cause of all the Misery that ever came upon Mankind: Sin turned Adam out of Paradise, sin made Cain cry out, my punishment is greater than I can bear: Sin destroyed the World with water, Sin burn'd Sodom and Gomorah with Fire and Brimstone, Sin rent the Kingdom of Israel from Saul, and God gave the Kingdom to David a better Man. Sin caused Nebuchadnesar to go Graseing among the Beasts of the Field, and brought his Nobles from being Compani∣ons of Princes, to be a Prey for devouring Lions Sin hath destroyed famous Kingdoms, Families, and particular persons; yea, sin cast some of the Angels out of Heaven into Hell, and sin will turn you out of this VVorld into Hell. Except you repent ye shall all likewise perish. Consider the unspeakable love of God in sending his only Begotten Son into the World to be a Ransome for Captive Souls, a Physician for
Sin-sick Souls, A Reconcilr for Souls that have been Enemies to God by wicked works, A Rest for weary Souls, Food for Hungry Souls, Ray∣ment for Naked Souls, and a Saviour to give Pardons to Criminal Souls. O how should this melt and break your Souls into Sorrow and true Con∣trition, that ever you should so sin, and so long time against such a good God, and such a pretious Christ. 10. Consider that this pretious Jesus hath perfectly kept all that Law of God which you have wickedly broken, and he hath suffered the se∣verity of Divine Justice, and thereby hath satisfied Divine Require∣ment, for and in the behalf of such poor miserable Sinners as you are, the Just suffered for the Unjust, he was made a Curse to Redeem others from the Curse of the Law, O this sweet Jesus was cut off, but not for himself, he was Stricken and Smitten of God, for the sins of others, that by his Stripes they might be Healed. 11. Consider that this very same Jesus is now alive, being Raised from the Dead. He that was Dead is Alive and bhold he liveth for ever more. He that was Hanged on the Cross, now sitteth on the Throne. He that did Bleed on the Cross now Pleadeth on the Throne. He that Died on the Cross now Reigneth on the Throne, having all Power in Heaven and in Earth, and is Admired, Adored and Worshipped by the Holy Angels. 12. Consider that the person of Jesus Christ, as God and Man in U∣nion together, and his blessed Merits in the Actual service of God, which he compleatly performed together, with the Punishments which he pa∣tiently suffered, is the only object of your Salvation, if you fix your Faith and Hopes upon any other object, either Persons or Things, you will be utterly, yea, Eternally undone, for there is no person on Earth, no works of Righteousness was wrought by your selves, the Virgin Ma∣ry Saints not Angels in Heaven that can save your Souls: None but Christ, none but Christ, he only is able to save to the utmost, all them that come to God by him. 13. Consider that Jesus Christ is very willing to save poor sinners, he hath declared his willingness in saying, Come unto me all yea that labour and are heavy laden, and you shall find Rest for your Souls, and in another place he sayeth, He that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. O sinners Christ is more willing to save sinners then they are to be saved, Demon∣strated thus. 1. In his coming from Heaven to Earth, and appearing in the likeness of a Man, though he was equal with God. 2. In his Condesending to so mean a Birth, being brought forth into the World, and laid in a Manger, the place of Beasts, that so poor sin∣ners might have a place among the Holy Angels. 3. In living such a Holy, Humble, and Sorrowful Life. 4. In dying such a Cruel and Cursed Death. 5. In his Rising from the Grave. 6. In his Assending into Heaven. 7. In his Pleading and Interseding with his Father in the behalf of all them that truly believe in him.
14. Consider the unwillingness of poor Sinners to be saved; Demonstrated thus: 1. They take pleasure in those things that they know are destructive to their pre∣cious Souls. 2. They are not willing to leave those things which are dishonouring to God, and damning to their Souls. 3. They are not willing to come to Christ; He hath said, You will not come to me that you may have Life. 4. They are not willing to hearken to the Counsel and Reproof of those that love and desire the eternal Welfare of their Souls. 5. They are not willing to accept of the gracious Offers and Proffers of God. O, apply these things to your selves, and say unto God, I, even I am the vile wretch that am guilty of all these horrid Crimes, and now I am in danger of Eternal Damna∣tion. Consider what it is to be Damned; forasmuch as Damnation is the greatest of all Miseries: Thus demonstrated; 1. It is to stand charged with all Sin at the time of Death. 2. It is to have the Soul disposed of by the great God to a State of Misery all the time of its separation from the Body. 3. It is to have the Body raised at the time of the Resurrection with shame and contempt. 4. It is to be condemned in the Day of Judgment, with that dreadful word Go ye Cursed. 5. It is to undergo everlasting punishment: And that must be further considered thus; 1. It is to be ever banished from the comfortable presence of God. 2. It is to be for ever in the Company of Devils. 3. It is for ever tormented in Flames of Divine wrath, which cannot, which will not for ever be quenched. 4. It is to be for ever deprived of all sorts of Comforts; no Society with good people, no Treasures, no Pleasures, no Honours in Hell; while we are on Earth, our Miseries are mixed with Mercies; but in Hell it is all Misery, and no Mercy; loads and heaps of Misery, but not a dram nor drop of Mercy. 16. Consider what it is to be saved; for as Damnation is the greatest of all Mi∣series, so Salvation is the greatest of all kind of happiness; Demonstrated thus: 1. It is to have your sins pardoned. 2. It is to be reconciled to God, and so brought into a blessed Friendship. 3. It is to be redeemed from the Slavery of Sin and Satan. 4. It is to have the Soul received into Heaven at the time of Death. 5. It is to have the Body raised and changed at the time of the Resurrection into the likeness of the glorious Body of Jesus Christ. 6. It is to be for ever with Christ, beholding and enjoying his Glory; being for ever freed from Sin, from Sickness, from Temptation, from Poverty, from Perse∣cution and from whatsoever now hath the Name of Misery upon it. 17. Consider that very great Sinners have obtained and shall obtain this blessed Salvation; and this may put you in some hopes, if you take the good right way. O therefore now weep bitterly; now pray sincerely; now condemn your selves deeply; now justifie God highly; now fly to Jesus Christ speedily: O now, even now, while sweet Jesus doth offer Balm to heal you, while his blessed Fountain is open to wash you, and while his precious Arms are stretched out to receive you, haste, haste, lest yo perish for ever, lest dying, you meet with Damning, and so after Hanging at the place of Execution, you hang in the Chains of Damnation; from which good Lord deliver you. FINIS.
