A4212 09692149 44014
THE MEDITATIONS, SOLILOQVIA, AND MANVALL OF THE Glorious Doctour S. Augustine. translated into English. THE SECONDE EDITION. PRINTED AT PARIS, By Mrs BLAGEART, M.DC.LV.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER before the Meditations, So∣liloquia, and Manuall of S. Augustine. THESE three lit∣tle treatises of the great S. Augusti∣ne, might all well haue bene called Manualls, in respect that they are of soe smalle bulke, as with ease to be portable by euery hand. But yet as the are
are little Manualls, soe with all they may be accounted great Cordialls, for the re∣lation vvhich they haue, and for the place vvhich they deserue to hold, in the hart of man. They princi∣pally consist of most sweete affections, and aspirations, which the enamoured soule of our incomparable Saint was euer breathing out to Almighty God; beseeching him in most tender man∣ner, to be dravving it still, neerer to himselfe. Wee may see, hovv he aspired to perfect vnion vvith that diuine Maiestie, but withall vve must knowe, that first,
he had taken paines to pur∣ge himselfe entirely, from all errour, sinne, and vani∣tie; and to plant the habits of vertue in his hart, by a most attentiue and faithfull imitation of the humilitie, and charitie of Christ our Lord. Vade, & tu fac simi∣liter. For vnlesse thou tra∣uaile in that high way, thou wilt neuer arriue to that iourneys end. Nor art thou to looKe for any experimen∣tall Knowledge of Gods sweet∣nes, till by prayer & practise of solid vertue, the bitter iuyce of sinne, and the of∣fensiue smoake of passion be discharged. But that
being done, roome is made for God, and he will maKe thee Knowe, and feele, how good he is.
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS contained in the Me∣ditations. THE FIRST CHAPTER. THE Inuocation of the Om∣nipotent God for the amendement of his life page 1 Chap. 2. The accusation of man, and the commendation and praise, of the diuine mercy, 4 Chap. 3. The complainte of a man who is not heard by our Lord through his disobedience, page 9
Chap. 4. The feare of the Iudge page 12 Chap. 5. The Father is inuoked by the Sonne, 16 Chap. 6. Heer man representeth the Passion of the Sonne to the Father. page 19 Chap. 7. Heer man acknowledgeth that himselfe by his sinnes, is the cau∣se of the Passion of Christ our Lord, page 23 Chap. 8. Heer man exposeth the Passion of the Sonne, to God the Father, for the reconciliation of man, page 28 Cap. 9. Of the inuocation of the holy Ghost. 35 Chap. 10. The prayer of the seruant of God conccauing humbly of him∣selfe, 37 Chap. 11. A Prayer to the blessed Tri∣nity, 38 Chapter 12. A Confession of the Omnipotency, and Maiesty of God, 39 Chapter 13. How God the Eather vouchsafed to helpe mankinde, and of the Incarnation of the worde, page 42 Chap. 14. Of the confidence which a
soule ought to haue in our Lord Ie∣sus, & in his Passion, 45 Chap. 15. Of the immense charity of the eternall Father towards man∣kinde, page 48 Chap. 16. Of the twofolde nature of Christe our Lord, who pittyeth, and prayeth for vs. 52 Chap. 17. Of the thanks which a man owes to God, for the benefitt of Redemption, 56 Chap. 18. A prayer to Christ our Lord page 60 Chap. 19. He distinguisheth betweene that VVisdome, which is called the howse of God, and that other VVis∣dome which is supremely diuine, page 65 Chap. 20. He prayeth that the spiri∣tuall howse of God, may pray for him, page 70 Chap. 21. How full this life of ours, is, of bitternesse, 73 Chap. 22. Of the felicity of that life, which our Lord hath prepared, for them that loue him, 75 Chap. 23. Of the felicity of that soule which departeth hence. 78 Chap. 24. He inuoketh the Saynts, 80
Chap. 25. The desire of the soule toward the supernall Citty of Ieru∣salem, page 87 Chap. 26. A Hymne of Paradise, page 88 Chap. 27. Of the continuall praise, which a soule conceiueth by the con∣templation of the Diuinity, 93 Chap. 28. VVhat it is to see God, and to inioy him, after a sort, and how we are to thinke of God, 98 Chap. 29. He declareth many pro∣pertyes of Almighty God, 100 Chap. 30. Of the vnity of God, and the plurality of Persons in him, pa∣ge, 107 Chap. 31. A prayer to the blessed Trinity, 112 Chap. 32. That God is the true, and souuereigne life, 114 Chap. 33. Of the praise which men and Angells giue to God, 117 Chap. 34. He complayneth against himselfe for not being moued, with the contemplation of God whereat the Angells tremble, 124 Chap. 35. A prayer which greatly moueth the hart to Deuotion, and to Diuine loue, 128
Chap. 36. A most deuoute Prayer by way of thanks-giueing, 138 Chap. 37. A most holy, & most ex∣cellent Prayer to almighty God, whe∣reby the soule is greatly moued to de∣uotion, page, 148 Chap. 38. A Prayer to be made in affliction, 161 Chap. 39. Another Prayer to our Lord Iesus Christe, 163 Chap. 40. Another Prayer to God. 172 Chap. 41. A Prayer vpon the Passion Christe our Lord, 180
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS contained in the So∣liloquia. THE FIRST CHAPTER. OF the vnspeakable sweetnes of God, pag 192 Chap 2. Of the misery and fragility of man, p. 200 Chap. 3 Of the admirable light of God, 206 Chap. 4. Of the mortality of Mans nature, 208 Chap. 5. VVhat it is, to be made no∣thing, 211. Chap. 6, Of the fall of a soule by sinne, 215
Chap. 7. Of the manifolde benefits of Almigthy God, 216 Chap. 8. Of the future Dignity of Man, 221 Chap. 9. Of the Omnipotency of God, 226 Chap. 10. Of the incomprehensible prayse of God, 228 Chap. 11. Of the hope, which is to be erected towards God, 231 Chap. 12. Of the snares of concupiscen∣ce. 234 Chap. 13. Of the misery of man, & the benefits of God, 238 Chap. 14. That God doth consider the workes, and purposes of mankinde. with a perpetuall attention, 243 Chap. 15. That Man of himselfe can doe nothing without diuine grace, 248 Chap. 16. Of the temptation of the de∣uill, 255 Chap. 17. That God is the Light of iust Persons, 259 Chap. 18, Of the benefits of God, 265 Chap. 19. Of the feruour of charity, 271 Chap. 20. That God hath submitted all things to the seruice of man, 274 Chap. 21. That the greatenes of the di∣uine
counsell may be inferred by the consideration of temporall blessings, 277 Chap. 22. That the diuine sweetnes taketh away all the present bitternes of the world, 280 Chap. 23. That all our hope, ought to be placed in our Lord, 284 Chap. 24. That all our saluation de∣pends vpon our God, 286 Chap. 25. That the will of man, wan∣teth efficacy towards goods workes without the grace of God, 289 Chap. 26. Of the antient benefits of Almighty God. 291 Chap. 27. Of the Angels which are deputed to the custody of man, 293 Chap. 28. Of the profound predestina∣tion, and prescience of God, 298 Chap. 29. Of them who first were iust, and afterwards became wiked, 303 Chap. 30. That a faithfull soule is a Sanctuary of God, 306 Chap. 31. That God is not to be found, eyther by the exteriour or interiour senses. 308 Chap. 32. A Confession of true faith, 322. Chap. 33. Of the Confession of our owne
basenes, 331 Chap. 34. A considerations of the di∣uine Maiestie, 333 Chap. 35. Of the desire & thirst of a soule towards God, 338 Chap. 36. Of the glory of our celestiall country, 346 Chap. 37. A payer to the blessed Trinity, 352
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS contained in the Manuall. THE FIRST CHAPTER. OF the wonderfull essence of God, page 355 Chap. 2. Of the unspea∣kable knowledge of God 357 Chap. 3. Of the desire of à soule which thirsteth after God, 360 Chap. 4 Of the misery of a soule which loues not God, 362 Chap. 5. Of the desire of a soule, 365 Chap. 6. Of the felicity of à soule
which is freed from the prison of flesh. and bloud, 367 Chap. 7. Of the Ioyes of Heauen, page 369 Chap. 8. Of the kingdome of Heauen, pag 341 Chap. 9. How God doth comfort an afflicted soule, 343 Chap. 10. Of the sweetnes of diuine, loue, 345 Chap. 11. Of the preparation of our Redemption, 349 Chap. 12. Of spirituall ioy, 378 Chap. 13. That the VVord Incarnate is the cause of our Hope, 381 Chap. 14. How sweet a thing is is to thinke of God, 382 Chap. 15. How much tribulation en∣dured for Christ our Lord, is to be desired, 384 Chap, 16. How the kingdome of God may be obteyned, 386 Chap. 17. VVhat a happy place Heauen is, page 387 Chap. 18. VVe cannot make any re∣quitall to Almighty God, but only by loue, 390
Chap. 19. VVhat it is which God re∣reth of vs, that so we may be like himselfe, 392 Chap. 20. Of the confidence of a sou∣le which loueth God, 394 Chap. 21. VVhat God did for man, 397 Chap. 22. Of the remembrance of the woundes of Iesus Christe our Lord, 399 Chap. 23. The remembrance of the woundes of Christ our Lord, is our remedy in all aduersity, 400 Chap. 24. An exhortation of the soule to the loue of Christ our Lord, 402 Chap. 25. That nothing can suffice the soule, but the supreme Good, page 405 Chap. 26. VVhat the knowledge of Truth is, 407 Chap. 27. VVhat at the mission of the holy Ghost doth worke in vs, page 448 Chap. 28. Of the working of that soule which loueth God, 411 Chap. 29. Of the harts true Repose, page 413 Chap. 30. VVatsoeuer doth withdraw
the sight of the mind from God, is wholly to be auoyded, 414 Chap. 31. How the vision of God was lost by sinne, & that misery came so to be found out, 416 Chap. 32. Of the Goodnes of God, 419 Chap. 33. Of the delightfull fruition of God, 421 Chap. 34. That this supreme Good is to be desired, 423 Chap. 36. Of the mutuall Charity of the Saints in Heauen, 426 Chap. 36. Of the fulnes of the ioy of Heauen, 428
THE MEDITATIONS OF THE GLORIOVS Doctour S. Augustine. THE FIRST CHAPTER. He inuokes Almightie God for the amendement of his life and manners. O LORD my God! bestowe vpon my hart. that I may desire thee; that by desi∣ringe thee, I may seeke thee; that by seekinge thee, I may finde thee; that by findinge thee I may loue thee, that by loueing thee, I may be freed from all my sinns; and that once being freed, I may returne to them noe more. O Lord my God! grant repentance to my hart,
contrition to my spirit, a fontaine of tears to mine eyes, and liberality in giueinge almes, to my hands. O my King! extinguish all desires of sense, and kindle the fire of thy loue in me. O thou my Redeemer, driue away the spirit of pride; and grant me, through thy mercy, the treasure of thy humility. O thou, my Sauiour! remoue from me the fury of anger, and vouch∣safe me (of thy grace) the sheild of patience. O thou my Creator! take all rancor from me; and through thy meekenes, inrich me with a sweete, and gentle minde. Bestowe on me, ô most mercifull Father, a solide faith, a conuenient hope, and a continuall charity! O thou my Directour! remoue from me, vanity and inconstancy of minde, vnsetlednes of body, scur∣rility of speech, pride of eyes, glut∣tony of diet, the offence of my neighbours, the wickednes of detractions, the itch of curiosity, the desire of riches, the oppression, which is imposed by the mighty, the appetite of vayne glory, the
mischeife of hipocrisy, the poyson of flattery, the contempt of the necessitous and poore, the oppres∣sion of the weake, the biteinge of couetousnes, the rust of enuy, and the death of blasphemy. Cutt away from me, O thou who art my maker! all vngodly temerity, pertinacy, vnquietnesse, idlenes, slee∣pinesse, slothe, dullnes of minde, blindnesse of hart, stiffnes of opiniō, harshnesse of conuersation, disobe∣dience to vertu, and opposition to good aduice, vnbridlednesse of speech, oppression of the poore, violence of the riche, slaunder of the innocent, sharpnesse towards my seruants, ill example towards myne acquaintance, and hard-hartednes towards my neighbours. O my God, and my mercy, I beseech thee, by thy beloued Sonne, grant that I may performe the workes of mercy, and pitty; sufferinge with the afflic∣ted, aduising such as erre, succour∣ring such as are miserable, supplying such as are in want, confortinge such as are in sorrow, releiuing the op∣pressed, refreshing the poore, che∣rishinge
the spirits which are woun∣ded; forgiueing those that trespasse against me, perdoninge such as doe me wronge, loueing them, who hate me, rendringe good for euell, dis∣piseing none, but honouringe all, imitating the good, takeing heed of the bade, imbraceing vertue, reie∣ctinge vice, haueing patience in aduersity, and moderation in pros∣perity; and, that, keepeing a guard vpon my mouth, and shuttinge the doore of my lipps, I may despise, all earthly, and aspire to heauenly things. CHAP. II. The accusation of man, and the com∣mendation & praise, of the diuine mercy. BEhold, (O thou who haste fra∣med me) how many things I haue desired, while yet I deserue not, so much as a fewe. I confesse, woe is me. I confesse that not onely these graces, which I haue begged, are not due to me, but rather many, & most exquisite torments. Yet doth the
example of the Publicanes, and Harlotts, & murthering theeues, giue me harte; who beinge suddenly drawne out of the very iawes of the enimy, haue beene imbraced, in the bosome of the good sheepheard. And thou, ô God, the Creator of all things, though in all thy workes thou be admirable, yet we beleiue that thou art much more admirable, in the workes of mercy. Wherupon thou saidst, by a certaine seruant of thine, His mercyes are ouer all his workes. And we doe confidently hope, that it was, as if thou hadest spoken it of euery one of vs in parti∣culer, when thou didst thus ex∣presse thy selfe of the whole people: saying, But I will not remoue mercy from it: For thou despisest noe man, thou reiectest noe man, thou ab∣horrest noe man, vnlesse perhaps it be some one, who is so mad as to abhorr thee. When therefore thou art angry, thou dost not onely not strike the offenders, but euē impartest blessings to them; if they giue ouer offending. O thou, my God! the very horne
of my saluation and my vpholder, I wretched creature, haue offended thee: I haue done wickedly in thy sight: I haue deserued thy wrathe: I haue prouoked thy fury: I haue sinned, and thou hast suffred me: I haue offended, and thou yet endurest me. If I repent, thou pardonest; if I returne, thou receiuest; nay more then this, whilest I am deferring, thou expectest me. Thou dost reduce me when I err: thou inuitest me when I resiste: thou staiest for me when I am dull, thou imbracest me when I returne: Thou teachest me when I am ignorant: thou cherri∣shest me when I am afflicted: thou raisest me whilest I fall: thou resto∣rest me when I am fallen: thou giuest me when I aske: thou art found when I seeke thee; and thou openest when I knock. O Lord, the God of my saluation! behold, I know not what I may al∣ledge: I know not what to answere: I haue no refuge, nor hole to retire my serfe into from thee. Thou hast showed me the way of good life, and thou hast giuen me knoweledge how
to cōduct my selfe: thou haste treat∣ned me with the feare of hell, thou hast allured me with the hope of the glory of heauen And now, O Father of mercyes! ô God of all consolation, strike through my very flesh with thy feare; to the end, through feare I may auoide that which thou threatnest; and restore to me the ioy of thy sauing grace, that by loue, I may obteyne the thinges which thou promisest. O Lord! my strength, and my fundation, my God, my refuge, & my deliuerer, inspire me with what I ought to thinke of thee; teach me with what words I should inuoke thee; impart the power of perfor∣meinge those workes, wherby I may please thee. I know there is one thing, wherby thou art appeased, & an other which thou art not wont to despise. To witt an afflicted soule, is a sacrifice to thee: and thou vouchsafest to accept an humble and contrite hart. O my God, and my helper! inrich me, I beseech thee, with these guifts; defend me against mine enemy
by these graces; impart this refres∣hinge to me, against the burninge heat of sensualityes, and lett this re∣fuge be open to me, against the importunity of all inordinate desires. O Lord! the strength of my saluatiō, doe not permitt me to be of them, who beleeue in thee for a season; but in the tyme of temptation departe from thee. Ouer shadow this head of mine, in the day of battell O thou who art my hope in the tyme of affliction, and my saueing health in the tyme of tribulation. Behold, ô Lord! ô thou my light, and my sal∣uation! I haue begged those things of thee which I neede: I haue inti∣mated those things which I appre∣hend and feare, but my conscience fills me with remorse, the secretts of my hart reprooue me, and that which loue gathered together, feare scattereth; and that which zeale moues me too, distrust drawes me from. My sinns, giue me terrour, but thy pitty putts me into hope; thy bounty exhorts me, though myne owne malignity holds me back. And that I may confesse a truth, the
images, and representations of my old sinns, be still obtrudeing them∣selues on my memory, & they hold me downe from presumeing too farr. CHAP. III. The complainte of a man who is not heard by our Lord, through his disobedience. FOr in fine, when a man is wor∣thy of hate, with what face shall he desire fauour? To whome pu∣nishment is due, what rash bold∣nes is it for him, to expect glory? He prouoketh his Iudge, who instead of giueinge satisfaction for his of∣fence, pretends to be honored with rewards. He insults vpon his Kinge, who beinge obnoxious to punish∣ment, will aduenture to begg a prize which is not due to him. And that foolish sonne, would exasperate the tender hart of his father, who (hauinge reproached the same fa∣ther) would presume to vsurpe the honour of the inheritance, before he had disposed himself to pennance. What is this, ô my deare Father,
which I say I haue done! I haue deserued death, and yet I aske life. I haue offēded my souueraigne Kinge, whose aide I doe yet thus impudently implore. I haue despised my Iudge whome thus rashly, I desire to be my helper. Most insolently haue I re∣fused, so much as to harken to my Father, whom yet I am presumeinge, to haue for my defender. Woe be vn∣to me, how late doe I come: woe be to me, how slack am I in makeing haste; woe be to me, who am run∣ninge still, hauing receiued fresh wounds and yet vouchsafe not when I am wel, to preuent the pearcinge of new arrowes. I haue neglected to forsee the darts before they came; but now that I behold my death at hand, I am full of trouble. I added wounds to wounds, because I feared not, to add crimes to crimes. My ancient scarrs, I haue broken through with new violence; because my late iniquities, haue corresponded with my ancient sinns; and that which thy diuine phisick had cured, and closed; the itch of my frensy, hath opened againe. The skinn
which being drawen ouer my wounds, did conceale my infirmity, hath putrified by the breaking out of filthy blood; whilest that iniquity which I iterated, did euacuate the mercy which thou dist grante. For I well know, how it is written: In what houre soeuer the iust man shall sinn, all his iustice shalbe forgotten. And now if the iustice of the iust man shalbe forgotten when he falls, how much more shall the peunance of a sinner be forgotten, if he returne againe to comitt those sinns? How often, like a dogg, haue I returned to my vomitt, and like a sowe, haue I weltered againe, in the mire? I may wel confesse it, for it is impossible, but I should remember it. How many ignorant persons haue I taught the way how to sinn? how many haue I persuaded, who had no minde to it? I haue compelled such as resisted; and I haue consented to such as desired. For how many haue I laide a snare, who were already in the right way? and for others who sought that way, I haue digged a pitt, and to the end that I might not
abhorr the doeinge of these things, I feared not to cast them out of my minde. But thou ô iust Iudge, who sealest vp the accounts of my sinns, and who standest watchinge ouer all my wayes, and haste numbered euery one of my stepps; thou I say, heldest thy peace, thou hast euer beene silent, and euer patient. But woe is me, thou wilt at length cry out, like a woman who is in the torment of child-bedd. CHAP. IV. The feare of the Iudge. O God, of Gods, O Lord who art too hard for the malice, and sinn of man. I knowe that one day thou wilt appeare; I know that thou wilt not be allwayes silent, when the fire shall burn in thy sight, and that strong tempest, shall com∣passe thee inn round about; when thou shalt call the heauen & earth, at such tyme as thou wilt iudge thy people. And behold all my iniquities shalbe discouered then, before so many thousands of nations; and all
my greiuous crimes not onely, deeds, but euen words, and very thoughts themselues, shalbe manife∣sted, to so many legions of Angells. Before so many iudges, shall I, deso∣late creature, stand, as there wilbe men, who haue farr outstripped me in good workes. By so many reprouers shall I be confounded, as haue giuen me examples of good life. And by so many witnesses shall I be conuinced, as haue taught me by good speeches; and instructed me, toward an imita∣tion of them, by their good examples. O my Lord, I can lighte vpon no∣thinge which I may say; nothing doth occurr which I can answere. And now, whilest I am subiect to this sharp triall, my conscience racks me, the secrets of my hart torment me, couetousnesse streightens me, pride accuses me, enuy consumes me, concupiscence inflames me, lust im∣portunes me, gluttony dishoners me, ebriety ouercomes me, detraction tears me, ambition supplants me, greedinesse disquiets me, discorde scatters me, anger disturbes me, mirth dissolues me, heauinesse op∣presseth
me, hypocrisy deceiues me, flattery alters me, fauour exalts me, & slaunder wounds me. Behold ô thou, who art my deliuerer from these feirce nations! behold who they be, whome I haue liued with all, from the very day of my birth; whome I haue obserued, and to whome I haue dedicated my selfe. Those very im∣ployments which I loued, condemn me; they which I praised, disho∣nored me. These are those frends with whome I did so carefully com∣ply; those Maisters, whose direction I followed, those Lords whome I haue serued; those Counseillers whome I haue beleeued; those citzens with whome I haue dwelt; & those domesticks whome I haue consented too. woe is me, ô my King, and my God, that my habitation here, is so much prolonged. Woe is me! O thou light of mine eyes, that I haue dwelt amongst the inhabitants of Cedar. And if holy Dauid could say that he had dwelt much with them, how much more, may I wretched creature say (O thou my God, and my strong fundation) that my soule hath dwelt
too much with them; for in thy sight, noe man liueinge can be iustifyed. My hope is not reposed in the sonnes of men, for if thou iudge them (when thy mercy is laide a side) whome wilt thou be able to finde iust? And if thou preuent not the wicked man by showeing mercy? thou wilt not finde any good man, vpon whome to bestowe thy glory. For I beleeue (O thou who art my saluation) that which I haue beene told, that it is thy mercy which bringeth me to pennance. Those lipps of thy mouth more sweete then Nectar, haue soun∣ded forth these words: Noe man can come to me, vnles my Father who sent me, drawe him. Because ther∣for thou haste instructed me: because by that instruction, thou hast merci∣fully framed me; as now I am; I doe with the most inward marrow of my soule, and with all possible strife of my hart, inuoke thee, ô Omnipo∣tent Father, with thy most beloued Sonne; and thee, ô most sweete Sonne, with the most excellent souueraigne Holy spirit, that thou wilt draw me towards thee, & that so I may runn
after the fragrance of thy pretious odours: and that I may doe it most dearely. CHAP. V. The Father is inuoked by the Sonne. INuoke thee, ô my God! I inuoke hee, because thou art present, to all such as call vpon thee, in the way of truth: for thou art Truth. Teach me, ô holy Truth, by thy mercy, how I may inuoke thee, in thee, be∣cause I know not how that must be done; and therefore I doe most hum∣bly begg of thee, to be taught by thee For to be wise without thee, is to play the foole; but to knowe thee, is perfectly to be wise. Teach me, ô diuine Wisdome, and instruct me in thy lawe, for I beleeue that he whome thou teachest, and whome thou instructest in thy lawe, shalbe happy. I desire to inuoke thee, and I beseech thee, that it may be in all Truth What is it to call vpon Truth, in Truth, but to call vpon the Father in his Sonnes. Thy speach therfore, ô
holy Father, is Truth, and Truth is the beginninge of thy words. For this, is the beginninge of thy words, that in the beginning was the word. In the very beginning doe I adore thee, who art the prime, and su∣preame beginninge. In that very worde of Truth, doe I also inuoke thee ô perfect Truth, in which word I beseech thee, who art that very Truth, that thou will direct, and teach me that Truth. For what is more delightfull, then to inuoke the Father, in the name of his onely be∣gotten Sonne; to induce the Father to mercy, by the remembrance of his Sonne; & to mollify the Kings hart by the mention of his dearest Sonne. For thus doe prisoners vse to be freed from their restrainte: So are slaues, freed from their chaines; and men who are lyable to the sadd doome of death, are not onely absolued; but growe intitled, sometymes, to extraordinary fauour, when they putt angry Princes in minde, of the loue they beare to theyr progeny: And when the intercession of the Sonne is imployed, the poore slaue is
wonte to auoide the punishment of his Lord. Iust so, ô thou Omnipotent Fa∣ther, I begg of thee, by thine Omni∣potent Sonne, that thou wilt drawe my soule out of prison, that I may confesse to thy name. I beseech thee, by that onely begotten Sonne of thine, who is coeternall with thee; that thou wilt discharge me, from these fetters of my sinns; and that by the mediation of thy most pretious issue, who is sitting at thy right hand; thou wilt, of thy goodnes, restore me to life, who for my great demerits am threatned with the sentence of death. For I know not what other intercessor I should be able to vse towards thee, but him who is propitiation for our sinns, and who sitteth at thy right hand pleadinge for vs. Behold, ô God the Father, him who is my aduocate with thee. Behold that supreame Bishop, who hath noe need to be expiated by any others blood, because he is res∣plendent by being all bathed, in his owne. Beholde here the holy Sa∣crifice which is holy, perfect, and
wel pleasing; & which is offered in the odour of sweetnes, & so accepted. Behold the lamb without spott, who is silent before the shearrer; and who being beaten vpon the face with blowes, and defiled with spittle, and reproached with scorne, did not yet so much as open his mouth. Behold, he who neuer committed sinn, hath borne our sinns; and by his owne wounds, hath cured our diseases. CHAP. VI. Here man representeth the Passion of the Sonne to the Father. BEholde deare Father, thy most holy Sonne, who hath suffered such bitter paines for me. Behold ô most clement Kinge, who it is that suffers, and mercifully remember, for whome he suffers. Is not he, ô my Lord, that innocent person, who beinge thine onely Sōne, was deliue∣red by thee, to the end that he might redeeme thy slaue? Is not he the au∣thor of life, who yet is carried like à sheepe to slaughter; and being made obedient to thee, did not feare to vn∣dergoe
a most outragious kinde of death, which was most hydeously greiuous? Call to minde, ô thou who art the dispenser of all saluation, that this is, that very he, whome al∣though thou didst begett, out of thyne owne substance, and strength; thou didest yet ordeyne to be partaker of my infirmity. Yea this indeed is that Deity of thyne, which apparelled it selfe with my nature, & that nature ascended vp to the tree of the Crosse, & endured bitter torment in the flesh, which it assumed. Send downe, ô Lord my God, the eyes of thy Majesty, vpon this worke of thy vnspeakable piety. Behold thy sweete Sonne, beinge stretched out from head to foote. Beholde those inno∣cent hands all distillings with his pretious blood, and thou beinge once appeased, forgiue the wickednes which my hands haue wrought. Consider that disarmed side of his, which is pearced by the pointe of a cruell Launce; and renew me in that most sacred springe, which I beleeue flowed downe from thence. Cast an eye towards those immacu∣late
feete of his, which neuer stood in the way of sinners, but did alwayes walke in thy Lawe. See how they are fastned, with cruell nailes, and doe thou perfect my paces in thy pathe∣wayes, and mercifully make me hate all wayes of wickednes. Remoue the way of iniquity from me, and of thy goodnes, make me choose the way of truthe. I beseech thee, ô Kinge of Saynts, by this Redeemer of mine, that thou wilt make me runn with speed through the way of thy Com∣mandemētes, that so I may be vnited to him in spiritt, who disdayned not to be vested with my flesh. Dost thou not, ô holy Father, ob∣serue how that most deere head of thy Sonne (he being yet but in the flower of his youth) is hanging downe vpon that necke, which is as white as snowe, and doth resolue it selfe into a most pretious death? Be∣holde, ô thou most meeke Creator, the humanity of thy beloued Sonne; and take pitty vpon the weakenes of our fraile nature. That bare brest of his, is lilly-pale; that side is all read, and goared with blood, those bowells
are withered, with being stretched out, those sweete bright eyes doe languish; that imperiall face is all discoloured; those long and grace∣full armes, are growen stiffe; those marble thighes are hanging downe; and those springs of that pretious blood, doe bedew, & bathe, his trans∣perced feete. Behold ô glorious Fa∣ther the torne lymms of thy most beloued Sonne; and in thy mercy, remember that he carrieth my na∣ture about him. Behold the punish∣ment of that man, who is God; and release the misery of that man who was created by him. Behold the punishment of the Redeemer, and remitt and pardon his offence who is redeemed. This is he, ô my Lord, whome thou didst strike for the sinns of thy people, though he be still that beloued, in whome thou art so well pleased. This is that innocent per∣son, in whome noe guile was found, and yet, he was esteemed to be one of the wicked.
CHAP. VII. Here man acknowledgeh that himselfe by his sinnes, is the cause of the Passion of Christ our Lord. WHAT hast thou commit∣ted, ô thou most sweete childe, that thou shouldest so be iudged? what hast thou committed, ô most amiable yonge man, that thou shouldest be treated so? what is thy wickednes? what is thy cryme? what is the cause of thy death? what is the occasion of thy condemnation? It is I, it is I, who am that wound, which putts thee to payne, and I am the cryme which kills thee: and I am the man who deserued that death which thou endurest. I am the wickednes, wherof reueng is taken vpon thee. I am that sornes of thy Passion: I am the labour of thy torment. O ad∣mirable kind of sentence! O dispo∣sition of an vnspeakable mistery! The wicked man sinns, and the iust man is punished: The guilty person offends, and the innocent man bears the blowes; the impious man errs,
and the holy man is condemned. That which the wicked man deser∣ues, the holy man endures; that which the slaue borrowes, his Lord pays; that which man committs, God vndergoes. How lowe, ô Sonne of God, how lowe did thy humility descend? how high did thy cha∣rity burne vp? how farr did thy piety proceed? howe wide did thy be∣nignity extend? whither did thy loue aspire? and where did thy compassiō arriue? For it is I, who haue done wickedly, and thou art punished. I, who haue committed the cryme, and thou art layd vpon the Racke. I, grewe proude, and thou art humbled. I was puffed vp, and thou art exte∣nuated. I haue showed my selfe diso∣bedient, and thou being obedient, dost answeare for the paine due to that disobedience. I haue obeyed the temptation of gluttony, and thou art halfe consumed for lacke of meate. Distempered affection drewe me on apace to vnlawfull concupiscence; and perfect charity was that, which led thee on to the Crosse. I presumed to doe that which was forbiddē, thou
didst vndergoe torments. I am de∣lighted with meate, thou art in la∣bour vpon the Crosse. I am fed with delight: thou art torne with nailes. I tasted the sweetnes of the apple; thou the bitternes of gall. Eue laughs, & congratulats my sinn with me; but Mary weeps and takes compas∣sion with thee. Behold, O Kinge of glory, behold how my impiety, and thy piety, are made apparent by one another. Beholde how my iniu∣stice & thy Iustice are made cleerly manifest. What! O my King, and my God, shall I render for all those things, which thou hast bestowed on me? For there is nothinge to be found in the hart of man, which can beare any portion to thy singular benefites. Can the sharpnes of mans conceite, thinke of any thinge, to which the mercy of God may be cōpared? Noe, it is not in the power of a creature to performe any seruice that can make full amends to his Creator. But yet, O Sonne of God, there is somewhat in this admirable dispen∣sation of thine, there is some what, wherein my frailty may answeare, in
some small proportion to what I owe if by the visitation of thy holy Spi∣ritt, my contrite hart, may crucify my flesh with the vices, and concu∣piscences therof. And when this fa∣uour is granted me by thee, I doe al∣ready, as it were, beginn to suffer sweetly with thee, because thou did∣est vouchsafe to dye for my sinns. And thus by the victory of the in∣ward man, he is prepared through thy help, toward an euident triumph; so that the spirituall persecution being ouercome, he fears not to sub∣mitt himselfe, for the loue of thee, to a materiall sword. And in this man∣ner, if it be pleasinge to thy mercy, the weakenes of our condition wil bee able, accordinge to our litle strength, to correspond with the greatenesse of our Creator. This, O deare Iesus, is that cele∣stial medicine: this is the antidote of thy loue. I beseech thee, by those an∣cient mercyes of thyne, infuse some such thing into my wounds, as wher∣reby, I (casting vp the contagion of vipers, which I haue suckt) may be reintigrated to my former health,
and that vpon the taste of the Nectar of thy diuine sweetnes, I may be drawen to despise the inticeinge va∣nities of this world, with my whole hart; and that, by thy goodnes, I may not be freighted with any aduersity which can happen here; but, being mindefull of that nobility which is to last for euer, I may still loath the windes of this transitory world. Lett nothinge, I beseech thee, be delight∣full to me, witheut thee. Lett no∣thinge be pleasinge, nothinge be pre∣tious, nothinge beautifull besides thee. Lett all things, I beseeche thee, growe base, & odious without thee. That which is contrary to thee, lett it be troublesome to me, and lett thy good pleasure, be my eternall desire. Lett it be à tedious thing to me, to reioyce without thee; and lett it delight me, to be greiued for thee. Lett thy very name, be a ioy to my hart; and lett the comfort of thy memory, bring my tears, which may be the bread I feed on, day and night, whilest I seeke thy lawe. And lett that lawe be esteemed by me, beyonde thousands of gold and
siluer. Lett it be an amiable thinge for me, to obey thee, and execrable to resiste thee. I beseech thee, ô my hope, by all thy workes of pitty, that thou wilt haue mercy vpon my sinns. Make mine ears stand open to thy Commaundements. And I beseech thee, by thy holy Name, lett not my hart decline towards the words of malice, to the makeinge of excuses vpon excuses, of my sinns: and I beseech thee also, by that admira∣ble humility of thine, that the foote of pride may not come towards me, and that the hand of a sinner may not stirre me. CHAP. VIII. Here man exposeth the Passion of the Sonne, to God the Father, for the reconciliation of man. BEholde, O thou Omnipotent God, the Father of my Lord, dis∣pose thou graciously, and haue mercy on me. I beseech thee, I say, since whatsoeuer I haue conceiued to be best, I haue deuoutly offerred; and whatsoeuer I haue found to be
most excellent, I haue humbly pre∣sented to thee. I haue left nothing in my selfe, which I haue not ex∣posed to thy Maiesty; Nothinge now remaines for me to adde, for I haue fastned all my hope on thee. I haue directed to thee, thyne owne deare Sonne, who is mine Aduocate. I haue placed that glorious ofspringe of thine, as a mediatour betweene thee, and me. I haue placed him, as I said, for an intercessour; by whose meanes I hope for pardon. I haue offred by these wordes of myne, that Word of thine, who, as I said be∣fore, was sent, for the pardon of my sinnes; and I haue recounted to thee, the Passion of thy most Holy Sonne, which I beleeue he hath endured for me. I beleeue that the Deity was sent by thee, and that it tooke vpon it selfe, my humanity; wherein he disdained not to suffer blowes, fetters spittings, and scornes; yea euen the Crosse, Nailes, and Launce. His Humanity was intertained with the cryes of infancy; it was bound in by the swathinge cloathes of that tender age; it was vexed by
the labour, and sweat of his youth; it was extenuated also by fastinge, afflicted by watchinge, and wea∣ried out by trauelling. It was af∣terwardes loaden with stirpes, and torne in sunder with other torments. It was ranked amongst the dead, and when once it was indued with the glory of Resurrection, he intro∣duced it into the ioyes of heauen. This is that, which must appease thee, and this must propitiate for me. Obserue therefore here, O God with mercy, what Sonne thou hast begotten, and what slaue thou hast redeemed. Obserue who is the Maker, and despise not the thinge which he hath made. Imbrace thou the sheepheard with ioy, and with mercy looke vpon that sheepe, which he hath brought home vpon his owne shoulders. This is that most faithfull sheepheard, who with many, and greate laboures, hath fought this poore sheepe, which so long was erring vp and downe, by those abrupt, and rocky hills, and by those precepices, which ouer∣looke those vallies. And who when
it was euen dyinge, through the faintnesse to which it was growen by that tedious errour, and exile; yet as soone as he could meete with it, he did with ioy putt himselfe vn∣derneath it; and with an admirable exercise, and strife of charity, he raised it out of that profound pitt of confusion; and haueinge imprisoned it in his owne bosome, by deare imbracements, he brought that one which he had lost, to the ninty nine which remayned. Behold, O Lord my Kinge, and my God Omnipotent! Behold how the good Pastor brings thee, that which thou haste committed to his charge. He vndertooke the saluation of man by thy direction, and he re∣stores him to thee, free from all in∣fection. Behold how thy most deare Sonne reconciles thy Creature to thee, which had wandred from thee so farr. Behold how that meeke Pa∣stor of mine, brings back to thy flocke, that which the violent theefe had driuen away. He restoreth that slaue to thy sight, whome his owne conscience had made a fugitiue; that
he, who of himselfe deserued pu∣nishment, by meanes of him, may obteyne pardon; and that he to whome hell was due for his sinnes, by the meanes of so great a Captaine, may confide that he shalbe recalled to his country. I was well able, O holy Father, to offend thee of my selfe; but of my selfe, I was not able to appease thee. Thy beloued Sonne, O my God, is become my helper, participateinge of my humanity, that he might cure my infirmity; that so from whence the cause of mine offence was growen, from thence he might offer the Sacrifice of praise to thee; and might therby make me acceptable to thy mercy; since, he showeth himselfe, sitting at thy right hand, as a confort of my substance, and nature. Behold, this is my hope, this is all the confidence I haue. If thou despise me, as thou hast reason for my sinn, yet looke back vpon me at least with mercy, for the loue of thy beloued Sonne. Consider that, in thy Sonne, wherby thou maisttake pitty vpon the slaue. Behold the mistery of his Incar∣nation,
and pardon the sensuality of my conuersation. As often as thou beholdest the wounds of thy blessed Sonne; I beseech thee, lett my wic∣kednes shrink out of thy sight. As often as thy pretious blood, lookes read from that holy side, I beseech thee, that the spotts of my corrup∣tion may be washed away. And as flesh prouoked thee to wrath, so lett flesh, I beseeche thee, incline thee to mercy. And in fine, as flesh se∣duced vs to sinn, so lett flesh bring vs back to pardon. It is much that my impiety diserueth; but yet it is much more which the piety of my Redeemer doth iustly exact. My in∣iustice is great, I confesse it: but farr greater is the Iustice of my Redee∣mer. For, as much as God is Supe∣rior to man, so much is my malice inferior to his goodnes, both in quantity and quality. For in what hath man sinned, wher∣in the Sonne of God, being made Man, hath not redeemed him? What pride was able to swell so highe, as that so great humility would not be able to beate it downe? What domi∣nion
of death could be so absolute, which the torment of the Crosse, in∣dured by the Sone of God, will not destroy. Infaillibly, O my God, if the faults of a sinfull man, and the grace of him who redeemed them, be putt into an equall ballance, the East will not be found so farr distant from the west; nay the lowest parte of hell, will not be found so farr distant from the highest pich of heauen, as they two will be. Now therfore, O thou most excellent Creator of light, pardon my faults, through the immense la∣bours of thy beloued Sonne. Lett now I beseech thee, his piety pro∣pitiate for my impiety; his modesty for my peruersity; his meekenes for my rudenes; his humility for my pride; his patience for my impa∣tiēce; his benignity for my harshnes; his obedience for my disobedience; his tranquillity for my vnquietnesse, his sweetenes for my bitternesse; his mildnesse for my anger; and let his charity ouerworke my cruelty.
CHAP. IX. Of the inuocation of the Holy Ghost. O Loue of that diuine power, the Holy communication of the Omnipotent Father, and of the most blessed Sonne, O thou Omnipotent Holy Ghoste, the most sweete com∣forter of the afflicted; slipp thou downe euen very now, by thy puis∣sant vertue, into the most secrett corners of my hart, and by the splen∣dor of thy cleere light, illuminate, (ô thou deere dweller in our soules) these darke retreyts of our neglected habitations; and by thy visitation, and by the abundance of thy dewe from heauen, make my soule growe fruitfull, which by reason of so longe a drought, is all deformed and de∣cayed. Wound thou the most rety∣red parts of this inward man, with the darts of thy loue; and inflame, and pearce the very marrowe of my dull hart, with those healthfull fires of thine. And by the flame of thy ho∣ly feruour, illuminate thou and feed the very interiour, both of my whole body and minde.
Giue me once to drink of the tor∣rent of thy delights: that now I may noe more haue a minde, so much as euen to taste, of the pestiferous sweetnesse of wordly things. Iudge, me, ô Lord, and discerne my cause from all wicked people, and teach me to doe thy will, for thou art my God. I beleeue therfore, that whomesoeuer thou dost inhabite, thou dost build vp a dwellinge place in him both for the Father and the Sonne. Blessed is he, who shall arriue to intertayne thee; because by thee, both the Fa∣ther & the Sonne will remaine with him. Come, come euen now, O thou moste benigne Comforter of all woe∣full soules. Thou, who protectest them, when they haue most need, and art their helper in tribulation. Come, ô thou clenser of sinns, and curer of wounds. Come, ô thou strength of the weake, ô thou who stayest such as are falling. Come ô thou teacher of the humble, and di∣stroyer of the proude. Come, ô deare Father of Orphants, and fauorable Iudge of widowes. Come, thou hope of the poore, & thou cherisher of
such as fainte. Come, thou propi∣tious starr of such as sayle, & thou hauen, against the danger of ship∣wrack. Come, ô thou excellent or∣nament, of such as liue; & the onely helpe of such as dye. Come, ô most holy Spiritt: Come, and haue mercy on me; make me fitt for thy self, & condiscend to me with pitty, that my meanenesse may growe pleasing to thy greatnesse, and my weakenes to thy strength. Accordinge to the multitude of thy mercyes; through Iesus Christe my Sauiour, who with the Father doth liue ad reigne in thy vnity, for euer, and euer. Amen. CHAP. X. The Prayer of the Seruant of God con∣ceauing humbly of himselfe. I Knowe, O Lord, I knowe, and I confesse that I am not worthy, that thou shouldest loue me; but yet at least, it is certaine, that thou art not vnworthy to be beloued by me. It is true that I am vnworthy to serue thee; but it is also true, that thou art not vnworthy to be serued
by thy Creatures. Giue me therfore somewhat, O Lord, of that which maketh thee so worthy, and so I shall growe worthy, who am vn∣worthy. Make me cease from sinn, by what meanes thou wilt; to the end that I may serue thee as I ought. Grant that I may so addresse, and order, and end my life, that I may sleepe in peace, and repose in thee. Grant that in the end, the sleepe of death may receiue me with rest; rest with securiry, and security with eter∣nity. Amen. CHAP. XI. A Prayer to the blessed Trinity. WE confesse to thee, with our whole hart, and with our mouth, we praise and blesse thee, O God the Father, who art vnbegotten; and thee, O God the Sonne, who art the onely begotten; and thee, O God the holy Ghoste, who art the Paraclete. To thee. O holy, and in∣deuiduall Trinity, be glory for all eternityes. Amen.
CHAP. XII. A Confession of the Omnipotency, and Maiesty of God. O Supreame Trinity, O thou sole power, & vndeuided Majesty, O God of ours, O Omnipotent God, I confesse to thee, who am the vn∣worthyest of thy seruāts, and the wea∣kest of thy mēbers. I cōfesse to thee in thy Church, and I giue thee honor, by offering thee a due sacrifice of praise, according to that little power, and skill, which thou haste vouch∣safed to affoord me, thy miserable creature. And because I haue no ex∣ternal presents, which I can make to thee, therfore these desires, and vowes of seruice and praise, which by the guift of thy mercy are in me, behold, how with an vnfained faith and with a pure conscience, I offer them to thee, not onely with a good will, but with a hart, which is full of triūph, and ioy. I beleeue therfore with my whole hart, and I confesse with my mouth, O thou Kinge of heauen, ad Lord of earth, that thou the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy
Ghoste, art in Persons three, and in Substance one, & that thou art God Omnipotent, of one simple, in∣corporeall, inuisible, and vncircum∣scribed nature. That there is nothing either aboue thee, or belowe thee, or greater then thou; but that thou art sublymely, and absolutely per∣fect, whithout the least deformity. Great, without quantity, good without quality, eternall, yet wholly without Tyme. That thou hast life without death; that thou art strong without any weakenesse; true without falshoode; euery where pre∣sent, without being scituated any where; filling all things, yet without any extension; occurringe euery where, yet without any crossinge, or contradiction. Transcending all things, without Motion; remaneinge in all things, without Station; crea∣tinge all things, without looseinge, or wantinge any thing, and ruleinge all things without labour. Giueinge a beginninge to all things, thy selfe haueinge noe be∣ginninge; makeing all things chan∣geable, & beinge yet vnchangeable
in thy selfe; being infinite in thy greatenesse, Omnipotent in thy power, souuereigne in thy good∣nesse, inestimable in thy wisdome, terrible in thy decrees, iust in thy iud∣gements, secret in thy thoughts, true in thy wordes, holy in thy workes, & plentifull in thy mercyes. Towards sinners, thou art most patiēt; towards penitents thou art most pittifull. Thou art euer the same, eternall, sempiternall, immortall, & vnchan∣geable God, whome neither space can dilate, nor littlenesse of place can streighten, nor any receptacle can keepe in, or constraine, nor the will vary, nor partiality corrupt; nether doe sad things afflict thee, nor ioyfull things transport thee. From whome neither forgetfullnes takes any thinge, neither doth memory restore any thing; neither doe things past passe away; nor future things succeed To whome neither the first gaue beginninge: nor the conti∣nuance of tyme increase: nor shall any accident giue it any end. But thou liuest for all eternity, both be∣fore, and in, and through all aages
And lett immortal praise, and eternall glory, and souuereigne power, and supreame honor, and a Kingdome, & Empire for all eternity, remaine with thee, through those infinite, vnwearied, and immortall ages, of ages. Amen CHAP. XIII. How God the Father vouchsafed to helpe mankinde, and of the Incar∣nation of the worde. HItherto, O Omnipotent God the beholder & searcher of my hart, I haue confessed the Omnipo∣tency of thy Maiesty, and the maiesty, of thy Omnipotency. But now, as I beleeue with the hart to Iustice, so will I confesse before thee, with the mouth to saluation, in what sort thou haste beene pleased, at the end of many ages, to releiue the misery of mankinde. Thou, O God, and our onely Father, wert neuer to be sent any whither. But of the Sonne, the Apostle writeth thus, When the full∣nes of tyme was come, God sent his Sonne. When he saith sent, he doth
sufficiently showe, that then he came sent into this world, when being borne of the euer B. Virgin Mary, he became, and appeared, true and perfect man, in flesh. But what is that, which that cheife of all the Euangelistes saith: He was in the world, and the world was made by him. He was sent thither in his Humanity, who was euer, and is there, by his Diuinity. Now, that this Mission is the worke of the whole blessed Trinity, I confesse with my whole hart, and mouth. But how then didst thou loue vs, O thou holy and good Father? how much didst thou loue vs, O most deare Creator; who didst not euen, spare, thyne owne Sonne, but didst deliuer him vp for vs wretched Creatures, He was subiect to thee, euen vnto the death, and that, the death of the Crosse, takeinge the hand-writinge of our sinns and nai∣linge it to the same Crosse. He cru∣cified also sinn it selfe, and killed death: He, who onely is free amongst the dead; haueing power both to lay downe his life for vs, and
afterward, to take it vp againe. Hence was he both the conquerer and Sa∣cryfice. And therfor the Conquerer because the sacryfice for vs To thee he was the Preist, and the Sacrifice; and therfore the Preist, because the Sacrifice. Most iustly haue I a strong hope in him, that thou for his sake, who sitteth at thy right hand, and is continually interceedinge for vs, wilt cure all our languishing diseases. For my infirmityes, O Lord, are great and many; great they are and many. The Prince of this world hath much to say against me, I knowe and cōfesse it, yet deliuer me I beseeche thee, by that Redeemer of mine, who sitteth at thy right hand, in whome he was able to finde none of his malice By him I beseeche thee, to iustify me; by him, who comitted noe sinn, nor was there any guile found in his mouth. I beseeche thee by that head of ours, in whome there is noe one little spott, deliuer this member, which yet is his, how weake and poore soeuer it be. Deliuer me, I beseeche thee from my sinns, my vices, my faults, and
my negligence. Fill me with thy holy vertues, & make me of most innocent conuersation. And grant, for thy holy names sake, that I may continue euen to the very end, in those good workes, which thou commaundest, according to thy holy will. CHAP. XIV. Of the confidence which a soule ought to haue in our Lord Iesus, & in his Passion. I Could easily haue despaired, through the excesse of my grei∣uous sinns, and of my infinite ne∣gligences, if thy word, O God, had not become flesh, and had not dwelt amongst vs. But now I dare not des∣paire, because when we were enemyes we were reconciled, by the death of thy Sonne, & how much more now, we beinge already reconciled, shall we be saued by him? For all the hope, and stay of all my confidence, doth consist, in that pretious blood of his, which was shed for vs, and for our saluation. In him doe I take
breath; and hopeing firmely in him, I earnestly desire to come to thee; not haueinge any iustice of mine owne, but that which is in thy Sonne, our Lord Iesus-Christe. We doe therfore thank thee. O most Clement, and benigne louer of mankind; who when we were not, didst powerfully create vs, by Iesus-Christe thy Sonne our Lord. And whē we were lost, by our owne fault, thou didst admirably deliuer, and recouer vs. I giue thankes to thy mercy; many thanks doe I giue thee with the whole affection of my hart; who (through that vnspeakable charity, wherewith thou didst vouchsafe, with strange goodnes, to loue vs miserable, and vnworthy Creatures) didst send thyne onely begotten Sonne, from thyne owne bosome, for our common good; so to saue vs sinners, who were then the sonns of wrath. I giue thee thanks for his holy Incarnation, and Natiuity, and for his glorious Mother, of whom he vouchsafed to assume flesh for vs, and our sal∣uation; that as he was true God of
God, so he might also, be true man of man. I thanke thee for his Crosse and Passion, for his death and Re∣surrection; for his Ascension into heauen, and for his seat of Maiesty at thy right hand. For vpō the fortieth day after his Resurrection, ascen∣dinge aboue all the heauens (whilest his Disciples were lookeing on) and being seated at thy right hand, he did according to his promisse, powre forth the Holy Ghoste vpon the Children of adoption. I thank thee, for that most sacred effusion of his most pretious Blood, wherby we are redeemed; and withall, for that Sacred, and Holy, and quickninge Mistery of his Body and Blood, which dayly we eate and drinke in the Church, and wherby we are washed and sanctified, and made partakers of that one supreame diuinity. I thank thee for this admi∣rable, and vnspeakable charity of thine, wherby thou hast so loued, and saued vs, vnworthy creatures, by that onely, and beloued Sonne of thine. For thou didst so loue the world, as to giue thy onely begotten
Sonne, that euery one who beleeued in him, might not perish, but haue eternall life. And this is eternall life, that we may knowe thee our true God, and whome thou hast sent Ie∣sus-Christe, by right faith, and by works which are worthy, and sutable to that faith. CHAP. XV. Of the immense charity of the eternall Father towards mankinde. O Immense Piety, O inestimable Charity; that thou might free thy slaue, thou haste deliuered vpp thy Sonne; God is made man to the end that wretchd man, might be drawen out of the prower of the Di∣uell. How inspeakably a benigne louer of man, is thy Sonne our God, to whose bowels of mercy, it seemed not sufficient, that he should dimi∣nish himselfe, so much as to be made man of the true Virgin Mary; vnlesse withall, he had vndergone the tor∣ment of the Crosse, shedding so his Blood for vs, and for our saluation. Our mercyfull God came downe; he
came, through his owne pitty, and goodnesse; he came to seeke, and saue, that which was loste. He sought his lost sheepe, he sought and found it, and he brought it home vpon his owne shoulders into his folde. Being a mercifull Lord, and extreamely deare Pastour. O Charity! O Pie∣ty! who euer heard of such things as these? who is he, that vpon the dis∣closinge of these bowels of mercy, will not be amazed? who will not wonder? who will not reioyce, for that excessiue Charity of thyne, wherewith thou louedst vs; Thou didst send thy Sonne in the likenesse of the flesh of sinn, that by sinn he might condemne sinn, and that we might be made thy iustice in him. For he is the true vnspotted lambe, who hath takē away the sinns of the world who hath distroyed our death, by dyinge, and restored our life, by his Resurrection. But what can we re∣turne to thee, O our God, for the be∣nefitts of thy mercy, which are so greate? What praises, and what thanks can we giue? For althouge we did possesse that knoweledge and
power, which the Angells haue, yet should we be vnable, to make returne of any thing which might be worthy of thy mercy and goodnes. If all the parts of our body, were conuerted into tongues, this meanesse of ours would neuer yet be able to answeare thee with due praise. For that in∣estimable Charity, which thou haste beene pleased to shew to vs vn∣worthy Creatures, through thyne onely pitty, and goodnes, doth farr transcend all our knoweledge. For thy Sōne our God, did not assume the Angelicall nature, but the seed of Abraham, being made like to vs, in all things except sinn. And so our Lord, takeinge the Nature, not of Angells, but of men vpon him, and glorifying it with the Stole of holy Resurrection, and immortality; he exalted vs aboue all the Heauens, aboue all the Quires of Angells, and aboue Cherubine, and Seraphine, placeing it at thy right hand. And this Nature, doe the Angells praise, and the Dominations adore; and all the Vertues of Heauen tremble to behold aboue them all, God-Man.
This is all my hope, and all my confidence. For there is in Iesus-Christe, our Lord himselfe, a por∣tion of the flesh, and blood of eue∣ry of vs. Where then any parte of me reignes, there I am confident I also reigne. Where my flesh is glorified, there doe I conceiue my selfe to be glorious. Where my blood doth beare Dominion, there do I finde my selfe to rule. Though I be a sinner, yet I cannot diffide not to participate in this grace. Though my sinns keepe me back, yet my substāce calls me on. Though my offences shutt me out, yet my communion of nature with him, reiects me not. For God is not so cruell, that he can forgett man, and not remember the thinge which he bears about himselfe; and which, for my sake, he tooke vpon him, & which for my sake he sought. No, our Lord God is full of meeke∣nesse, and benignity; and he loues his flesh, his body, and his bowells▪ in the same God, and Lord Iesus-Christe, who is most sweete, most be∣nigne and most clement; in whose person we are already risen, and are
ascended into heauē, and are already seated in those heauenly habitatiōs. Our owne flesh loueth vs, and we haue the prerogatiue of our blood in him. We are his members and his flesh; and he in fine, is our head; and of these parts, the whole body is made, as it is writen: Bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh and they shalbe two in one flesh. And againe, No man did euer hate his owne flesh but he cherisheth▪ and loueth it. This is a great mystery, I say in Christ, & in his Church, saith the Apostle. CHAP. XVI. Of the twofolde nature of Christe our Lord, who pittieth, and prayeth for vs. I Giue thee thankes O Lord our God, with my lipps, and with my hart, and with the whole power I haue, for thy infinite goodnesse; and for all those mercyes, by which thou didst vouchsafe, to succour vs poore creatures, after an admirable manner, by thy Sonne our Sauiour, and Redeemer, who dyed for our
sinns, and rose for our iustification, and now liueinge in eternity, doth sitt at thy right hand, and inter∣ceedeth for vs. And together with thee, he taketh pitty of vs, because he is God, of thee, his Father, coe∣ternall, and consubstantiall with thee in all things, wherby he may for euer saue vs. But for as much as he is man, in those respects wherein he is lesse then thou, all power is giuen him, both in Heauen and in earth, that at the name of Iesus, euery knee may bowe, celestial, ter∣restrial and infernall; and euery tongue my confesse, that our Lord Iesus Christe is in thy glory, Omni∣potent God the Father. He indeed is appointed by thee, to be the Iudge of the quick and the dead, but thou iudgest noe man, but thou haste giuē all iudgement to thy Sonne, in whose brest all the treasures of wisdome and knowledg are layd vp, and hidd. But he is both the witnes, and the Iudge. A Iudge and witnes he is, from whome noe sinfull conscience can fly; for all things lye open and naked to his eyes. That very he, who
was iudged vniustly, shall iudge the whole worlde in equity, and the people in Iustice. I doe therefore blesse thy holy na∣me for all eternity, and I glorify thee, with my whole hart, O mer∣cifull, and Omnipotent Lord, for that admirable, and vnspeakable coniunction of thy diuinity and hu∣manity, in the vnity of one person; not that God might be one, and Man another, but that one and the same should be God and Man, man and God. But although, The word was made flesh, by a strange gra∣ciousnesse and mercy; yet nether of those two Natures, is changed into another substance. There is no fourth person, added to the mistery of the Trinity, for the substance of the Worde, of God and Man, was vnited, and not confounded, that so, that might be assumed to God which he had taken from vs, and yet that, which had beene before, might still continue the same it was. O wonderfull mistery, O vn∣speakable kinde of commerce. O
admirable, and for euer to beloued benignity of the diuine mercy. We were not worthy to be seruants, and yet behold, we are made the Sonnes of God. Nay, we are the heires of God and coheirs of Christ. Whence came this to vs, and who brought vs to this? But I beseeche thee, O thou most mercifull God the Father, by this inestimable goodnes and piety, and charity of thine, make vs worthy of the many and great pro∣misses of thy Sonne our Lord Iesus-Christe imploy thy strength, and confirme that in vs which thou hast wrought. Perfect that which thou haste begun, that we may deserue to attayne to the fulnesse of thy mercy. Inable vs by thy Holy Spiritt, to vnderstand, deserue, and reuerence with due honor, this great mystery of piety, which is manifested in the flesh, iustified in the spirit, hath appeared to Angells, is preached to Gentiles, is beleeued in the world, and is assumed to glory.
CHAP. XVII. Of the thanks which a man owes to God, for the benefitt of Redemption. O How deepely are we thy debters, O Lord our God, being redeemed by so high a price: being saued by so rich a guift: being assisted by so glorious a benefitt? How much art thou to be feared, loued, blessed, praised, honored and glorified by vs miserable creatures, whom thou haste so loued, saued sanctifyed, and exalted? For to thee doe we owe all our power, all our beeing, and all our knowledg. And who hath any thinge which is not thyne? Thou art our Lord, and our God, from whom all things pro∣ceed. For thy selfe, and for thy holy Name, giue vs So me part of thy heauenly riches, that by meanes of those blessings and guifts of thyne, we may serue & please thee in truth, and that by way of returne we may dayly render thee all due praise, for so many benefits of thy mercy. Nor
can we serue thee, or praise thee by any other meanes, then by thy owne guift For euery good grace; and euery perfect guift, is from aboue descending from thee, the Father of lights, wiht whom there, is noe change, nor so much as any shadow of mutability. O Lord our God! deare God, good God, Omnipotent God, vnspeakable God, whose nature cannot be cir∣cumscribed, God the ordeyner of all things, & the Father of our Lord Iesus-Christe, who diddest send the same beloued Sonne of thyne, our most sweete Lord, out of thy bosome, for our vniuersall profitt, to take our life vpon him, that he might bestowe his life vpon vs, and that he might be perfect God, of thee the Father, and perfect Man of his Mother, all God and all Man, and one, and the same Christe, eternall, and tempo∣rall, immortall and mortall: Crea∣tor, and creature; stronge & weake triumphant, and yet ouercome; the nourse, and the creature which is nourished; the Pastor & the sheepe: he that dyed for a tyme, and dyed
in time, and yet is liueinge for all eternity. He promiseinge to such as loued him, that they should be pro∣uided for, said thus to his Disciples: What soeuer you shall aske the Father in my name, he wil giue it to you By this Supreame Sacrifice, and true Preist, and good Pastor, who offered himselfe in Sacrifice to thee, laying downe his life for his flocke, by him I beseech thee, who sitteth at thy right hand, and interceedeth for vt, being our Redeemer and Aduo∣cate before thy pitty and goodnesse, I beseech thee, I say, O God, the most deere and benigne louer of mankinde, that thou wilt giue me grace, with the same Sonne of thyne, and the Holy Ghoste, to praise, and glorify thee in all things, with great contrition of hart, and a fountaine of teares, with much reuerence and trembling, because theirs whose the substance is, theirs also are all the accessaryes therof. But because the body which is corrupted, doth depresse the soule, I beseeche thee, to rowse vp my dullnes by thy vertue and make me perseuere with
strength in thy Commaundements, and praises day and night. Grant that my hart may wax warme with∣in me, and that, whilest I am in meditation, the fire may burne. And because thy onely Sonne himselfe did say: No man cometh to me, vn∣lesse the Father who sent me, drawe him, and no man cometh to the Fa∣ther but by me, I beseech, and hum∣bly pray thee, be thou euer drawe∣ing me to him, that at last he may bring me thither to thee, where he is sittinge at thy right hand. where there is an eternall life eternally hap∣py, where there is perfect loue, and noe feare, where there is an euerla∣stinge day, and one spirit of them all; where there is certaine and supreame security, and secure tran∣quillity, and serene alacrity, and sweet felicity, and happy eternity, and eternall beatitude, and a bles∣sed praise, and vision of thee, which neuer ends. where thou with him, and he with thee, and both, in the communion of the same Holy Gho∣ste, doe sempiternally liue, and being God, dost reigne, for euer, and for euer. Amen.
CHAP. XVIII. A Prayer to Christe our Lord. O Christ my God my hope Sweete louer of mankinde, Light, life, way, health And beauty most refin'd; Behould those things which thou Did'st suffer, vs to saue; The chaynes, the wounds, the Crosse, The bitter death, the graue, Riseing within three dayes From conquering death and hell, By thy Disciples seene, Reforminge mindes so well, Vpon the fortieth day, Climeing the Heauens soe high, Thou liuest now, and thou Shalt raigne eternally. THou art my liueing and true God, my holy Father, my deare Lord, my greate Kinge, my good shepheard, my onely instructor, my best helper, my most beautifull louer, my liueinge breade, my Eter∣nall Preist, my guide into my coun∣try,
my true light, my holy sweet∣nes, my right way, my excellent wisdome, my pure simplicity, my peaceable concord, my safe custody, my good portion, my euerlasting saluation, my great Mercy, my in∣uincible patience, my imaculate Sa∣crifice, my holy Redemption, my firme hope, my perfect charity, my true Resurrection, my eternall life, my excessiue ioy, and most blessed Vision, which is for euer to remai∣ne. I pray thee, I begg of thee, I be∣seech thee, that I may walke by thee, passe on by thee, and repose in thee, who art the way, the truth, and the life, without whome, no man cometh to the Father. For thou art he, whome I desire, O thou most sweete & most beautifull Lord, O thou splendor of thy Fathers Glo∣ry, who sittest aboue the Cherubins, and beholdest from thence, the most profound Abysses, which are be∣lowe; thou light, which declareth truth; illuminateing light: light, which neuer leaues to shine, whome the Angells desire to behold Loe my hart is before thee; disperse the
darknes therof, that by the clearnes of thy loue, it may be yet more fully strucken, and beaten through with light. Giue thy selfe to me, O my God, restore thy selfe to me. Behold I loue thee, and if it be to little, make me loue thee more. I cannot measure out, to know, how much of my loue is wanting to thee, of that which ought to make it vp enough. Let my life runn on towards thyne imbracements, and lett it neuer looke aside, till it be all hidden vp, in the hidden ioy of seeing thy face. In the meane tyme this I know, that it goes ill with me, when I want thee O Lord. And not onely is it ill with me, in respect of the things which are without me, but in respect of them also which are within me. For whatsoeuer plenty there may be in the world, which is not my God, is noe better to me, then meere begge∣ry. For it is thou alone, who canst not be changed, either into better or worse; thou, who indeed, and simply, art alone; thou to whom it is not one thing to liue, and an other
thing to liue happily, beccause thou art thyne owne Beatitude. But thy creature, to nhom it is one thing to liue, and another thinge to liue happily, must not attribute eyther happy life, yea or so much as life, to any other thing, then thy grace. Therefore is it, that we stand in need of thee, and not thou of vs. For although we had noe beeing at all, yet there would be nothing wanting to thee, of that compleat good, which thou art. It is necessarie therfore that we adhear still to thee, O Lord, that by thy continuall assistance, we may be able to liue holyly, and vprightly. For we are drawē downe fast enough, by the waight of our frailty; but by thy guifte we are kindled, and car∣ried vpward, and we are inflamed, and we fly on, whither we are goe∣inge, which is towards the peace of Ierusalem. For I haue reioyced in those things, which haue beene said to me, let vs goe into the howse of our Lord. There, hath a rectifyed and good will placed vs; and so, as that we can desire noe more, but that we may remaine there for euer.
But because whilest we are in this body, we wander as pilgrims from thee, therefore we haue not here any permanent Citty, but we expect another which is to come, for our habitation is in Heauen And there∣fore, by the conduct of thy grace, doe I goe into the most retyred corner of my hart, and I sing loue songs to thee, O my Kinge, and my God; groaninge out certaine groa∣nes, which indeed cannot be descri∣bed, in this place of my pilgrimage where thy lawe is the song in which I delight my selfe. And calling Ie∣rusalem to minde, I extend, and stretch the whole power of my hart towards it: Ierusalem which is my Country, Ierusalem which is my Mother; And towards thee also who art the ruler, the illuminator, the father, the tutor, the defendor, the pastor, the chaste and strong delight therof, the solide ioy, & all wnspekable good things; yea all of them together, because thou art the onely supreame and true good. Nor will I be drawen aside from this exercice, till thou, O my God, and
my mercy, shalt draw together all that which I am, from this des∣persion, and deformity wherein I finde my self, and till thou shalt conforme me to thy selfe, and con∣firme me therein for all eternity, in the communion of that most deere Mother of mine, whither the flower and first fruites of my spiritt, are already gone before. CHAP. XIX. He distinguisheth betweene that wis∣dome, which is called the house of God, and that other wisdome which is supremely diuine. THis is that howse of thine, O God, noe earthly howse, nor yet built of any corporeal thinge in heauen, but I meane that spirituall howse, which is partaker of thyne eternity, because it is for euer to re∣maine without spott; For thou hast appointed that it should remaine for euer, and for euer thou haste imposed a precept, and it shall not passe away. Yet that creature, O God, is not
eternall, as thou art eternall; be∣cause it was not without beginning; for it was made. Of all the Creatures, this Wisdome is that which was created first. I meane not that Wis∣dome, which was absolutely coe∣ternall, and coequall with God the Father, wherby all things were created, and in which Beginninge, heauen and earth was made: but I meane the Wisdome which is created; namely that spirituall na∣ture, which by the contemplation of thy light, is light; for euen this, although it be created, is called Wisdome. But as much difference as there is, betweene the light which doth illuminate, and that which gro∣weth to be light by being illumina∣ted; so much difference also there is, betweane thee, who art the suprea∣me wisdome, creatinge all things, and this other which is created; as also there is betweene that Iustice which iustifieth, which is thy selfe, O our God, and that Iustice which is produced in vs by our beinge iu∣stified. For we also are called the Iu∣stice of God the Father, in thee,
who art his Sonne our Lord, by the testimony of the Apostle. Though therfore the first of all the creatures was a kinde of Wisdome (Which was made to be a rationall, & intel∣lectuall mind; inhabiting thy holy Citty, our mother which is aboue, and which is free, and eternall in the Heauens) & what Heauens but those Heauens of the Heauens, which praise thee, because this is that, wherof it is said, The Heauens of the Heauens to our Lord, & although we finde no Tyme before that Crea∣ture, because it was before the crea∣tion of Tyme, as being the first of all the creatures; yet neuerthelesse thou art before it. O Eternall God, the Creator of all things, from whome, as soone as it was made, it tooke a beginninge, though not indeed, of Tyme, because Tyme was not then created; but yet a beginninge of that nature, which it was come to haue. It came therfore so from thee; O Lord our God, as that it is cleerly another thing then thou art. For al∣though I finde noe Tyme neither be∣fore it, nor in it; it is yet neuertheles
fitt to behold thy face; neither is it euer diuerted from thence, Hence it comes that it is not subiect to any change. Yet a kinde of mutabillity is still in it, wherby it would growe all darke and cold, vnlesse, by adhearing to thee, with an excessiue loue, it did (like a sunn which were euer bright as noone day) both shine, and boile vp with heat towards thee. In fine, that creature doth so ad∣hear to thee, our true God, who art truely eternall, that although it be not coeternall to thee, yet neuerthe∣lesse it is not discharged, nor distrac∣ted from thee, into any variety, or vicissitude of tyme. But it reposeth in the most true cōtemplation of thee alone. For to such, an one ô Lord as loues thee, as much as thou com∣mandest, thou dost cleerly discouer thy selfe, and it sufficeth him. And from hence it growes, that the An∣gells doe neuer decline, either from thee, or from themselues; but perpe∣tually they remaine in the same state, incessantly beholding thee, and in∣cessantly loueinge thee, who art the
true light, and the chaste loue. O how blessed and sublyme is this Creature of Creatures, most happy in eternally adhearing to thy beati∣tude; happy and excessiuely happy, in haueinge thee to inhabite, and to illuminate it, and that for euer. Nor can I finde what I may more fittly call this heauen of the heauens to our Lord, then that howse of thine, which is contemplateinge thy de∣lighte, without any defect at all, and without the least inclination to departe from that to any other; that pure minde, most intirely one, that establishemēt of those blessed spirits in the foundation of peace, in those heauens aboue, which are yet aboue these heauens which we see. Hereby, my soule (whose pilgri∣mage is so far of from thee) may vn∣derstande, if now it thirst affer thee; if now her teares, are not made her bread; if now she desire that one thinge, and begg it agayne and agayne, that she may inhabite thy howse all the days of her life. And what is the life of that howse, but thou thy selfe; and what are the dayes
therof, but thy eternity, as thy years are, which neuer faile. Let therfore the soule vnderstand here, as well as it can, how sublymely thou art Eter∣nall before all tymes, since that howse of thyne, which neuer wandred from thee (although it be not coeternall with thee, yet by reason that it ad∣heareth to thee, without any failing, or euer faintinge) vndergoeth noe variety of tyme: but sucking vp thee, her immutability, with a perpe∣tuall & perseuering purity of minde, she doth at no tyme, and in noe place depart from thee, to whom she clea∣ues with vnseparable loue, & to whom thou art euer present. And so, haueing no future which it may ex∣pecte, nor any transitory thing pas∣sing by, which it may remember; it is not varied to and fro by turnes, nor extended into future tymes. CHAP. XX. Here man prayeth that the said spiri∣tuall howse of God, may pray for him. O Thou bright and beautifull howse of God, I haue loued thy
comelynesse, and the place of the ha∣bitation of the glory of my Lord God, who did both build thee, and doth possesse thee. Lett this pilgri∣mage of myne, send sighes to thee, day and night, lett my hart pant to∣wards thee; lett my minde thinke on thee; and lett my soule desire to at∣tayne to the Society of thy beatitude I say to him who made thee; that he would possesse me in thee, for it is he who made both thee & me. Or ra∣ther doe thou desire and beseeche of him, that he will make me worthy of the participation of thy glory. For I doe not challenge thy holy Society, nor thy admirable beauty, by any meritt of mine; but I despaire not to obteine it, by the Blood of him who redeemed me. Onely let thy meritts help me, let thy most holy and most pure Prayers, which cannot but be effectuall with Almighty God, suc∣cour my sinfulnesse. I confesse that I haue wandred like a lost sheepe, and my habitation here is prolonged, and I am cast farr of from the face of my Lord God, into this blindenesse of banishment.
where, being driuen from the ioyes of Paradise, I am dayly lamentinge with my selfe, the miseryes of my captiuity; and I singe a mornefull songe, and I make huge lamenta∣tions, when I remember thee, O Ierusalem who art my mother: & whilest I finde my feete standinge in thy outward Courts, O thou faire and holy Sion, but am not able so much as to looke into those interior parts of that Temple. But yet I hope that I shall once be brought into thee, vpon his shoulders, who is my Pastor, and who was thy builder, that I may triumphe with thee, in that inspeakable ioy, wherewith they reioyce, who stand with thee before God our Sauiour himselfe, who discharged our enmytyes in his flesh, and who pacifyed all things which are both in Heauen and in earth, by his blood. For he is our peace, who made both to become one; and who ioyned in himselfe, those two walls, which went by con∣trary ways. Ordeyninge thy perma∣nent felicity, and promissing that he would giue himselfe to vs, accordinge
to the same measure, sayinge: And they shalbe equall to the Angells of God in Heauen. O Ierusalem, thou eternall house of God, be thou (after the charity of Christe our Lord) my ioy, and my comfort, and let the sweet memory of thy blessed Name, be a solace to my so∣rowes and heauinesse of hart. CHAP. XXI. How full of biternesse this life of ours, is. O Lord I am extreamely weary of this life, and of this woefull pil∣grimage. This life, this miserable life, fraile life, vncertaine life, labo∣rious life, vncleane life. Life which is the lady of wicked men, the queene of proude men, full of miseryes and errours, which deserues not to be call'd a life, but a death, since we are dying in euery moment, by diuers kinds of death, through the seuerall miseryes and changes, which we are subiect too. Doth therfore this, which we liue in this world, deserue to be called life; when humors make vs swell, and greife extenuates,
and vnnaturall heat dryes vp, and impressions of the ayre infect. Meat maketh fatt, fasting maketh leane, mirth makes dissolute, sorrowes con∣sume, care straitneth, security makes dull. Riches puffs vs vp; po∣uerty casts vs downe; youth extolls vs; and old age makes vs stoope; sicknes breakes, & sorrow oppresses vs. And to all these miseryes, furious death succeeds, and at a clapp doth so impose an end vpon this miserable life, that as soone as it hath left to be, it is scare beleeued, that euer it was. This vitall death, and this mor∣tall life, although it be all sprinckled with these, and many other bitter miseryes: alas, alas, it doth yet take very many, by the inticeinge plea∣sures therof, and it deceiues them, by the false promisses which it makes. And although, of it selfe, it be so very biting, & so bitter, as that it cannot be concealed from her blinde louers; yet are there an infinite nom∣ber of fooles in the world, whome she intertaynes & inebriates, with the golden chalice which she hath in her hand. Happy are they (but
they are to fewe) who refuse her fa∣miliarity, who dispise her sleight entertaniements, and ioys; & who forsake all society with her, lest they be forced to perish together with her who deceiued them. CHAP. XXII Of the felicity of that life, which our Lord hath prepared for them that loue him. O Thou life, which our Lord hath prepared for them who loue him. O thou vitall life, happy life, quiett life, secure life, beautifull life, pure life, chaste life, holie life; life which knowes not what belongs to death, which knowes not what belongs to sorrow; life without spott, without greife; without anxiety, without any perturbation without corruptiō, without variety and mutation: life, toppfull of all excellency, and dignity; where there is noe aduersary to impugne vs; noe inticeinge baite of sinn to allure vs; where there is perfect loue, & noe feare; & an euerlastinge day, and one spiritt of vs all; where God is seene
face to face; & where the soule is full fedd with this food of life, without all defect. I am resolued to looke earnesly to∣wards thy light; Thy felicity, and delightes drawe me to thee with a greedy hart. The more I consider thee, the more doe I languish with thy loue, and with a vehement desire of thee; and I am extreamely de∣lighted with the sweete remem∣brance of thee. I am therfore resol∣ued, I am resolued to cast vp myne eyes to thee, to erect the state of my minde, and to conforme the affec∣tions of my will to thee. I am resol∣ued to talke of thee, to heare speake of thee, to write of thee, to conferr with others of thee; daily to read somewhat of thy felicity & glory; & when I shall haue redd it, to reuolue it very often in my hart; that at least by this meanes, I may passe on from the burninge heats, and dangers, & toyling labours of this mortall, & dying life, to the sweete refreshing of that vitall aire of thyne; and that I may proceede at last, (when I shall lay my selfe downe to sleepe) to re∣pose
my head a little, in that bosome of thyne. To this end, I enter now and then, into those sweete feilds of thy holy Scriptures; and whilest I am turninge ouer those leaues, I gather the fresh flowers of sentences from thence. By reading them I eate; by frequenting them I ruminate; and by gathering them vp at last, I lodge them in the deepe receptacle of my memory; that, by this meanes, ha∣ueing taken a taste of thy sweetnes, I may feele the biteernes of this most miserable life, so much the lesse. O thou most happy life, O Kingdome which art truely blessed, free from death, and farr from haueing an end, to which noe tymes shall euer succeede, where that day which is still continued without night, ad∣mitts of noe Tyme; where the con∣quering souldiers being associated to those chantinge quires of Angells, sing that Canticle of the Canticles of Syon, to Almighty God, without ceasinge; the garland of triumph imbraceinge their glorious heads, & that for euer.
I would to Christe, that my sinns beinge once forgiuen me, and then this burden, beinge layd downe, I might be assigned to eternall rest; & might enter into thy ioyes, within those excellent and beautifull walls of thy Citty; receiuinge the crowne of glory from the hand of my Lord. That I might be present, with tho∣se most holy Quires of Angells; That together with those blessed Spiritts, I might concurre to glorify our Creator; that I might veiwe the present face of Christe our Lord; that I might for euer behold that suprea∣me, vnspeakable, & vncircumscri∣bed light: and that so not being subiect to any feare of death, I might for euer reioyce, in the euer∣lastinge endowment of incorruption. CHAP. XXIII. Of the felicity of that holy soule which departeth hence. HAppy is that soule, which beinge discharged from this body of earth, goes freely vp to heauen, and is in peace, & safetie,
not fearing, either any enemy, or death it selfe. For it will then haue present, and shall for euer behold, that most beautifull Lord, whom it hath serued, and whom it hath lo∣ued, and to whom at length it arri∣ueth all full of glory, and ioy. This glory of so great beatitude, noe tyme shall diminish, nor wicked enemy be able to bereeue vs of. The Daughter of Syon saw this soule, and did pu∣blish it to be most happy: The quee∣nes and the concubines sawe it, say∣inge, Who is this, which goeth for∣ward like a riseinge morninge, faire like the Moone, bright like the Sunn, and terrible like a pitched feild of armed men? How ioyfully doth she goe forth, make haste, and runn, when with astonished eares, she hears her spouse say thus: Rise vp, and make haste, O thou my freind, and my beautifull creature, and come with me: for now the Win∣ter is ouer-past, the Storme is gone, and hath hidd it selfe: the flowers haue appeared in our Land, the tyme of pruninge is now come, the voice of the turtle hath beene heard
in our land, The figg tree, hath brought forth her younge fruite, the vines are in flower, and send forth theire odour. Rise vp, maKe haste, O thou my freind, my faire Creature, my doue, in the holes of the RocKe, in the lowes places of the wall: Shew me that face of thyne, let thy voice sound forth in my ears: for thy uoice is sweete, and thy face is full of comlinesse, and grace. Come my elected, and my beautifull Creature, my doue, my immaculate, my Spou∣se, Come, and I will place my thro∣ne in thee, because I haue had a greedy desire of thy beauty. Come, that thou maist reioyce in my pre∣sence, with my Angells, whose so∣ciety I haue promissed thee. Come, after many dangers, and labours, and enter into the ioy of thy Lord, which none shalbe able to take from thee CHAP. XXIV. A prayer to the sanites to secure vs in our dangers. HAppy are all you, O Saynts of God, who now haue passed
through the sea of this mortality, and haue obteyned to arriue at the gate of eternall quietnesse, security, & peace, your selues beinge peace∣full and secure, and perpetually full of triumph and ioy. I beseeche you, by your owne Charity: you, who are secure concerninge your selues, be yet solicitous concerning vs. You are secure, concerninge your owne incorruptible glory; be you solicitous of our manifold misery. By him I beseech you, who chu∣sed you, who made you what you are; in the fruition of whose beauty you are satiated: by whose immorta∣lity you are now immortalized: by whose most blessed vision, yow are continually in ioy: be you also con∣tinually mindfull of vs. Helpe vs mi∣serable creatures, who in the salt waters of this life, are tossed, with stormes rounde about vs. You are those most beautifull gates, who haue beene erected, to a huge alti∣tude: O giue some helpe to vs▪ who are noe better then a base pauement lying so farr vnderneath you. Stretch forth your hand, & raise vs vp vpon
our feete, that we recouering out of our infirmity, may become strong, and fitt for warr. Interceede, & pray with constancy, and perseuerance for vs miserable, and most negligent sinners; that by your Prayers, we maybe ioyned to your holy society, for otherwise we shall not be saued. For we are extreamely frayle; and of no strength or vertue, miserable, base wretches: beasts, who care but for the belly, the slaues of flesh & blood, in whome the very shadow of good∣nes, doth scarce appeare. And yet not withstandinge, beinge placed vnder the confession of Christe our Lord, we are borne vp, by the wood of his Crosse, whilest we saile through this great and spatious sea; where there are creepinge creatures without number: where there are wilde beasts, great and small, where there is á most cruell dragon, euer ready to deuour vs; where there are places full of dangers, as Scylla and Charybdis, and innumerable others; where carelesse persons, and they who are of a waueringe faith, suffer shipwracke. Pray you to our Lord,
pray, O you who are full of pitty, pray all you troopes of Saintes, and all you compagnies of blessed Spi∣ritts, that beinge assisted by your Prayers, and meritts, we may, with our shipp and merchandize obteyne to arriue sound & safe, at the hauen of eternall saluation, & quietnes, and continuall peace, and of that securi∣ty which must neuer haue an end. CHAP. XXV. The soules desire to attayne to the hea∣uenly Citty of Ierusalem. O Ierusalem, that art my mother, O thou Holy Citty of God, thou most deere Spouse of Christ our Lord, my hart loues thee, and my soule is extreamely desirous to enioy thy beauty. O how gracefull, how glorious, and how noble art thou? Thou art all faire, and there is noe spott in thee. Exult, and reioyce, O thou faire Daughter of the Prince; for the King hath earnestly desired thy beauty: and he who excelleth all the Sonnes of men in beauty, hath beene enamoured with thy Comli¦nesse.
But what kinde of man is that beloued of thyne, who is so much beloued, O thou fairest of woemen? My beloued is white and read, the choise of a thousand. As a fruite-tree in the midest of a wilde wood, so is my beloued, amongst the Son∣nes of men: Vnder his shadowe, whome I haue desired, behold I sitt downe with ioy, and his fruite is sweet to my throate. My beloued putt forth his hand through a diui∣sion in the wall, and my belly trem∣bled vpon that touch of his. I haue sought him whom my soule loues, in my little bedd by night, I haue sought him, and I haue found him: I hold him fast, and I will not lett him goe, till he introduce me into his howse, and into his chamber, which is this glorious mother of mine. For there, wilt thou afford me those most sweete brests, more abun∣dant and more perfectly; and satis∣fy me with so admirable a saciety, as that I shall hunger, and thirst noe more for euer. O happy soule of mine, happy for euer, and for euer, if I may merit to
behold thy glory, thy beatitude, thy beauty; those gates and walls of thyne, thy streets, thy many mansions, thy most noble citizens, and that most powerfull Kinge of thyne our Lord, seated in his Maiesty. For thy walls are of pretious stones, thy gates are of most Orient pearle, thy streetes are paued with purest gold, wherein that ioyfull Alleluya is per∣petually sunge. Thy many mansions haue theyr fondatiō of squared stone, built vp with saphires, & coue∣red with plates of gold, where no man shall enter who is not cleane; no man inhabite who is defiled. Thou art made faire, and sweete in thy de∣lightes, O Ierusalem our mother. There is no such thinge in thee, as we suffer here, nor such thinges as we see, in this miserable life of ours. There is nor darkenesse, nor night, nor any diuersity of tymes in thee. In thee there shines no light of the lāpe, noe splendor of the Moone, noe beame of the Starrs, but God of God, light of light, the Sunne of Iustice, is euer illuminateing thee. The white and immaculate lambe, is that cleere,
and most beautifull light of thine. Thy Sunne, and thy brightnesse and all thy Beatitude, is that indeficient contemplation of this most beauti∣full Kinge. The King of Kings himselfe, is in the midest of thee; and his Children, are circlinge him inn, round about: There are those musicall Quires of Angells, there is that congregation of heauenly Citizens. There is the sweete solemnity, of all them, who are goeing into thy ioyes, out of this sad pilgrimage of theirs. There is that Quire of the Prophetts; There is the intire number of the Apostles; There is the triumphant army of inu∣merable Martyrs; There, is the holy Congregation of blessed Confessors; There, are those true, and perfect Moncks; There, are those holy woe∣men, who haue ouercome the pleasu∣res of this world, and the infirmity of their sexe: There, are yong men, and maides, who haue outrunn their years, by the Sanctity of their actiōs: There, are those sheepe, and lam∣bes▪ who haue escaped from the sna∣res of terrene pleasures, and they all
triumph in their propter mansion. The glory of euery one is different, but the ioy common to them all True & perfect charity raigneth there, be∣cause God is there, who is all in all, whome they see without end, and by euer seeing him, they are all burning in his loue. They loue and praise him, & they praise & loue him. All the worke they doe, is the praise of God without end, without euer lea∣ueing off, and yet without euer la∣bouring. Happy shall I be, and for euer truely happy, if, after this poore body of mine comes to be dissol∣ued, I may obteyne to heare those Canticles of celestiall melody, which are sung to the praise of that eternall Kinge, by the inhabitants of that su∣pernall Citty, and by those troopes of blessed spiritts. Happy shall I be, yea too happy, if I also may obteyne to sing my parte there, and to stand in the presence of my kinge, my God, and my guide, and to see him in his glory, as he hath vouchsafed to promisse, saying: Father, I Will that they whom thou haste giuen me, may be with me, that
they may see my glory, which I had with thee, before the creation of the world. And els where, he saith. Let him who ministreth to me, follow me; and where I am, there shall my seruant also be. And yet againe he saith: He who loueth me, shalbe be∣loued of my Father and I will loue him, and I will manifest my selfe to him. CHAP. XXVI. A Hymne of Paradise. VNto the springe of purest life, Aspires my withered hart; Yea and my soule confinde in flesh, Employes both strength, and art, Working, suing, strugling still, From exile, home to part. And whilst she sighes, to see her self In furious tempests tost; She lookes vpon the glorious state Which she by sinning lost. And present ills, or past contents, Doe make vs thinke of most. But who can fully speake the ioy
Or that high peace vnfold; Where all the buildinges founded are On Orient perles vntold. And all the workes of those high roomes, Doe shine with beames of gold. The structure is combin'd with stones, Which highest price doe passe; Nay euen the streetes, are pau'd with gold As if it were but glasse. No trash, no base materiall, Is there, or euer was. The horride cold, or scorching heat Hath no admittance there; The roses doe not loose their leaues, For Spring lasts all the year: The Lilly's whyte, the Saffron redd, The Balsam droops appear. The fields are greene, the plants do thriue, The streames, with hony flowe. From spices odours, & frō gummes, Most pretious liquors growe. Fruites hang vpon whole woods of trees,
And they shall still doe so. The season is not changd, for still Both Sunne, & Moone are bright. The Lambe of this faire Citty, is That cleare immortall light Whose presence, makes eternall day, Which neuer ends in night. Nay, all the Saints themselues, shall shine As bright as brightest Sunne; when after triumph, crowned they To mutuall ioyes shall runne. And safely count their fightes, and foes, When once the warre is done. For being freed from all defects, They feele no fleshly warre. Or rather, both the flesh & minde, At length vnited are. And ioying in so rich a peace, They can admitt no iarre. But hauing quitt these fading leaues, They seeke their roote againe; And looke vpon the present face Of Truthe, which hath no stayne;
Still drinking, at that liuely spring, Huge draughtes of ioyes in graine. From thence they fetch that happy state, Wherein no change they see; But cleere, and chearfull, and con∣tent, From all mishaps are free. No sicknes there, can threaten health, Nor young men, old can be. There, haue they their Eternity; Their passage, then is past. They grow, they flourish, and they sprout, Corruption, off is cast. Immortall strength, hath swallo∣wed vp The power of death at last. Who knowe the knower of all things What can they choose but knowe? They all behold their fellowes harts, And all their secretts showe. One simple act of will, and nill, From all their mindes doth flowe.
Though all their merits diuers be According to their paynes, Yet charity makes that ones owne, Which any fellow gaynes, And all which doth belong to one, To all of them pertaynes. Vnto that body iustly goe The Eagles all, for meate. Where, with the Angells, and the Saints, They may haue roome to eate. One loafe, can feede them all, who liue In both these Countries great. Hungry they are, yet euer full, They haue what they desire. Sith no saciety offends, Nor hungar burnes like fire. Aspiringly they euer eate, And eating they aspire. There, euer are your newe concerts With songs which haue no end The organs of eternall ioy, Doe on their eares attend. In prayse of their triumphant King, They all their voyces spend.
O happy Soule, which canst behold This King still present there, And vnder thee discerne the world Runn round, secure from feare, With Starres and Plannettes, Moone and Sunn: Still moueing in their Spheare. O Christ thou valiēt soldiers crowne Cast downe an eye: of pittie; That hauing once our armes putt downe, we may inioy that Citie: And with those heauenly Quires beare part. In their eternall dittie. Grant Iesu grant we still persiste, In thy iust cause defending: As longe as worldly warre may last, As longe as strifs depending: That we may carrie thee ith end The prize which knows noe ending CHAP. XXVII. Of the continuall praise, which a soule conceiueth by the contemplation of the Diuinity. O My soule, blesse our Lord, and all the powers within me
sing praise to his holy Name. O my soule, blesse our Lord, and forgett not all his benefitts. O all yea workes of our Lord, blesse our Lord, in all the places of his dominion. Let vs praise God, whome the Dominations adore, whome Cherubin and Sera∣phin, with a neuer ceasing voice, proclame, Holy, Holy, Holy. Let vs ioyne our voyce, to the voice of the holy Angells, and lett vs praise this Lord, who is common to vs both, to the vttermost of our power. For they praise our Lord, most pu∣rely, and incessantly, who are alwayes plunged in that diuine contempla∣tion, not by a glasse, or in a figure, but face to face. But who shalbe able to say, or so much as to thinke, what kinde of innumerable multitude of blessed Spiritts, and celestiall powers, that is, which standeth in the sight of our Omnipotent Lord God? What glory, what endles festiuity they enioy, by the vision of God? What delight, without any defect? what ardour of loue, not tormenting, but delighting? who can say, what desire
there is, of the vision of God, when they haue saciety, and how they can haue saciety with desire? where in nether desire, procures any payne, nor saciety breeds any loathinge? How they growe to be happy, by adhearing, to that supreame beati∣tude? How they growe to be made light, by their coniunction with that true light? How by euer beholdinge the immutable Trinity, themsel∣ues are changed into immutabi∣lity? But how shall we be able to com∣prehend that higth of Angelicall dignity, when we are not able, so much as to finde out, the nature of our owne soule? what kinde of thing is that, which is able to giue life to flesh, and yet is not able so much as to conteyne it selfe in good thoughts? what kinge of thing is this, so strong, and se weake, so little, and so great; which searcheth into the secrets of God, and riseth into contemplation of celestiall things; and is prooued to haue found out, with such subtill power of witt, the skill of so many arts, for the vse of man? what kind
of thing is this, which knoweth so many other things, and yet is so wholyignorāt of how it selfe comes to be made? For although many doubt∣full things be said by many about the beginninge of the soule, yet we finde it to be a certaine intellectual spiritt, a spirit made by the power of the Crea∣tor; liueinge after a sort immor∣taly, and quickninge the body which it doth sustaine, subiect to mutability, and forgetfulnesse which is often de∣pressed by feare, and extolled by ioy. O admirable thinge, and to which all astonishment is due. Of God, the Creator of vs all, who is vnspeaka∣ble and incomprehensible, we read, we speake, and we write excessiuely, sublimely, & wounderfull things, without any ambiguity at all but whatsoeuer we say of Angells, and soules, we are not so well able to prooue. But yet lett the minde passe on euen from these thinges, and transcend all that which is created. Lett it runn and rise, and flutter, and fly through; and lett it fix the eyes of Faith, as eagerly as it can, vpon him who crea∣ted
all things. I will therfore, make certaine stepps of riseinge in my hart; and by them I will assend into my soule; and by the purest power of my minde, I will assend to my Lord, who remaines ouer my head. Whatsoeuer is visibly seene, whatsoeuer is imagined, though in a most spirituall manner, I will re∣moue farr of, from the sight of my hart and minde, with a strong hand. Let the pure and simple power of my vnderstanding passing on, with a speedy flighte towards him, arriue to him who is that Creator himselfe both of Angells and soules, and all things else. Blessed is that soule, which for∣saketh inferior things, and aspireth to them, which are sublyme; and placeing the seat of her habitation, in those highe vnhaunted wayes, doth contēplate the Sunn of Iustice, frō those mighty rocks, with eagles eyes. For there is nothinge so beau∣tifull, and so delightfull, as with the sharpe sight of the minde, and the eager desire of the hart, to con∣template this God himselfe alone,
and after a wounderfull manner in∣uisibly to beholde him who is inui∣sible, & so, to taste, not the sweetnes of this world, but of another; and to behold not this inferior; kind of light, but another. For this light, which is shutt vp in place, is also ended in tyme, its varied by the interruption of night; and this light, which is common to vs with wormes, and other vnreasonable beasts, in com∣parison of that other souueraigne light, is rather to be called night then light. CHAP. XXVIII. What it is to see God, and to inioy him, after a sort, and how we are to thinke of God. BVt although that supreame and vnchangeable essence, that in∣deficient light, that light which is enioyed by the Angells, can be seene by noe creature in this life; (this being the reward, which is reserued onely for the Saints, who enioy ce∣lestiall glory) yet to beleeue, to con∣ceaue, to haue a feelinge, and ar∣dently
to aspire towards this Glory, is to see it, after a sort, and to pos∣sesse it. Let our voice therfore ex∣tend it selfe beyond the Angells, and lett man contemplate God, with an carnest minde; and lett him, with what words he can, expresse Gods praises, to God himselfe. For it is all reason, that the Creature should praise his Creator, since he vouch∣safed to create vs, that we might praise him, when yet he had noe need of our praises. For his vertue is incomprehensible, he needeth none, but is all sufficient for himselfe. Our Lord is great, and his vertue is great, and of his wisdome there is noe end. Our Lord God is great, and highly worthy to be praysed. Let our soule therfore loue him, let our tongues sing of him, and our hand write of him; and let the faithfull hart im∣ploy it selfe, onely, in these holy thoughts. Let the man of spirituall desires, and a contemplator of ce∣lestial mysteries, be dayly recreated, with the most delicious food of this heauenly contemplation; that so being fully fed, with this heauenly
repaste, he may cry out with great exclamation, he may cry out with the very bowells of his hart; cry out with excesse of ioy, & say as follow∣eth with a most ardent affection of his minde. CHAP. XXIX. He declareth many propertyes of Almighty God. O Thou Supreame, most excel∣lent, Omnipotent, most mer∣cifull, most iust, most secret, most present, and most strong; most stable and incomprehensible, inuisible, yet seeinge all things; Vnchangeable, yet changeing all things; Immortall, without place, without tearme, or circumscription; Vnlymited, ine∣stimable, ineffable, inscrutable; Im∣moueable, yet moueinge all things; Vnsearchable, vnexpressable, terri∣ble, & to be greatly feared, to be honored, and trembled at; to be worshipped and reuerenced. Neuer new, and neuer old, and yet innoua∣ting all things, and draweing prowde people into decay though they
marke it not Euer in action, yet euer quiet; gathering together, and yet needinge nothinge; carryinge all things, without feeling any waight; fillinge all things, without beinge includede; creatinge, protectinge, nourishinge, and perfectinge all things. Thou seekest, and yet thou wantest nothinge: Thou art in loue, yet without passiō; Thou art iealous, yet thou art secure; Thou repentest, yet thou art not sorry; Thou art an∣gry, yet thou are not moued; Thou changest thy workes, but thou neuer changest thy decrees. Thou takest that which thou findest, yet didest thou loose nothing; Thou art neuer poore, and yet thou art glade of gayne; Thou art neuer couetous, yet thou exactest vsury at our hands by our saperrogatiō, thou becomest our debter; and yet who hath any thinge which is not thyne; Thou payest debts, yet thou owest nothinge; Thou forgiuest debts, yet thou loosest no∣thinge. Thou alone doste quicken all things, thou haste created all things, thou art euery where, and thou art euery where altogether;
Thou canst be felt, yet thou canst not be seene: Thou art not wanting any where, yet art thou farre from the thoughtes of wicked men. But thou art not wanting euen there, although thou be farr of from them, because where thou art not presēt by Grace, there thou art present by reuenge. Thou touchest all things, yet thou touchest them not all alike. For some, thou touchest onely, that they may be, but not that they may liue, and feele, and discourse. But some thou touchest, that they may be, and liue, but yet not so, as that withall, they may feele and dis∣course. And some agayne, thou dost so touch, as that they may be, and liue, and feele, and discourse also. And although thou be neuer vnlike thy selfe, yet dost thou touch vnlike things, after an vnlike manner. Thou art euer present, yet sometymes thou art hard to be found We follow thee, when thou standest still, and yet we are not able to lay hold on thee, whilest yet thou holdest all things, fillest all things, comprehendest all things, exceedest all things, vphol∣dest
all things. Neyther dost thou on the one side vndergoe them, and art ouercome by them on the other. Neyther dost thou fill things, on the one side, and yet art comprehended by them, on the other; but by com∣prehending them, thou fillest them; and by filling them, thou compre∣hendest them; as by sustayning them, thou exceedest them; and by exceeding them, thou sustaynest them. Thou teachest the harts of the faithfull, yet without the noise of words. Thou reachest from one end to the other strongly; and thou dis∣posed of all things, sweetely. Thou art not extended, according to the proportion of places; nor art thou varied by the vicissitude of tymes. Thou haste neyther accesse, nor re∣cesse, but thou inhabitest that inac∣cessibile light, which no man euer sawe or can see. Remaineinge quiet in thy selfe, thou doste make thy circuite about all things, and thou art euery where expressely and intirely all. For thou canst not be deuided or cutt, who art truely all; nor canst thou be made
into partes, because thou, wholy holdest all, fillest all, and dost possesse and illustrate all. The minde of man cannot con∣ceaue the immense profundity of this mistery, nor the tongue of elo∣quence declare it; nor can learned speach, nor all the volumes of all Libraryes, vnfolde it. If there were bookes to fill the whole world, yet they could not vnfolde thy admi∣rable knowledge, because thou art truely vnspeakable: and canst not by any meanes be concluded, nor expres∣sed, as thou art, who art the fountayne of diuine light, and the Sonne of euer∣lastinge charity. Thou art great, without quantity, & therfore thou art immense: thou art good, without quality, and ther∣fore thou art truely, and supreamely good, and there is none good but thou alone, whose will is thy worke, and whose inclination is thy power, who didst create all things of no∣thinge, and thou didst it, by the onely act of thy will. Thou doste possesse all thy creatures, without needing any of them: Thou gou∣uernest
them, without labour, and thou rulest them without trouble: and there is nothinge at all, either, in the highest or lower thinges which can disturbe the order of thy dominion. Thou art in all places, without being cōteyned in any place: Thou conteynest all things without circuite: and thou art present euery where, without eyther scituation, or motion. Thou art not the Author of ill, nor canst thou doe it: yet is there nothing which thou canst not doe; nor didst thou euer repent thy self of any thinge which thou hadest done, nor art thou troubled with any com∣motion, or tempest of thy minde; nor doe the dangers of the whole world, drawe any danger vpon thee. Thou commandest not, nor yet allowest of any wickednes or sinn. Thou neuer lyest, for thou art e∣ternall Truth. By thy onely Good∣nesse we are made, by thy Iustice we are punished, and by thy mercy we are deliuered. Nothing, neither in Heauen, or which is Elementary, eyther of fire, or earth, or any other thing subiect
to our sense, is to be worshipped in∣stead of thee, who truely art what thou art, and art not changed; and to whome it doth most principally agree, that thou be called that which the Grecians call On, and the Latins Ens, which signifieth. The thing which is, for thou art euer the same, and thy years will neuer fayle. These, and many other things haue beene taught me, by my holy Mother the Church, wherof I am made a member, by thy grace. It hath taught me, that thou, the onely one, and true God, art not corporeall, nor passible: and that nothinge of thy substance or nature, is any way vio∣lable, or mutable, or composed, and framed: and therefore it is certaine that thou canst nor be perceiued, by corporeall eyes: and that thou coul∣dest neuer be seene, in thy proper essence, by any mortall creature. He∣reby it is clearely to be vndestood, that as the Angells see thee now, so are we to see thee, after this life. But yet, nether are the Angells them∣selues, able to se thee iust as thou art: and in fine the Omnipotent
Trinity, is not wholy seene by any, but by thy onely selfe. CHAP. XXX. Of the vnity of God, and the plurality of Persons in him. BVt thou art truly Vnity in thy diuinity, though manifold in the plurality of thy Persons, so that thou canst not be numbred by any number, nor measured by any mea∣sure, nor waighed by any waight. For we doe not pretend, to finde out any beginninge, of that supreame goodnesse, which thou thy selfe art, from whence all things, by which all things, and in which all things: but we say, that all other things, are good by the participation of that goodnes, For thy diuine Essence, did euer, and doth still want Matter, although it doe not want Forme, namely that Forme which was neuer formed, the Forme of all Formes, that most beau∣tifull Forme, which when thou dost imprint vpon particuler things (as it might be some seale) thou makest them, without all doubte,
differre from thy selfe by their owne mutabilitie, without any change in thee, eyther by way of augmentation, or diminution. Now whatsoeuer is within the cōpass of created thinges, that also is a creature of thyne, O thou, one Trinity, and three in Vnity, thou God, whose Omnipo∣tency possesseth, and ruleth, and filleth all things, which thou didst create. And yet we doe not therefore say, that thou fillest all things, as if they did conteyne thee, but rather so, as that they be conteyned by thee. Nor yet dost thou fill them all by partes, nor is it to be thought, by any meanes, that euery creature receiues thee after the rate of the bignesse which it selfe hath: that is to say, the greater, the greater parte: & the lesse the lesse: since thou thy selfe, art in them all, & all of them in thee: whose Omnipotency concludeth all things nor can any man finde a way, where∣by to make escape from thy power, For he, who hath thee not wel. pleased, wilbe sure not to escape thee, being offended; as it is written, neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the desert moun∣taynes, because God is the Iudge. And els where it is sayd: Whither shall I goe from thy spiritt, and whither shall I fly from thy face. The immēsity of thy diuine greatnes is such, that we must knowe thee to be whithin all things, and yet not included, and without all thinges, yet not excluded. And therefore thou art interior, that thou maiste conteyne all things: and therefore thou art exterior, that by the immensity of thy greatnes, thou maiste conclude, all things. By this therefore, that thou art interior, thou art showed to be the Creator; but by this, that thou art exterior, thou art proued to be the Gouernour of them all. And least all things which are created, should be without thee, thou art interior; but thou art exterior, to the end that all things may be in∣cluded in thee. Not by any local ma∣gnitude of thyne but by the potētiall presence of thee, who art present euery where, and all thinges to thee are present, though some vnder∣stād these things, and others indeed,
vnderstand them not. The insepa∣rable vnity therfore of thy nature, cannot haue the persons seperable, because as thou art Trinity in Vnity, and Vnity in Trinity, so thou canst not haue separation of persons. It is true, that those persons are named seuerally; but yet thou art so pleased to show thy selfe, O God, thou Trinity, to be inseperable in thy persons, as that there is noe name belonginge to thee in any one of them, which may not be referred to another, according to the rules of relation. For as the Father to the Sonne, and the Sonne to the Father; so the Holy Ghoste is most truely referred, both to the Father & Sōne. But those names, which signify thy substanec, or person, or power, or Essence, or any thing which properly is called God, doe equally agree to all the persons; As great God, Om∣nipotent and eternall God; and all those things which naturally are saide of thee, O God. Therefore there is noe name, which concernes the nature of God, which can so agree to God the Father, as that it
may not also agree to God the Sonne, as also to God the Holy Ghoste. As for example, we say the Father is naturally God, but so is the Sonne naturally God; and so also is the Holy Ghoste naturally God; and yet not three Gods, but naturally one God, the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghoste: Therfore art thou ô Holy Trinity, inseperable in thy persons, as thou art to be vnder∣stoode by our mind, although thou haue seperable names in worde; be∣cause thou dost by no meanes, in∣dure a plurall number, in the names belonging to thy nature. For herby it is showed, that the persons cannot be deuided in the blessed Trinity, which is one true God, because the name of any one of the Persons, doth euer relate to an other of them. For if I name the Father, I shew the Sonne; if I speake of the Sonne, I proclame the Father: if I speake of the Holy Ghoste, it is necessarily to be vnderstoode, that he is the Spiritt of some other, namely of the Father, and of the Sonne. Now this it that true Faith, which flowes from sound
doctrine. This indeed, is the Catho¦lique, and Orthodoxall Faith, which God hath taught me, by his Grace, in the bosome of his Church, which is my Mother. CHAP. XXXI. A prayer to the blessed Trinity. MY Faith doth therefore call vpon thee, which thou, O Lord haste giuen me, through thy goodnes, for my saluation. Now the faithfull soule, liues by Faith. He now holds that in hope, which here∣after he shall haue indeed. I call vpon thee, O my God, with a pure con∣science, and with that sweete loue, which groweth out of Faith, where∣by thou haste brought me, to the vnderstanding of truthe; casting away the darknes of ignorance, and whereby thou haste drawen me out of the foolish bitternes of this world; and so accompanyinge it, with the sweetnes of thy charity, thou haste made it delightfull, and deer to me. I doe with a lowde voice inuoke thee, O blessed Trinity, &
with that sincere loue which grow∣eth out of Faith, which Faith, thou haueing nourished euen from my cradle, did'dst inspire by the illu∣stration of thy grace; and which thou hast encreased and confirmed in me, by the documents of my Mother the Church. I inuoke thee, O holy and blessed, and glorious Trinity, in Vnity; the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghoste, our God, our Lord, and our Paraclete, Charity, Grace, and Com∣munication, the Father, the Sonne, and the Illuminator; the Fountayne the Riuer, and the Irrigation, or wa∣teringe. All things by one, and all things in one, from whome, by whome, in whome, all things. The liuing life, the life proceeding from the liuing life, the life liuing. One from himselfe, One from one, and One from two. One, being from himselfe, One, being from another, and One, being from two other. The Father is true, the Sonne is Truth, and the Holy Ghoste is Truth. Therfore the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghoste are
one essence, one power, one goodnes, one beatitude, from whome, by whome, and in whome, all things are happie what things soeuer are happie CHAP. XXXII. That God is the true, and souuereigne life. O God the true and Souuereigne life, from whome, by whome, and in whome, all things doe liue, which haue any true, and happy life. O God who art that goodnesse, and that beauty, from whome, by whome and in whome all things are faire, and good, which haue any beauty, or goodnesse in them. O God, whose faith doth excite vs, whose hope doth erect vs, and whose charity doth vnite vs O God, who requirest that we seeke thee, and who makest vs finde thee, and who openest to vs, when we knocke. O God, from whome to be auerted is to fal; and to whom to be conuerted is to rise; and in whom to remayne is to be im∣moueable. O God whome noe man
looseth, but he who is deceaued; no man seeketh, but he who is admo∣nished; and noe man findeth, but he who is purged. O God whome to know, is to liue; whome to serue is to reigne; whome to praise, is the ioy and saluation of the soule. I praise thee, I blesse thee, and I adore thee, with my lipps, with my hart, and with all the whole power I haue. And I present my humblest thanks to thy mercy, and goodnes, for all thy benefitts; and I sing this Hymn of glory to thee, Holy, Holy, Holy, I inuoke thee, O blessed Trinity, beseechinge, that thou wilt come into me, and make me worthy to be the Temple of thy glory. I begge of the Fa∣ther, by the Sonne: I begge of the Sonne, by the Father; I begge of the Holy Ghoste, by the Father, and the Sonne, that all vice may be farr remoued from me, and that all holy vertue may be planted in me. O Immense God, from whome all things, by whome all things, in whome all things, both visible and inuisible are made. Thou who doste
inuiron thy workes, without, and fillest them, within; who dost couer them from aboue, and dost susteyne them from belowe; keepe me who am the worke of thy hands, and who hope in thee, and who onely confide in thy mercy. Keepe me, I beseech thee, here, and euery where, now and euer, within, and without; be∣fore me, & behinde me; aboue and belowe, and round about; that no place at all, may be left, for the trea∣cherous attempts of my enemies against me. Thou art the Omnipo∣tent God, the keeper and the Pro∣tector of all such as hope in thee, without whome noe man is safe, none freed from danger. Thou art God, and there is noe other God but thou, neyther in heauen aboue, nor on earth belowe. Thou whoe per∣formest workes of prowess, and so many wonderfull and vnscrutable things; which exceed all number. Praise is due to thee, honor is due to thee, and to thee Hymns of glory are due. To thee doe all the Angells the heauēs & all the power therof, sing Hymns, and praises,
without ceaseing; and all creatures, and euery spiritt doth praise thee, the holy and indiuiduall Trinity, as it becomes the creatures there Creator, the slaues their Lord, and the souldiers, their King. CHAP. XXXIII. The praises of men and Angells. TO thee doe all the Saintes, and they who are humble of hart, to thee doe the spiritts and soules of iust persons, to thee doe all the Cittizens of heauen, and all those orders of blessed spiritts sing the hymn of honor and glory, adoreinge thee humbly without end. All the Citti∣zens of heauen doe praise thee, O Lord, after a most honorable and magnificent manner; and man who is an eminent parte of thy Creatures doth also praise thee. Yea and I wretched sinner, and miserable Creature that I am, doe yet labour with an extreame desire to praise thee, and wish that I could loue thee, with excessiue loue. O my God, my life, my strength, and my praise, vouchsafe to lett me praise thee.
Grant me light in my hart, putt thou the word into my mouth, that my hart may thinke vpon thy glory, and my tōgue may singe thy praises, all the day longe. But because it is noe hansome praise, which proceeds out of the mouth of a sinner, And because I am a man of polluted lipps, Clense thou my hart I beseeche thee, from all spotts, sanctify me, O thou Omnipotent sanctifier, both within and without, and make me worthy to sett forth thy praise. Re∣ceaue with benignity, and accepta∣tion, from the hand of my hart, which is the affection of my soule, receiue I say, the sacrifice of my lipps, and make it acceptable in thy sight, and make it ascend vp to thee in the odour of sweetnes. Let thy holy memory, and thy most diuine sweetnes, possesse my whole soule; and draw it vp at full speed, to the loue of inuisible things. Let it passe from the visible to the inuisible; from the earthly to the heauenly; from the temporall to the eternall; and lett it passe on so farr, as to see that admirable vision.
O eternall Verity, O true Cha∣rity, O deer Eternity, thou art my God; to thee doe I sigh day and night; to thee doe I pant; at thee doe I ayme; to thee doe I desire to arriue. He who knowes thee, knowes Truth and he knowes Eternity. Thou, O Truth, dost preside ouer all things. We shall see thee as thou art, when this blind and mortall life is spent, wherein it is said to vs, where is now thy God? And I also said to thee Where art thou, O my God? In thee am I refreshed a little, when I power out my soule towards thee, by the voice of my exultation and confessiō, which is as the sounde of a man, who is bankquetting, end celebratinge some great festiuity—And yet agayne it is afflicted, because it falls back, and returnes to be an Abysse; or ra∣ther it findes that still it is so. My faith which thou hast kindled, in this night of myne, before my feete, doth say, Why art thou sad, O my soule, and why doste thou afflict me? Hope thou in God; his word is a lanterne to my feete. Hope, and continue to doe so, till the night (which is the
mother of the wicked) doe passe a way; till the wrath of our Lord passe away; wherof sometymes we were the Children. For sometymes we were darknes. Till this fury of water pass cleane a way, we still dragg on, in our body (which is dead through sinn) the reliques of that darknes: Till such tyme as the day shall approach, & all shadowes may be remoued. I will hope in our Lord. In the morrow of the next life, I shall assist, and contemplate, and I will euer confesse to him. In that morrow, I shall assist, and behold the health of my countenance, which is my God, who will reuiue euen our mortall bodyes, for that spiritts sakes, which dwelleth in vs; that now we may be light, euen whilest we are saued here, by hope. That we may be the Sonns of light, and the Sonns of God, and not of night, and darknes; For sometymes we were darknes, but now we are light in thee, O our God, and yet we are so here, but by Faith, and not face to face. Because that hope which is seene is not hope.
All that immortall people of thy Angells praiseth thee O Lord; and those celestiall Powers glorify thy Name. They haue no need to read any such writing as this, towards the makeinge them knowe, the holy & indiuiduall Trinity. For they see thy Face for euer, and there they read, without any syllabes of tyme, what that eternall will, requires. They read, they choose, and they loue. They euer read, and that neuer pas∣seth, which they are readinge. By choosing, and by loueinge they read, the very immutability of thy counsell; and their booke is neuer shutt, and their scrowle neuer fol∣ded vp; for thy self is all that to them, and so thou art to be for euer. O how excessiuely happy are those powers of heauen, which are able to praise thee, most purely and holyly, with excessiue sweetnes, and vnspeakable exultation? They praise thee for that, in which th ioy; because they euer see reason  they should reioice, and praise them But we, being op∣pressed by this burthen of our flesh, and being cast farr of from thy face,
in this pilgrimage of ours, and being so racked by the variety of worldly things, are not able worthily to praise thee. Yet we praise thee as we can, by Faith, though not face to face; but those Angelicall spiritts praise thee face to face, & not by Faith. For our flesh putteth this vpō vs & obligeth vs to praise thee, farr otherwise, then they doe. But how soeuer euen we sing praise to thee in a different manner; and yet thou art but one, O God, thou Creator of all things to whome the sacrifice of praise is offered, both in heauen and earth. And by thy mercy, we shall one day arriue to their society, with whome we shall for euer see, and praise thee. Grant, O Lord, that whilest I am placed in this fraile bo∣dy of mine, my hart may praise thee, my tongue may praise thee, and all the powers of my soule may say, O Lord, who is like to thee. Thou art that Omnipotent God, whome we worshi as Trine in Persons, and On the Substance of thy Diety. We adore the Father vnbegotten, the Sonne, the onely
begotten of his Father, and the Holy Ghoste, proceedinge from them both; and remaininge in them both. We adore thee O Holy and indi∣uiduall Trinity, one Omnipotent God, who when we were not, did'st most puissantly make vs; and when, by our owne fault we weare lost, by thy pitty, and goodnes, thou did'st recouer vs, after an admirable manner. Doe not I beseech thee, per∣mitt that we should be vngratefull for so great benefitts, and vnworthy of so many mercyes. I pray thee, I beseech thee, I begg of thee, that thou wilt increase my faith, hope, and charity. I beseech thee, make vs, by that grace of thyne, to be euer firme in beleiueinge, and full of efficacy in working; that so, by meanes of incorrupted Faith and workes wor∣thy therof, we may through thy mercy, arriue to euerlastinge life. And there beholding thy glory; as indeed it is, we, whome thou haste made worthy to see that glory of thyne, may adore thy Maiesty, and may say together: Glory be to the Fa∣ther,
who created vs: Glory be to the Sonne, who redeemed vs, Glory, be to the Holy Ghoste, who san∣ctifyed vs: Glory be to the supreame, & indiuiduall Trinity, whose workes are inseparable, and whose empire is eternall. To thee our God, praise is due, to thee a Hymne of glory, to thee all honor, benediction, clarity, thanksgiueing, vertue, and fortitude, for euer, and for euer. Amen. CHAP. XXXIV. He complayneth against himselfe for not being moued, with the contem∣plation of God whereat the Angells tremble. PArdon me O Lord, pardon me, through thy mercy, pardon, and pitty me; pardon my great ignorance and imperfections. Doe not reiect me, as a presumptuous creature, in that I aduenture, being thy slaue (I would, I could say a good one, and not rather that I am vnprofitable and wicked, and ther∣fore very wicked because I take this boldnes) to praise, and blesse, and
adore thee, who art our Omnipo∣tent God, and who art terrible, and excessiuely to be feared, without contrition of hart, without a foun∣taine of tears, and without due re∣uerence, and trembling. For if the Angells, who adore, and praise thee, doe tremble, whilest they are filled with that admirable exultation; how comes it to passe, that I, a sinfull creature, whilest I am present with thee, and sing prayses, and offer sa∣crifices to thee, am not frighted at the hart, that I am not pale in my face; that my lipps tremble not, and my whole body is not in a shiueringe and that so, with a flood of tears, I doe not incessantly mourne before thee. I would fayne doe it, but I am not able, because I cannot doe what I desire. Herupon I am vehemently wondringe at my selfe, when by the eyes of Faith, I see how terrible thou art; but yet, who can doe euen this, without thy grace? For all our saluation, is nothing but thy great mercy. Woe be to me, how comes my soule to be made so senseles, as that it is not frighted, with excessiue
terrour, whilest I am standing before God, and singinge forth his praise? Woe be to me, how comes my hart to be so hardned, that myne eyes cannot incessantly bring forth whole floods of tears, whilest the slaue is speaking before his Lord, Man with God, the. Creature with the Creator; he who is made of durte, with him who made all things of nothing? Beholde O Lord, how I place my selfe before thee; & that which I conceiue of my selfe in the most se∣cret corner of my hart, that doe I not conceale from thy paternall eares. Thou art rich in thy mercy, and li∣berall in thy rewards; grant me some of thy good guifts, that therby I may doe seruice to thee. For we cannot serue, nor please thee, by any other meanes, then of thy guift. Strick through, I beseech thee, this flesh of mine, with thy feare. Let my hart reioyce, that it may feare thy name. O that my sinfull soule might so feare thee, as that holy Man did, who said: I haue all∣wayes feared God, like the waues of a Sea, which were flowing ouer me.
O God, thou giuer of all good things grant me, whilest I am celebratinge thy praises, a fountayne of tears, together with purity of hart, and ioy of minde; that loueing thee per∣fectly, and praiseinge thee worthily, I may feele, and taste, and sauour with the very palate of my soule, how sweete, & delicious thou art: O Lord, accordinge to that which is written: Taste, and see, how sweete our Lord is: Blessed is the man who hopes in him. Blessed is the people which vn∣derstandeth this ioy. Blessed is the man whose helpe is from thee: He hath disposed of certayne degrees, whereby to rise vp in his hart, in this valley of tears, in the place which he hath appointed. Blessed are the cleane of hart; for they be the men, who shall see God. Blessed are they who dwell in thy house, O Lord, for they shall praise thee, for euer, & for euer.
CHAP. XXXV. A prayer which greatly moueth the hart to Deuotion, and to Diuine loue. O Iesus, our Redemption, our Desire, and our Loue; thou God of God, giue helpe to me, who am thy seruant. I inuoKe thee, I call vpon thee, with a mighty crye, and with my whole hart. I inuoke thee into my soule, enter into it, & make it fitt for thy selfe, that thou maist possesse it without spott, and wrinckle. For to a most pure Lord, a most pure habitation is due. San∣ctify me therfore, who am the ves∣sell which thou hast made. Euacuate me of malice, and fill me with grace, and still keepe me full, that I may be made a Temple, worthy to be inha∣bited by thee, both here, and in the other euerlasting world. O thou most sweete, most benigne, most loueing, most deer, most powerfull, most de∣sireable, most pretious, most amiable, most beautifull God: thou who art more sweete then hony, more white
then any milk or snow, more deli∣cious then Nectar, more pretious then gold or jewells, and more deere to me, then all the riches and honors of the earth. But what doe I say, O my God, O thou my onely hope, and my so abundant mercy? What doe I say, O thou my happy, and secure sweetnes? What doe I say when I vtter such things as these? I say what I can, but I doe not say what I should. O that I could say such things, as those Quires of Angells doe vtter, in those celestiall Hymns O how wil∣lingly would I euen spend, & powre out my whole selfe, vpon thy prai∣ses? O how faine would I, most de∣uoutly, and most indefatigablie pro∣claime those Hymns of celestiall me∣lody, in the middest of thy Church, to the praise and glory of thy Name; But because I am not able to doe these things compleatly, shall I therefore hold my peace: woe be to them, who hold their peace of thee, who loosest the tongues of dumm persons, and makest the tongues of children eloquent. Woe woe be to
them who hold their peace of thee, for euen they who speak most, may be accompted to be but dumbe, when they doe not speake thy praise. But now who shalbe able wor∣thily to prayse thee, O thou vnspea∣kable Wisdome of the Father? But yet although I finde noe wordes whereby I may sufficiently vnfold thee, who art the Omnipotent, and Omniscient Word; I will yet; in thy meane tyme say what I can, till thou biddest me come to thee, where I may say that of thee, which is fitt, and which I am bound to say. And therefore I humbly pray, that thou wilt not haue an eye, so much to that which I say now in deed, as to that which I say in my desire. For I desire (and that with a great de∣sire) to say that of thee, which is fitt and iust, because it is fitt that thou be praised; and celebra∣ted, and all honor is due to thee Thou seest therefore, O God, thou who knowest of all secrett things, that thou art more deer to me, not onely then the earth, and
all that is therein, but that thou art more acceptable, and amiable to me, then heauen it selfe, and all that it conteynes. For I loue thee, more then heauen, and earth, and all those other things which are in them; Nay these transitory things are without doubt not to be beloued at all, if it weare not, for the loue of thy Name. I loue thee, O my God, with a greate loue, and I desire to loue thee yet more. Giue me grace, that I may euer loue thee as much as I desire, and as much as I ought, that thou alone maist be all my inten∣tion, and all my meditation. Let me consider thee, all the day long without ceasinge; let me feele thee, euen when I am sleeping, by night; let my spiritt speake to thee; lett my minde conuerse with thee; let my hart be illustrated with the light of thy holy vision; that thou being my Director, and my Captayne, I may walke on, from vertue to ver∣tue; and that at last, I may see thee, the God of Gods in Syon. Now as
in a glasse, or in a cloude; but then face to face, where I shall knowe thee, as I am knowen. Blessed are the cleane of hart, for they are the men who shall see God. Blessed are they who dwell in thy howse, O Lord, for euer, and for euer, shall they praise thee. I beseech thee therefore, O Lord, by all thy mercyes, whereby we are freed from eternall death, mollyfy my hart, which is hard, & stony, and rocky, and steely, with thy powerfull, and most sacred vnction; and grant, that by the fire of contrition, I may beco∣me a liueing sacrifice before thee, in euery moment of my life. Make me euer to haue a contrite and humbled hart, in thy presence, with abun∣dance of tears. Grant that through my great desire of thee, I may be vt∣terly deade to this world; and that I may forgett these transitory things, through the greatnes of my loue, and feare of thee; and this so farr forth, as that I may neuer reioyce nor mourne, nor feare any thinge, which is tem∣porall; and that I may not loue them; least so I be eyther corrupted by
prosperity, or deiected by aduersity. And because the loue of thee, is strōg as death, I beseech thee that the fiery and mellifluous force of thy loue, may suck vp, and deuoure my whole minde, from all those things which are vnder heauen; that I may in heare to thee alone, and be fedd with the memory of thy onely sweetnes. O Lord, I beseech thee, I beseech thee, and still I beseech thee, that the most sweete odour of thee, and thy mellifluous loue may descend, and enter into my hart, Lett that admirable, and vnspeakable fra∣grance of thy sauour, come into me, which may kindle an euerlastingly a burning desire of thee in my hart, and which may draw out from thence, those vaynes of water which spring vp to eternall life. Thou art immense, O Lord, and therfore it is but reason that thou be loued and praised, beyond all measure, by them whome thou hast redeemed with thy pretious Blood. O thou most benigne louer of man. O thou most mercifull Lord, and most vn∣partiall
Iudge, to whome the Father gaue all power of Iudgment; Thou seest how vniust a thinge it is, that the children of this world, the children of night, and darknes, should with a more ardent desire, indeauour, and study, and seeke perishing riches, and transitory ho∣nors, then we thy seruants doe loue thee our God, by whome we are created and redeemed. But if on the other side, a man will affect some man, with so great loue, as that one of them will scarce indure the ab∣sence of the other; if the Spouse be transported, with so great ardour of affection to her fellow Spouse, that through the greatnes of her loue; shee can take noe rest, nor beare the absence of that dearest freind, without deep sorrowe; with what loue, with what labour, with what feruour ought that soule, which thou haste espoused to thy self by Faith, and other mercyes, loue thee her true God, and her most beau∣tifull Spouse, who hast so loued, and saued her, and haste done so many, and, so great thinges for her good.
For although this world haue cer∣tayne delights and loues belonging to it, yet doe they not so delight, as thou O God. In thee the iust man is indeed delighted, because thy loue is sweete, and quiet; for the harts which thou dost possesse, thou fillest with tranquillity, sweetnes, and delight, On the other side, the loue of this world, and of the flesh, breeds anxiety, and pertubation, and depriues thoses soules of qui∣etnes into which it enters; for it doth euer sollicite them, with suspitions, perturbations, and many fears. Thou art therefore the delight of iust persons, & that iustly. For the strength of rest and peace, is with thee, and a life vncapable of pertur∣bation. He who enters into thee, O deere Lord, enters into the ioy of his Lord and shall haue nothing more to feare; but shall finde himselfe to be perfectly well, in the most excellent place which can be thought; and he will say, This is my rest for all eter∣nityes, this shalbe my habitation, for I haue chosen it; And agayne, Our Lord gouernes me, and nothing
shalbe wantinge, in that place of full feedinge; yea there it is, that he hath lodged me. Sweete Christ, deare Iesus, fill my hart for euer, I beseech thee, with the vnquenchable loue, and the con∣tinuall memory of thee; in such sort, as that I may all burn vp, like any eager flame, in the sweetnes of thy loue, which many waters, may neuer be able to extinguish, in me. Grant O most sweete Lord, that I may loue thee, and that through the de∣sire of the I may discharge my selfe of the waight of all carnall de∣sires; and of the most greiuous bur∣then of all earthly concupiscences, which impugne, and oppresse my miserable soule, that running lightly after thee, in the odour of thy pre∣tious oyntements, till I be effectually satisfyed with the vision of thy be∣auty, I may, with all speed, arriue thi∣ther by thy cōduct. For there are two kindes of loues; one good, and ano∣ther badd; one sweete, and another bitter, and they cannot both re∣mayne in one hart. And therefore if any man loue any thinge, in dis∣honour
of thee, thy loue, O Lord, is not in him. That loue of sweetnes, and that sweetnes of loue; not tor∣menting but delightinge; a loue, which remaineth sincerely, and chastely for all eternity, a loue which euer burnes, and is neuer quenched. O sweete Christe, O deer Iesus, O Charity! my God, inflame me all with thy fire, with thy loue, with thy sweetnes and delight, with thy ioy & exultation, with thy pleasure and ardent desire which is holy, and good; chaste, and pure, secure, and serene; that being all full of the sweetnes of thy loue, and all burnt vp, in the flame of thy charity, I may loue thee, O God, with my whole hart, and with all the marrow of my affections; haueing thee still, and euery where, in my hart, in my mouth, and before my eyes, so that there may neuer be any place open in me, for any adulterine or impure loue. Hearken to me, O my God, hearken to me, O thou light of mine eyes. Hearken to what I aske, and teach me what to aske, that thou maist hearken to me. O thou pittious
and most mercifull Lord, doe not become inexorable to me for my sinns; but for thyne owne goodnes sake, receiue these prayers of thy Sonne, and grant me the effect of my petition, and desire, by the inter∣cession, prayer, and impetration of the glorious Virgin Mary my Lady, and Mother, and of all thy other Saints. Amen. CHAP. XXXVI. A most deuoute Prayer by way of thanks-giueing. O Christ our Lord, the Word of the Father, who camest in∣to the world to saue sinners, I be∣seech thee, by the most indulgent bowells of thy mercy, amend my life, better my actions, compose my manners, take all that from me, which hurteth me, and displea∣seh thee; and giue me that which thou knowest, to please thy selfe, and profitt me. Who is he but onely thou, O Lord, who can make a man cleane, he being conceiued of vn∣cleane seed. Thou art an Omnipo∣tent God of infinite piety, who ius∣tifiest
the wicked, and reuiuest such as are dead, through sinn; & thou changest sinners, and they are so no more. Take from me therefore, whatsoeuer is displeasing to thee in me; For thyne eyes haue seene my many imperfections. Send forth, I beseeche thee, thy hand of piety towards me, and take from me, whatsoeuer is offensiue in me to thyne eyes. Before thee, O Lord is my health, and sicknes, conserue that, I beseech thee, and cure this. Heale me, O Lord, and I shalbe healed, doe thou saue me, and I shalbe saued; thou, who curest the sick, and conseruest the sound; thou who with the onely beck of thy will, restorest that which is in decay, and ruine. For if thou vouchsafe to sowe good seede in thy feild, which is my hart, it will first be necessary, that, with the hand of thy pitty, thou shouldest pluck vp the thornes of my vices. O most sweete, most benigne, most loueing, most deer, most de∣sirable, most amiable, and most beautifull God, infuse, I beseech
thee, the multitude of thy sweetnes, and of thy loue into my hart; that I may not so much as desire, yea, or euen thinke, of any carnall thinge; but that I may loue onely thee, and haue onely thee in my hart, and mouth. Write, with thy finger in my hart, the sweete memory of thy mel∣lifluous Name, which may neuer be blotted out againe. Write thy will, and thy lawe, in the tables of my hart, that I may haue both thy lawe, and thy selfe, O Lord of immense sweetnes, at all tymes and places, before myne eyes. Burne vp my mynde with that fire of thyne, which thou did'st send into the world, and did'st desire that it might be much kindled; that I may daily offer to thee, abundance of tears, the sacri∣fice of a troubled spirit, and contrite hart. O sweete Christe, O deer Iesus, as I desire, and as, with my whole hart I craue, so giue me thy holy and chaste loue, which may reple∣nish, and take, and possesse me wholy. And giue me that euident si∣gne of thy loue, a springing foun∣tayne
of tears, which continually may flowe; that my tears themselues may witnes thy loue to me, and they may discouer and declare, how deerly my soule loueth thee; whilest through the excessiue sweetnes of that loue, it cannot conteyne it selfe from tears. I remember, deare Lord, that good woeman Anna, who came to the Tabernacle, to begg a sonne of thee, of whome the Scripture saith that after her tears, and prayers, her countenance was cast no longer towardes seuerall things. But whilest I call to mind her so great vertue, and constancy, I am racked with greife, and confounded with shame, because I finde my selfe too misera∣blie cast downe, towards vanity. But if she wept so bitterly, and did so perseuer in weepinge, who onely de∣sired to haue a sonne; how ought my soule to lament, and continue in la∣mentation, which seekes and loues God, and earnesty desires to get home to him? How ought such a soule lament, and weepe, who seeketh God, day and night, and is resolued to loue nothinge but Christ
our Lord? It is no lesse then a wōder, if such a persons teares, become not his bread, day and night. Looke back therefore, and take pitty on me, for the sorrowes of my hart are multiplyed. Giue me of thy celestiall contemplation; and despise not this sinfull soule, for which thou dyedst. Giue me I beseeche thee, in∣ternall teares, which may springe from the most secret corner of my hart, whereby the chaines of my sinns may be broken; and lett them euer fill my soule, with celestiall ioy, that I may obteyne some little por∣tion in thy Kingdome, if not in the Society of those true and perfect Moncks, whose stepps I am not able to followe, yet at least with deuout woeman. I doe also call to minde, the ad∣mirable deuotion of another woemā, who sought thee with tender loue, whē thou wert layd in the Sepulcher. Who retired not from the sepulcher, when the Disciples retired; who satt downe there, all afflicted and wounded; & she wept there long, and much, and riseing vp with many
tears, she did agayne and agayne, play as it were the spy, with her watchfull eyes, vpon that solitary place; to see if perhapps she might be able to finde thee any where, whom she sought with such ardour of desire. She had already entered into the sepulcher once and agayne; but that which in it selfe, seemes too much, seemes not enough, to one that loues. The vertue of a good worke is perseuerance; and because she loued thee beyond the rest, and loueing wept, and weeping sought, and seeking perseuered, therefore did she deserue, to be the first of all others to finde the out; and to speake with thee. And not onely that, but she was the first proclamer of thy glorious Resurrection, to thy Dis∣ciples; thy selfe thus directing, and sweetly commaunding that it should be so, Goe, and will my brethren that they pass on into Gallile; they shall see me there, But now, if that woeman wept, and continued in weepinge, who sought the liueing, amongst the dead, and who tou∣ched thee but with the hand of
Faith; how ought my soule to lamente, and persiste in lamen∣tation, which beleeueth with the hart, and confesseth with the mouth, that thou art her redeemer, praesiding now in heauen, and regninge euery where? How ought such a soule to lament and weepe, which loues thee with her whole hart, and couetts to see thee with her whole desire? Thee who art the sole refuge, and the onely hope of miserable creatures, to whome one can neuer pray without hope of mercy? Afford me this fauour, I be∣seech thee, for thyne owne sake, & for thy holy Name, that as often as I thinke of thee, speake of thee, write of thee, read of thee, conferr of thee; as often as I remember thee, and am present with thee, and offer praise and prayers, and sacrifice to thee, so often may I weepe abun∣dantly, and sweetely in thy presence, that so my tears may be made my bread, day and night, Thou, O King of glory, and thou instructer of soules in all ver∣tue, haste taught vs, both by do∣ctrine
and example; that we are to lament, and weepe, sayinge: Bles∣sed are they who mourne, for they shalbe comforted. Thou didest weepe ouer thy deceased freind, and thou didest shedd abundant tears ouer that miserable Citty, which was to perish. And now, O deare Iesus, I beseech thee, by those most pretious tears of thyne, and by all those mercyes, whereby thou didest vouchsafe so admira∣bly to releyue vs wretched Crea∣tures, giue me the grace of tears, which my soule doth greatly af∣fect, and couet. For without thy guift, I cannot haue it, but be thou pleased to impart it to me, by that holy Spirit of thyne, which mollifyes the hard harts of sinners, and giues them compunction to weepe; as thou didest giue it to our Fathers, whose footesteps I am to imitate, that so I may lament my selfe, duringe my whole life, as they lamented themselues, day and night. And by theyr merits and prayers who pleased theo, and did most
deuoutly serue thee, I beseeche thee, take pitty vpon me, thy most miserable, and vnworthy seruant; and grant me the grace of tears, Grant me that superior kinde of ir∣rigation or watering, and that infe∣rior also, that my tears may be my bread day and night; and that; by the fire of sorrowe, I may be made a fatt, and marrowy Holocauste, in thy sight. O my God, let me be all offer∣red vp, vpon the altar of my hart; and let me be receyued by thee as a most acceptable sacrifice to thee in the odour of sweetnes. Grant me, O most sweete Lord, both a continuall, and a cleere founteyne, wherein this vncleane Holocauste, may be cleansed. For although I haue already offered my selfe to thee, by thy fauour, and grace; yet in many things, doe I offend dayly, through my excessiue frailty. Giue me therefore the grace of tears, O blessed, and amiable God, through the greate sweetnes of thy loue, and by the commemoration of thyne owne mercyes. Prepare this
table for thy seruant, in thy sight, & putt it into my power, that as often as I list, I may be filled therewith. Grant through thy pitty, & goodnes that this excellent and inebriating chalice, may quench my thirste; & lett my spiritt pante towards thee, & my hart burne bright in thy loue; forgetting all vanity, and misery Hearken to me, ô God, hearken, ô thou light of myne eyes, hearken to that which I desire, and make me desire such things, as thou wilt grant. O Lord, thou who art holy, & exorable in thy selfe, doe not be∣come inexorable to me, for my sinns; but for thyne owne goodnes sake, re∣ceaue the Prayers of thy seruant, & grant me the effect of my desire, and sute, by the prayers and merits of my Lady, the glorious Virgin Mary, and of all thy Saintes. Amen.
CHAP. XXXVII. A most holy, and most excellent Prayer to Almighty God, whereby the soule is greatly mooued to deuotion. O Lord Iesus, O Holy Iesus, O good Iesus, who didest vouch∣safe to dy for our sinns, and to rise agayne, for our Iustification; I be∣seech thee, by that glorious Resur∣rection of thyne, raise me vp from the sepulchre of all my vices, and sinns; & dayly giue me a part, in thy Resurrection by grace, that I may obteyne to be made a true pertaker of thy Resurrection to glory. O thou most sweete, most benigne, most loueinge, most pretious, most amiable, and most beautifull, Lord, who didest ascend vp to heauen, in a triumph of glory; and beinge a most puissant Kinge dost sitt at the right hand of thy Father: Drawe me vpward, that I may runn after thee, in the pursute and sent of thy odoriferous oyntments. I will runn, and not faynt. Whilest thou art lea∣ding, and draweinge me, I will be
runninge. Drawe vp this mouth of my thirsty soule, into those cele∣stiall spirings of eternall satiety. Nay, rather drawe me to thy very selfe, who art the true liueinge fountayne; that so accordinge to the vttermoste of my capacity, I may drinke that, where-vpon I may for euer liue, O thou my God, and my life. For thou haste said, with thy holy and blessed mouth: If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drinke. O thou fountayne of life, grant to my thirsty soule, that it may alwayes drinke of thee; that, accordinge to thy holy and faithfull promisse, the liueing waters may flowe from me, O thou fountayne of life, fill my minde, with the torrent of thy delight, and inebriate my hart with the sober ebriety of thy loue; that I may forget all vaine, ād earthly things, and may perpetually haue thee, and thee alone, in my me∣mory; as it is written: I haue beene mindfull of God, and I was delighted. Imparte to me the holy Spiritt, which was signifyed by those watters, which thou didest promisse, that
thou wouldest giue, to such as thir∣sted after them. Grant, I beseeche thee, that with my whole desire, and endeauour, I may tend thyther, whither I be∣leeue thee to haue ascended, vpon the fortieth day, after thy Resur∣rection That so my body onely, be held in this present misery; and that I may euer be with thee in desire and thought. That my hart may be there, where thou art, who art my incom∣parable, disireable, and extreamely amiable treasure. For in the great de∣luge of this life, wherein we are tossed with stormes to and fro sur∣rounding vs; and where there is noe secure castinge of anchor; nor place more eminent, wher-vpon the Doue may place her foote, & repose her selfe in some smale measure; there is noe where, any safe peace; noe where any secure quietnes, but euery where warrs and strife; all places full of ene∣myes; fighting without, and fears within. And because one parte of vs is celestiall, and the other terrestriall the body which is subiect to corup∣tion, doth dull and stupify the soule
Therefore doth this soule of myne, which is my companion, and my freind, and which colmes all weary, from trauellinge, vpon a long, and laborious way, lye languishinge, and torne in sunder, by those vanityes, which it passed by; and it doth hunger, and thirst extreamely; and I haue nothinge to sett before it, be∣cause I am a poore creature, and a meere begger. Thou ô Lord my God who art rich in all things, and art a most plentifull imparter of celestiall satiety, giue foode to it being weary, recolect it being scattered; and repair it being torne in peeces. Behold it is at the doore, and knockes. It beseeches thee, by those bowells of thy mercy, whereby thou didest visite vs riseinge from aboue, to open thy hand of pitty, to this miserable soule which knockes; and commaund (out of thy benignity & grace) that it may enter in to thee; that it may repose in thee, and that it may be recreated, and fedd with thee who art that true celestiall bread, and wine. That when it is satisfyed therewith, it may recouer strength
and so ascēd vp to the things aboue it & being snatched vp out of this valley of misery, by the wing of holy desires it may fly into those celestiall King∣domes. Let my spiritt, ô Lord, let my spiritt, I beseech thee, take the wings of an Eagle, let it spring vp and neuer fainte; let it fly, till it arriue euen! as farr as the beauty of thy house; that place of the habita∣tion of thy glory; that it may there be full fedd vpon that table, where thy celestiall Cittizens are refreshed, with those secret delights of thyne, in that place of rich feedinge; close by those full fountaynes; and there, ô my Lord, let my hart repose, and rest in thee. My hart is a high sea. swelling vp with waues. Thou, who didest com∣maund both windes and seas, where vpon great tranquillity did followe, come downe, and walke vpon these Waues of my hart; that all my thoughts may become serene and quiet; to the end that I may embrace thee, my deare, and onely Lord; and that I may contemplate thee (who art the sweete light of myne
eyes) being freed from the blinde mistes, or foggs of all vnquiet cogi∣tations. Let my hart fly vnder the shadowe of thy wings, from the scorching heate of the cares, and cogitations of this world; that so being hidden vp in that sweete re∣freschinge of thine, it may exult, & singe: In thy peace, in thy very selfe will I sleepe and rest. Let my memory sleepe, let it sleepe, I beseeche thee, O my Lord God, from all sinn and vice. Let it hate iniquity, and loue sanctity. For what is more beautifull, what is more delightfull, then in the middest of the deepe darkenes, and the many bitter sorrowes of this life, to pante towards that diuine sweetnes of thine, and to aspire to that eternall beatitude; and there to haue our harts fixed, where it is most certaine that true ioy is to be found, O thou most sweete, most loueinge, most be∣nigne, most deare, most precious, most desirable, most amiable, and most beautifull Lord, When shall I be able to see thee: When shall I apppeare before thy face? Whē shall
I be satisfyed with that beauty of thine? Vvhen wilt thou lead me out of this darke prison, that I may confesse to thy Name; that so, from thence forth,, I may haue noe more cause of greife? Vvhen shall I passe on into that admirable, and most goodly house of thine? where the voice of ioy and exultation, is euer ringing out, in those Tabernacles of the Iust? Blessed are they who dwell in thy house, O Lord, for euer, and for euer, shall they praise thee. Blessed are they, & truely blessed; whome thou hast chosen, and assumed into that celestiall inheritance. Beholde how thy Saints, O Lord, doe florish like the Lilly; they are filled with the euer springinge plenty of thy house; & thou giuest them to drink of the torrent of thy delights. For thou art the fountayne of life, and in thy light they shall see light; in so high degree as that they who are but a light illu∣minated by thee, ô God, who art the illuminateing light, doe yet shine in thy sight, like the Sunn it selfe. O how admirable, how pretious, and how beautifull, be the habita∣tions
of thy house O thou God of all strength? This sinfull soule of mine is carried with extreame desire to enter thyther. O Lord, I haue loued the beauty and order of thy house; and the place of the habitation of thy glory. One thinge I haue begged of our Lord, and I will neuer leaue to begg the same; that I may dwell in the house of our Lord, all the days of my life. As the Stagg runns panting towords the fountaines of water, so doth my soule runn thirstinge after thee, O God. When shall I come, and once appeare before thy face? When shall I see my God, after whome my soule is in a deadly thirst? When shall I see him, in the land of the Liueinge; for in this land of the Dyinge, he cannot be seene, with mortall eyes. Vvhat shall I doe, miserable creature that I am; beinge bound vp, hand and foote, by these chaynes of my mortality, What shall I doe? Whilest we remaine in this body, we wander from our Lord. Vve haue not here any permanent Citty, but we are looking after another, which is to
come, for our habitation is in heauen Vvoe be vnto me, for that my abode nere is prolonged. I haue dwelt with the inhabitants of Cedar; and my soule hath beene too true a dweller there. Vvho will helpe me to the winges of a doue, that I may fly and rest? Nothinge can be so delightfully deare to me as to be with my Lord. It is good for me to adheare to my God. Grant to me, ô Lord, whilest I am confined to this mortall flesh, that I may adheare to thee, as it is written: He who adhears to our Lord, becometh one spiritt with him. Grant me, I beseech thee, the wings of Contemplation; that beinge indued therewith, I may fly vp a pace towards thee. And because all that which is sinfull, and weake, is wor∣keinge downeward, ô Lord hold hold thou my hart, that it may not rush into the bottomes of this darke valley; that by interposition of the shadow of the earth, it may not be seuered from thee, who art the true Sunn of Iustice; and so may be hin∣dred from beholdinge celestiall
things, by the drawinge of black cloudes ouer it. Therefore am I aspi∣reinge to those ioyes of peace; and to that most calme and delight-full state of light. Hold thou fast my hart in thy hand; for vnlesse it be by thee it will neuer be able to rayse it selfe to thinges aboue. Thither doe I make all haste, where supreame peace doth reigne; and where eternall tranquil∣lity is resplendent. Hold fast, and guide my spiritt, and raise it; accor∣dinge to thy good will; that so thy selfe beinge the guide therof, it may ascend into that region, where there is an eternal spring; and where thou feedest Israel for euer, with the food of truthe; that there (at the least with some swifte, and catchinge thought). I may now lay hold of thee, who art that Souereigne Vvisdome, remaineinge ouer all things, and gouerninge, and con∣ducteinge all things. But to the soule which is stri∣uing, and struglinge towards thee, there are many thinges which call vpon it, by way of giueinge it im∣pediment. O Lord, I beseeche thee,
that they may all be putt to silence, by thy commandement. Lett my very soule be silent to it selfe. Lett it passe by all things: Lett it transcend all thinges created, and dispatch them all away from it selfe. Lett it arriue to thee, and vpon thee, who art the onely Creator of all things: let it fasten the eyes of Faith: let it aspire towards thee: let it be wholy atten∣tiue to thee: let it meditate vpō thee: let it contemplate thee: let it place thee euer before her eyes, and lock thee vp in her hart: thee who art the true and soueraigne good, & that ioy, which must neuer haue an end. Many Contemplations there are, whereby a soule which is deuoute to thee, may be admirably intertay∣ned & fedd; but in none of them is my soule so delighted, and laid to rest, as in the thought of thee; and when it thinks and contemplates, thee alone. How great is the multi∣tude of that sweetnes of thine, where∣with thou dost admirably inspire the harts of thy louers? How admira∣ble is that deernes of thy loue, which they enioy who loue nothinge but
thee; who seeke nothinge, nor de∣sire, so much as to thinke of any thinge but thee. Happy, soules are they, whose onely hope thou art: and whose onely worke, is Prayer. Happy is that man, who sits in so∣litude and silence, and stands still vpon his guard, day and night; and who, whilest he is imprisoned in this poore litte body of his, may yet be able in some proportion, to haue a taste of thy diuine sweetnes. I beseech thee, ô Lord, by those pretious wounds of thyne, which thou wert pleased to beare vpon thy Crosse, for our saluation; and from whēce that precious Blood did flow, whereby we are redeemed; be pleased to wounde this sinfull soule of myne, for which thou didst also vouchsafed to dye. Wound it with the fiery and most puissant dart of thy excessiue charity. For the Word of God is full of life, and efficacy; and it is more penetratiue then any sharp two-edged sword. Thou art that choise arrow, and that most sharp sword, which is able, by thy power, to pearce through the hard buckler of
mans hart. Strike through my hart, with the dart of thy loue, that my soule may say to thee: I am woun∣ded with thy loue. And doe it in such sort, as that out of this very wound of thy loue, abundance of tears may streame downe from mine eyes, day and night. Stricke through, O Lord, strike through, I beseeche thee, this most hard hart of mine, with the deare, & strong pointed launce of thy loue; and pearce downe yet more deepely into the most interiour parte of my soule, by the mighty power of thy hand. And so drawe forth out of this head of mine abundāce of water; and from these mine eyes, a true fountaine of tears, which may conti∣nually flowe, through my excessiue loue, and desire of the vision of thy beauty. To the end that I may mourne, day and night, admittinge of no comfort, till I shall obteyne to see thee, in thy celestiall bedd of state: Thee, who art my beloued, and most beautifull Spouse, my Lord and my God. That beholding there (in the society of such as thou hast chosen) that glorious, and admirable, & most
beautifull countenance of thine, (which is topp full of all true swee∣tenes,) I may with profound humi∣lity adore thy Maiesty. And then at last, being replenished, with the celestiall, and vnspeakable iubila∣tion of eternall ioy, I may cry out with such as loue thee, and say: Beholde, that which I aspired too, I see. That which I hoped for, I haue, That, which I desired, I inioy. For to him am I conioyned in hea∣uen, whome being yet on earthe, I loued witth my whole power: I im∣braced with entire affection; and I inheared to, with inuincible loue. Him doe I praise, adore, and blesse, who liueth & raigneth, God, for euer, and euer. Amen. CHAP. XXXVIII. A Prayer to be made in affliction. HAue mercy on me, O Lord, haue mercy on me, deer Lord, haue mercy on me, most miserable sinner, who cōmitt vnworthy things, and doe endure such as I am worthy of; for I am daily sinninge, and daily
feeling the scourge of sinn. If I con∣sider the euill which I cōmitt daily, it is noe great matter which I suffer. It is much wherein I offend, and it is little which I endure. Thou art lust, O Lord, and thy iudgment is right; yea; all thy iudgments are iust and true. Thou art iust and true, O Lord our God, and there is noe iniquity in thee. Thou, O mercifull and Omni∣potent Lord, dost not afflict vs sinners, cruelly, and vniustly. But when we were not, thou didst make vs with thy hand of power; and when we were lost, through our owne fault, thou didist admirablie restore vs by thy pitty and goodnes. I know, and am well assured, that our life is not driuen on, by rash. and irregular motions; but it is disposed, and gouerned by thee, O Lord our God. So that thou hast a care of all, butt especially of thy seruants, who haue placed their whole hope in thy mercy. I doe therefore beseeche, and humbly pray thee, that thou wilt not proceed with me, according to my sinns, whereby I haue deserued thy wrathe;
but accordinge to thyne owne great mercy, which surpasseth the sinns of the whole world. Thou O Lord; who doest inflict exterior punish∣ments vpon vs, giue vs interior patience, which may neuer faile; that so thy praise may not departe from my mouth. Haue mercy on me O Lord, haue mercy on me, and helpe me, accordinge to what thou knowest to be necessary for me, both in body and soule. For thou knowest all things, thou canst doe all things, thou who liuest for euer. CHAP. XXXIX. A verie deuoute Prayer. to God the Sonne. O Lord Iesus Christe, the Sonne of the liueing God, who didest drinke vp that Calice of thy Passion, thou being extēded vpon thy Crosse, for the Redemption of all mortall men; vouchsafe this day to giue me helpe. Beholde I come poore to thee who art riche; miserable, to thee who art mercifull. Let me not goe empty, or despised from thee. I am
hungry now when I beginn, let me not giue ouer, empty of thee. I come to thee almost starued, let me not departe from thee vnfed. And if now, before I eat, I sighe; grant at least, after I haue sighed, that I may eate. First of all, O most sweete Iesus, I confesse myne owne iniustice against my selfe, before the magnificence of thy mercy. Behold O Lord, how I was conceaued and borne in sinne; and thou didst wash me, and sanctify me, and after that I did yet pollute my selfe with greater sinnes. For I was borne in Original sinn, which was necessary to me, but afterwards I weltred in actuall sinn, which was voluntary. Yet thou O Lord, beinge not vnmindfull of thy mercy, didst take me from the house of my fa∣ther, of flesh and blood; and out of the Tabernacles of sinners, and didst inspire me to follow thee, with the generation of them who seeke thy face, and who walke in the right way, and who dwell amongst the Lillyes of chastity; and who feed with thee, at the table of profound pouerty. And I, vngratefull for so
many benefits, did, after I had rece∣aued Baptisme, worke many wick∣ed deeds, and committed many exe∣crable crymes. And whereas I ought to haue remoued those former sinns, I did after, add new sinns to those. These are my wickednesses, O Lord, whereby I haue deshonored thee, & defiled my selfe, whome thou haste created after thyne owne Image and likenesse, by pride, vaine glorye, and a number of other sinnes, whereby my vnhappy soule is afflicted, torne, and destroyed. Behold, O Lord, how my iniqui∣tyes haue ouergrowne my head, and how they oppresse me, as any heauy burden might doe. And vnlesse thou, whose property it is to haue mercy, and to forgiue, be pleased to put the hand of thy Maiesty vnder me, I shall not faile to be miserably drowned in that bottomlesse pitt. Consider, O Lord God, and see, because thou art holy; and behold how my enemy insulteth ouer me, saying, God hath forsaken him, I will persecute him, and take him, for there is none to deliuer him. But
thou, O Lord, how long? Conuert thy selfe to me, and deliuer my soule, and saue me for thy mercyes sake. Haue mercy vpon thy Sonn, whome thou didst begett weth noe small sor∣row of thine, and doe not so consi∣der my wickednes, as thereby to for∣gett thyne owne goodnes, Who is that Father, which will not deliuer his Sonne? Or who is that Sonne, whome the Father will not correct with the staffe of pitty? Therefore, O my Father, and my Lord, though it be true that I am a sinner, yet I leaue not, for all that, to be thy Sonne, because thou haste both made me, and made me agayne. As I haue sinned, so doe thou reforme me; and when thou shalt haue men∣ded me by thy correction, deliuer me then to thy Sonne. Can the Mother forgett the Childe of her wombe? Yet supposeing she could, thou hast promised, O Father, that thou wilt not forgett him. Behold I cry out, and thou hearest me not, I am tormented with sor∣rowe, and thou comfortest me not; What can I say, or what shall I doe,
most wretched creature that I am? I am vtterly without all comfort, and I am cast of from the sight of thyne eyes,. Woe is me, from how great happinesse, into how great misery am I fallen? Whither was I goeinge, and yet where am I arriued? where am I, or rather where am I not? To whome did I aspire, and yet now, what kinde of things be they, for which I pant, and sighe? I haue sought for happinesse, and behold I hawe mett wish infelicity. Bebold I am euen dyinge, and Iesus is not with me & without fayle it is better for me not to be at all, then not to be with Iesus; it is better for me not to liue at all, then to liue without life. But thou, O Lord Iesus, and what is become of thyne ancient mer∣cyes? wilt thou be anggry with me for euer. Be thou appeased, I be∣seeche thee, and haue mercy on me, and doe not turne thy face from me; thou, who for the redeeminge of me, didst not turne thy face from such as did reproch, and spitt at thee. I confesse that I haue sinned,
and that my conscience calls for no∣thing but damnation, and my pen∣nance wil not serue for satisfaction▪ but yet it is certayne, that thy mer∣cy doth surpasse all sinn, Doe not, I beseeche thee, most deer Lord, marite vp my wickednes against me, to the end that thou maist enter into exact account with thy seruant. but blott out my iniquity; according to the multitude of thy mercyes. woe be vnto me miserable creature, when the day of Iugdment shall come, and the booke of consciences shall be opened, and it shal be said to me: Behold the man, and his wor∣kes. what shall I doe then, O Lord my God, when the heauens will re∣ueale my iniquityes, and when the earth will rise vp against me? Be∣holde, I shalbe able to make noe answeare; but my head, hanging downe through confusion I shall stand trembling, and all confounded before thee. Vvoe is me, wretched creature, what shal I say? I will cry out to thee, O Lord my God! For why should I consume my selfe with holding my peace? and yet if I
speake, my greife will not be ap∣peased. But yet, howsoeuer, if I hold my peace, I am inwardly tor∣mented with extrcame bitternes. Lament O my soule, as the Widowe vseth to doe, ouer the husband, of her youth. Howle thou misera∣ble creature, and cry out, because thy spouse, who is Christ our Lord, hath dismissed thee. O thou wrathe of the Omnipotent, doe no thou rush downe vpon me, for I am not∣able to receaue thee. It is not in all the power I haue to be able to endure thee. Haue mercy on me, least I despaire, and grant that I may repose in hope; and if I haue committed that for which thou maiste condemne me: yet thou haste not lost, that for which thou art wont to saue sinfull men. Thou, O Lord, desirest not the death of a sinner; nor dost thou re∣ioyce in the perdition of dyinge soules; nay thou dyedst thy selfe to the end that dead men might liue, and thy death hath killed the death of sinners. And if
they liued by thy death, I be∣seech thee, O Lord, that I, by the meanes of thy life, may not dy. Send forth thy hand from on highe, and take me out of the hand of mine enemyes, that they may not reioyce ouer me, and say: We haue deuoured him. Who can distrust of thy mercy, O deer Iesus, since thou didest redeeme vs, and reconcile vs to God, by thy Blood, when we were thine enemies? Behold how, being protected vnder the shadowe of thy mercy, I come runninge to thy Throne of glory, askinge par∣don of thee, and crying out, and knocKinge, till thou take pitty of me. For if thou haste called vs to take the benefit of thy pardon when we sought it not, how much more shall we obteyne it, when we seeke it? Doe not, O most swete Iesus, remember thy Iustice against this sinner, but be mindfull of thy benig∣nity towards thy creature. Be not mindfull of thy wrathe, against him who is guilty; but be mindfull of thy mercy, towards him who is in
misery. Forget the proude wretch, who prouoketh thee, and take pitty of that miserable man, who inuo∣keth thee, For what is Iesus, but a Sauiour; and therefore, O Iesus, I beseeche thee by thy selfe, rise vp to help me, and say vnto my soule, I am thy saluation. I presume much O Lord, vpon thy goodnes, because thy selfe teacheth me to aske, to seeke, and to knocke; and therefor being admonished by that voyce of thyne I doe aske, seeke and knocke. And thou, O Lord, who biddest me aske, make, me receaue; thou whoe aduisest me to seeke, grant that I may finde; thou who teachest me to knocke, open to me, who am knockinge. And eonfirme me who am weake; reduce me who am lost, raise me to life, who am dead, and vouchsafe, in thy good pleasure, so to gouerne my sences, my thoughts, words, and deeds, that from hence forth I may serue thee, and liue to thee, and deliuer my selfe wholy vp into thy hand. I know, O my Lord, that for thy onely haueinge made me, I owe
thee all my selfe; and in that thou wert made Man for me, and didest redeeme me; I should owe so much more to thee, then my selfe (if I had more) as thou art greater then he, for whome thou gauest thy selfe But behold I haue no more, nor yet can I giue thee what I haue, with∣out thee; but doe thou take me, and drawe me to thy selfe, to thy imitation and loue, as already I am thyne by creation, and con∣dition: thou who euer liuest and reignest. CHAP. XL. A profitable Prayer, O Lord God Omnipotent, who art Trine and One, who art allwayes in all things, who wert before all things, and who art euer to be in all things, God, to whome be praise for euer; to thee doe I commend (for this day, and for all my life herafter) my soule, my body, my sight, my hearinge, my taste, my smell, and my touch; All my thoughts, affections, speaches,
and actions: all my exteriors, and interiors; my sense, my vnderstan∣ding, and my memory; my faith, my hope, and my perseuerance, in∣to the hands of thy power, by day and night, and in all houers and momenta. Hearken to me, O Holy Tri∣nity, and conserue me, from all euill, from all scandall, and from all mortall sinne; from all ambus∣hes, and vexation of Deuills, and from all our enemyes, visible, and inuisible; by the Prayers, of the Patriarches. by the Meritts of the Prophets, by the suffrages of the Apostles, by the constancy of the Martyrs, by the Chastity of the Virgins, and by the intercession of all the Saints, who haue been pleas∣ing to thee, since the beginning of the World. Expell from me all boasting of minde: increase com∣pounction of hart, diminish my pride, and perfect thou true humi∣lity in me. Stirr me vp to shed tears, mollify my hard, and stony hart, deliuer my soule, O Lord, from all the trecheryes of myne enimyes,
and conserue me in thy will. Teach me, O Lord, to doe thy will, for thou art my God. Giue me O Lord, perfect see∣sing, and vnderstanding, that I may be able to comprehend thy pro∣found benignity. Giue me grace to aske that, which it may delight thee to heare, and may be expedient for me to obteyne, Giue me tears which may rise from my whole hart, wherby the chaynes of my sinns may be dissolued, Hearken, O my Lord, and my God, hearken to what I aske, and vouchsafe to grant it. If thou despise me, I perish: if thou reguard me, I liue: if thou looke for innocency at my hands, I am dead already, and I stinke: if, thou looke vpon me with mercy, though I stinke, yet thou raisest me out of the graue. Put that farr from me, which thou hatest in me, and ingrafte in me the spiritt of chasti∣ty, & continency, that whatsoeuer I may chance to aske of thee, yet in the very askeing of it, I may not offend thee. Take from me that
which hurts, and giue me that which helpes. Giue me O Lord, some Phisicke whereby my woundes may be cured. O Lord, giue me thy feare, compunction of hart, humi∣lity of minde, and a pure consci∣ence. Grant O Lord, that I may euer maintayne fraternal charity, and that I may not forget mine owne sinne, nor busy my selfe with those of other men. Pardon my soule, my sinns my crymes; visite me who am weake, cure me who am sicke, strengthen me who am languishing, and reuiue me who am dead, Giue me a hart, O Lord, which may feare thee, a will which may loue thee, a minde which may vnderstand thee, eares which may heare thee, and eyes which may see thee. Haue mercy on me, O God, haue mercy on me, and looke downe on me, from that holy seat of thy Maiesty; and illuminate the darknes of my hart, with the beame of thy splen∣dor. Giue me, O Lord discre∣tion, that I may discerne betweene good and bade; and grant that I may
haue a vigilant minde. O Lord, I begg of thee the remission of all my sinns, from whome and by whome, propitiation may be granted me in the tyme of my necessity and of my greatest streights, O holy and immacutate Virgin Mary, the Mo∣ther of God, the Mother of our Lord Iesus Chirste, vouchsafe to interceede of me with him, whose Temple thou deseruedst to be made, Holy Michaell, holy Gabriel, holy Raphael: O you holy Quires of Angells, and Archangells, of Pa∣triarches, and Prophetts, of Apost∣les, and Euangelists, Martys, and Confessors, Preists, and Leuitts, Monckes, and Virgins, and of all the Saints, I presume to begg of you, hy him, who chose you, and by the contemplation of whome you are in such ioy, that you will vouchsafe to make supplication to God himselfe for me; that I may obteyne to be deliuered from the iawes of the Deuill, and from eter∣nall death. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to grant me eternall life, according
to thy Clemency, and most benigne mercy, O Lord Iesus Christe, grant concord to Preists, and to Kings, Bishopps, and Princes, who iudge iustly, giue tranquillity, and peace. O Lord, I beseech thee, for the whole holy Catholike Church, for men, and woemen, for Religious and secular people, for all the gouer∣nors of Christians, and all such, as, beleeuing in thee, doe labour for the holy loue of thee, that they may obteyne perseuerance in theyr good workes. Grant, O Lord, O Eternall Kinge, chastity to Virgins, con∣tinency to such as are dedicated to thee, O Almighty God, sancti∣mony to maried folles, pardon to sinners, releife to orphans, and wi∣dowes, protection to the poore, safe arriual to such as are in iourney; comfort to such as mourne, euer∣lasting rest to the faithfull soules departed▪ a safe hauen to such as are at Sea, to thy best seruants, that they may continue in their vertue, to them who are but indifferently
good, that they may growe better, to them who are wicked and sinfull, (as to me poore wertch) that they may quickly reforme themselues. O most sweete, and most mer∣cyfull Lord Iesus Christe, the Sonne of the liueinge God, the Redeemer, of the world, I confesse my selfe to be a miserable sinner in all things, and aboue all men; but thou also, O most mercifull and supreame Father, who takest pitty vpon all, doe not suffer me to become an alien from thy mer∣cy. O God, thou King, of Kinges, who haste giuen me this truce of liueing till now; grant me deuo∣tion to reforme my selfe, stirr vp in me a minde which may earnestly desire and seeke thee, and loue thee aboue all things, & feare thee, and doe thy will, thou who art all euery where in Trinity, and Vnity, and that for euer. Especially there∣fore I beseech thee, O Lord, O Holy Father, who art glorious and blessed for euer, that all they who remember me in their Prayers, and who haue commended themselues
to my vnworthy ones, and who haue performed any office of chari∣ty, or worke of mercy towards me, and they also who are ioyned to me by kindred; and by the naturall affe∣ction of flesh and blood, and as well all they, who are now aliue, as those others who are departed, may be mercifully and graciously gouerned by thee, that they perish not. Vouchsafe to giue succour to all the Christians who liue, grant absolu∣tion with eternall rest, to the faith∣full who are dead. And moreouer I doe in most particuler manner begg of thee, O Lord, thou who art Al∣pha and omega, that when the last day, and pointe of my life shall ar∣riue, thy selfe will vouchsafe to be my mercifull Iudge against that ma∣ligne accuser, the Deuill, and be thou my continuall defend or against the sleights of that ancient enemy of mine, and make me continue in that holy heauen of thyne, in the society of al the Angells and Saints, thou who art blessed for euer and euer. Amen.
CHAP. XLI. A Prayer in memorie of the Passion of Christe our Lord. O Lord Iesus Christe, my Re∣demption, my mercy, and my saluation; I praise thee, I giue thee thanks, though they carry noe pro∣portion to thy benefits. Though they be very voide of deuotion, though they be leane, in respect of the fatnes of that most sweete loue of thee which I desire; yet such as they are, not such, I confesse, as I owe, but such as I am able to con∣ceaue, my soule is now paying to thee. O thou hope of my hart, and thou vertue of my soule, and the life and end of all my intentions, lett thy most powerfull dignity supply that, which my most fainte weaknes doth endeauour. And if I haue not yet deserued so much of thee, as to loue thee so much as I ought, yet at least I haue an earnest desire to. performe the same O thou my light, thou seest my conscience, be∣cause, O Lord, all my desires are
before thee. And if I endeauour to doe any thing which is good, it is thou who bestowest it vpon me. If that be good, O Lord, which thou inspirest, or rather because the incli∣nation which I haue to loue thee is good: grant me that, which it is thy will that I should desire, and grant that I may obteyne to loue thee, as much as thou requirest. I giue thee praise, and thankes, for what I haue, lest otherwise thy gnift might proue vnfruitfull to me, which thou hast bestowed, of thyne owne free will. Perfect that which to hast begunn, and giue me that, through thy mercy, which thou madest me desire, without any me∣rit of mine. Conuert, O most be∣nigne Lord, my dull heauinesse, into a most feruent loue of thee. To this, O my most mercifull Lord, my prayer, my memory, my medi∣tation of thy benefitts, doe all tend, that thou maiste kindle thy loue in me. Thy goodes, O Lord, created me, thy mercy, when I was crea∣ted, did cleanse me from original sinn, thy patience, after that I was
washed in Baptisme, hath tolerated, nourished and expected me, when I was all wrapped vp, in the filth of other sinns. Thou, O my good Lord, didst expect my amendement, and my soule expecteth the inspira∣tion of thy holy grace, that I may come to pennance, and goode life. O my God, my Creator, my expecter, and my feeder I thirst after thee, I sigh towards thee, and vehemently desir to attaine to thee. And as the poore childe, beinge depriued of the pre∣sence of his most benigne father, doth incessantly weepe and cry out and imbrace, by his memory, that fathers face, with his whole hart, so I (not so mueh as I should) but so much as I can, am mindefull of thy Passion, mindfull of thy stroakes, mindfull of thy stirpes, mindfull of thy wounds, mindfull how thou wert murthred for me, how thou wert embalmed, how thou wert buried; and mindfull also of thy glorious Resurrection, and admira∣ble Ascension. These things doe I hold fast, with vndoubted faith, I lament the miseries of my banish∣ment,
I hope for the onely conso∣lation of thy coming, and I desire the glorious contemplation of thy face. Woe be vnto me, in that I was not able to behold that Lord of An∣gells, being humbled to the con∣uersation of men; to the end that he might exalt men, to the conuer∣sation of Angells, when God, being offended, dyed, that man who offen∣ded him, might liue. Vvoe be vn∣to me, that I obteyned not to be amazed, in being present at that spectacle of admirable and inesti∣mable piety. Vvhy, why, at least, O my soule doth not the sword of most sharp sorrow pearce thy hart, since thou wert not able to haue endured, that launce which wounded the side of thy Sauiour; since thou could∣est not behold those hands and feete of thy Creator, to be so violated with nayles, and the bloode of thy Reddeemer, so hydeously to be shedd? Vvhy, at least, art not thou inebriated with the bitternes of tears, since he drunck the bitternes of gall? Why art thou not in com∣passion
of that most holy Virgin, his most worthy Mother, my most worthy Lady? O my most mercifull Lady, what fountaynes shall I say they were, which brake out of thy most chaste eyes, when thou didest obserue, how thy onely innocent Sonne, was bound, and scourged, and slaine in thy presence? Vvhat tears shall I beleeue did bedewe? and bathe thy most sweet holy Face, when thou didest behold that Sonne of thyne, who was also thy God, & thy Lord, extended vpon the Crosse, without any falt of his? and that flesh, which was of thyne owne flesh, to be so wickedly torne, by wretched people: wiih what kinde of sobbing sighes, shall I conceaue thy most pure hart to haue beene torne, when thou hear∣dest those words, Woeman, behol∣de thy Sonne, and the Disciple, Vvoeman beholde thy Mother; when thou tookest the Disciple for the Master, and the seruant for the Lord. O that I had beene the man, who tooke downe my Lord from
the Crosse, with that happy Io∣seph? That I had embalmed him with odours? That I had Lodged him in the sepulchre? or at least, that I had followed him, and had obteyned so much, that, to so great a funerall as that, some little parte of my obsequiousnesse, had not beene wantinge. O that with those happy woeman, I had beene frighted, by that bright vision of those Angells; and had heard that message of the Resurrection of our Lord: That message of my com∣fort: That message so much ex∣pected, and desired. O that I had heard these words from the mouth of the Angell, Doe not feare, you seeke Iesus crucifyed, but he is ri∣sen, he is not here. O thou most meeke, most be∣nigne, most sweete, and most ex∣cellent Lord! when wilt thou giue me a sight of thee? for yet I neuer sawe thât incorruption of thy blessed body; I neuer kissed those places of thy wounds. & that pearcinge of the nayles; I neuer bathed those ouuertures of thy true,
thy admirable, thy inestimable, and incomparable Flesh and Blood, with the tears of ioy. When wilt thou comfort me, and when wilt thou giue me cause to conteyne this sorrow of mine? For indeed this sor∣row will not end in me, as long as I shall be in pilgrimage, frō my Lord. Vvoe be to me, O Lord, woe be to my soule; for thou who art the comforter therof, didest goe thy wayes out of this world, with∣out so much as biddeing me fare∣well. When thou didest putt thy selfe vpon those new wayes of thyne, thou gauest thy blessing to thy seruants; but I was not there Thou wert carried vp to heauen in a cloude, but I saw it not. The Angells promised, that thou woul∣dest returne; but I heard them not. Vvhat shall I say, what shall I doe, whither shall I goe, where shall I seeke him, & when shall I finde him? Vvhome shall I aske? Vvho will declare to my beloued that I languish for loue? The ioy of my hart is gone. My mirth is changed into sorrow. My very flesh and my
hart haue fainted, O thou God of my hart, and my part: God, who art my portion for euer. My soule hath refused to be comforted, vn∣lesse it be by thee, my true sweetenes. For what haue I to care for in heauen but thee; and what haue I desired on earth but thee? It is thou, whō I de∣sire, for whom I hope, and whom I seeke: To thee my hart doth say, I will seeke thy countenance, and I will seeke it yet agayne. O turne thou not thy face from me. O thou most benigne louer of mankinde, to thee the poore crea∣ture is lefte, thou art the helper of the Orphan. O thou my safe Ad∣uocate, haue mercy on me, who am a forsaken Orphan. I am left as a pupill wihout a father; my soule is as solitary as a Vvidowe. Behold the tears of my desolation, and wid∣owehoode, which I offer thee, till such tyme as thou shalt returne. Come therefore, Lord, come now, appeare to me, and I shalbe com∣forted. Afford me thy presence, and I shall haue obteyned my desire. Reueale thy glory, and I shall be in
perfect ioy. My soule hath thirsted towards thee, O how abundantly doth my very flesh thirst after thee. My soule hath thirsted towards God, who is the liueinge foun∣tayne. When shall I come and ap∣peare before the Face of our Lord? When wilt thou come, O my com∣forter, whome I will expect? O that I might be sure to see that ioy, which I desire O that I might be satiated, when thy glory shall appeare, of which I haue so great hunger. O that I might be ine∣briated, by that springinge plenty of thy house, towards which I sighe: O that thou wouldest giue me to drinke deepely of the torrent of thy pleasure, which I thirst af∣ter. O Lord, let my tears in the meane whyle, be my bread, day and night, till such tyme as it may be said to me, Behold thy God; till my soule may hear this word, Be∣holde thy Spouse. Feed me in the meane tyme with my sighes, refresh me with my sorrowes. Perhapps my Redeemer will come, because he is good; and he
will not stay long behinde, who was here from the beginninge. To him be glory, for euer, and for euer. Amen. DEO GRATIAS. The end of the Meditations of Saint Augustine.
THE SOLILOQVIA OF THE GLORIOVS Doctour S. Augustine. THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the vnspeakable sweetnes of God. LET me knowe thee, O Lord, thou who knowest me. Let me knowe the, O thou strength of my soute. Shew thy sel∣fe to me, O thou who art my com∣forter: let me see thee, O thou, who art the light of myne eyes. Come, O thou ioy of my spirit,
let me behold thee, O thou solace of my harte. Make me loue thee, O thou life of my soule. Appeare to me, O thou who art my great delight, my sweete consolation, my Lord, my God, my life, and the to∣tall glory of my soule. Let me finde thee, O thou desire of my harte: Let me possesse thee, O thou loue of my soule. Let me embrace thee, O thou celestiall Spouse! O thou my soueraigne, and both my ex∣ternall, and internall ioy. Let me possesse thee, O thou eternall bea∣titude. Let me possesse thee in the very center of my hart, O thou bles∣sed life, and thou soueraigne sweet∣nes of my soule. I wil loue thee, O Lord, my strength, O Lord, my foundation, and my refuge, and my deliuerer, Let me loue thee, O my God, and my helper; thou who art a tower of strength to me, and my deare hope in all my aduersity. Let me embrace thee, who art that Good, without which nothing is good, and let me enioy me thee, who are that best, without which nothing is best.
Open the deepe hollowes of myne eares, by thy word, which is more penetratiue then any two edged sword, that soe I may growe to heare thy voyce. Thunder, O Lord, from aboue, with that voyce of thyne, which is soe loud and strong Let the Sea, and the fulnesse therof tunder out: let & the Earth, and all which is therein, be moued. Illustrate myne eyes, O thou incom∣prehensible light: Darte forth that bright lightening, and dissipate thē, that they may not behold vanity. Drawe downe the riuers at full speede, put them into commotion, that the fountaynes of water may appeare, and the foundations of the Earth may be disclosed. O thou inuisible light, grant to vs such a power of seeing, as that wee may be able to behold thee. Grante, O thou odour of life, such a new power of smelling in vs, as that wee may runn after thee, vpon the odour of thy ointments. Cure this taste of ours, that it may relish, and discerne, and knowe, how great that multitude of thy sweete∣nes
layd vp, for such as feare thee: that is, of such as are full filled with thy loue. Graunt me a hart which may thinke of thee, a will, which may loue thee, a minde, which may re∣member thee; an vnderstanding, which may conceiue thee; and a rea∣son, which may adheare close to thee, who art the supreame delight, and art to be soe for euer. Let that loue which is wise, be euer loueinge thee. O thou Life, to which all things liue; Life which giuest me life: Life which is my very life it selfe, whereby I liue, and without which I dye: Life, whereby I am reuiued, and without which I perish: Life whereby I reioyce; and with out which I am in misery: Life, which art a vitall life, a Life which is sweete and amiable, and to be re∣membered for euer, where art thou? I beseech thee, that I may finde thee, that I may faynt in my selfe, and be refreshed in thee? Be thou neer to me in my soule, neer in my hart: neer, in my mouth: neer in myne eares: neer, to giue me helpe,
because I languish with loue; be∣cause I dye without thee, and I am reuiued by remembring thee. Thy odour doth refresh me: the memo∣ry of thee doth cure me, but I shall then onely be satisfyed when thy glory shall appeare, O thou life of my soule. My soule earnestly desires, and doth euen languish through the me∣mory of thee. When shall I come, and appeare before thee, O thou my ioy? Why doest thou turne thy face from me, O thou my ioy, wherein I reioyce? where art thou hidden o beautie, which I desire? I smell the sweete odour of thee: I liue, and I ioy therein. Thy selfe I doe not see, but I heare thy voyce, and it reuiues me. But why doest thou hide thy Face from me? Doest thou say perhaps, that noe man shall see my Face, and liue? well then, O Lord, let me dye, that I may see thee, and let me see thee, that I may dye here below. I will not liue, but I will dy. I de∣sire to be dissolued, and to be with Christ. I desire to dye that I may
see Christ, I refuse to liue, that I may liue with Christ. O Lord Iesus, receiue my spirit! O thou my life, receiue my soule. O thou my ioy, drawe my hart vp to thee; O thou my sweete food, let me feede on thee. O thou my Hea∣de, direct me: Light of mine eyes, illuminate me: O thou my true sweetenes, temper me; thou pretious odour quicken me; thou Word of God, recreate me. O thou my praise, delight thou the soule of thy seruant; enter into it, O thou ioy of myne, that it may reioyce in thee. Enter into it, O thou soue∣raigne sweetenes, that it may re∣lish those things which indeed are sweete. O thou eternall light, illu∣strate it, that it may vnderstand, & knowe, and loue thee. For there∣fore it is, o Lord, that he who loues thee not, doth not loue thee, be∣cause he knowes thee not: and ther∣fore doth he not knowe thee, be∣cause he vnderstands thee not, and therefore he vnderstands thee not, because he comprehends not thy light: For the light shined in
darkenes, and darkenes comprehen∣ded it not. O thou light of our mindes, O bright Truth, which illuminatest all men comeing into this world: comeing into it indeede, but not loueinge it. For he who loueth the world is made the enemy of God.) Driue of all darkenes, from the face of the Abysse of my minde; that it may see thee, by knoweing thee; that it may knowe thee, by com∣prehending thee; and that by soe knowing thee, it may loue thee. For whosoeuer knoweth thee, forgetts himself, that he may loue thee. He loues thee more then himselfe; he forsakes himself, that he may fly to thee, and that he may reioyce in thee. From hence therefore it growes, O Lord, that I loue thee not soe much as I ought, because I doe not fully knowe thee. But because I knowe thee little, I loue thee little; and be∣cause I loue thee little, I reioyce little in thee; but departing from thee, (who art the true interiour ioy) towards exteriour things, whilest I want thee alone. I affect to
finde impure, and false freindships, amongst thy creatures. And so (wretch that I am) I haue bestowed this hart of myne, vpon vayne things, which I ought to haue im∣ployed vpon thee with an entire ap∣petite, and affection; and so, by loueing vanity, my selfe am growen to be wholy vayne. And hence also it is, O Lord, that I reioyce not in thee, and that I adheare not to thee. For I, am in exteriour things, thou in interiour: I am in temporall things, thou in spirituall: my minde is scattered & spilt, my thought is entertayned, my speach is im∣ployed vpon transitory obiects: but thou, O Lord, doest dwell in the eternities, and art eternity it selfe. Thou art in heauen, I on earth: thou louest high, and I lowe things; thou celestiall, I terrestriall: & when shall these contrarietyes, be euer able to meete?
CHAP. II. Of the misery and frayletie of Man. WRetch that I am, when shall this crookednes of mine be straightened, according to that rectitude of thyne. Thou, O Lord, louest to be alone, and I to be in multituds: Thou louest to be in silence, and I in noyse: Thou louest truth, and I loue vanity: Thou louest purity, and I vncleanenes. What should I say more, O Lord: thou art truely good, and I naughty: thou art holy, and I am wicked; thou art happy, and I vniust: thou art light it selfe, and I am truely blinde: thou art life it selfe, and I am dead: thou art Phisicke, and I am sicke: thou art ioy, and I am sorrow, thou art soueraigne Truth, and I am an vni∣uersality of vanitie, as indeede all men liueinge are Woe be therefore to me, O thou Creatour of myne, what shall I say? Yet hearken thou, O my Creatour, for I am thy crea∣ture,
and I am euen now vpon peris∣hing; I am thy creature, and am euen very now, vpon dying. I am the worke of thy hands, and I am, euen now, reduced to nothing. I am the thing which thou haste made. Thy hands▪ O Lord, haue made me, and fashioned me; those hands I say, which were fastened to the Crosse, with nayles, for me. Doe not, O Lord, despise the worke of those hands of thine I beseech thee, behold the wounds which are in thine owne hands. Behold, O Lord, how thou haste writtē me, in thyne owne hāds. Reade that wrightinge of thine, and saue me. Behold I thy creature doe sigh towards thee, thou art my Creatour, and doe thou refresh me. Behold I, who am the worke of thy hands, cry out to thee; thou art life it self, doe thou quicken me. Behold I, whom thou haste fra∣med, am lookeing towards thee; thou art my maker, and therefore doe thou restore me. Pardon me, O Lord, for my dayes are nothing. And yet, what is any man, that he should presume to speake to his
Creator, who is God? Pardon me whilest I am speakeing to thee; for∣giue thy slaue, who presumes to open his mouth, to soe great a Lord. But necessity hath noe lawe. Greife forces me to speake; the ca∣lamity which I endure, constraynes me to cry out. I am sicke, and I cry out to my Physician. I am blinde and I make haste towards the light. I am dead, and I aspire towards life. Thou, O Iesus of Nazareth, art the Physician, thou art the Light, & thou art life Haue mercy on me, O thou Sonne of Dauid: Take pitty on me, O thou fountaine of mercy. Giue eare ro thy poore creature which cryes out af∣ter thee. O thou light, which art passing by, expect this blinde man, reach forth thy hand to him, that he may come to thee, ard may see light in thy light. O thou liueing life reuiue thou this dead man. But yet, who am I, that am speakinge to thee? Woe be to me, O Lord, haue mercy on me, O Lord: on me, who am a rotten carkas, the food of wormes, a stinkeing pott, and that
matter, whereon fyre must feede: VVoe be to me, O Lord, wretched man that I am: Man, who being borne of a woeman, is to liue but a little time, and is to be filled with many miseries: Man, I say, who is growen like to vanity it selfe, and being cōpared to the foolish beasts, is now also become like to them. But yet still what am I? a darke abysse, a wretched peece of earth, a childe of wrath, a vessell euen made fitt for reproach; begotten with impurity, liueing in mysery, and dying in agony. Alas poore wretch, what am I? and yet a∣gaine, alas, what am I to be? A vessell full of dunge, a hollow shell full of putrefaction, full of stinkeing filth, which euen breedeth horrour. Blynde, poore, naked, subiect to a world of myseries, and, wholly ignorant, eyther how I came into the world, or how I shall gett out. Miserable, and mortall, whose dayes passe away like a shadow, whose life doth vanish, like awayning Moone, like a flower which gro∣weth vpon a stalke, and presently
decayes. Now it florisheth, and in the turneing of a hande, it wither∣eth. This life, I say, this frayle life of myne, this transitory life, this life, which how muche the more it encreaseth, soe much the more it decayes: how much the more it proceedes, so much the nearer it drawes to death. A deceiptfull life, and like to a shadow, and all besett, with the very snares of death. Now I reioyce, and euen now againe I am sadd; now I am strong, and now againe I am weake; now I liue, and now I am about to dye; now I laugh, and now againe I weepe, now I seeme happy, whilest yet I am all wayes mi∣serable. And soe subiect are all things to change, vpon all warninges, as that there is scarce any one of them, which continueth permanent for the space of an houre. Here feare and apprehension, and hunger, and thirst, and heate, and cold, and sickenes of body, and sorrow of mynd is in all aboundance. And all these are followed by vntimely death, which snatcheth men out of the
world by a thousand wayes. It kills one man with a feauer, another man is oppressed with greife of mynd; hunger consumeth one, thirst makes an end of another; one man is drow∣ned by water, another man is stran∣gled by a halter; another is destroyed by fyre, another is deuowred by wilde beasts. One is killed by the sword, another is corrupted by poyson; and another ends his mise∣rable life, by the surprise of some strange and sodayne feare, And now besides, and beyond all these things, a huge misery it is, that as nothing is more certayn then death, soe of nothing is a man more vncertayn, then of the tyme when he shal dy. When he thinkes he standeth fastest, he is tripped vp, and his hope peri∣sheth. Noe man can tel, eyther when or where, or how he shall dye; and yet he is sure enough, that dye he must. Behold, O Lord, how great this misery of man is, wherein I am pla∣ced, & yet I am voyd of feare. How great the calamite is which I endure, and yet I am farre from greife, nor
doe I cry out to thee. But I will cry out O Lord, before I passe away, to the end that I may not passe away, but remayne in thee. I will therfore declare, I will declare my misery. & I will not be ashamed to confesse my basenes before thee. Helpe me, O thou my strength, whereby I am raised; succour me, O thou Power whereby I am susteyned. Approach to me, O thou light, whereby I see; Appeare to me, O glory, wherein I ioy; disclose thy selfe to me, O thou life, whereby I liue, O thou my Lord and my God. CHAP. III. Of the admirable light of God O Thou light, which Tobias sawe, when he taught his sonne the way, of life, though himselfe were blinde. Thou light which Isaack sawe interiourly, when he foretold future things to his sōne, though his eyes of flesh and blood, were full of darkenes. Thou inuisible light I say
to which all the abysses of humane harts are visible. Thou light which Iacob sawe, when thou teaching him interiourly, he did exteriourly pro∣phecie to his children. Behold, whi∣lest thou art light, deepe darkenes is spredd ouer the face of the abysse of my minde. Behold, whilest thou art truth, a thicke mist, is spredd ouer the wateres of my hart. O thou word, whereby all things are made, and without which nothing is made: Thou Vvord, which art before all things, and nothing was before it: Thou VVord, which guidest all things, and without which all things are nothing; thou Vvord which saydest in the beginning, Let light be made, and light was made; say that also to me; let light be made, and let it then indeede be made. And make me also knowe whatsoeuer is not light, because, without thy helpe, I shall mistake light for darkenes, and darkents for light, And so with∣out thy light, there is noe truth; but errour and vanity are at hand; There is no order, but eonfusion; noe knowledge, but ignorance; noe sight
but blindenes; noe open way, but wandering mazes; noe life, but death. CHAP. IV. Of the mortality of Mans nature. BEhold, O Lord, because there is noe light, there is death; or rather, I cannot say, that death is there; because death indeede is nothing? and by that we tend to be nothing; whilest we are not affrayd to make our selues nothing, by com∣mitting sinne. And this, O Lord happeneth iustly to vs. For we re∣ceiue penishement, fitt for our de∣merits, whilest we slide away, like a little falling water. For nothing is made without thee. And by doeing, and makeing that which is nothing, we growe to be nothing, because we are nothing without thee, by whome all things are made, & without whome nothing is made. O Lord, (thou who art the Word; O God, who art the Vvord, by whome all things, and without whome nothing
is made) Vvoe be to me miseaable creature, who haue beene soe often blynded, for thou art light, and I haue beene voyd of thee. Vvoe be to me miserable creature, who haue beene soe often wounded; for thou art health it selfe; and I am voyd of thee. Vvoe be to me miserable crea∣ture, who haue soe often beene in∣fatuated by errour; for thou art Truth, and I am voyd of thee. Vvoe be to me miserable creature, who haue soe often gone astray; for thou art the way, & I haue wandred from thee. Vvoe be to me miserable crea∣ture, who haue beene so often dead, for thou art life, and I am without thee, Vvoe be to me miserable crea∣ture, who haue beene annihilated soe often; for thou art that Vvord, by which all things were made, and I am without thee, without whome nothing is made. O Lord who art the word. O God the Vvord, who art that light, whereby light is made; who art the way, the truth, and the life, in whome, there is noe darkenes, nor vanity, nor death. Light, without
which all is darkenes; Vvay without which all is errour; Truth, without which, all is vanity; and life, with∣out which, all is death. O Lord, doe but say this word, Fiat lux: let light be made, that soe I may see light, and auoyd darkenes; that I may see the way, and auoyd straying; that I may see truth, and auoyd vanity: that I may see life, and auoyd death. O Lord, my light, doe thou il∣luminate me: O thou, my illumi∣nation, and my saluation, whome I will praise: my God, whome I will honour; my Father whome I will loue; and my spouse, for whome I will preserue my selfe. Shine forth, I say, shine forth, thou light, vpon this blinde creature of thine, who is sitting in darkenes, and the sha∣dow of death; and direct his feete into the way of peace; Vvhereby I may enter into the place of thy admi∣rable Tabernacle, as farre as the house of God himselfe, and the voyce of exultation, and confession. For a true Confession, is the way where∣by one may enter into thee, who art the way; whereby we may de∣parte
from all wandring, and may returne againe, to the same way; because thou art that true way of life. CHAP. V. VVhat it is, to be made nothing. I will therfor confesse my misery to thee; I will confesse to thee, O thou my Father, and my Lord, that maker of Heauen and Earth, that soe I may be admitted, to approche thy mercy. For I am made wholly miserable, and am reduced to no∣thing, and I knew it not. For thou art truth and I was not with thee. My iniquityes haue wounded me, and I was not troubled thereat. For thou art life, and I was not with thee. They brought me to nothing, be∣cause I was not with thee, who art the Word, whereby all things were made, and without it nothing, and therefore did I become nothing without thee. For that is nothing which leades to nothing. All things are made by him; whatsoeuer are made; and what kinde of things where they? God sawe all those
things which he made, and they were very good. All things which are made, were made by the Word, and whatsoeuer things were made by that Word, are very good. Why are they good, in regard that all things are made by the Vvord, & without it nothing is made? Because nothing is good withaut a partici∣pation of that souueraigne Good But sinne is there, where that Good is not: and for that cause, it is euen nothing. For euill is nothing, but a priuation of good; as blindenes is noe other thing but a priuation of light. Sinne therefore is nothing because it is made without the Vvord, without which nothing is made; and that is sinne or euill which is depriued of that good, whereby all things are made, which haue any beeing. But now those things which are not, are not made by him; and consequently they are nothing. Therefore those things are euill, which are not made, because all things which are made, are made by the Vvord, and all things which are made by the Vvord are good. Since
therefore all things are made by the Vvord, sinne is not made by it; and therefore it remaynes that all things, which are not made, be not good, for as much as all things which are made, be good, and therefore those things are euill, which are not made: and therefore they are nothing, because nothing is made, without the Vvord. Sinne therefore is no∣thing, because it is not made. But then how is it euill, if it be nothing? Because euill is a priuation of that good, whereby that which is made is good. To be therefore whithout the Vvord, is to be euill, which yet is not properly to be; because nothing is without it. But what is it to be separated from the word? If thou desire to knowe this, learne first what this Vvord is. The Vvord of God sayth, I am the Vvay, the Truth, and the Life. To be separated there∣fore from the Vvord, is to be out of the Vvay, and without Truth, and life; and therefore without it, is nothing, and so it is euill, in being separated from the Vvord, whereby
all things were made very good. To be separated then from the Vvord, whereby all things were made, is noe other thing, then to faile, and to passe from being a fact, to be a de∣fect; because nothing truely is with∣out it. As often therefore as thou departest from good, thou doest se∣parate thy selfe from the Vvord, because the Vvord is good; and soe thou growest to be nothing, because thou art without the Vvord, with∣out which nothing is made. Now therefore O Lord, thou O light, hast illuminated me, that I might see thee: I sawe thee, and I knowe my selfe; for soe often haue I growen to he nothing, as I haue se∣parated my selfe from thee; and be∣cause I forgett that good which thou art, therefore did I growe to be wicked. Woe be to me, wretched man, how came it to passe, that I knewe not that by forsakeing thee, I grewe to be nothing? but why doe I aske, how I could be ignorant thereof, if I were nothing? we knowe what it is to be nothing, that it is not, which is nothing; and that the thing
which is not good, is not, because it is nothing. If therefore I were not, when I was without thee, I was as no∣thing; and as an idoll, which is no∣thing. Vvhich hath eares indeede, but it heareth not; nostrells, but it smelleth not; eyes, but it seeth not; a mouth, but it speaketh not; hands, but it feeleth not; feete, but it walketh not; and it hath all the lineaments or parts of a body, but yet without that sense, which, belongeth to them. CHAP. VI. Of the fall of a soule, by sinne. WHen therfore I was with∣out thee, I was not any thing, but I was nothing; & therfore I was blinde, deafe, & insensible, be∣cause I discerned not that which was ill, nor felt the afflictiō of my wounds, nor could I discerne myne owne dar∣kenes, because I was without thee, who art the true light, which illu∣minateth all men comeing into the world. Vvoe be to me, they haue
any other parte thereof; but onely soe farre forth, as they are conserued by the Word, whereby all things are made. Let me therefore adheare to thee, O Word, that thou mayest conserue me. For as soone as I de∣parted from thee, I had vtterly pe∣rished in my self, but that thou, who haddest made me once, didest vouch∣safe to make me yet againe. I sinned, and thou didest visit me. I fell, & thou didest rayse me. I was ignorant, & thou diddest teach me. I was blinde, and thou diddest illuminate me. CHAP. VII. Of the manifold benefitts of Almighty God. DEclare to me, O my God, how much, I, miserable creature, am bound to loue thee. Declare to mee, how much I am obliged to praise thee; & make me see, how much I must procure to please thee. Thunder downe O Lord, from aboue, with a shrill, & steady voyce, into the interiour eare of my harte. Teach
me, & saue me, and I will prayse thee, who didest create me, when I was nothing, who didest illuminate me, when I was in darkenes; who didest reuiue me, when I was dead; and who hast fedd me, from my very youth, with all thy good blessings. Yea and doest now nourish this vn∣profitable worme who is stinkeing, and rotteing in his sinns, with all thy most excellent guifts. Open to me O thou key of Dauid thou who openest, and noe man shutteth, to whome thou openest: and who shuttest, and noe man ope∣neth to him, to whome thou shuttest. Open, I say, the gate of thy light towards me, that I may enter in, and see, & knowe and confesse to thee, with my whole hart, because thy mercy towards me is greate, and thou hast drawen my soule, out of that lower hell. O Lord, my God, how admirable and prayseworthy is thy Name, throughout the word? And what is man that thou shouldest be mindefull of him, or the sonne of man, that thou shouldest visit him? O Lord thou hope of thy Saints, and
thou tower of theyr strength: O God, thou life of my soule, whereby I liue, and without which I dye. Thou light of myne eyes, by which I see, and without which I am blinde; thou ioy of my hart, and thou delight of my spirit; I beseeche thee that I may loue thee, with my whole hart, and with my whole mynde, & euen with all the very bowells of my affe∣ction, since thy selfe didst first loue me. And how came I to obteyne this fauour at thy hands, O thou Crea∣tour of the Heauens, and of the Earth, and of that deepe abysse: Thou who haste noe neede of any thing, which is myne? VVhence came I to be soe happy, as that thou shouldest carry loue to me? O thou VVisdome, which openest the mou∣thes of dumbe men: O thou VVord whereby all things were made; open thou my mouth, endewe me with the voyce of prayse, that I may re∣count all those benefits, which thou O Lord, hast bestowed on me, from the beginning. For behold, I am, because thou
hast created me, and that thou wouldest create me, and number me out, in the multitudes of thy other creatures, thou diddest preordeyne from all eternity, before thou madest any thing; in that beginning of the world, before thou didest extend, and spread the heauens abroade, nether yet, was there any abysse of the sea, nor hadest thou made the Earth, nor layd a foundation for the mountaynes nether yet had the fountaynes bro∣ken forth. Before all these things, I say, which thou madest by thy Word, thou didest foresee by the most certayn prouidence of thy truth that I was to be thy creature, & thou wert resolued, that I should be soe. And whence grew this benefit to me, O thou most benigne Lord, most high God, most mercifull Father, most puissant, & withall for euer meeke Creatour? VVhat merits were there of myne? What meanes was there to make me soe acceptable, that it should be pleasing in the sight of thy mighty Maiesty, to create me? I had noe beeing, and thou madest me of nothing.
But what kinde of thing didest thou make me? Not some dropp of water: not some sparke of fyre? not some birde, some fish, some serpent, or any other vnreasonable creature, not some stone, or peece of wood: Nor any thing of that kinde, which onely hath a beeing, or of that other kinde, which hath not onely a beeing, but growth, and sense; but beyond them all, thou wert pleased, that I should be of them, who haue a beeing because I am; and of them who haue a beeing, and encreasing, because I am and growe; and of them which are, which growe, and which feele, be∣cause I am, I growe, and I feele. And thou hast created me, little inferiour to the Angells; because I haue recei∣ued a power of knoweinge thee, which is common betweene them, ād me. But yet I sayd well, in saying, that it was a little inferiour. For they haue that happy knowledg of thee, by expresse vision; whereas I haue it but by hope; they haue it face to face, and I, but by a glasse as in a cloud: they haue it perfectly, and I, but partly.
CHAP. VIII. Of the future Dignity of Man. BVt when that shall come which is perfect, that will be euacuated which is imperfect: when also we shall see thee clearely, face to face, what shall now hinder vs, to be but little inferiour to the Angells, Whom thou, O Lord, doest vouchsafe to crowne with the crowne of hope, which is adorned with honour and glory; whome thou doest excessiue∣ly honour, as thy friends; and as persons who are euery way equalls, and Peeres of the Angell. Yea and thy truth saith this. For they are e∣quall to the Angells and they are the sonnes of God. And what are they but sonnes of God, if they be equall to Angells. They shall indeede be sonnes of God, because the sonne of man, is made the sonne of God. When therefore I consider this, I am bould to say, that man is not somewhat lesse then the Angells:
nay, he is not onely equall to the Angells, but superiour to them, be∣cause man is God, and God is a man, & not an Angell. And therefore I will say, that man is the most worthy crsature, because the Word which was in the beginning God, with God; the Word, whereby God sayd, let light be made, and light was made (that is the Angelicall nature) the Word, Whereby God created all things, in the beginning: the same Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst vs, and we haue seene his glory. Behoulde the glory, wherein I glory, when I glory as I ought. Behoulde the ioy, wherewith I ioy, when I ioy as I ought. O Lord my God, my life, and the entire glory of my soule; I confesse to thee O Lord, my God, that when thou didest create me capable of reason, thou didest, in some respect, make me equall to the Angells, because I may be perfected by thy word, soe farre, as that I may arriue to an e∣quality with the Angells: and that I may haue the adoption of thy
sonnes, by thy onely begotten Word▪ O Lord, by that beloued Sonne of thyne in whom thou art well pleased; by that onely heyre, who is coeternall and consubstantiall with thee, which is Iesus Christ, our onely Lord, and Redeemer, our Illuminator, & Com∣forter, our Aduocat with thee, and the light of our eyes; who is our life, our Sauiour, & our onely hope, who loued vs more then himselfe; by whome we haue confidence, layd vp for vs with thee, & a firme hope, and accesse in comeing to thee, be∣cause he gaue power to such as would beleiue in his Name, that they might become the sonnes of God. Let me giue praise to thy Name, O Lord, who by creating me, ac∣cording to thine image, and likenes, haste ordayned me to be capable of soe great glory, as that I may be made thy sonne. Trees are not capable of this; stones are not capable; nor in fine, any of those things, which are moued, or growe in the ayre, or in the Sea, or on the earth, because he did not giue them power, by the Word, to become his sonnes; because
they are not capable of reason. For this power doth consist in reason, whereby we knowe God. But he gaue this power to men, whome he created capable of reason, according to his owne image, and likenes. And I also, O Lord, am, by thy grace, a man, and by grace, I may be∣come thy Sonne, which they can∣not be. From whence came this fauour to me, O Lord, thou soueraigne truth, and thou true souueraignity, & thou who art the beginning of all thy creatures? whence came this bles∣sing to me, that I had a capacitie to be∣come the sonne of God, which they had not? Thou art he, who remainest for euer, who didest create all things at once. At once thou didest create men, and beasts, and stones, and the plants of the earth. Noe merits, of any of them, did preceede, noe former priuiledge was due to them. For thou didst create them all, out of thine owne meere goodnes; and all the creatures were equall in merits, because none of them had any merits at all.
And how then grew thy goodnes, to bee greater towards this thy crea∣ture, whome thou haste made ratio∣nall, then towards all the rest, which are not endewed with reason? Why am not I as all they are; and why are not all they as I am? or why at least am not I alone like them? What me∣rits were there of myne? What fa∣uour was dew to me, that thou shouldest create me capable of being thy sonne, which yet thou wouldst deny to all them? Farr be it from me, O Lord, to thinke that this procee∣ded from any merits of mine. It was thy onely grace, thy onely goodnes which made me partaker of the sweetnes therof. Now graunt me therefore, O Lord, of that grace, whereby thou didest create me of nothing; grant me, I beseeh thee of that grace, to the end that I may be gratefull to thee, for the same.
CHAP. IX. Of the Omnipotency of God. THy Omnipotent hand, which is euer one, and the same, did create the Angells in Heauen, and the base wormes on Earth; and yet thou wert not greater in the creation of the former, and lesse in the crea∣tion of the later. For as noe other hand but thine was able to create an Angell; soe nether could any hand but thyne, create the poorest worme. As noe hand but thyne, had bene able to create the Heauens; soe could none els, create the lightest leafe of any tree. As noe hand but thyne, could create any body of ours; soe none but thyne, could make any one haire of our heads, e∣ther black or white, Thy onely Omnipotent hand, doth all these things; to which all things, are possible, a like. For it is not more possible for it, to create a miserable worme then an Angell;
nor more impossible to extend, & spread abroad the whole heauen, then one single leafe; nor is it easier to frame one haire of our heads, then to make our whole body; nor is it harder for it, to plant and build the earth vpon the waters, then the wa∣ters vpon the earth. But whatsoeuer he had a mynde to doe, he hath done as he was pleased to doe both in hea∣uen and on earth, and in all the deepe Abysses, so hath he framed things, & me among them all; as he would, & could, and knew them. Thy hand, O Lord, could haue made me a stone, a bird; or a serpent, or any other brute creature; and thou knowest how to doe it, but thou wouldest not, through thy great goodnes to mee. Vvhy therefore am I not some stone, or some tree, or some brute beast; but because thy goodnes hath ordeyned otherwise concerning me; and that thou shouldest so ordeyne; was not caused by any precedent merits of myne.
CHAP. X, Of the incomprehensible prayse of God. WHence came this mercy to me O Lord, and whence shall I be able to gett power, where∣with I may be able to prayse thee. For as thou madest me without me, accor¦ding to thyne owne good pleasure, so art thou praysed in thy self, as thou art best pleased, without mee. Thy prayse O Lord, is thy very selfe. Lett all thy workes prayse thee, according to the multitude of thy greatenes: Thy prayse, O Lord, is incompre∣hensible. It is not comprehended by the hart, nor to be measured by the mouth, nor receiued by the eare; For these things passe on away, but thy prayse, O Lord, remaynes for euer. The cogitation of man begins, and his cogitation ends; the voyce sounds and the voyce is blowen ouer; the eare heares, and it leaues of to heare; but thy prayse endures for euer. Vvho is therefore he, that shall
prayse thee? Vvhat man shall be able to announce thy prayse? Thy prayse is not transitory, it is eternall. He prayseth thee, who beleiues thee to be thyne owne prayse. He prayseth thee, who knoweth, that he cann neuer arriue to prayse thee, enough. Thy prayse is euerlasting, & doth neuer passe. In thee is our prayse, and in thee shall my soule, be praysed. It is not wee who prayse thee but it is thou who prayseth thy selfe; and in thy selfe and by thy selfe, and wee also haue our prayse in thee. Then haue wee true prayse when wee haue prayse from thee: when light approueth light. For thou O true Prayse, doest imparte true prayse; but as often as we seeke prayse, from any other but thee, soe often doe wee loose thy prayse, because that other is transitory, but thyne, eternall. If wee seeke that prayse which is tran∣sitory, wee shall loose the prayse which is eternall. If wee desire that which is eternall, let vs not loue that, which is transitory. O thou eternall Prayse, O thou my Lord, and my God, from whome all prayse proceedeth, and
without whom, there is no prayse I am not able to prayse thee without thee: but let me possesse thee, and I shall prayse thee. For who, O Lord am I, that, of my selfe, I should be able to prayse thee? dust, and ashes I am; a dead and stinkeing dog I am. I am a very worme, and putrefactiō it selfe. Vvho am I, that I should prayse thee, O thou most Mighty Lord, and thou God of the spirits of all flesh; who inhabitest Eternity? Shall darkenes be able to praise light or death, life? Thou art light, and I am darkenes; thou art life, and I am death. Shall vanity be able to prayse truth? Thou art truth, but I am a man, as vane, as vanity it selfe. How then O Lord, shall I be able to praise thee? Shall my misery be able to prayse thee? Shall stinkes be able to prayse pretious odours? Shall the mortality of a man, who is here to day, and will be gone to morrowe, be able to prayse thee? Shall man who is rottennes it selfe, be able to prayse thee? and the sonne of man, who is noe better, then a base worme? Shall he be able to
prayse thee, O Lord, who is con∣ceyued, and borne, and bredd vp in sinne? verily thy prayses cannot be gratefull in the mouth of a sinner. O Lord my God, let thy incom∣prehensible power; thy wisdome which cannot be circumscribed, and thy goodnes which cannot be decla∣red, prayse thee. Let thy superemi∣nent clemency, thy superabondant mercy, & thy sempiternall vertue, and diuinity praise thee. Let thy most Omnipotent fortitude, thy supreme benignity, and charity, whereby thou didest create vs, O Lord thou God of my soule, prayse thee. CHAP. IX. Of the hope, which is to be erected towards God. BVt I, who am thy creature, re∣posing vnder the shadow of thy Vvings, will hope in thy goodnes, whereby thou didest create me. As∣siste thy creature, who was created by thy benignity; let not that perish
through my malice, which hath bene wrought by thy goodnes. Let not that perish by my misery, which hath bene framed by thy mercy. For what doth it profit thee, to haue created me, if I shall descend to hell, through myne owne corruption? For hast thou, ô Lord, in vaine made all the sonnes of men? Thou hast created mee O Lord, and therefore gouerne that which thou hast crea∣ted. Doe not, O Lord, despise the the worke of thine owne hands. Thou madest mee of nothing, and if thou doe not gouerne me, O Lord, I shall againe retourne into my no∣thing. For as once I was not, O Lord & then thou madest me of nothing; soe if thou doe not gouerne me, yet once againe I shall of my selfe, be re∣duced to nothing. Helpe me; O Lord my life, and let me not perish in my wickednes. If thou haddest not created mee, O Lord, I had not beene; and because thou didest create me, Behold I am. But if now thou doe not gouerne me, behold I am noe more. For neither my merits, nor any priuiledge of
myne: compelled thee to create me, but thyne owne, most benigne bounty & clemency. Let that charity of thyne, O Lord my God, which com∣pelled thee to create me, I beseech thee, oblige thee to gouerne mee. For what doth it profit me, that thy charity constrayned thee to create me, if now I perish in my mi∣sery: and if thy right hand doe not perfect me. Let that mercy compell thee, O Lord my God, to saue that which thou hast created, which com∣pelled thee to create that which thou haddest not created. Let chari∣ty ouercome thee to make thee saue, which ouercame thee, to make thee create: because now that chari∣ty, is not lesse then it was. For that very charity, is thy very selfe, who art the same for euer. Thy hand O Lord is not so abbreuiated, as that it cannot saue vs; nor is thine eare out of tune, that it cannot heare vs; but my sinnes haue made a diuision betwixt thee and me, betweene light, and darkenes; betweene the image of death, and life: betweene vanity, and verity, betweene this
lunatike inconstant life of myne, & thyne, which is capable of noe change, or end· CHAP. XII. Of the snares of Concupiscence. THese are those shadowes of darkenes, wherewith I am couered, in the Abysse of this darke prison, where I lye prostrate, till such tyme as the day may dawne, and the black shadowes be remoued; and the light may be made, in the firmament of thy power. Let the voyce of our Lord in power. The voyce of our Lord in magnificence, say thus. Let light be made, and let darkenes be driuen away, & let the earth appeare dry, & sprout forth fresh, and greene plants. which may bring forth seede and the good fruite of the Iustice of thy Kingdome. O Lord, our Father, and our God, thou light, whereby all things liue, and without which all things are accounted for dead, doe not
leaue mee in my wicked thoughts, and, doe not continue me, in the pride of myne eyes. Take from me all concupiscence, and deliuer me not ouer to haue an irreuerent, and vn∣bridled mynde: but possesse thou my harte, that it may be euer thinkeing vpon thee. Illuminate myne eyes, that they may see thee, and let them not be vanely extolled in thy sight, who art eternall glory, but let them haue humble thoughts, and not be employed vpon certayn wounderfull things, which are too high. Let them behould those things, which are on the right hand, and not those which are on the left hand, which are mis∣liked by thee; and let thyne eyelids point out the steps, which I am to make. For euen thyne eyelids, doe examen the sinnes of men. Dispatch away, & distroy my con∣cupiscence, by that sweetnes of thyne which thou hast layd vp, for such as feare thee, that I may couett thee, with an euerlasting desire. Lest other∣wise, the interiour gust of my soule being entyced, & deceiued by vane obiects, may esteeme sweete to be
bitter, & bitter, sweete; darkenes to be light, and light, darkenes. That I may be deliured, out of the middest of so many pitfalls, which are spred euery where, by the ene∣my, ouer the face of this way, wherein we walke, for the takeing of sinners soules, whereof the whole world is full. Which one, who sawe would not passe ouer in silence, but sayd, For whatsoeuer is in the world, is ether concupiscence of the eyes, concupiscence of the flesh, or pride of life. Behoulde, O Lord my God, how all the word is full of the snares of cōcupiscēce, which they haue pre∣pared for my feete. And who shall be able to escape these snares? It must certainly be he, from whome thou shalt haue taken the pride of his eyes that the concupiscence thereof, may not catch him; and from whome thou shalt haue taken the concupis∣cence of the fleshe, lest he be taken by it; and from whome thou shalt haue taken an irreuerent, and vn∣bridled minde; least pride of life should craftily deceiue him. O how happy is he, to whome thou voutch∣safest
these things: for he shall passe on in safety. And now, O my Redeemer, I beseeche thee by thy selfe, assist me, that I may not be cast downe, in the sight of myne enemyes, being en∣wrapped in those snares, which they haue prepared for my feete, that soe they may oppresse my soule. But deliuer me, O thou strength of my saluation, lest els myne enemyes, who hate thee, may contemne, and deride mee. Rise vp, O Lord my God, O thou strong Champion of myne, and let myne enemyes be dis∣persed, and let them, who hate thee, be made to fly, from before thy face. As wax dissolueth in the presēte of the fyre, soe let sinners perish, before thy face And as for me, let me be hidden vp, in that secret of thy countenance, and let me reioyce with thy children being satisfyed with all good things. And thou, O Lord God, the Father of orphanes, and the mother of thy pupils, hearken to the loude and woefull cry of thy children; and spred abroade thy winges, that we may fly vnder them, from the face of the e∣nemy,
O thou tower of the strength of Israel, who doest not slumber, nor sleepe, whilest thou keepest Israel; because the enemy who impugneth Israel, doth nether slūber, nor sleepe. CHAP. XIII. Of the misery of man, and the benefits of God. O Light. which noe other light doth see. O brightenes, which noe other brightnes can discerne. O light, which obscureth all light. O brightenes, which blindeth all other brightenes. O light, from which all light, O brightenes, from which all other brightenes growes. O light, in respect of which all light is darkenes and all brightenes, blackenes; Light in whose presence, all obscurity is bright, and all darkenes light. So∣ueraigne light, which noe cloud can ouershadow, and noe darke miste, make dull; and noe fogg obscure, which noe close prison shutteth vp, & which noe shadow can separate.
Light, which doth illuminate all things: all together, once and euer, O swallow mee vp, I beseeche thee; into that Abysse of thy clarity; that I may on all sides see thee, in thee; and my selfe in thee; and all things vnder thee. Doe not forsake mee, and let not the shadowes of myne ignorance encrease, and my sinnes be multi∣plyed. Without thee, all things are darkenes; to me all things are euill, because there is nothing good without thee, who art the true, the onely. & the soueraigne good. This I confesse, and this I know, O Lord my God, that wheresoeuer I am without thee, it goeth ill with me; not onely without me; but euen with in me also. For all aboundance whatsoeuer, which is not my God, is but mere beggery to me. Then shall I be satisfyed, when thy glory shall appeare. And thou, O Lord, who art my very life of beatitude; graunt that I may confesse my mise∣ry to thee, from the tyme that the uariety of temporall things, did dis∣sipate and diuide me, when I fell,
through the trechery of my carnall senses, from thee, who art that vnity of goodnes, that one soueraigne good. And it diuided me from that one, amongst many things: and I grew thereby, in to a laborious kinde of aboundance, and a copious kinde of wante; whilest I would be seeking after this, and that; & was satisfyed with nothing, soe long as I found not in my self, that incom∣mutable, and singular, and vndeui∣ded one good; which haueing once obtayned, I neede nothing, nor haue greif for nothing; and which possessing once, the desire of my whole soule is fully satisfyed. Woe is mee, what misery is this vpon misery, when the wretched soule flyes from thee; with whome it might euer abound, and reioyce; and when it followeth the world, by meanes whereof, it is still in wante, and payne? The world cals me after it, and I faynt in following it. Thou callest me, O Lord, and I am all re∣freshed by thee. And yet I am soe peruersly miserable, as to follow that, which makes me faynt, rather
that, which refresheth me. This is directly the infirmity, which I am subiect too, O cure it, thou Physician of soules, that I may confesse to thee, (O thou saluation of my soule, with my whole hart) all that aboundance of thy benefits, wherewith thou hast fedd me from my very youth; and wherewith thou wilt feede me to the extremity of my old age. I beseeche thee by thy selfe, that thou forsake me not. Thou diddest make me, when I was not: Thou diddest redeeme me, when I was lost: For lost I was, and dead. And to him who was dead, thou did∣dest descend, thou tookest mortality vpon thee; nay thy selfe being a King, to thou didest descend to thy slaue; and redeeme that slaue thou deliuer ledst thy selfe. That I might liue, thou vn∣dertookest to dye: Thou ouercamest death, and by pulling downe thy selfe thou didest rayse mee vp. I perished, I was sould away, & thou camest downe to redeeme me; & thou didest loue me soe much; as to buy me, vpon the price of thine owne blood. O Lord, thou diddest loue me
more then thy self; since thou didest resolue to dye for me. By so costly a bargaine, and at soe high a price, thou diddest reduce me from ba∣nishement; thou diddest redeeme mee from seruitude, thou didest retyre mee from punishement. Thou diddest call mee in thy Name; thou diddest marke me out with thy blood, that the memory of thee, might for euer stand before mee, and that my hart might neuer receede from him, who did not refuse the Crosse for mee. Thou didest annoynt mee with that oyle, which belonged in cheyf, to thy selfe; that as thou art Christ, soe from thee, I might be called a Christian. And in thy hands thou hast written mee; that thou mightest haue a continuall memory of mee, with thee; vpon condition that the continuall memory of thee, might be still with mee. Thus hath thy grace and mer∣cy, euer preuented mee. For thou, O my deliuerer, hast often freed me, from many, and greate daun∣gers. When I wandred, thou broughtest me back to the way,
when I was ignorant, thou diddest teach me; when I sinned, thou diddest reproue mee; when I was in sorrow, thou diddest releiue me; when I was in despayre, thou didest comfort me; when I fell, thou diddest rayse mee: when I stood, thou hel∣dest mee: when I walked thou diddest lead mee; when I slept, thou diddest guard mee; and when I cryed out to thee, thou diddest heare me, CHAP. XIV. That God doth consider the workes, and purposes of mankinde, with a perpetuall attention. O Lord my God, and the life of my soule, thou hast impar∣ted these, and many other benefits to mee, whereof it would be a deare thing for mee, to be euer speaking, euer thinkeing, and euer giueing thankes. That I might for euer praise, and loue thee for all thy good blessings with my whole harte, and my whole soule, and my whole mynde, and my whole strength, and with all the very marrow, and the
most intimate parts of my affection. and with all the parts and powers of my whole man, O Lord my God, who art the happy sweetnes of all them, who are delighted in thee. But thyne eyes, haue seene my im∣perfections: Those eyes, I say, of thyne, which are farre brighter then the Sunne, lookeing downe round about, at ease, vpon the wayes of men, and vpon the profound Abysse, and they doe euery where contem∣plate, both the good and badd. For as thou doest preside ouer all things (thou being all, for euer, present euery where, and takeing particu∣lar care, of all these things, which thou hast created, because thou hatest none of them, which thou hast made) so also dost thou consider all my paces, and steps, and doest euer keepe a watchfull guard ouer mee, day and night; and like a perpe∣tuall centinell, dost diligently note my wayes; as if thou haddest for∣gotten all the whole world of thy other creatures, both in heauen and earth, & didest not care for the rest. For nether would the light of thyne owne vnchangeable sight, en∣crease
in thee, though thou shoul∣dest behould, but any one onely thinge; nether is it diminished, al∣though thou behould diuers, and innumerable things. For as thou dost perfectly, and at once consider any one thinge by one onely acte of seeinge, soe doth thy whole sight, most perfectly, and that at once be∣hould the whole of euery particular thinge, how different soeuer they may be among themselues. And as it considereth all, soe it considereth one, and as any one, soe euery one, and all of them at once, doest thou consider, without any diuision, or mutation, or diminution. Therefore all thou, in all time, without time, doest consider all mee, at once, and that cōtinually, as exactly, as if thou haddest nothinge else to consider. And soe therefore, doest thou stand in guard of mee, as if thou wouldest attend to mee alone, & diddest for∣gett all the rest. For thou doest euer shew thy selfe to be present, and if thou finde me ready, thou doest euer offer thy self also ready. Whither soeuer I goe, O Lord, thou forsa∣kest
me not, vnles I be the first to forsake thee, wheresoeuer I be, thou departest not away, for thou art eue∣ry where; and wheresoeuer I goe I shall finde thee. By what meanes may I be kept from perishing, with∣out thee, since without thee, I can∣not be at all. I confesse that whatsoeuer I doe, whether it be litle, or much, I doe it all, in thy presence; and whatsoe∣uer that be, thou seest it better then my selfe. For whatsoeuer I doe, thou findest thy self present there, as a perpetuall spectatour of all my cogi∣tations, intentions, delectations, & operations. O Lord, all my desires, & thoughts, are euer standing before thee. Thou discernest, O Lord, whence the spirit comes, where it is, & whither it goes. For thou art the ponderer, and waigher out of all spirits; and whether that roote be sweete or bitter, from which the faire leaues of our actions are sent out, thou, as an internall Iudge, dost know best. Yea and thou dost sifte most subtilely, into the most se∣cret parts and pith of those very roo∣tes; & dost not onely obserue &
number, & contemplate, and keepe accompt of the intention, by the most exquisite truth of thy light: but also of the most profound, and hidden sapp of that roote; to the end that thou mayest repay to euery one, not onely according to their workes, or theyr expresse intention, but also according to that interiour and ori∣ginall spirit of the roote of theyr ac∣tions, from whence the intention of him that worketh, doth proceede. To whatsoeuer I tend; when I worke; whatsoeuer I thinke, in whatsoeuer I am delighted; thyne eares heare mee, thyne eyes see me, and consider mee. Thou dost marke, and iudge, and note, and write in thy booke, whether it be good, or badd: to the end, that afterward, thou mayest render eyther rewardes for that which is good; or torments for that which is euill: When thy bookes shall be opened, all soules shall be iudged, according to those things which shall be written in tho∣se bookes. And this perhaps is that, which thou didest already say to vs: I will consider the last thinges of tho∣se
men. And that also, which is sayd of thee. O Lord, He considereth the end of all men, For thou O Lord dost in all those things, which we doe, more attend to the end of our intention, then to the act of our ope∣ration. And when I consider those things diligently, O Lord my God, who art soe terrible, and full of strength, I am alike confounded betweene huge feare, and shame. For a mighty neces∣sity is imposed vpō vs, of liueing with rectitude and iustice, who doe all the things which we doe before the eyes of a Iudge, who seeth all things. CHAP. XV. Tat man of himselfe can doe nothing without diuine Grace. O Thou most mighty, and Om∣nipotent God, the God of the spirits of all flesh; whose eyes are o∣uer all the wayes of the sonnes of A∣dam, from the day of theyr natiuity, to that other of theyr death, to the end that thou mayest reward euery
one of them, according to theyr workes, whether they be good or bad: Teach me, how I may confesse my pouerty to thee. For once I said that I was rich, and that I wanted nothing, & I did not know the while that indeede I was poore, and naked, and a miserable wretch. I beleiued that I was some-what, when yet in∣deede, I was nothing. I told my selfe that I would become wise, and I tur∣ned a starke foole. I thought my self to be prudent, but I was deceiued. And now I see that all is thy guift, without whom wee can doe nothing. For vnles thou, O Lord, keepe the Citty, he watcheth but in vaine, who pretends to keepe it. Thou hast taught me thus, to knowe thee, whilest thou diddest leaue mee, for a while, and proue mee; not that thou mightest knowe mee thereby, but for my sake, that so I might come to knowe my selfe. For (as I was saying, ô Lord) I thought once that I was some-what of my self; I conceiued, that I was sufficient by my self; nor did I discerne, that thou wert he that go∣uerned
mee, till thou diddest a little withdrawe thy selfe from me. And then presently I fell, and soe I sawe, and knew, that thou didest gouerne mee; and that it was of my self, that I fell; and that it was of thee, that I rose againe. Thou, O Light, diddest open myne eyes, and diddest rowse mee vp, and illuminate mee; and I sawe, that the life of man vpon earth, is all temptation; and that noe flesh must presume to glory before thee, for soe noe man liueing can be iustifyed. For if there be any good in him, whether it be great, or little, thy guift it is, and nothing is ours, but that which is naught. Of what ther∣fore shall any flesh be able to vant? Shall he glory in sinne. This is not glory but misery. May he glory in that which is good? Noe: For he may not glory in that which belongeth to another. Thine O Lord, is the Good, annd thyne must be the Glory. For hee who see∣keth glory to himselfe, and not to thee, out of the good he doth, that man is noe better, then a theefe, and
robber, who had a minde to bereaue thee of thy glory. For he who will be praysed for any guift of thyne, and seeketh not thy glory, but his owne therein, although he be pray∣sed by men, for that guift of thyne, yet he is dispraysed by thee; in re∣gard that he sought not soe much thy glory by it, as his owne. And now he who is praysed by men, whilest thou dispraysest him, shall not be defended by men, when thou iudgest him, nor deliuered by them, when thou con∣demnest him. But thou, O Lord, who diddest frame me in my mothers wombe, do not suffer me to fall vnder so greate a reproofe, as that I should be char∣ged with procureing to robb thee, of thy glory. To thee be glory, of whome all good things are; and to vs, confusion of face, and misery, vnles thou vouchsafe to haue mercy on vs. But thou hast mercy, O Lord, thou hast mercy vpon vs all, who hatest none of those things which thou hast made; and who bestowest of thy good guifts, vpon vs; & dost enrich vs, O Lord our God, with
thy most excellent graces. For thou louest poore creatures, and thou en∣richest them with thy aboundance. And now behould, O Lord, we are thy poore children, and thy little, little flocke; open thy gates to vs, and thy poore shall eate, and be sa∣tisfyed, & they who seeke thee, and prayse thee. I doe also knowe, O Lord, and I confesse, (for I am taught to doe it by thee) that they onely who knowe they are poore, and confesse theyr pouertie to thee, shall be enriched by thee; and they who conceiue themselues to be rich, whereas indeede they are poore; will be found excluded from thy riches. For my parte therefore, I confess my pouerty to thee, O Lord my God, and let all glory remayne to thee. For all that, which hath bene well done by mee, is thyne. O Lord, I confesse to thee, as thou hast taught me, that I am no∣thing, but an vniuersality of vanity, & a shadow of death, and a blacke kinde of Abysse, and a plott of earth, which is all empty, and vnfruitefull, and which shootes not vp one leafe
without thy blessing; and of it selfe, it yeilds no other fruite, then confu∣sion, sinne and death. If euer I had any good thinge, I receiued it of thee; Whatsoeuer good I haue now is thine, and of thee I haue it. If euer I stood fast, I stood by thee; but whensoeuer I fell, of my selfe I fell; and for euer had I weltered in that myre, if thou haddest not rai∣sed mee. And for euer had I con∣tinued blinde, vnles thou haddest illuminated mee. When I fell, I had neuer risen, vnles thou haddest rea∣ched forth thine hand. And when afterward thou diddest raise mee, I had instantly retournend to fall, vnles thou haddest susteyned mee: and I had perished very often, vnles thou haddest gouerned mee. So perpetually, O Lord, soe perpe∣tually was I preuented by thy mer∣cy, and grace; deliuering me from all my sinnes, saueing me from all such as are past; solliciteing me against such as were present, and fortifying me, against such as might be future; Cutting of, before my face, those snares of sinnes, by pre∣uenting
the occasions, and causes thereof. For, vnles thou haddest also done this fauour to me, I might haue committed any sinne in the whole world. And I know, O Lord, that there is noe kinde of sinne, which any one man did euer com∣mitt, which another man may not also committ, if the helpe of the Creatour, whereby man is made, be wanting. But thou art the cause why I committed them not: Thou diddest commaund that I should ab∣stayne from them, & thou didest infuse thy grace, that I might be∣leiue in thee. For thou, O Lord diddest gouerne mee for thy selfe; and thou diddest keepe me both for thy selfe, and for my selfe: and thou diddest giue me light & grace to the end that I might not commit adul∣tery and euery other sinne.
CHAP. XVI. Of the manifold temptations of the deuill. THe Tempter was absent, and thou wert the cause that he was absēt. Fitt time, and place for sinne were wanting; and thou wert the cause that they were wanting. The Tempter was present, and nether time, nor place, were wanting; but thou diddest keepe me from con∣senting. The Tempter came to mee, all vgly and frightfull as he is; and thou diddest comfort mee soe farre, as to make me despise him. The Tempter came to mee all strong, and armed; and to the end that he might not conquer mee; thou restraynedst him, & didest strengthen me. The Tempter came transfigured into an Angell of light; and to the end that he might not deceiue mee, thou re∣bukedest him, and thou diddest illu∣minate mee, that I might knowe him. For he is that great, and redd dragon, that ancient serpent,
and he is called the Deuill, and Satā, haueing seauen heads, and tenn hornes. Whose imployment is, to inueigle this greate huge Sea, where∣in innumerable creatures are still creeping, creatures; greate, and small; that is to say, seuerall kindes of deuills, who study nothing els, day and night, but how they may walke theyre round, seeking whome they may deuoure, vnles thou deli∣uer them. For this is that ancient Dragon, who sprung vp first, in that paradise of pleasure, and who with his tayle, drawes the third parte of the starrs of heauen after him, and brings them downe to the earth; he who is poyson, corruptes the waters of the world, that soe mē who drinke thereof, may dye, and who trāples vpon gold, like so much durte; and into whose mouth, the riuer of Ior∣dan flowes; and he is growen to that presumption, that he feares non at all. And who shall be able to defend vs from the crushing of his teeth? who shall be able to deliuer vs out of his iawes, but thou, O Lord, who hast broken all the heades of that huge Dragon.
Helpe vs, O Lord, and spread thy wings ouer vs, that soe wee may flye vnder them, from the face of this dragon, who persecureth vs. And doe thou defend vs by thy sheild, from the push of his hornes. For to this, doth he direct his continuall study: vpon this is his cheife desire imployed, that he may deuoure the soules which thou hast created. And therefore, O my God, wee cry out to thee; deliuer vs from this daily aduersary of ours, who whether wee sleepe, or wake, or eate, or drinke, or whatsoeuer els wee doe, is pressing vpon vs, by all meanes, and by many fraudes, and tricks, he is addressing poysoned arrowes against vs, both priuately and publikely, that soe he may destroy our soules. And yet O Lord, soe strangely miserable are wee made, as that although we see this Dragon continually comeing towards vs, with his mouth wide open, ready to deuoure vs; yet ne∣uertheles, wee sleepe, and wee are euē wanton againe in our slouth as if wee were secure before him, who yet couets nothing but our destruction.
Our enemy, that he may kill vs, is continually awake, and wants his sleepe; and yet wee, will not soe much as wake from sleepe, that wee may defend our selues. Behould, he hath spred infinite snares before our feete; and he hath stuffed all our wayes with seuerall kindes of gynnes, whereby to catch our soules; and who then shall be able to free himselfe? He hath layd snares in riches, and snares in po∣uerty; snares in meate, in drinke, in pleasure, in sleeping, and wak∣eing; he hath spred snares in words and in workes, and in all our wayes. But thou, O Lord, deliuer vs from the snares of the hunter, and from that bitter word; that wee may con∣fesse to thee, and say: Blessed be our Lord who hath not giuen vs to a pray to their teeth. Our soules is deliue∣red as a sparrow might be, out of the hunters snare; The snare is broken, and wee are deliuered.
CHAP. XVII. That God is the Light of iust Persons. ANd thou, O Lord, who art my Light, illuminate myne eyes, that I may see and walke in thy light, and not stumble vpon the sna∣res of the enemy. For who shall be able to auoyd such a multitude of sna∣res, vnles he see them; and who shall be able to see them, vnles he be illu∣minated by thy light? For that father of darkenes, hides all those snares, in his owne darkenes; that all they may be taken by them, who are in his darkenes; and who are the son∣nes of darkenes; not discerning thy light, wherein, whosoeuer walketh needes not feare. For he who walkes by day, stumbles not; but he stum∣bles who walkes by night: for the light is not in him. Thou O Lord art Light, thou art the light of the sonnes of light; thou art the Sunne, which knoweth not what belonges to setting; that day wherein thy children walke without
stumbling; and without which, all they who walke are in darkenes, as being destitute of thee, who art the light of the world. Behould wee dis∣couer daily, that by how much the more, any man is estranged from thee, who art the true light, so much the more intricately is he wrapped vp in the darkenes of sinne. And how much the more he is in darkenes, so much the lesse can he discerne the snares, which are spred for him, in his wayes. And soe by not discer∣neing them, he falleth often into them, and is taken by them; & which deserues to strike vs full of hor∣rour, such a man, doth not soe much as knowe, that he is fallen: Now he, who knowes not that he hath taken a fall; will care soe much the lesse to rise, as he still conceiueth, that he stands. But thou, O Lord, my God, thou true light of the mynde, illumi∣nate now myne eyes that I may see thee, and knowe thee, and not tum∣ble headlong downe, in the sight of myne enemyes. For this mayne ad∣uersary of ours, doth labour euen
to exterminate vs outright; whilest wee, the whyle, begg of thee, that thou wilt make him melt before our face, as wax doth, vpon the ap∣proach of fyre. For hee, O Lord, is that cruell theefe, first, and last, who tooke counsell, how he might robb thee of thy glory, but soe, being puf∣fed and swollen vp, he burst, and fell vpon his face, and thou diddest pre∣cipitate him downe from that Holy Hill of thyne; and from the middest of those bright stones, in the middest, whereof he had once beene walkeing. And now, O Lord my God, and my life, he neuer giueth ouer to perse∣cute thy children, euer since he fell. And out of his hatred to thee, O Mighty King, he procureth to destroy thy creature, which thy Omnipotent goodnes hath created, according to thyne owne Image; to the end that he may possesse thy glory, which himselfe lost, by pride. But crush thou him to peeces, O strong Champion, be∣fore he deuoure thy lambes; and il∣luminate vs, that wee may discerne the snares, which he hath prepared
for vs; and make vs able to escape, and arryue to thee, O thou ioy of Israell. Thou best knowest all these things thou knowest his contentious spirit, and his most stiffe neeke. Nor doe I speake of these things, as pretending to discouer them to thee, who know∣est all things, and from whom noe little thought can lye hidd. But make my iust complaint against this enemy of mine, before the feete of thy Ma∣iesty; that so thou mayest both con∣demne him, and saue vs, thy Chil∣dren, Whose strength thou art. This enemy of ours, O Lord, is full of craft, and shifts, nor can those intri∣cate wayes of his, be easily traced out, no nor so much as the ayre of his coun¦tenāce be discerned by vs, vnles we be illuminated by thee. For sometimes he is here, & sometimes he is there. Now he shewes himselfe like a lambe, and then like a wolfe; now like darkenes, and then like light; and according to the seuerall qualityes of persons, according to the variety of tymes, and places; and according to the mo∣mentary chaunge of things, he sug∣gesteth
seuerall temptations. For to the end that he may deceiue sad peo∣ple, he pretends himselfe to be sad for company. To the end that he may delude, such as are in ioy, he faynes himselfe also to reioyce. That he may beguile such as are spirituall, he transformeth himselfe, into an An∣gell of light. That he may insinuate himselfe, and by that meanes crush such as are strong, he takes the sem∣blance of a lambe, that he may de∣uoure such as are meeke, he bor∣rowes the face of a Wolfe. All these things he takes vpon him, accord∣ing to the similitude and proportion of the temptations, which he meanes to vse. As some, he frights with a nocturnall feare, others, by the arrow which flyes by day, others, by the bu∣sines which walkes by night; others, by expresse assault, and others by that deuill of high noone. Now, who is he that can thinke himselfe a match for this enemy so farr, as that he may so much as know him; and who did euer reach to the bottome of his craft? Who shall re∣ueale the makeing of his garment to
vs, and who shall make vs knowe the walke of his teeth? Behould he hideth his arrowes in his quiuer, and he couers his snares, vnder a shew of light; & soe he is lesse subiect to be vnderstood, vnlesse O Lord, O thou hope of ours, we beg light from thee, whereby we may discerne all things. For not onely doth he striue to de∣ceiue vs in the sensuall workes of flesh and blood; nor onely in the exercise of vice, which is easily dis∣cerned; but euen amongst our most spirituall actions, he hideth certain subtile snares; & vnder the colour of vertue, he puts on vice, & transfor∣mes himselfe into an Angell of light. these, and many other things, O Lord our God, doth this very sonne of Beliall, this Satan, endeauour to bring against vs. And now as a Lyon, then as a Dragon, both manifestly and secretly, interiourly, and exte∣riourly, both by day and night, he is laying traynes for vs, that soe he may destroy our soules. But thou, O Lord, deliuer vs, thou who sauest such as hope in thee, that our enemy may haue cause to be sorry for as
much as may concerne vs; but that thou O Lord our God, maist be praised in vs. CHAP. XVIII. Of the benefits of God. BVt let mee the sonne of thy hand∣mayd, who haue commended my selfe into thy hands, confesse to thee, O my deliuerer, with my whole harte in these little poore confessions of myne, and let me call to minde, all those good blessings, which thou hast voutchsafed to bestow on mee, from my youth, and in my whole life. For I well know that ingratitude doth much offend thee, which is the roote of all spirituall mischeife; and a kinde of dry and parching wynde, which blasteth all goodnes; and it shutteth vp the fountayns of diuine mercy towards man; and by this mea∣nes, both our ill deedes which were dead gett life againe; & our good deedes which liue, doe quickly growe to dy, and haue noe more life afterward.
But as for mee, O Lord, I will giue thankes to thee. Let not mee, O thou my deliuerer, be vngratefull to thee, since thou hast freede mee. How often had that Dragon euen swallowed mee vp, and thou O Lord diddest drawe mee out of his mouth? How often haue I sinned, when he was ready to haue deuoured mee, but thou O Lord my God diddest defend mee? When I did wickedly against thee, when I transgressed thy com∣maundements, he stood ready to snatch mee away into hell, but thou forbadest him. I offended thee, and the while, thou defendedest mee. I did not feare him, and yet thou did∣dest preserue mee. I departed from thee, & made offer of my selfe to myne enemy; but thou diddest fright him so, as that he should not dare to carry me away. These benefits diddest thou bes∣towe vpon me, O Lord my God; and I wretched creature knew it not. Full often hast thou freed mee, from the uery iawes of the Deuill, and snat∣ched me out of the mouth of the
Lyon; and full often hast thou brought me back againe from hell, though I was ignorant thereof. For I descended euen towards the very ga∣tes of hell, and thou heldest me back from goeing in. I drewe neare the ga∣tes of death, and thou wert the cause why they opened not themselues to receiue mee. Thou also, O my Sa∣uiour, hast often deliuered me from corporall death, when I was subiect to great sickenes. And when I found my self in many daungers, by sea, by land, by fyre, by sword, and many other wayes; thou wert euer deliuer∣ing mee, euer present to mee, and euer saueing mee with great mercy. For thou, O Lord, diddest well knowe, that if death had then seised vpon mee, hell had possessed my sou∣le, and I had bene damned for euer. But thy mercy and thy grace, O Lord my God, preuented mee, and gaue mee deliuerance from that death of my body, and conse∣quently from the death of my soule. These and many other benefits diddest thou imparte to mee, but I was blinde, and knew them not, till
I was illuminated by thee. But now, O thou light of my soule, O Lord my God, my life, by which I liue, and the light of mynes eyes, by which I see; Behould, thou hast illumina∣ted mee, and now I knowe thee, and cōfesse my selfe to liue by the guift of thy hand; and I giue thankes to thee Which though they be meane, and poore, & full of disproportion to thy benefits, yet they are the best, which my frailty can affoord. For thou alo∣ne, art my God, my benigne Crea∣tour, who doest loue our soules, and hatest none of those things, which thou hast made. Behold, I who am the greatest of those sinners, whom thou hast saued (to the end that I may giue an exam∣ple to others, of thy most benigne piety) will confesse thy great bene∣fits to me: For thou hast snatched me out of that lower hell, once, twi∣ce, and thrice, and a hundered, and a thousand times. And indeede, I was euer tending towards Hell, and thou wert euer drawing mee back. And thou mightest iustly haue dam∣ned me a thousand times, if thou haddest beene soe disposed. But thou
wouldest not, because thou louest soules, O Lord my God, and thou dissemblest the sinnes of men, that soe they may come to pennance, and there is much mercy in all thy wayes Now therefore I see these things, O Lord my God, and I knowe them, by thy light; and my soule doth euen faynt, and is sicke with loue, vpon the consideration of thy great mercy towards mee; since thou hast snatched my soule, out of that lower Hell, and hast brought mee back againe, to life. For I was all plunged in death, and thou hast wholy reuiued mee. Be therefore all my life and beeing thyne; and I doe wholly offer my whole selfe vp to thee. Let my whole spirit, my whole harte, my whole body, and my whole life, liue to thee, O thou my sweete life; for thou hast deliuered me wholly, that thou mightest possesse me wholy, thou hast intirely repaired me, that so a∣gaine thou mayest haue mee intirely. Let mee therefore loue thee, O Lord, my strēgth; let mee loue thee, O thou vnspeakeable exultation of my soule. And let me liue now not to my self but
to thee. My whole life which perish∣ed by my misery, was raised vp by thy mercy, thou who art that mercifull God, and full of pitty, which thou doest extend, in thy goodnes, to thousands of such as loue thy Name. Therefor O Lord my God, and my sanctifyer, hast thou comaunded in thy Lawe, that I should loue thee with my whole harte, with my whole soule, with my whole minde, with my whole strength, and with all the powers I haue. Yea and with the most internall marrow of all my affections and this, in all the houres, and mo∣ments of my time, wherein I am en∣ioying the benediction of thy mer∣cyes. For I should euer perish, but that thou doest euer gouerne mee. I should euer dy; but that thou doest euer quicken mee. And thou doest oblige mee to thee, in euery moment of my life; since in euery moment therof, thou impartest great benefits to mee. As therefore, there is noe houer or point of time in my whole life, wherein I am not assisted by thy be∣nefits; soe also ought there not to be
any moment, wherein I should not haue thee before the eyes of my myn∣de; and wherein I should not loue thee with my whole strength. But euen this I cannot doe, saue by thy guift onely to whome euery good guift belongeth, and euery excellent grace is descending from thee the Father of Lights, with whome there is noe transmutation, nor shadow of chaunge. For it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of thee, taking mercy that wee loue thee. Thine, O Lord is this guift to whome euery good thing belon∣geth. Thou commaundest that thou be beloued: Giue vs that which thou commandest, and then, commaund vs what thou wilt. CHAP. XIX. Of the feruour of charity.
I Loue thee, O my God, and I am euer desireing to loue thee more. For in very deed, thou art more swee∣te, then any honny; more nutritiue then any milke; and more cleere then any light. Therefore art thou more deare to me, them gold, or siluer, or pretious stone. And whatsoeuer de∣lightfull thing I had in the world, was displeasing to mee, in compari∣son of thy sweetenes, and the order of thy house which I loued. O thou fyre which euer burnest, and art neuer quenched; O loue, which is euer boyling hote and neuer growest lu∣ke-warme; doe thou inflame mee. Let mee, I say, be wholy inflamed by thee; and let me wholy loue thee. For he loues thee too little, who loues any thing together with thee, which he loues not for thy sake. Make me loue thee, O Lord, because thou didst first loue mee. And how shall I finde wordes, whereby I may vnfold the notions which I haue of thy singular loue to mee, testifyed by those innumerable benefits, by which thou hast trayned me vp, from the beginning? For af∣ter the benefit of the creation, when in the beginninge thou didest make me of nothing, after thyne owne Image, doeing me honour, and ex∣alting
me beyond the rest of thy creatures, which thou madest; and innobling me with the light of thy countenance, which thou didest stampe vpon the entrie of my hart; whereby thou didest disseuer me, both from insensible creatures, and from brute beasts, which are endewed with sense, and thou madst me, not much inferiour to the Angels; yet euen this, seemed not enough, in the sight of thy deity. For since that time, thou hast entertayned, and nourished mee, with daily and singular, and great presents of thy benefits, without in∣termission. And thou hast giuen me comfort, and made me sucke, like somme little tender infant of thine, at the breasts of thy consolation. For to the end that I might yeild thee my entire seruice, thou hast appointed, that whatsoeuer thou hast made should serue mee.
CHAP. XX. That God hath submitied all things to the seruice of man. THou hast made all things sub∣iect to the feete of man, to the onely end, that man might become wholly subiect to thee. And to the end that man might be wholly thine hee is entitled to a dominion ouer all thy workes. For thou hast created all exteriour things, for the body; the body for the soule; and the soule for thy selfe; to the end that man might tend onely to thee, & might loue onely thee, possessing thee, by way of comforte to himselfe; and thy creatures, by way of receiuing ser∣uice from them. For whatsoeuer is conteyned vnder this vaute of hea∣uen, is inferiour to the soule of man; which was created, that it might possesse the supernall, soueraigne good aboue; by the fruition whe∣reof, it might be happy: and where∣vnto when it shall adheare, outstrip∣ping and ouerlooking all relations
and respects to all inferiour things, which are subiect to mutation, it shall calmely and constantly behold the face of that eternall immortality, and the vision of that supreame Ma∣jestie, to which it hath aspired here. Then shall they be in fruition, of those most excellent delights in the house of our Lord; in comparison whereof all those things which here we see, may well goe for nothing. Those are they, which the eye hath not seene, nor the eare heard, nor haue they entred into the hart of man, which God hath prepared for them who loue him. And these things O Lord, wilt thou imparte to the soule of man. And with the consideration of these things, dost thou who louest soules, delight the soules of thy seruants. But yet, why should I wonder at those things, O Lord my God, therein thou dost but honor thyre owne Image, and that similitude of thyne, according to which they are created. For whilest we are yet in ths corruptible and ignoble body, to the end we might see thou hast giuen this
light of heauen, by the hands of thy vnwearied ministers the Sunne and Moone, which doe perpetually ob∣serue thy precept, in serueing thy children day and night. To the end that we might breath, thou hast gi∣uen the purity of the ayre. That we might heare; the variety of sounds. That we might smell; the sweetnesse of odours. That it might tast, the variety and quality of sauoures. That it might touch, thou hast giuen the bulke of all bodies. For the other ne∣cessary occasions of man, thou hast giuen beasts to carry him. And thou hast imparted the birds of the ayre, the fish of the sea, and the fruites of the earth for his refection. Thou hast also created out of the earth seuerall medicines, which may be applyed to the seuerall infirmities of men; and thou hast prepared particular com∣forts, which are to encounter and reuerse those particular-inconue∣niences which may occurre. And all this thou hast done because thou art full of mercy, and pitty; & thou being our potter, dost knowe the matter whereof wee are made.
For, in fine, wee are but as soe much durt in thy hand. CHAP. XXI. That the greatenes of the diuine counsell may be inferred by the consideration of temporall blessings. BEhold mee, I beseeche thee; let thy great mercy stand open to me. Illustrate mee yet more with thy light; that soe it may be discouered to me, more and more. For by these little workes of thyne, wee growe to comprehend thy great ones; and by thy visible workes, we are ena∣bled to take some ayme at thy inuisi∣ble workes, O Lord our God, the holy, and good Creatour of vs all. For if, O my Lord; whilest we are in this body, which is soe corrupti∣ble and ignoble, thou dost imparte to vs so great, and euen innumerable benefits, by meanes of the heauens, and of the ayre; of the earth and sea; of light and darkenes; of sunne and shade, of dew and gentle rayne; of wyndes and stiffe showers; of birds,
and fishes; of beasts and trees; of the multiplicity of herbes and plants of the earth; & by meanes of the minis∣try of all thy creatures, which doe successiuely serue vs at due and se∣uerall times; to ease vs thereby, of that trouble, and fastidious∣nes, which otherwise wee might be subiect too; what kinde of benefits, I beseeche thee, and how greate, and euen innumerable will they be, which thou hast prepared for such as loue thee, in that celestiall country, where we shall behould thee face to face. If thou doe vs soe much honour in this prison, what wilt thou doe in thy pallace? Greate, and innumerable are thy workes, O Lord, thou King of the heauens. For since these of the lower rancke, which thou hast deliuered ouer, to be vsed promiscuously here, both by good an badd; be all of them very excellently good & delightfull; what kinde of things shall they pro∣ue to be, which thou hast onely trea∣sured vp for them alone who are good? If thy guifts be soe diuers, and euen innumerable, which now thou
bestowest both vpon thy freinds, & vpon thyne enemyes; how greate, how innumerable, how dearly swee∣te, and how delightfull, are they to be, which thou wilt onely bestow vpon thy freinds? If the solace be so greate, which thou giuest vs in this day of our tears, what wilt thou giue, in that day of our espousalls? If this place of exile, and restraint afford such pleasures, what I beseeche thee will our Country doe? The eye cannot see, without thee, what thou hast prepared for such as loue thee. For according to the greate multitude of thy magnificence, soe also the multitude of that sweetenes is great, which thou hast hidden vp for them that feare thee. For thou, O Lord, my God, art great, thou art immense, there is noe end of thy grea∣tenes, there is noe number of thy Wisedome; & there is noe measure of thy benignity; & there is neither end, number, nor measure of the reward, which thou bestowest. But as thou art great, so are thy rewards great; for thou thy selfe art the re∣ward, and the guift, which thou be∣stowest
vpon all such as shall valiant∣ly haue fought thy battayles. CHAP. XXII. That the diuine sweetenes taketh away all the present bitternes of the world. THese are those great benefits wherewith thou, O Lord God, the sanctifyer of thy Saints, wilt sa∣tisfy, and remoue the want of thy hungry children. For thou art the hope of the desperate; the comforte of the desolate; thou art that very crowne of hope, which is ad∣orned with the glory prepared for such as ouercome. Thou art the e∣ternall satiety, of such as haue bene allmost starued; and thou art to be bestowed vpon such as hunger after thee. Thou art that euerlasting con∣solation, who bestoweth thy selfe, vpon them alone, who despise the comforts of this world, for that euer∣lasting consolation of thyne. For they who looke for theyr comfort here, are esteemed vnworthy of thy com∣forts; but they who are afflicted here
are comforted by thee; and they who partake with thee in thy Passion, shall partake with thee also, in thy consolation. Noe man must thinke to be comforted, both in this, and in the other world; nor must he thin∣ke to be in ioy, both here and there; but he must necessarily loose the one, who will possesse the other. When I consider these things, O Lord my comforter, my soule refu∣seth the comforts of this life, that soe it may be held worthy of thy e∣ternall consolations. For it is high reason, that any man should loose thee, if he make choyse to be com∣forted, more in any other, then in thee. And I beseech thee euen by thy selfe, O thou supreme Truth, that thou permitt me not to be comforted by any vayne consolation; but that it may onely be in thee. And I beg, that all things may growe bitter to me, that thou alone mayest appeare sweete to my soule, thou who art that inestimable sweetnes, whereby all bitter things are made sweete. For thy sweetenes is the thing which ma∣de that torrent of stones, sweete to
Steuen. Thy sweetenes made that burneing gridyron, sweete to blessed Laurence. Through thy sweetenes, the Apostles went reioyceing, from the Councell, because they were held worthy, to suffer reproach for thy Names sake. Andrew went both with security and ioy to the Crosse, because he hastened to taste of thy sweetenes. And this sweetenes of thy∣ne did soe fill the two Princes of the Apostles, that for it, the wood of the Crosse, was chosen by one of them; and the other was not affrayed, to submitt his head to the murtheringe sword. For the purchasse of this swee∣tenes Bartholomew sold away his ve∣ry skinne. And to haue a taste there∣of, the vndanted Iohn, drunke off that poysened cupp. And as soone as Peter had tasted of it, he forgott all other things, and cryed thus out, like one who were inebriated, saying, O Lord, it is good for vs to be here. Let vs here make three Tabernacles. Let vs dwell here; let vs contempla∣te thee; For we neede nothing else. It is enough for vs, O Lord, to see thee. It is enough, saith he to be sa∣tiated
with soe great delight. And the reason was this; Because he had tasted some one dropp of diuine swee∣tenes, all other sweetenes was lothed by him. What then shall wee thinke, that he would haue sayd, if he had once tasted, of the great multitude of the sweetenes of thy diuinity, which thou hast hidden vp for them that feare thee. That Virgin had also tasted of this vnspeakeable sweetenes of thyne, of whome wee read, that she went topp full of ioy, and glory to the prison, as if she had bene inuited to some mar∣riadge Feast. And of this, I suppose, he also had tasted who sayd, That the multitude of that sweetenes of thyne, O Lord, was great which thou had∣dest hidden vp for them that feare thee, and who also aduised men thus, Taste, and see, how sweete our Lord is. For this is that beatitude, O Lord our God, which wee expect, by the guift of thy hand, for which wee fight as in a warfare vnder thee, O Lord; for which wee are mortifyed to thy honour, all the day long; that at last wee may liue to thee, in that life of thine.
CHAP. XXIII. That all our hope and ardent desire of our hart ought to be placed in our Lord. BVt thou O Lord, the expecta∣tion of Israell, and that desire, to which our harte doth euery day aspire, make haste to vs, and doe not stay. Rise vp, make hast, and come; and bring vs out of this prison to confesse vnto thy Name, that wee may glory in thy light. Open thyne eares, to the cry of the teares of thy forsaken children, who thus are calling out to thee. Giue vs, O thou Father of ours, our daylie breard this day, in the strength whe∣reof wee may walke day and night; till at last wee may arriue to thy Holy Mountaine Horeb. And I also, poore little one that I am, amongst the poore little ones of thy familly, when shall I, O my God, my Father, and my strength, come, and appeare before thy face; that I, who confesse vnto thee now for a tyme, may doe it
there, for all eternity. Happy shall I be, if once I may be admitted to be∣hould thy brightenes. Who will graunt mee soe much fauour, as that once I may bee ad∣mitted to that happines. I knowe, O Lord, I knowe, and confesse, that I am vnworthy to enter vnder thy roofe. Yet doe thou admitt mee for thyne owne honnours sake; & con∣found not thy slaue, who hopes in thee. And who shall be able to enter into thy Sanctuary, to consider the wonders of thy power, vnles thou open him the gate? And who can open it, if thou shutt it? For if thou destroy, there is none can build vs vp. And if thou shutt a man in, there is none, who cā putt him out. If thou contayne the waters, all the world will be dryed vp, but if thou let thē loose, they will ouerrune the earth. If thou haue a mynde to anihilate all that which thou hast created, who shall presume to contradict thee? Now therefore, ô thou eternall goodnes of thy mercy (which is that whereby thou madest whatsoeuer thou woul∣dest) thou art the Archytect of the
whole world: and therefore doe thou also gouerne vs. Thou didest creat vs, and therefore doe not thou despise vs; for wee are the worke of thy hands. And it is playne e∣nough, O Lord our God, that wee, who are but base wormes, and durt shall neuer be able to enter into thy eternityes, vnles we be in∣troduced by thee, who hast created all things of nothing. CHAP. XXIV. That all our saluation depends vpon God. BVt I, the worke of thy hands, will confesse to thee, in thy feare, that I will not putt my confidence in my bowe, or thinke that my sword can saue me, but that must be donne, by thy right hand, and by thyne arme, and by the illumination of thy coun∣tenance. For otherwise I should des∣payre. But thou, who diddest create mee, art my hope, that thou wilt not forsake such as trust in thee. For thou art our Lord God, sweete and patient, and disposeing of all things, in mer∣cy.
For it we haue sinned, wee are thyne; and if wee haue not sinned, wee are thine, because we are num∣bred among thy creatures. Wee are but as a leafe, in respect of the world, and all mankinde is but vanity; and our life is but as a va∣pour vpon the earth. Be not angry, if wee thy poore, forsaken little chil∣dren fall, because thou, O Lord our God, knowest the matter whereof wee are made. Wilt thou, O God of inestimable fortitude, shew forth thy power, against a leafe which is whipped away by the winde? And persecute a withered strawe. Wilt thou, O Eternell King of Israell, damne a dead dogg? wilt thou damne a single gnatt, Wee haue heard O Lord, of thy mercy, and thou put∣test not to death, nor reioycest in the perdition of dying men. Therefore doe wee beseeche thee, O Lord, that thou wilt not permitt that, which thou hast not made, to haue dominion ouer this creature of thine, which thou hast made. Nay thou art greiued with our perdition; and what then O Lord shall be able
to hinder thee, who art omnipotent, from eternally reioyceing in our sal∣uation? If thou wilt, thou canst saue mee; but I cannot doe it, though I would. The multitude of the mise∣ries which I carry about mee, is very greate. It is at hand with mee, to will a thing, but I cannot finde the way to perfect it. Yet I cannot euen will a good thing, vnles thou also wilt; nor can I performe that which I haue a will to doe, vnles thy power strengtheneth mee. Yea, and that which I haue power to doe, falls out sometymes, that I will not doe it, vn∣les thy will may be done in Earth as it is in Heauen. And what I will doe, & can doe, I doe not knowe, vnles thy wisedome illustrate mee. And though also I doe knowe, hauing sometymes a will to doe a thing, and sometymes also a power to doe it, yet my VVis∣dome passeth away, all imperfect and empty as it is, vnles thy true VVis∣dome helpe mee. But in thy will, all things are placed; and there is none who can resist that will of thyne, O thou the Lord of all thy Creatu-Creatures,
who hast supreame do∣minion ouer all flesh; and doest worke whatsoeuer thou wilt, in Hea∣uen, and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all the Abysses. Let therefore thy will be done in vs, vpon whome thy Name hath beene inuoked; and let not this no∣ble worke of thyne perish, which thou diddest create for thyne owne glory. And what man borne of woe∣man is hee, who can liue, & not see death, and deliuer his soule from the hand of hell, vnles thou alone doe snatch him thence; Thou who art the vitall life of all life, whereby all things liue. CHAP. XXV. That the will of man, wanteth efficacy towards good workes without the Grace of God. I Haue now confessed to thee, O thou prayse of my life, O Lord, my God, and the strength of my Saluation, that there was a tyme, when I had confidence in myne owne
strength, which yet was noe strength at all. And when I was so resolued to runne on, where I thought my selfe to stand fastest, there I fell fowlest; & in∣steede of aduanceing, I retyred; and I was more and more estranged, from that which I thought to haue appre∣hended. And so being come to know the little proportiō of my strēgth by the many experimēts which I made for the wāt thereof; I doe now vnder∣stand, (because I haue bene illumina∣ted by thee) that whatsoeuer I haue thought my selfe most able to doe that could I euer bring least to passe. For I sayd sometimes, I will doe this, and I will perfect that, & I did neither the one, nor the other. If I had the will, I wanted the power. If I had the power I had not then the will; because I trusted in myne owne strength. But now, I confesse to thee, O Lord, my God, the Father of Hea∣uen and Earth, that noe man shall ouercome in his owne strength, to giue occasion thereby to the foolish presumption of flesh and blood, to glory in thy sight. For it is not in the power of a man, to will that which
he hath power to doe; or to doe that which he cann will, or to knowe what he cann will, and doe; but ra∣ther the paces of men are directed by thee: the paces of them, I meane, who confesse themselues to be di∣rected by thee, and not by themsel∣ues. Wee beseech thee therefore, O Lord, by the bowells of thy mercy be pleased to saue that which thou hast created. For if thou wilt, thou canst saue vs; and the strength of our saluation consisteth in the pleasure of thy will. CHAP. XXVI. Of the auncient benefits of Al∣mighty God. CAll to mynde thy auncient mer∣cy, whereby thou diddest pre∣uent vs, from the beginning, in tho∣se benedictions of thy sweetenes. For before I was borne, (I who am the sonne of thy handmayde, O Lord, who hast bene my hope, euen from the brests of my mother) thou did∣dest preuent mee, by preparing tho∣se
wayes for mee, wherein I might walke, and whereby I was to arriue to the glory of thy house. Before thou framedst mee in my mothers wombe, thou knewest mee; and be∣fore I parted from her wombe thou diddest praeordayne concerning mee, whatsoeuer was pleasing to thy selfe. What things are contayned and writ∣ten in thy booke, concerning mee, in that secret of thy Consistory, I, for my parte, doe not knowe, and there vpon I am in extreme feare, but it is well knowen to thee. For that which I might expect to happen in successe of dayes and tymes bet∣weene this, and a thousand yeares hence; all that is already done, in the sight of thy eternity; and that which is future, is finished already there. Now therefore whilest I liue in this darke night; and whilest I am ignorant of these things, feare, and trembling come vpon mee, since I see, on all sides, that many dangers doe sett vpon mee close at hand; and that I am hunted by many ene∣myes, and hemmed in, by innume∣rable miseryes in this life. And vnles
I had thy helpe, in the middest of so great calamityes, I should despaire. But still I haue a strong hope in thee, O thou most meeke Prince, and my God. And the consideration of the multitude of those mercy which thou hast shewed to mee, doth ease my min∣de; & the fore-running signes of thy mercyes which preuented mee before I was borne, and doe now shine par∣ticularly towards mee, doe sollicite me to haue good hope, concerning those future, better, & more perfect guifts of thy benignity, which thou reseruest for thy freinds. That soe I may reioyce, O Lord my God, with that liuely, and holy ioy, whereby thou dost euer recreate my youth. CHAP. XXVII. Of the Angels which are deputed to the custody of man. FOr thou hast loued me, O thou onely Loue of myne, before I loued thee; and thou hast created mee after thine owne Image, and thou hast preferred me, before all
thy creatures. Which dignity, I keepe now also hauing knowen thee, for whome thou hast made mee. Thou hast also made thy Spirits, Angels, for my benefitt, and thou hast commaunded them to keepe me in all my wayes, lest els perhaps I might hurte my foote against a stone. For these are the Guard which stands vpon the walls of the Citty of thy new Ierusalem; and these are those Mountaynes, which are sayd to stand in the circuit thereof, keeping watch by night, ouer thy flocke; least, at any time, the Lyon should snatch away our soules, whilest none were by, to deliuer them, that aun∣cient serpent I say, our aduersary, the deuill, who is euer walkeing the round, seekeing whom he may de∣uowre. These are those happy Citizens, of Ierusalem, that supernall Citty, that mother of ours, which is aboue, and they are sent in ministery, to them, who are to take hold of the inheritance of saluation; that they may deliuer them from theyr ene∣myes, and guard them in all theyr
wayes; that they may comfort and admonish thy children, and offer vp theyr prayers in the sight of the glory of thy Maiestie. For they loue theyr fellow-Cittizens, by whose society they expect that the ruine of the Schisme which was made by the re∣bellious Angells may be repayred. They doe therefore assist vs, with greate care, and watchfull endea∣uour at all tymes, and in all places succouring vs, and making proui∣sion against our necessityes; and pas∣seing with great sollicitude, betwee∣ne vs and thee, O Lord; presen∣ting our sighes, and sobs to thee, that they may obtayne for vs, an easy pardon, from thy mercy; and may bring downe from thee, the de∣sired benediction of thy grace. For they walke with vs, in all our wayes; they goe in, and out with vs; consi∣dering with greate attention, how vertuously, and piously wee conuer∣se in the middest of a wicked nation; with great endeauour, and desire, we seeke the Kingdome of God, and the iustice thereof; with how greate feare and trembling wee serue thee;
and how also wee exult towards thee; in the ioy of our harts. They helpe such as are takeing paynes; they protect such as are at rest; they encourage such as fight; they crowne such as conquer; they reioyce with such as ioy, (I meane such as ioy in thee) and they suffer with such as suffer, I meane such as are in sufferance for thee. They haue a mighty care of vs. Great is the ardour of theyr affection towards vs; and all this for the ho∣nour they beare to that inestimable charity, where-with thou louest vs, For they loue them, whom thou lou∣est; they keepe them whom thou keepest, and they forsake them whom thou forsakest. Nor doe they loue the workers of wickednes, be∣cause thou hatest all the workers of iniquity; and destroys all them who speake lyes. As often as wee doe well, the Angels ioy, and the Deuills grie∣ue. But as often as wee swarue from vertue, wee make the Deuill glad, and wee depriue the Angels of theyr ioy. For they haue ioy by one sinner, doeing pennance; but the Deuill
hath ioy, when pennance is giuen ouer, by a good man. Graunt them therefore, O Father, graunt that they may euer reioyce concerning vs; and that thou mayest euer be praysed by them, in vs; and that both they, and wee, may be brought into one, & the same sheep∣foulde; that together wee may confesse to thy Holy Name, O thou Creatour, both of men, and Angels. Whilest I am calling these things to minde before thee, I confesse to thee with prayse, that these are grea∣te benefits, whereby thou hast ho∣noured vs, whilest thou giuest thy Spirits for Angels, to assist vs. Thou haddest already bestowed, whatsoe∣uer was contayned vnder the vaut of heauen, yea and thou reputest that as but little, which is contayned vn∣der heauen, vnles thou mayest also, add those things, which are aboue the heauens. Lett all thy Angels prayse thee also, for this, O Lord; Let all thy workes also, confesse to thee; and let all thy Saints themselues blesse
thee for it. O thou our Supreame honour, thou hast too highly hono∣red vs; and thou hast beautifyed, and enriched vs with many guifts. Thy Name, O Lord, is admi∣reable ouer the whole Earth. For what is Man, that thou shouldest magnify him, or soe apply thy harte towards the loue of him. For thou, O auncient Truth, hast sayd, My delight is to be which the Sonnes of men. But yet, is not Man rotennes, and the Sonne of Man a very Wor∣me? Is not euery Man liueing, a kinde of vniuersality of vanity? And yet dost thou thinke it worthy for thee, to cast thyne eyes vpon him, and to bring him with thee into Iudgement? CHAP. XXVIII Of the profound Predestination, and prescience of God. TEach mee, O thou most pro∣found Abysse, O thou Wise∣dome, which art the Creatrix of all things, which hast poysed the moun∣taines
in weight, and the lesser hills in a ballance, and hast hung vp the whole bulke of the Earth in three fingers. Suspend thou towards thy selfe the weight of this corporall heauines which I carry about mee, in thy three inuisible fingers, that I may see and knowe, how admira∣ble thy Name is, ouer the whole Earth. O thou Light most auntient, which didest shine before all other light, in those holy hills of old E∣ternity, to which all things were open and cleare, euen before they were made. O thou light, which hatest euery litle spott, thy selfe being most immaculate, and most pure, what delight canst thou take in man, and what agreement cann there be, betweene light and darke∣nes? For where in fine is the ground of those delights which thou takest in man? Or how diddest thou pre∣pare in mee, a sanctuary worthy of thy Maiestie, into which when thou enterest, thou mayest take delight and gust? For it is fitt, that thou, who art the very power which clean∣seth
all things, shouldest haue a clea∣ne roome to be in; thou who canst not be so much as seene, and much lesse possessed but by pure soules? But where is this Temple soe pure in any man, as that it may be fitt for the reception of thee, who rulest the whole world of men? Who can make a man cleane, he being conceiued of vncleane seede? Is it not thou who art onely cleane? For who can be cleansed, by one who is himselfe vncleane? For ac∣cording to the Lawe, which thou gauest to our Fathers, in the fyre which burned the hill; and in the cloud which couered the darke water, we are told, that whatso∣euer an vncleane man did touch, should be vncleane. But all wee, are as a menstruous cloath, proceeding out of an impure, & corrupted masse; and wee cannot become cleane, vnles wee be cleansed by thee, who art onely cleane. And wee carry the marke of our impu∣rity in our very fore-heads, and are farre from being able to conceale it from thee, who seest all things. Soe
that wee can neuer be cleane, vnles wee be cleansed by thee who art one∣ly cleane. But amongst vs, who are the son∣nes of men, thou cleansest some, in whome thou hast bene pleased to dwell. Whome out of the inaccessi∣ble profound secrets of the incom∣prehensible iudgements of thy Wise∣dome, (which are euer iust, though secret) thou hast beene pleased to predestinate without any merits of theyrs, before the world was made, and hast called them out of the world and hast iustefyed them in the world, and wilt magnify them after the world. But thou dost not this to all, which all the wise men of the earth doe wonder at, euen to amasement. And I also, O Lord, whilest I consider this, doe all tremble, and am astonished, at the altitude of the riches of thy Wisedome, and know∣ledge, and at the incomprehensible iudgements of thy Iustice, to the reason whereof I cann noe way arri∣ue. Since out of the same clay thou designest some vessells to honour, & others to eternall reproach.
Such therefore as thy chusest out of many, to be a holy Temple for thy selfe, them doest thou clense, powreing out pure water vpon them; whose names and number thou knowest, who alone, dost number the multitude of the starres, and cal∣lest them all by theyre names; who are also written in the booke of life, and cann noe way perish; to whome all things, yea euen theyre very sin∣nes themselues, doe cooperate to∣wards theyre good. For when they fall, they are not bruised, because thou doest putt thy hand vnder them keeping all theyre bones in such sorte, that noe one of them may be broken. But the death of sinners is most pernitious, of those I meane, whome before thou madest heauen and earth, thou diddest, according to the most profound Abysse of thy iud∣gements, (secret indeede but euer iust) fore knowe, to eternall death. The number of whose names, as also of theyre foule demerits, is with thee; who hast numbered the sands
of the Sea, and hast measured the bottome of the Abysse; whome thou hast left in theyre vncleanenes; & in whome all things cooperate to theyr ill, yea euen theyre very prayer is turned into sinne. Soe farre forth as that although they should mount vp, as high as the skye, and theyre heades should touch the very clouds, and should build theyr nest amongst the Starres of Heauen, they yet shall perish in the end, like a very dung hill. CHAP. XXIX. Of them who first were iust, and after∣wards become wicked. GReate are these iudgements of thyne, O Lord my God, O thou iust and powerfull Iudge, who iudgest according to equitie, and dost worke, and performe inscru∣table things. Which when I consi∣der, all my bones doe euen shiuer with trembling, because noe man liueing vpon the earth can be secure. But wee must learne hereby, to ser∣ue
thee piously, and purely all the dayes of our life; exulting to thee with reuerence; and that wee may not serue thee, without feare; nor reioyce without trembling. And that neyther he, who is girt, nor vngirt, nor in fine, any creature of flesh and blood, may glory, but may be full of apprehension & hor∣rour before thy face; since noe man knoweth, whether he be worthy of loue, or hate, but all things are re∣serued in vncertainty for the future tyme. For we haue seene many, O Lord, and wee haue also heard it from our elders, (which certeinly I cannot call to mynde without much trem∣bling, nor repeate without much feare) who at the first, ascended after a sorte, vp to heauen, and did place theyre nest, euen amongst the starrs; & yet afterwards fell downe, to the very Abysse; and theyr sou∣les grewe to be euen stupifyed in sin∣ne. Wee haue seene starres, fall downe from heauen, through the force of the Dragons tayle, who strooke them: And others who lay
prostrate vpon the dust of the earth, haue ascended vp by the helpe of thy hand, which raised them, after an admirable manner. We haue seene liueing men dy, & dead men raise againe to life; and them, who wal∣ked amongst the sonnes of God, in the midest of those shineing stones of his Temple, to haue mouldered away into nothing, like soe much durt. Wee haue seene light, growe darke; and againe, wee haue seene light proceede out of darkenes; be∣cause the Publicanes and harlots haue precedence of the naturall in∣habitants in the Kingdome of hea∣uen, whilest the children of the same Kingdome are cast out into exteriour darkenes. But how come all these things to passe, but onely, because they would needes ascend, into that mountayne, into which that first Angel did goe vp, and came downe a deuill. But whom thou hast predestinated, them thou hast called, and sanctifyed, and clensed, that they may be a fitt ha∣bitation for thy Maiestie, in whom, & with whom thou takest holy and
pure delight, & in whom thou art pleased, and thou dost recreate theyre youth. Dwelling so with them in theyr memory, that they proue a holy Temple for thee, which is a matter of much dignity and honour to our humanity. CHAP. XXX. That a faithfull soule is a Sanctuary of God. THe soule which thou hast crea∣ted, not of thy self, but by thy Word; not of any elementary matter, but of nothing; this soule which is rationall, intellectuall, spirituall, euer liueing, euer in motion, which thou hast stamped, with the light of thy countenance, and consecrated, by the vertue of thy Baptisme, is ma∣de so capable of thy Majesty, that it can onely be filled by thee, and by noe other. When it possesseth thee, the desire therof is fully satisfied: and there resteth then, noe more ex∣teriourly which it can desire. But when it is found to desire any thing exteriourly, it is cleere, that it pos∣sesseth
not thee interiourly; vpon the haueing of whome, there remay∣neth nothing more to be desired. For since thou art the soueraigne and to∣tall Good, the soule which posses∣seth that totall Good, can aske noe more. But if it desire not that totall Good, it remaineth that it must desi∣re some-what which is not that to∣tall Good, and which therefore cannot be that soueraigne Good; and consequently not God, but a Creature. Now, as long as it desires a Crea∣ture, it is subiect to continuall hun∣ger. For although it obtayne that of the Creature, to which it preten∣deth; yet still it is not full, because nothing can fill it, but thou, accor∣ding to whose Image it is made. But thou doest onely fill them, who desire nothing els but thee; and thou, O God makest such to be worthy of thee, and holy, blessed, immaculate, and in fine, thy freinds, as repute all things but dunge that they may gaine thee alone. For this is that Beatitude, which thou hast bestowed on man. This is that ho∣nour,
where-with thou hast honou∣red him, both amongst, and aboue all thy other Creatures; that thy Name may be admirable, ouer all the earth. Behold, O Lord my God, Su∣preame, most Excellent, and Om∣nipotent, I haue found that the pla∣ce wherein thou dwellest, is the soule which thou created, after thy∣ne owne Image, and likenes, and which seeketh & desireth thee alone. For in that soule which seeketh or desireth thee not, thou doest not dwell. CHAP. XXXI. That God is not to be found, eyther by the exteriour or interiour senses. I Haue wandred like a lost sheepe in exteriour thinges, seekeing thee who art interiour; and I did putt my selfe vpon much labour, by see∣keing thee without my selfe, who dwellest in mee, if indeede it be true, that I desire thee. I haue wal∣ked round about the streetes, and
open places of the citty, of this world, in search of thee; but I found thee not, because I did foolishly loo∣ke that abroade, which was within. I sent all my exteriour senses, as my Ambassadours abroad, that soe I might seeke thee; but I found thee not, because I sought thee ill. For I see, O my light, and my God, who hast illuminated mee, that I sought thee ill, by theyr meanes, because thou art within, and yet they scarce can tell how thou diddest enter. For the eyes will say, if he were not of some colour, he came not in, by vs. The eares say thus, if he made noe noise, he did not passe by vs. The nose saith, if he had no smell, I know nothing of him. The taste saith, if he had noe sauour, he entred not in by mee. The sense of touching also addeth, if it haue noe corpulency, there is noe cause, why you should interrogate mee. These kind of things, O my God, are not in thee; and therefore the beauty of bodyes, or the order of tyme, or candour of light, or colour,
or the concerts of sweete musicke, or whatsoeuer other thing of delight∣full sound; or the odour of flowers, & pretious oyntments, or other aro∣maticall odours: or hony, or Man∣na, which is soe delightfull to the taste, or other things, which is soe amiable to be embraced, or touched; or in fine any other obiect which are subiect to these senses of ours, are the things which I seeke, when I seeke my God. Farre be it from mee, that I should beleiue these thing to be my God, which are comprehended, by the sense of brute beasts. And yet neuertheles, when I seeke my God, I seeke a certayne light aboue all other light, which the eye doth not receaue; and a certaine voyce beyond all voyces, which the eare doth not contayne; a certayne odour, beyond odours, which the nose doth not ap∣prehend; a certain sweetenes, be∣yond all sweetenes, to which the taste doth not reach; and a certain imbra∣cement, beyond all imbracements, whereof the touch cannot iudge. For this light shineth where place doth
not contayne; this voyce soundeth, where the ayre doth not carry away, this odour giueth smell, where it is not scattered by any wynde; this sa∣uour giueth tast, where it is not di∣minished by being eaten; this em∣bracement is touched, where it can∣not be diuorced. This is my God, and noe other can be compared to him. This doe I seeke, when I seeke my God; and when I loue my God, I loue this. Too late am I come to loue thee, O thou beauty which art soe aun∣cient, and I so new; too late am I come to loue thee. Thou wert with∣in, and I without; & without I sought thee, and I rushed with de∣formity, vpon those things which thou madest fayre. Thou wert with me, but I was not with thee. Those things did keepe mee farre from thee, which yet had noe being at all, but onely in thee. For I raunged ouer all things in seekeing thee; and for the loue of them, I lost my selfe. I asked the earth, if it were my God, and it told mee, noe; and all things which are vpon the earth
made the same confession. I asked the Sea, and those Abysses, and the creeping creatures which are therein & they answered, Wee are not thy God, thou must looke him aboue vs. I asked the stable ayre, and the whole ayre, with all the inhabitants thereof, sayd, Anaxinenes is decey∣ued, I am not thy God. I asked the heauen, the Sunne and Moone, and the Starres; and they sayd, Neither are wee thy God. Then I sayd to all them who stand about the doores of my flesh and blood, tell me some∣what of my God, which you knowe; tell me some-what, I say, of him. And they all cryed out, with a loude voyce, He made vs. Then I sayd thus to the whole bulke of the World, Tell mee whe∣ther thou be my God, or noe: And it answered also thus, with a loud voyce: I am not thy God, but I am by him. He made mee, whom thou seekest in mee. Seeke him aboue mee, for he gouerneth mee, who made thee. By the question which I aske of these inanimate creatures, I meane
nothing, but a profound considera∣tion of them; and by my sayeing that they make such or such an answere I meane, but the attestation which in in theyre seuerall kindes they make of God. For they all cry out in this manner, it is God who made vs. For as the Apostle saith, The inuisible things of God are discerned and vnderstood, by considering the crea∣tures of this world. Then I returned to my selfe, and I entered into my selfe, and sayd, who art thou? And I answered my selfe thus. A man rational and mor∣tall. And I begun to discusse, what this might be, and I sayd; Whence cometh such a liueing creature, O Lord my God? VVhence, but from thee, who madest me, & not I my selfe. VVho art thou then by whome I liue; thou by whome all things liue. VVho art thou? Thou O Lord art my true God, and onely Omni∣potent, and eternall, and incompre∣hensible, and immense, who euer liuest, and nothing dyeth in thee, for thou art immortall, and dost in∣habite eternity. Thou art admirable
in the eyes of Angells, vnspeakable, inscrutable, and vnnameable; thou art the true, and liueing God, ter∣rible, and powerfull, admittinge in thy selfe, nether beginning, nor end, but being both the beginning, and end of all things, who art before the first ages, and before the very first beginnings of them all. Thou art my God, and the Lord of all those good things, which thou hast created, and with thee doe stand the causes of all things which are stable; yea and the beginning of all things, which in themselues be mu∣table, are yet, and doe remayne im∣mutable with thee; And the reasons of all things, not onely which are eternall, and rationall, but euen of such as are temporary and irra∣tionall, doe yet liue eternally with thee: tell O my God, this humble seruant of thyne; tell, ô mercifull God, this miserable creature of thine whence groweth such a creature as man, but from thee? O God Is man perhaps of skill enough to make himself? Is his beeing, and liueing, deriued from any roore but thee? Art
not thou, the supreme beeing, from whome all beeing doth proceede? For whatsoeuer is, is of thee, and no∣thing is without thee? Art not thou that fountayne of life, from which all life doth flowe; for whatsoeuer liueth, liues by thee, and without thee nothing liues? Therefore thou, ô Lord, diddest make all things, and now do I aske, who made mee? Thou ô Lord did∣dest make mee, without whome nothing was made. Thou art my maker, and I am thy worke. I giue thee thankes, ô Lord my God, by whome I liue, and by whome all things liue, for haueing made mee. I giue thee thankes, ô thou my framer, because thy hands haue made, and faschioned mee. I giue thee thankes, ô thou my light, be∣cause thou hast illuminated mee, and I haue found both thee, and my selfe. where I found my selfe, there I knewe my selfe; where I found thee there I knewe thee; & where I knewe thee, there thou didest illuminate mee. I giue thee thankes, O thou my light; because thou hast illuminated
mee. But what is that, which I sayd, when I affirmed I knewe thee. Art not thou God incomprehensible, and immense, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who onely possessest immortality, and dost inhabite an inaccessible light, whome, noe man hath euer seene or can see. Art not thou that hidden God of inscrutable Maiesty, the onely perfect knower, and admirable contemplator of thy selfe? who did euer perfectly knowe that, which he neuer sawe, and thou hast sayd in thy truth, Noe man shall see mee and liue. Thy Apostle did also say, in the Truth, Noe man did euer see God. VVho hath there∣fore knowen, that which he neuer sawe? Thy Truth also it selfe hath sayd, Noe man knoweth the Sonne, but the Father; and noe man knoweth the Father, but the Sonne. The Holy Trinity, is perfectly knowen to it selfe alone; and that knowledge farre passeth the vnder∣standing of man. VVhat is therefore that, which I sayd, I who am a man made all of vanity, in saying I knowe thee. For who knoweth thee, but
thou thy selfe? For thou alone, art God Omnipotent, superlaudable, and superglorious, and superexal∣ted, and supreme; and thou art na∣med superessentiall, in these most holy, and most diuine Scriptures. Because thou dost exceede all essence, which is intelligibile, or intellectuall, and sensible. And thou art knowen to be aboue all the names, which can be named; and that not onely in this world, but in the future, super∣essentially, and superintelligibly. Because, by this hidden and super∣essentiall diuinity, thou doest dwell within thy selfe, inaccessibly, and inscrutably beyond all created reasō vnderstanding, and essence. VVhere there is an inaccessible brightnes, & an inscrutable, vnspeakable, and incomprehensible light, to which noe other light arryues; because it it beleeued to bee incontemplable, and inuisible, and superrationall, and superintelligible, and superin∣accessible, & superunchaungea∣ble, and superincommunicable; which noe Angell euer did see, or euer shall be able to see perfectly.
This is that heauen of thine, O Lord, that heauen of the heauens, that supersecret, superintelligibile, superrationall, and superessentiall light, whereof it is sayd, the hea∣uen of the heauens to our Lord. The heauen of the heauens; in respect whereof, these other materiall hea∣uens, are but a kinde of earth, be∣cause that former heauen is supe∣radmireably exalted, aboue all ma∣teriall heauene, and the Empireall heauen it self, is but as earth in res∣pect of it. For this is that heauen of the heauens to our Lord; be∣cause it is not knowen by any but by our Lord, to which noe men ascen∣deth, but he who descended from heauen; because noe man knoweth the Father, but the Sonne, and the Holy Spirit of them both; and noe man knoweth the Sonne, but the Father, and the Holy Spirit of them both. Thou, O Trinity, art enti∣rely knowen to thy self alone. Holy Trinity, truly superadmireable, superinessable, superinscrutable, superinaccessible, superincompre∣hensible, superintelligible, super∣essentiall;
and superessentially sur∣passing all sense, and reason, all vn∣derstanding, all intelligence, all es∣sence, euen of the most supercelestiall mindes; which it is wholy impos∣sible, euen for the Spirit of Angells to speake of, or to knowe it, or to vnderstand it, or euen to thinke per∣fectly thereof. How therefore haue I knowen thee, O Lord my God, who art most high, ouer all the earth, and aboue all the heauens; whome nether Cherubin, nor Seraphin, doe exactly knowe, but theyre faces are vayled with the wings of theyr contemplation, before him, who sitteth vpon that high Imperiall Throne; cryeing out, and sayeing, Holy; Holy, Holy Lord God of hoasts, The Earth is full of thy glory As for thy Prophet, he was all in trembling, and he sayd, Woe be vnto mee, for I haue held my peace; because I am a man of polluted lipps. But my harte hath quaked, and sayd Woe be vnto me, who am a man of polluted lipps; because I haue not held my peace, but sayd,
that I knewe thee. And yet O Lord, woe be to them who are silent con∣cerning thee. For the greatest talkers may be accounted but dumbe, if they doe not speake of thee. And as for me O Lord my God, I will not be silent concerning thee, because thou hast made mee, and I haue therefore knowne thee, be∣cause thou hast illuminated me. But yet how haue I knowen thee? I haue knowen thee in thy selfe. Yet I haue no knowen thee in thy selfe, as thou art to thy selfe; but I haue knowen thee, as thou art to mee. But yet howsoeuer, it is not without thee, but in thee; because thou art the light which hast illuminated mee. For as thou art to thy selfe, thou art onely knowen to thy selfe; but as thou art to mee by thy mercy and grace, thou art knowen to mee. But what art thou vnto mee? Tel me O mercifull Lord, who am thy miserable seruant; tell me by thy mercy, what thou art to mee. Say to my soule, I am thy saluation. Doe not hide thy face from mee; lest if thou doe, I dye. Suffer me to speake;
me; who am dust, and ashes; suffer me to speake to thy mercy. For thy mercy towards mee is greate, and I will presume to speake to thee, though I be but dust and ashes. Tell mee who am thy supplyant; say O mercifull Lord to thy miserable creature; say, by thy mercyes, what thou art to mee. And thou hast thun∣dered downe, with a mighty voyce, vpon the inward eare of my hart, and thou hast broken through my deafenes, and I haue heard thy voyce. And thou hast illuminated my blindenes, and I haue seene thy light, and haue knowen that thou art my God. It is therefore that I sayd, that I haue knowen thee. For I haue knowen, that thou art my God. I haue knowen that thou art the onely true God, and Iesus Christ whome thou hast sent. For thrre wat a time, when I knewe thee not, bu, woe be to that time, when I knew not tgee. Woe be to that blindenes, when I sawe not thee. Woe be to that deafnes, when a heard not thee. For being blinde, & deafe, I did rush, with great deformity, vpon those
things, which yet thou had dest made fayre; and thou wert still with mee but I was not with thee. And those things kept mee farre from being with thee, which yet, if they had not bene in thee, could haue had noe beeing at all. Thou diddest illuminat mee, O thou light of the world, and I saw thee, and I loued thee. And indeede, noe man loueth thee, but he who sees thee; and noe man sees thee, but he who loues thee, Too late am I come to loue thee, O thou beauty, which art so auntient, and yet so new. Too late am I come to loue thee; and woe be to that time, when I loued thee not. CHAP. XXXII. A Confession of true faith. I Giue thankes, O thou who art my light, because thou hast illu∣minated mee, and I haue knowen thee. How haue I knowen thee? I haue knowen thee to be the onely liueing God, and my true creatour. I haue knowen thee to bee the
Creator of heauen, & earth, of all things visible, and inuisible; to be the true, Omnipotent God, immortall, inuisible, vncircumscribed, vnlimi∣ted, eternall, inaccessible, incom∣prehensible; inscrutable; vnchan∣geable, immense, infinite, the first beginning of all, both visible, & in∣uisible creatures by whome all things are made, and by whome all the Ele∣ments subsist. Whose Maiestie, as it neuer had any beginning, soe neither shall it end, for all eternity. I haue knowen thee to be one onely true God, the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost; three Persons indeede, but one essence, and the same, wholly, simple, and vndiuided nature. And that the Father is of none; that the Sonne is onely of the Father; and that the Holy Ghost, is iointly of them both; euer without beginning, and for euer to be without ending, to be Trine, and onely One; and that, the true Omnipotent God. That thou art that one beginning of all things, and the Creatour of all things, both visible and inuisible, spirituall and
temporall; who by thy Omnipotent vertue, diddest, in the beginning of Tyme, create both the spirituall and corporall creature; that is to say the Angells in heauen, and the fa∣bricke of the world, and then thou madest man, as being compounded both of body and soule. I haue knowen thee, and I doe confesse thee, O God the Father, to be vnbegotten; and thee O God the Sonne, to be begotten of the Father, and thee O holy Ghost, the Paraclete to be neither begotten, nor vnbegotten, And I beleiue with my harte to Iustice, and I confesse with my mouth to saluatiō, the holy and indiuiduall Trinity, in three persons, coequall, consubstantiall, and coeternall, Trinity in Vnity, and Vnity in Trinity. I haue knowen thee the true God and our Lord Iesus Christ, to be the onely begotten Sonne of God, the Creatour, the Sauiour and the Re∣deemer of mee. and all mankinde, whome I confesse to haue bene be∣gotten of the Father, before all ages God of God, light of light, true
God of true God, not made but be∣gotten, consubstantiall, & coeternall with the Father, and the Holy Ghost by whome all things were made, from the beginning. And I beleiue firmely, and confesse truely. that thou O Iesus Christ, the onely be∣gotten God, wert incarnate, ioyntly by the holy Trinity for the saluation of man; and that thou wert con∣ceiued, through the cooperation of the Holy Ghost, by the perpetuall Vithin Mary, and that thou wert made true man, consisting of a reasonable soule and humane flesh. Who being the onely begotten of God, and consequently both im∣passible, and immortall, yea for the great loue, wherewith thou louest vs, thou being still the same sonne of God, wert yet, according to thy hu∣manity, made both passible, & mor∣tall; who being the onely sonne of God, diddest voutchafe to suffer Passion, and death, vpon the tree of the crosse, for the saluation of mankinde, to the end that thou mightest deliuer vs from eternall death. And being the author of
light, thou diddest descend to Hell, where our fore-Fathers satt in darkenes. And the third day, being a glorious conquerer, thou did∣dest rise vp, from the dead, re∣sumeing thy sacred body, which had lyen dead in the sepulchre; for our sinnes; and thou diddest quic∣ken it, the third day, according to the scriptures; that thou mightest place it, at the right hand of thy Fa∣ther. For haueing ledd with thee, out of captiuitie, them whom our aun∣tient enemy, the enemy, of all man∣kinde, had captiued in Hell, thou being the true Sonne of God, didest ascend aboue all the heauens, with the substance of our nature; that is to say both with thy soule, and that humaine flesh, which thou haddest taken, of the glorious Virgin. And thou diddest surpasse all the quyers of Angels, where thou sittest at the right hand of thy Father; and where that fountayne of life is, and that inaccessible light, and that peace of God, which passeth all vnderstan∣ding. There doe wee adore, and be∣lieue
thee, O Iesus Christ to be true God and man; confessing, that thou hast God for thy Father, and that from heauen wee expect thee, to come as Iudge in the end of the world, to iudge the quicke and the dead; that thou mayest render eyther reward or punishment to all men, eyther good or badd, according to those workes, which they shall haue wrought in this life, that soe they may be eyther in rest, or eternall misery. For all those creatures who haue receiued a humane soule into that flesh, which here they haue carryed about them, shall rise at that day, in the voyce of thy stren∣gth, to the end that the whole man may receyue, eyther glory or tor∣ments, according to his merits. Thou art that life and resurrection it selfe, whom wee expect to be our Sauiour Iesus Christ our Lord, who will reforme this poore meane body of ours, by conformeing it to the bo∣dy of his clarity. I haue knowen thee also to be true God, O thou one holy Spirit of the Father and the Sonne, pro∣ceding
iointly from them both, to be consubstantiall and eternall with the Father and the Sonne, to be our Paraclete and Aduocate, who did∣dest also descend in the shape of a doue, vpon the same God Iesus Christ our Lord, and diddest ap∣peare vpon the Apostles in tongues of fyre. who also from the begin∣ning, hast taught all the elect & Saints of God, by the gifte of thy grace; and hast opened the mouth of the Prophets, that they might rela∣te wounderful things of the King∣dome of God; & who. together with the Father & the Sonne, art adored, and glorifyed by all the Saints of God. Amongst whome I also, who am the sonne of thy hand∣mayd, doe glorify thy name, with my whole harte, because thou hast illuminated mee. For thou art that reall light, that light which tells vs truth, the fyre of God, the Do∣ctour of soules; the very Spirit of Truth, which teacheth vs all truth, by thy vnction; without which, it is impossible for vs to please God. For thou thy self, art God of God,
and light of light, proceeding from the Father of lights, and from his Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, after an ineffable manner; with whome thou, being coequall, and coe∣ternall, art glorifyed, and dost raigne ioyntly with them superes∣sentially, in the essence of the same Trinity. I haue knowen thee, my one, liueing, and true God, the Fa∣ther, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, three in persons, but one in essence; whome I confesse, adore, and glorify with my whole harte, as my onely true, Holy, immortall, inuisible, vnchaungeable, and vns∣crutable God; that one Light, one Sunne, one bread, one Life, one Good, one Beginning, one End, one Creatour of heauen and earth, by whome all things liue, by whome all things subsist, by whome all things are gouuerned, ordered, and quickened which are in heauē, on the earth, and vnder the earth; and be∣sides whome, there is noe God, either in heauen, or in earth▪ I haue knowen thee, by thy faith,
wherewith thou hast inspired mee, O thou my light, and the sight of myne eyes, O Lord my God, the hope of all the ends of the earth; the Ioy which doth recreat my youth, and the good which strēgthen∣eth my age. For in thee O Lord, do all my bones excessiuely reioyce, and say, O Lord who is like to thee. Who amongst the Gods is like thee, O Lord. Not they who are made by the hands of men but thou by whome the hands of men are made. The Idolls of the Gentiles are gold, and siluer, the worke of mens hands. But soe is not the maker of men. All the Gods of the nations, are Deuills; but our Lord made the heauens; and this Lord is God. As for those Gods, who made not heauen, and earth, let them perish, both from heauen and earth But let heauen and earth, blesse that God, who made heauen and earth.
CHAP. XXXIII Of the Confession of our owne basenes. WHo, O Lord, is like thee among the Gods? Who is like thee, O thou who art magnifi∣cent in thy sanctity, who art terrible & laudable, and doeing wonderfull things? Too late I come to knowe thee, O thou true light; too late am I come to knowe thee. But there was a greate and darke cloude before these vayne, eyes of myne; soe that I could not see the sunne of Iustice, and the light of truth. I was wrapped vp in darkenes, my selfe being the childe of darkenes, and this darkenes of myne, I loued, because I did not knowe the light. I was blinde, and I loued blindenes, and by darkenes I walked on, to further darkenes. Who brought me out from thence, where I, blinde creature, was sitting in darkenes, and in the shadow of death; who tooke mee by the hand, and led me out; VVho was he, that did illuminate mee? I sought not
him, but he sought me? I called not vpon him, and he cryed out vpon mee? But who is he that did all this It is thou O Lord my God, the Father of mercyes, and the God of all conso∣lations; it is thou O holy Lord and my God, whome I confesse with my whole harte, giueinge thankes to thy Name. I sought not thee, but I was sought by thee. I inuoked not thee, and thou calledest mee. Thou calledst mee by thine owne Name; thou diddest thunder thus downe into the inward eare of my harte, with this mighty voyce, Let Light be made, and light was made, and that greate cloud flew away; that darke thicke cloud, was dissolued which had closed vp myne eyes And I sawe thy light, and I knew thy voyce, and I sayd O Lord that thou indeed art my God, Who hast drawen mee out of darkenes, and out of the shadow of death; and thou hast called me into thy admireable light, and behold I see. Thankes be giuē to thee O thou who art the Illuminator of my soule. And I looked backe, and sawe the darkenes wherein I had
bene, and that profound blacke pitt wherein I had lyen; and I did all quake, and shiuer, and I said, Woe woe be to that darkenes, wherein I lay. Woe, woe be to that blindenes, wherin I was not able to see the light of heauen. VVoe, woe to that former ignorance of myne, when I had noe knowldege of thee O Lord. But I giue thee thanks, O thou my illu∣minator, and deliuerer, because thou hast illuminated mee, and I haue knowen thee. Yet still I am come too late, to knowe thee, O thou antient Truth; too late I am come to knowe thee, O thou eternall Truth. Thou wert in the light, and I in darkenes and I knew thee not because I could not be illuminated, without thee; nor indeede without thee, is there any light at all. CHAP. XXXIV. A consideration of the diuine Maiestie. O Thou holy of holyes thou God of inestimable Maiestie, the God of God, and the Lord of Lords. who art admirable, inexpli∣cable,
and vnconceiuable; before whome the Angelicall power of heauen, doe euen shiuer, whome the Thrones, and Dominations doe adore, and in whose presence all the Vertues of Heauen doe euen quake; of whose power and Wise∣dome there is noe number, who hast layd the foundations of the who∣le world vpon nothing, who hast tyed vp the Sea, as if it were in some skinne, who art most Omnipotent, most Holy, and the most powerfull God ouer all the spirits of all man∣kinde. From whose sight the hea∣uen and earth doe fly away; to who∣se becke all the elements are subiect, let all thy creatures adore and glori∣fy thy Name. And I, the Sonne of thy hand∣mayd, doe by faith bowe downe the necke of my harte, vnder the feete of thy Maiestie, presenting thee with thankes, for that thou hast voutchsafed to illuminate mee by thy mercy. True Light, holy Light, delightfull Light, admira∣ble Light, superlaudable Light, which illuminateth euery man co∣meing
into this world, and the eyes also of the Angels. Behold, now I see, and I thanke thee for it. Behold I see the light of heauen; there is a beame which striketh brightly downe, from the face of thy light, vpon the eyes of my mynde, and it filleth all the powers of my soule, with ioy. But O, that once it might be perfected in mee. Encrease I beseech thee, O thou author of light, encrease I beseech thee, that which soe brightly stri∣keth through, vpon mee. Let this light be dilated, I beseech thee, let it be dilated by thee. What is this, which I feele: what fyre is this which heates any harte; what fyre is this whereby my harte is stroken through with beames? O fyre which euer burnest, and art neuer quen∣ched, doe thou kindle mee. O light, which doest euer shine, and art ne∣uer darkened, doe thou enlighten mee. O how very fayne, would I been flamed by thee? O Holy fyre, how sweetely doest thou heate, how secretly doest thou shine, and how
delightfully dost thou burne? Woe be to them who doe not burne by thee. VVoe be to them which are not illuminated by thee. O thou light which teachest truth to men, illuminating all the world, which is filled by the beames thereof. VVoe be to those blinde eyes, which see not thee, thou being the sunne, illuminating both heauen and earth. VVoe be to those weake, and daseling eyes, which cannot looke on thee. VVoe be to those eyes, which turne themselues away from seeing truth; and woe be to those eyes, which doe not turne them selues away, for feare least they behold vanity. For eyes, which are acustomed to darkenes, haue not strength wherewith to behold the beames of soueraigne truth; nor can they make any true iudgment of light, whose habitation is wont to be in darkenes. They see darkenes, they allow of darkenes, they loue darkenes; and soe, goeing from dar∣kenes to darkenes, they fall head∣long, and they knowe not where. Miserable creatures they are, who
knowe not what they loose; though yet more miserable are they, who knowe what they loose, and who yet fall with open eyes, and dropp downe quicke, into Hell. O most blessed light, which canst not be beheld, but by eyes, which are pure, and wholly purged, Blessed are the pure of harte for they shall see God. Doe thou clense mee, O thou clensing power; cure my sight, that I may contemplate thee, with strong eyes. For they are none but strong eyes, which can looke on thee: Putt away I beseech thee, O thou inaccessible splendour, the skales of that auntient mistynes, by the beame of thy illumination, that soe I may be able to looke on thee, with cer∣tayne casts of my eye, which may not be checked, and beaten back, and that I may see light in thy light I giue thee thankes, O my light, for behold now I see. I beseech thee O Lord, that it may be spred ab∣roade by thee. Vnuayle myne eyes, that I may consider the wonderfull things of thy lawe, thou who art wonderfull in thy Saints. I giue thee
thankes, O my light, for behold I see; though as yet it be but by a re∣presentation, as in a glasse: But when will it be face to face? when will that day of ioy, and exultation arryue, when I may enter into the place of that admireable Taberna∣cle, the very house of God, that so face to face, I may see him, who seeth mee, and so my desire may be fullfilled. CHAP. XXXV. Of the desire and thirst of a soule towards God. AS the harte desireth the foun∣taynes of water, soe doth my soule thirst after thee, O God. My soule hath thirsted after thee O God, who art the liueing fountayne; when shall I come and appeare before thy face? O thou fountayne of life, thou vayne of liueing waters, when shall I arriue to those waters of thy sweet∣nes, from this barren vnhaunted, and dry earth, that I may see thy
power, and thy glory, and that I may appease my thirst, by the waters of thy mercy. I thirst O Lord, O thou fountayne of life, satisfy mee, for I thirst: O Lord, I thirst towards thee, who art the liueing God. When O Lord shall I ap∣proache, and appeare before that face of thyne? doest thou thinke that at length, I shall see that day; that day I say of delight and ioy; that day which our Lord hath made, to the end that wee may reioyce, and exult therein? O sweete, and beautifull day, which hath noe euening, and who∣se Sunne hath nothing to doe with setting; wherein I shall heare the voyce of prayse, the voyce of exul∣tation and confession, wherein I shall heare this word, Enter into the ioy of thy Lord; enter into eternall ioy, into the house of thy Lord, and thy God, where there are greate, and vnsearcheable, and wounderfull things, whereof there is noe num∣ber. Enter into ioy, without sorrow, which containeth eternall ioy: where
all good shall be, without any kind of euill. Where whatsoeuer thou wilt haue, shall be, and where no∣thing shall be which thou wilt not haue. Where there will be a life, which is vitall, sweete, amiable, and eternall: Where there will be noe enemy assaulting, nor noe false delight allureing; but a supreame, and certayn security, secure tran∣quillity, a quiet ioy, a ioyfull feli∣city, a happy eternity, and eternall beatitude; a blessed Trinity, a Trine Vnity, a sole Deity, & a happy vi∣sion of that Deity, which is the ioy of thy Lord and thy God. O ioy vpon ioy, ioy which ex∣celleth all ioy; & without which there is noe ioy; when shall I enter into thee, that I may see my God, who dwelleth in thee, that soe I may there partake of this greate vision. What is it which deteyneth mee? VVoe be vnto mee, because my ha∣bitation here is perlonged. VVoe be vnto mee, and how long shall it be sayd to mee, where is thy God? How long shall it be sayd to me, Ex∣pect, and reexpect. But now what
shall I expect? Is it not thee, O Lord my God? VVee expect a Sau∣iour, our Lord Iesus Christ, who will reforme this poore meane body of ours, and conforme it to the body of his glory: wee expect when our Lord returneth from the marriage, that he may carry vs in, with him. Come Lord, and doe not stay. Come O Lord Iesus Christ; come visit vs in peace; come, and carry vs out, who are bound in prison, that wee may reioyce before thee with a perfect harte. Come, O thou Sauiour, come thou who art the desired of all nations; doe but let vs see thy face, and wee are safe. Come my Light, and my Redee∣mer, lead my soule out of this pri∣son, that I may confesse to thy holy Name. How long shall I, wretched crea∣ture, be tossed vp and downe, in these waues of my mortality, cryeing out vpon thee, O Lord, whilest thou hearest mee not. Harken to mee, O Lord, who am cryeing to thee out of this deepe Sea, and waft mee into the Hauen
of eternall blisse, to theyr society, who being conducted out of this dan∣gerous Sea, haue obtayned to repose in that most safe harbour, which is thy selfe, O God. O how truely happy are they, who be deliuered from that Sea to the shore, from ba∣nishment to their country, and from the prison to the Pallace. Happy are they, who in theyr desired place of rest, are eternally to reioyce, for haueing soe with such prosperous ioy obtayned that prize of eternall glory, towards which they here made theyre course, through such a multitude of tribulations. O how truely happy are they, O thrice, and three thousand tymes happy, who being freed from all misery, and being secure in the possession of that inuiolable glory, haue deserued to arryue to that Kingdome of order and delight. O Eternall Kingdome, Kingdome which out liueth all ages; where there is a light which neuer fayleth, and a peace which passeth all vnder∣standing; where the soules of the Saincts repose; and eternall ioy hāg∣eth
ouer theyr heads. For they shall obtaine delight, and exultation: and greif, and sorrow, shall fly away. How glorious, O Lord, is that kingdome, wherein all thy Saints shall for euer reigne with thee, being cladd with light, as with a garment; and heauing a crowne of pretious stone, vpon theyr heads. O king∣dome of eternall beatitude, where thou O Lord, who art the hope of the Saints, and the diademe of theyr glory, art beheld by them, face to face; delighting them on all sides, with thy peace, which passeth all vn∣derstanding. VVhere there is infini∣te ioy without greif; health without payne workeing without labour, light without darkenes, life without death, all good without any ill. VVhere youth neuer waxeth old; where life neuer cometh to an end; where beauty is neuer diminished; where loue is neuer weakened; where health is neuer blasted, where Ioy is neuer impayred, where payne is ne∣uer felt, where groane is neuer heard; where sadnes is neuer seene; where ioy is euer had; where noe euill is
feared, because the souueraigne good is possessed there, which consists in euer seeing the face of our Lord the God of all strength. Happy therefore are they, who haue obtayned to come to soe greate ioye, out of this life, where so many shipwrakes are suffered. And O, vnhappy and wretched creatures wee, who are steereing our ships, through the floods of this great sea, & through these stormy whirlepoo∣les, not knoweing whether or no wee shall be able to arryue, to the porte of saluation. Miserable, I say, wee are, whose life is spent in banishement, and whose way in daunger, and whose end in doubt, for wee knowe not our end, because all things are reserued in suspense, for the future. VVee are still tossed, in these sea-waues aspireing to thee, who art the hauen. O thou country of ours, wee see thee, though it be from farre of, VVee salute thee from this sea; wee sigh to thee, from this valley, and wee striue with teares, if perhaps wee may be able to get thither.
O Christ, thou God of Gods, thou hope of mankinde, thou refu∣ge and strength of ours, whose light, like some beame of the sea starre, doth strike our eyes, from farre of, amongst the foggy mists and tempests of this sea, wherein wee liue; that soe our course may be directed to thee, who art our hauen; gouerne, I beseech thee, our ship, with thy right hand, by the instrument of thy Crosse; that wee may not perish in these floods, that the stormes of water, may not drowne vs; that the pro∣found pitt may not swallow vs vp; but drawe vs out of this sea, to thee, who art our onely solace, whome wee see with our lamenting eyes, to be expecting vs, though from farre of, vpon the shore of that celestiall country, as it might be some Sunne of Iustice, or morneing starre. Behould wee cry out to thee, who are redeemed by thee, and who are now those exiles of thine, whom thou hast redeemed, with thy pre∣tious blood. Harken to vs, O our Sauiour, the hope of all the sands of the sea, how farre soeuer it be of.
Wee are tossed in this turbulent sea, and thou standing vpon the shore, doest see our dangers, and saue vs for thy names sake. Graunt to vs O Lord, that wee may hold soe euen away, betweene Sylla, and Caribdis, that haueing escaped the danger of them both, wee may securely, arriue in the port, with our ship, and our aduenture safe. CHAP. XXXVI. Of the glory of our celestiall country WHen therefore we shall be come to thee, O thou foū∣taine of wisedome, to thee O indefi∣cient light, to thee, O thou who art the splendour, which cannot be defaced, that we may then behould thee, not by representation, as in a glasse, but face to face: then shall our desire be fully satisfyed with good things; because no other thing will remayne to be desired by vs, when we shall possesse thee, O Lord our soueraigne good, who art to be the reward of the blessed, and the
diademe of theyre glorye, and the sempiternall Ioy, which hangeth ouer theyr heads; possessing them, both inwardly, & outwardly in that peace of thyne, which passeth all vn∣destanding. There shall wee see, and loue, and praise. Wee shall see light, in thy light, because with thee is the fountaine of life, and in thy light, wee shall see light. But what kinde of light? an immense light, an in∣corporeall, incorruptible, and in∣comprehensible light; a light indef∣cient, a light which cannot bee put out, an inaccessible light, an vncre∣ated light, a light which sheweth truth▪ a diuine light, which illumi∣nateth the eyes of Angells, which reioyceth the youth of saints, which is a light of lights, and the fountaine of life, which is thy selfe, O Lord my God. For thou art that light, in whose light wee shall see thy self, who art that light; hat is to say, thee, in thee; in the splendour of thy coun∣tenance, when wee shall see thee, face to face. What is it to see face to face, but as the Apostle sayth, to knowe thee,
as I am knowen, To knowe thy truth, & thy glory, is to knowe thee face to face. To knowe the power of the Father the, wisedome of the Son∣ne, the meekenes, of the Holy Ghost; the one and indiuiduall essence, of the supreme Trinity. For to see the face of the liueing God, is to possesse the soueraigne good. It is the ioy of the Angells, and of all the Saints; the reward of eternall life, the glory of spirites, the eternall Ioy, the crowne of beauty, the prize of feli∣city, the rich repose, the beauty of peace, the internall, and externall Ioy; the celestiall Ierusalem, the Paradise of God, the happy life, the fullnes of felicity, the delight of eternity, the peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding. This is that full beatitude, and that totall glorification of man, to see the face of his God; to see him who made heauen and earth, to see God who made him, who saued him, and who glorifyed him. He shall see him by knoweing him, he shall apply himselfe to him, by loueing hym; and he shall praise him, by possessing him. For he is the inheri∣tance
of his people, of the people of Saints, of the people which he redee∣med. He is the possession of theyre felicity, he is the reward, & recom∣pence of theyre expectation. I will, sayth he, be a great, and excessiue reward to thee. For great things be∣come great persons. Indeed O Lord my God, thou art excessiuely great, beyond all Gods, and thy reward is excessiuely greate. For it cannot be true, that thy self should be great, and thy re∣ward litle: but as thou art great so thy reward is great for thy re∣ward, and thy self, are not two se∣uerall things. But thou thy selfartex∣cessiuely great, and thou thy self, art that reward, which is soe excessiuely great, Thou thy self, art he, who cro∣wneth vs, & who art the crowne; thou thy self art he, who maketh the pro∣mise, and who art that very promise it selfe; Thou art he who bestowest the guift, and who art the guift it self; Thou thy self art the rewarder, and thou art the reward of eternall felicity. Thou art therefore he, who crowneth, and thou, O my God, art the crowne, and diademe of my hope
which is ad orned with glory. Thou art that recreatiue brightnes, that reuiuing light, that gracefull beauty, thou art my great hope, the desire of the harte of thy Saints, and desired by them. Thy vision therefore is the totall pay, the totall reward, & the to∣tall Ioy, which wee expect. For this is eternall life; this I say, is thy wise∣dome, This is eternall life, that wee may knowe thee, onely true God. and Iesus Christ, whome thou hast sent. VVhen therefore wee shall see thee, the only God, the true God, the God liuing, Omnipotent, simple, inuisible, incomprehensible, not to be circumcribed, and thy onely be∣gotten Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord who is consubstantiall, and coeter∣nall, with thee, whome thou hast sent into the world for our saluation, in the vertue, and power of the Ho∣ly Ghost, they being Trine in per∣sons, and one in essence; one onely Holy God, besides whome there is noe God, Then, wee shall enioy, what now wee seeke, which is eter∣nall life, and euerlasting glory, which thou preparest for them, who loue
thee, and hidest vp for them who feare thee, and wilt impart to them who seeke thee, them who seeke thy face for euer. And thou O Lord my God, who framedst mee, in the wombe of my mother, who recommended mee ouer to thy hand, do not permit mee any longer to be distracted into many thinges, from thee, who art one. But gather mee vp from exte∣riour obiects into my self, and then take mee from my self into thee; that my hart may be euer saying to thee, my face hath sougt thee O Lord, & I will seeke thy face; The face of our Lord power wherein alone of the to∣tall eternall glory of blessed soules, doth consist; & the vision whereof is the eternall life & euerlasting glory of the SSts, Let therefore my hart reioyce, that it may feare thy name; let the hart of such as doe but euen seeke our Lord, reioyce; but much more let them reioyce, who finde him. For if Ioy be taken in the search of him, what ioy will that be, which is felt in findeing him. Ther∣fore I will be euer seeking thy face
ardently. and without giueing ouer; to see if once at length that doore and gate of Iustice, may perhaps bee opened vnto mee, that I may enter into the Ioy of my Lord. This is the gate of our Lord, and the Iust shall enter into it. CHAP. XXXVII. A prayer to the blessed Trinity. O You three, coequall, and coe∣ternall persons, who are one true God, the Father, the Sonne and the Holy Ghost; thou who alo∣ne, dwellest in eternity, and inac∣cessible light. Who hast layd the foundations of the earth with thy power; and who gouernest the world with thy wisedome, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth, terri∣ble and powerfull, Iust and mercifull, admireable, laudable. and amiable. One God three persons, one essence, power, wisedome; one onely vndeui∣ded Trinity; Open thou the gates of Iustice to mee who am crying out after them; and being once entered
by them, I will confesse to thee O Lord. Behold, I, who am a poore begger, doe knocke at thy doore. O thou who art the soueraigne Master of the house, command that it may be opened to me thou who say d∣est, knocke, and it shall be opened to you. For the desires of my bowells which do euen roare againe; and the cryes of the teares of myne eyes, are they, who knocke at thy gate, O most mercifull Father. Before thee, is my whole desire, and my groanes are not hidden from thee. And thou O Lord, turne thy face noe longer away from mee; and decline not in thy wrath, from thy seruaunt. O thou Father of mercyes, hearken to the loud crye of thy poore childe, and reach forth thy best helping hand; that it may drawe me out of the pro∣found pitts of water, and out of the lake of misery, and out of the durt, and dregs; that I may not perish, whilest the mercy of thyne eyes, is beholding mee; and the charity of thy bowells is lookeing on. But ena∣ble mee, to escape to thee, who art my Lord, and my God, that I may
see the riches of thy kingdome; and may behold thy face for euer, and may sing prayse to thy holy name. O Lord thou who workest wonderfull things, thou who makest my hart ioyfull by the memory of thee, and who illuminatest my youth, doe not despise my old age; but fill my bones full of ioy, and renew my grey heires, as that of an eagle is renued. All glo∣ry, all prayse, all strength, all power, all magnificence; all beatitude, all mercy, be ascribed to God the Fa∣ther, and the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost. Amen. The end of the Soliloquia. Deo gratias.
THE MANVALL OF S. AVGVSTINE. THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the wonderfull essence of God. THov O Lord, dost fill heauen & earth; carrying all things, and yet they are no burthen to thee. Thou fillest all thinges, with∣out being shut vp by them. Thou art euer working, yet euer quiet; ga∣thering togeather, yet thou needest nothing; seeking, yet wanting no∣thing; louing, yet without passion; iealous, yet without feare. Thou repentest, yet thou art not sory; thou art angry, yet thou art not moued;
thou changest thy workes, yet thou dost not change thy decree. Thou takest what thou findest, yet thou dist neuer loose any thing; thou art not poore, and yet thou exactest vsu∣ry at our hands; thou payest them, to whom thou owest nothing; and we are enabled by thee, to pay thee more then we owe thee, and yet who hath any thing, but of thy guift? Thou payest thy debtes, and yet thou owest nothing; thou releasest our debtes, and yet thou loosest nothing; thou art euery where, and yet altogether; thou canst be felt, and yet thou canst not be seene; thou art no where ab∣sent, and yet thou art farre from the harts of wicked men. For thou art not absent euen when thou art farre off, because where thou art not by grace, thou art by reuenge; thou art present euery where, and yet we can hardly find thee out; we follow thee who art standing still, and yet we are not able to lay hold on thee; thou contaynest all things, thou fil∣lest all thinges, thou imbracest all thinges, thou exceedest all thinges, and thou sustainest all thinges. Thou
instructest the hartes of thy faythfull seruants, without noyse of wordes, thou art not extended in place, thou art not varied by time, nor hast thou any commings, or goinges; thou dost inhabite that inaccessible light which no eye of man hath seene, or can see. Reposing all quiet in thy selfe, thou goest euery where about all thinges; for thou canst not be deuided, or cut, because thou art truely one, nor dost thou impart thy selfe by parts, but all that which thou art, holdeth all thinges, filleth all things, illustrateth & possesseth all things. CHAP. II. Of the vnspeakable knowledge of God. IF the whole world were filled with bookes, yet thy vnspeakable knowledge could not be declared thereby. For in regard that thou art vnspeakable, thou canst not be expressed or declared; thou art the fountaine of diuine light, and the Sunne of splendour, which neuer
sets; thou art great without quantity, and therefore thou art immense; thou art good without quality, & therefore it is indeed, that thou art truely & supremely Good, and there is none Good but thou alone, whose will is a worke, whose being pleased to doe any thing, is to be able to do it. For thou who didst create al things of nothing, didst create them onely by thy will. Thou dost possesse all thy creatures, without needing any of them; thou gouernest them without labour, thou rulest them without wearines; nor is there any thing which can disturbe the order of thy dominion, from the highest to the lowest; thou art in all places without place; thou conteynest all things without departing to the outside of them; thou art euery where present, yet without either situation, or mo∣tion; thou art not the Author of euil, for thou canst commit none; and yet there is nothing which thou canst not doe; nor didst thou euer repent thy self of any worke of thine. By thy goodnes we are made, by thy iustice we are punished, by thy mercy we
are freed, and thy omnipotency doth gouerne, rule, and replenish what∣soeuer it did create. Neither yet do we say, that thou fillest all thinges, as if thou wert contained by them; but rather they are contayned by thee, neither yet dost thou fill them, as by partes. For we are in no case to thinke, as if any thing did receaue thee, after the rate of that greatnes, more or lesse, which it selfe may haue (that is the greatest thinges a greater quantity, and the lesse a lesser) since rather thou art all, in all thinges; and all things in thee; whose omni∣potency concludeth all thinges. Nor hath any thing, any meanes of deli∣uering it selfe from thy power. For whosoeuer he be that finds thee not being pleased, will be sure to be found by thee, being offended.
CHAP. III. Of the desire of a soule which thirsteth after God. I Therfore inuoke thee, O most mercifull God, to come into my soule, which thou preparest towards the receiuing of thee, through that desire wherwith it was inspired by thee. Enter into it, I beseech thee, and make it fit for thy selfe; that as thou hast made it, and restored it, thou maist possesse it also: and ena∣ble me to place thee as a seale vpon my hart. I beseech thee, O most ho∣ly God, do not forsake me, who am now inuoking thee; since, before I inuoked thee, thou didst both call me, and seeke me, to the end that I thy seruant, myght seeke thee; and by seeking thee, might finde thee, and that once hauing found thee, I might loue thee. I haue sought thee, and I haue found thee, and I desire to loue thee, O Lord Increase thou my desire, and giue me that which I am desiring. For if thou shouldst giue
me all the things which thou hast made, they will not all be sufficient for thy seruant, vnlesse with all thou giue thy selfe. Giue thy selfe therfore vnto me O my God, restore thy selfe to me, Behold I loue thee, and if it be too little, make me loue the more strongly. Behold, I am held fast by the loue of thee; I am set on fire by the desire of thee, and in the sweet me∣mory of thee I am delighted. Behold, whilst my minde is sending vp sighes to thee; and whilst it is me∣ditating vpon thy vnspeakeable pit∣ty, the burthen of my flesh doth lesse oppresse me; the tempest of my thoughts is laid; the weight of my mortality and misery doth not dull my edge as it was wonte. All things are in quiet, all things are in peace▪ my hart doth burne, my mind doth ioy, my memory is fresh, my vn∣derstanding is bright, and my whole spirit, being kindled through a desire of thy vision, doth find it selfe to be carried away, at full speede, by the loue of inuisible things. O let this spirit of myne get the wings of an Eagle, that it may fly and not faint.
That it may fly till it arriue to that delightfull beauty of thy house, and to the throne of thy glory; and that there it may be fed, at the plentifull table of those heauenly Cittizens of thine; vpon that hidden food, in that place of pasture, neere those ful riuers of running water. Be thou our exul∣tation, who art our hope, our health and our redemption. Be thou our ioy, who art to be our reward. Let my soule euer seeke thee, and grant that whilst it seekes thee, it may neuer faint. CHAP. IV. Of the misery of a soule which loues not God. WOE be to that wretched soule, which seekes not nor loues Christ; for it remayneth all mi∣serable and dry. It is lost labour, for him euen to liue, who loues not thee, O God. He who cares to liue, O Lord, and not to do it for thy respect, is nothing; and doth serue for no∣thing. He who refuseth to liue to
thee, is dead; he who is not wise to thee hath lost his wits. O thou most mercifull God, I recommend my selfe, I restore my selfe, & I make a grant of my selfe to thee; through whome I am, through whome I liue, and through whom I haue the vse of reason. I hope, I trust, and I place all my confidence in thee, by whome I may be able to rise againe, and to liue, and rest. It is thou whom I desire, whome I loue, and whome I adore; and with whome I am to re∣mayne & raigne, and be happie. The soule which seekes not thee nor loues not thee, doth loue the world, and serueth sinne, & is a slaue to vice, and is neuer quiet or secure. O thou most holy God, let my min∣de be euer performing seruice to thee; let this pilgrimage of mine, be euer sighing towards thee: let my hart burne through the loue of thee, let my soule, O my God, repose in thee: let it contemplate thee, in excesse of mind; and let it singe prayses to thee in full ioy, and let this be my comfort, in this banishment of mine. Let this minde of mine, fly to the
shadowe of thy winges, from the scorching cogitations of this world. Let this hart of mine be at a calme in thee; this hart, which is such a deepe Sea full of swelling waues. O thou, who art so rich of heauenly food, thou most aboundant imparter of that spirituall celestiall satiety, giue nourishment to him, who is defea∣ted with hunger; gather him vp, who is scattered; free him who is entrald, & stitch him together who is torne. Behold he standeth at the doore and knocks. I beseech thee by those bowells of thy mercy, in which thou, being the Orient, didst visit vs from on hygh; commaund that it be ope∣ned to this miserable creature who is knocking: that so, with nimble feete, I may enter into thee, and repose in thee, and be refreshed by that bread of heauen. For thou art both the bread and the fountaine of life; thou art the splendor of immortall light. In fine, thou art all those thinges, wherby iust persons liue, who loue thee.
CHAP. V. Of the Desire of a soule. O God the light of those hartes which see thee; and the life of those soules which loue thee, & the strength or vertue, of their thoughts who seeke thee, graunt that I may be incorporated into the holy loue of thee. Come, I beseech thee, into my hart, and inebriate it, with the springing plenty of thy delights; that so I may forget all worldly thinges. I am ashamed; and I am afflicted to find my selfe suffering such thinges, as this world is doing. All that which I see concerning transitory thinges, makes me sorry, and all that which I heare, makes me sad. Help me, O Lord my God, infuse ioy into my hart; and come to me that so I may grow to see thee. For this house of my soule, is strait, till thou come into it, and so it be inlar∣ged by the. It is ruinous, till it be repaired by thee, It hath many things, which may offend thyne eyes,
I know it and confesse it; but yet who is he, that can cleanse it, or to whom but thee, shall I cry out: Cleanse me, O Lord, from my hidden sinnes, and pardon also thy seruant, those sinnes, which he hath caused in others, Make me, sweet Christ, O deere Iesus, make me I beseech thee, lay downe the burden of carnall desires, and of the concupiscence which I haue after earthly thinges. Giue do∣minion to my soule ouer my body, and to my reason, ouer my soule, and to thy grace, ouer my reason; and subdue me, both in my outward and inward man, to thy will. Graunt to me that my hart may praise thee, to∣geather with my tongue, and all the strength I haue. Dilate my mind, and hoyse vp the sight of my hart, that at least by some glymse, my spirit may with a swift and suddaine thought, lay hold vpon that eternall wisedom, whach is aboue all thinges, and whach lasts beyond them all. Dis∣charge me I beseech thee from he chains wherin I am bound by sinnes; chat at last I may giue ouer all thin∣ges,
& that I may hasten to thee, and behold, and adhere to thee alone. CHAP. VI. Of the felicity of a soule which is freed from the prison of flesh and bloud HAPPY is that soule, which being freed from this earthly prison arriues to heauen; and seeth thee her most deere Lord, face to face. And which is no longer subiect to the least feare of death; but doth reioyce in the incorruptibility of e∣ternall glory. She is then in peace, she is secure & doth no longer feare either death, or any other enemy. For she possesseth her deere Lord whom she hath long sought, and whome she hath euer loued; and being associated to those Quires of Angels, she doth eternally sing those melodious Hymnes of thy euer last∣ing solemnity. O Christ thou King, thou deare Iesus, to the prayse of thy glory. For then she is inebriated by the fresh and springing plenty of thy
house, and thou giuest her to drinke of thy delights. O happy society of those heauenly Cittizens? O glo∣rious solemnity of them who returne to thee, from the sad labour of this pilgrimage of ours, to that sweetnes of beauty, to that delightfulnes of all splendour, and to that dignity of all pleasing grace, where thy Cittizens, O Lord, do continually behold thy countenance. There is no eare in that place which can heare any thing that may offend it. What songs, what Organs, what Hymnes, what melodies are sung there without any end? Eternally are there sounded forth mellifluous cōcents of Hymns; that most sweet melody of the An∣gells; those most admirable canticles of Canticles which are sung forth by those heauenly Cittizens, to thy prayse and glory. No bitternes, nor any kind of vnsauorynes or gall, can haue any place in that Countrey of thine; for there is no wickednes, nor any wicked man: There is no ad∣uersary or enemy; there is no tempt∣ing bayte of sinne, there is no want, no shame, no quarell, no reproach,
no exception taken; no feare, no vn∣quietnes, no payne, no doubt, no violence, no dissention. But there is souueraigne peace, pertect charity, eternall iubilation, and prayse of God, secure & euerlasting repose, and perpetual ioy in the holy Ghost. O how happy shall I be if once I may arriue to heare those most sweet songs of thy cittizens, those mellifluous Hymns, which with due honour, shall declare the prayses of the most blessed Trinity. But O how happy, euen too happy shall I be, if my selfe may obtaine to sing to our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, some one of those sweet songs of Syon. CHAP. VII. Of the Ioyes of Heauen. O Vitall life, O eternall life, and eternally happy; where there is ioy without griefe, rest without la∣bour, dignity without feare, riches without want, life without death, perpetuity without corruption, and felicity without calamity. Where all
thinges are good, in perfect charity; where there is showing, & seeing face to face; where there is complete knowledge in all, and by all; where the soueraigne goodnes of God is discerned; where the illuminating light is glorifyed by the Saints; wher the Maiesty of God is beheld pre∣sent, and the mind of the beholders is satiated by this food of life, with∣out all defect. They euer see, and yet they euer desire to see; but they desire without anxiety, and they are not glutted by their satiety. Where the true Sonne of Iustice doth re∣create them all, by the admirable sight of his beauty; and so doth illu∣minate all the inhabitants of that heauenly Countrey. Where the light of them who are illuminated by that other superiour illuminating light, doth shine farre beyond the splendor of our Sun, and beyond the clarity of al the Startes; adhering to that immortall Deity, them selues being made thereby incorruptible and immortal, according to this pro∣mise of our Lord and Sauiour: Fa∣ther, they whome thou gauest me I
will, that where I am, they may be also there; that they may see my brightnes; and that they all may be one, as thou O Father art in me, & I in thee, so they also may be one in vs. CHAP. VIII. Of the kingdome of Heauen. THE kingdome of heauen, is a most happy kingdome; a king∣dome which hath no death nor end; where there shal be no succession of tymes, nor no interruption of the day by any night. Where the victorious souldier is euen laden with vnspea∣keable treasures; an immortal crowne being placed vpon his trium∣phant head. O that the diuine mer∣cy (hauing first discharged the weight of my sins) would commaund me (who am the least amongst the seruants of Christ) to lay downe this burthen of flesh and bloud, that so I might passe on towards my true repose, in those eternall ioyes of his Citty; that I might beare my part,
among th'inhabitants of those heauē∣ly Quires; that I might assist in glori∣fying our Creatour with those bles∣sed spirits; that I might behold the face of God there present; that I might not be so much as touched with the least feare of death; but that I might securely reioyce, through the incorruptibility of immortall glory; that being conioyned to him who knoweth all things, I might loose all blindnes of ignorance; that I might esteem meanely of all earthly thinges; that I might no longer vouchsafe to behold, or euen so much as to remember this valley of teares, the life whereof is laborious and cor∣ruptible; a life which is full of all bitternes; a life which is the mistresse of sinne, and the slaue of Hell. The humours of our body doe puffe it vp, paynes put it downe; intemperate heats dry it; the ill affections of the ayre, indispose it; meate makes it fat; fasting makes it shrinke; loose myrth dissolueth it; afflictions con∣sume it; solicitude straitens it; secu∣rity makes it sottish, riches make it vane; pouerty makes it base, youth
extolleth it; age makes it stoope; sicknes breaks it; sorrow deiects it; the Diuell lyes in wayte for it; the world flatters it; the flesh is deligh∣ted; the soule is blinded; and the whole man is disioynted. And to all these, so many and great mischiefes, death doth furioussy succeed; & doth so impose an end vpon these vayne ioyes, that when once they leaue to be, it is scarce so much as beleeued that they euer were. CHAP. IX. How God doth comfort an afflicted soule after too great lamen∣tations. BVT what prayse, what thakes shal we be able to giue thee, O our God, who euen in the midst of these great miseries of our mortali∣ty, dost not faile to comfort vs with the admirable visitation of thy Gra∣ce. For Behold, when I am full of many sorrowes; whilst I am fearing the end of my life; whilst I am consi∣dering my sinns; whilst I am medi∣tating
vpon death; whilst I am frighted with thinking on thy iudge∣ment? whilst I tremble at the tor∣ments of hell; whilst I am ignorant with what scales my works are to be wayghed by thee; whilst I cannot knowe by what kind of end shal be able to shut them vp, whilst I am ruminating vpon these & many other things in my hart; thou O my Lord and my God, according to thy won∣ted pitty, art present with a resolu∣tion to comfort me wretched creatu∣re. And when I am in the midst of these complaints, and excessiue la∣mentations, and in the profoundest sighings of my hart, thou takest vp this afflicted and perplexed minde, aboue those high topps of the moun∣taines, euen to those odoriferous spicy beds of thine; and thou dost place me, in that deepe pasture, neere those brookes of sweet waters; where thou preparest, in my sight, a table full of choice & curious meats, which may refresh my wearied spirit; and may giue ioy to my afflicted hart, And so at last, being all restored by those delights, and forgetting
mine owne many miseries, and being exalted aboue the highest partes of the earth and earthly thinges, I re∣pose in thee, who art true peace. CHAP. X. Of the sweetnes of diuine loue. O My God I loue thee, I loue thee, and faine would I loue thee yet more, and more. Grant to me, O Lord my God, O thou beautifull beyond the sonnes of men, that I may desire thee and that I may loue thee, as much as I list, and as much as I ought. Thou art immen∣se; and without measure, thou oughtest to be beloued; especially by vs, whom thou so hast loued, and so hast saued, and for whom thou hast done so many, and so mighty things. O loue, which euer burnest, and art neuer quenched; sweet Christ, deere Iesus, O cha∣rity, my God, kindle me, with all that fire of thine; with thy loue, with thy lyking, with thy sweetnes, with thy desire, with thy Charity,
with thy ioy and exultation, with thy piety and suauity, with thy plea∣sure, & with that ardent desire of thee, which is holy, and good, & chast, & cleane, That so being all full with the sweetnes of thy loue, and all perfumde & sweetened by the flame of thy Charity, I may loue thee, my most sweet, and most beautifull Lord, with my whole hart, with my whole soule, with my whole strength, & with all the application of my mind, with much contrition, & euen with a very fountaine of teares; with much reuerence and trembling loue, car∣rying thee in my hart, and in my mouth, & before mine eyes, at all tymes, & in all places; that so there may neuer be found any roome in me, for any disloyall and impure loue. CHAP. XI. Of the preparation of our Redemption. O Most beautifull Christ Iesus, I beseech thee by that most sa∣cred effusion of thy most pretious bloud, whereby we are redeemed
graunt me contrition of hart, and a very fountaine of teares, especially whilest I am offering vp, both my vocall, and mentall prayers to thee. Whilest I am singing the Office of thy prayse to thee; whilest I do either declare with my mouth; or consider in my mind the mystery of our redemption, that expresse testi∣mony of thy mercy: Whilest I (though vnworthy) am assisting at thy sacred Altar, intending to offer vp to thee, that admirable & cele∣stiall sacrifice, which is so worthy of all reuerence and deuotion; and which thou, O Lord, our God, & our Priest, didst immaculately in∣stitute, and didst commaund to be offered vp, in commemoration of thy charity (that is, of thy death and passion) for our saluation, and for the dayly reparation of our frailty. Let my mind be confirmed whilest I am in the midst of those so great mi∣steryes, by the sweetnes of thy pre∣sence. Let it find, that thou art there at hand; and let it reioyce before thee. O thou fire which euer flamest, O thou loue which euer burnest, sweet
Christ, deere Iesus, thou eternall and neuer fayling light; thou foode of life, which dost refresh vs and yet dost neuer diminish in thy selfe; who art dayly eaten, and yet dost euer remaine entiere, shine thou vpon me, kindle me, illuminate and sanctify this vessell which is thi∣ne owne. Make it empty of malice, replenish it with grace; and when it is once full, keep it so that I may re∣ceaue this food of thy flesh, to the saluation of my soule; and that by feeding on thee, I may liue of thee, and by thee; that so I may arriue to thee, and repose in thee. CHAP. XII. Of spirituall ioy. O Thou sweetnes of loue, and thou loue of sweetnes, let my stomacke feed on thee; & let euen my bowels be all filled with the Nectar of thy loue, and let my mind vtter that good word. O charity, O my God, thou hunny which is so sweet,
thou milke which is so white. Thou art the food of strong persons, make me increase towards thee, that so I may feed vpon thee, and tast thee withth epalate, not of a sick, but of a sound person. Thou art the life by which I liue, the hope to which I doe adhere, and the glory which I desire to obtaine. Hold thou fast my hart, rule my mind, direct my vn∣derstanding, erect my loue, suspend my thoughts, and draw the mouth of this spirit, which thirsteth after thee, into those liuing streames of celestiall running waters. I beseech thee impose silence vpon these tu∣multuous thoughts of flesh and bloud; let these conceits of the earth, & of the waters, and of the ayre, and of these heauens which re we see, hold their peace. Let all visions, & reuelations which are imprinted vpon the imagination be silent, and euery tongue and sensible expression, and what soeuer els, which hath his complete beeing by passing on. Let euen the soule be islent to it self, and let it outstrip and exceed it selfe, by not thinking of it selfe, but only of
thee, O my God; because thou, in very deed, art all my hope, & all my confidence. For in thee, O my God, and my Lord, in thee, O most sweet, O most amiable, O most mercifull Christ Iesus, there is a part of the flesh and bloud of euery one of vs. Now therefore where a part of me doth raigne, there do I beleeue my self to raigne. Where my bloud hath dominion, there do I also confide my selfe to be in dominion; where my flesh is glorifyed, there doe I know my selfe to be glorious. For howsoeuer I am a sinner, yet I cannot despaire, but that I shalbe admitted to this communication of thy grace. And although my iniquityes forbid me, yet that substance of mine doth inuite me; and although my sinnes do exclude me, yet that participation of nature doth not suffer me to be reiected.
CHAP. XIII. That the VVord Incarnate is the cause of our Hope. FOr our Lord is not so an enemy as that he can forebeare to loue his owne flesh, and the parts of his owne body, & his owne bowells. I might iustly haue despayred, by reason of my excessiue sinnes, & vices & of those infinite negligences and faults which I haue commited, and which I dayly do commit, by thought word and deed, and by all those meanes, wherby the frailty of mans nature may sinne, vnlesse the Vvord my God, had become flesh; and had dwelt amongst vs. But now I dare not despaire; because he growing obe∣dient to thee, euen to the death, and that the very death of the Crosse, did take that hand-writing of our sins, and nayling it to the same Crosse did crucify both sinne and death. In him therefore, doe I securely conceaue hope, who sitteth at thy right hand and interceedes for vs. And confi∣ding in him, I trust I shall arriue to
be with thee, in whome we are risen, and haue liued againe, and haue as∣cēded vp to heauen, and are remaining there. To thee be praise, glory, honour, & thankesgiuing for euer. CHAP. XIV. How sweet a thing it is to thinke of God. O Thou most mercifull Lord, who didst so loue, and saue vs, who didst so quicken and exalt vs; O most mercifull Lord, how sweet is the memory of thee; How much more I meditate on thee, so much more art thou sweet & amiable to me. There∣fore doth it delight me extremely, to behold thy excellencyes with a pure sight of the mind, and with a most sweet affection of pious loue, accor∣ding to the little power I haue, in this place of my pilgrimage. Where al∣though I be apperrelled with a poore garment of flesh and bloud, I do yet continually aspire to the considera∣tion and desire of thy admirable ama∣bility and beauty. For with the dart
of thy charity am I wounded, and I am all on a light fire of desire concer∣ning thee. I couet to arriue to thee, and thee doe I desire to behold. Therefore will I euer stand vpon my guard, & with vigilant eyes I will be singing in spirit; and I will also sing with my vnderstanding, & with all my forces will I prayse thee; who art both my Creatour and my Redeemer I will penetrate the heauens with my affectiō, and I will so approch to thee with my desire, that I may be held but onely in body, by this present mi∣sery; and all my thoughts, and the greedines of my desire shalbe euer vpon thee; that so my hart may be where thou my treasure art, who art so desirable, so incomparable, and so deerely amiable. But behold, O my most pittifull and most merciful God, whilest I am applying my selfe to the consideratiō of thy immense goodnes and pitty, my hart is not able to goe through with it. For thy grace, thy beauty, thy vertue, thy glory, thy magnifi∣cence, thy Maiesty, and thy charity, doth exceed all the powers of our
mind. And as the splendour of thy glory is inestimable, so is the beni∣gnity of that eternal charity of thyne vnspeakable; whereby thou hast adopted them for thy sonnes, & ioyned them close to thy selfe, whom formerly thou hast created of no∣thing. CHAP. XV. How much tribulation endured for Christ our Lord, is to be desired. O My soule, if dayly we were to suffer torments, yea and euen to endure the very paines of hell, & that for a long tyme together; to the end that we might arriue to see Christ in his glory, & to be associated to his Saints, would it not be fit for vs to beare all that affliction, if therby we might be thought fit to be made per∣takers of so high a good, and so great a glory? Let therfore the deuills lye in wayte for vs; let them prepare theyr temptations; let fasting breake our bodyes; let garments loade our flesh; let labours weigh heauy vpon
vs; let watching drye vs; let one man cry out vpon vs, and let an∣other man disquiet vs; let cold con∣tract vs; let the conscience repine; let heat burne vs; let the head ake, the breast be inflamed, let the sto∣macke be swolne, let the face growe pale, and let the whole body be di∣stempered; let my yeares be spent in groaning, yea let rottennes enter into my bones, and multiply therin, so that yet I may rest in that day of tribulation, and may ascend to our elected people. For how great wil that glory of iust persons be; how great will be that ioy of the saints, when euery one of their faces, shal be resplendent, like a Sunne? When our Lord shall begin to muster vp his people by different ranks in the kingdome of his father; & shall assi∣gne the promised rewards according to the workes and merit of euery one. Celestiall rewards, for workes which were performed heere on earth. Great rewards for little workes & eternall, for such as were but temporall. That, indeed, will be a whole huge heape of felicity,
when our Lord shall bring his Saints into the vision of his Fathers glory, and shall place them vpon their seats in heauen, that so he may be all in all. CHAP. XVI. How the kingdome of God may be obteyned. O HAPPY sweetnes, O deli∣cious happines, which it will be for vs, to behold the Saints, be with Saints, and to be Saints, to see God, and to possesse him, for all eter∣nity, and euen if it might be, beyond eternity. Let vs be continually thin∣king on these things; let vs aspire to them with our whole desire, that so we may speedily arriue to enioy them. If thou aske how this may be done; by what merits, or by what helpes; giue eare and I will tell thee, This affaire is put into thine owne power; for the kingdome of heauen suffereth violence. The kingdome of heauen, O man, doth exact no price at thy hands but onely thy
selfe. So much is it worth, as thou thy selfe art. Giue thy selfe, and thou shalt haue it. Why art thou troubled about the price? Christ our Lord did giue himself away that he might purchase thee, to be a kingdome for his father; and so do thou also, giue thy selfe, that thou maist become a kingdome for him, & that sinne may not raigne in thy mortall body, but the Spirit in the renouation of life. CHAP. XVII. What a happy place Heauen is. O My soule, returne toward that heauenly Citty wherin we are written, and enrold as Cittizens. And as Cittizens amongst the Saints, & the houshold seruants of God, and as the heires of God and coheires of Christ our Lord. Let vs consider that excellent felicity of this citty of ours, to the very vttermost of what we are able. Let vs therefore say with the Prophet: O how glorious thinges are sayd of thee, thou Citty of God, the habitation which is made
in thee, is, of them who are all full of ioy. For thou art founded in the exultation of the whole earth. No old age is in thee, nor any misery which is wont to wayte vpon old age. In thee, there is no man lame, of arme or legg, nor crooked nor other wise deformed; when once they meet toge∣ther, becoming perfect man, in the measure of the age, of the fulnesse of Christ. What is more happy then such a life where there is no fear of pouerty, nor no incommodity of sicknes; where no man is offended, no man is angry, no man enuious, no desire doth solicite vs; there is no appetite of meate, no man is im∣portuned by thirsting after honour and power; there is no feare of the Diuell, or the craft of those infernall spirits; all terrour of hell is farre off, there is no death either of body or soule, but a life which is made full of ioy by the guift of immortality. In fine, there is no kind of ill, or dis∣cord, but all thinges are full of agreement & proportion, for as much as the concord of all the Saints is intierely one; all things are full of
peace and ioy; all things are quiet, and serene. An euerlasting splendor there, is not like that of this Sunne of ours, but another, which is so much more bright, at it is more blessed. For that Citty (as we read) shall need neither Sūne, nor Moone; but our Lord omnipotent, will illu∣minate it, and the Lambe is the bright lampe therof. Where the Saints shall shine like starres, and they who instruct many others, like the splendour of the firmament. No night shalbe therefore there, no darknes, no concourse of clowds, no incommodity at all of heat or cold; but such a temper of things there wil be, as neither the eye hath seene, nor the eare hath heard, nor can it enter into the hart of any other mē, but such as shalbe thought worthy to enioy it; Whose names are written in the booke of life. But it exceedeth all these thinges to be associated to the Quires of Angells and Archangells; to behold the Pa∣triarkes and the Prophets, to see the Apostles, and all the Saints; yea to see our owne parents & friends.
These things indeed are glorious, but yet still incomparably a more glorious thing it is to behold the present face of God; & to looke vpon that vnlimitted light of his. A superexcellent glory it will be, when we shall see God in himselfe: we shall see, & we shall possesse him in our selues, and of that sight, there wil be no end. CHAP. XVIII. We cannot make any requitall to Almighty God, but only by loue. THE soule which is beautifyed by the Image, and dignifyed by the ressemblance of God, hath groūd inough within it selfe (which is also imparted by the same God) wherby she may be aduised to remain perpetually within him; or at least to return towardes him, if she chance to haue beene separated by her affe∣ction, or rather by her defectes. And not only hath she ground of solace in the hope which she may conceaue
of pardon and mercy; but yet fur∣ther, she may also presume to aspire, euen to the marriage of the Word, and to contract a league of friendship with God; and togeather with that king of the Angells, to be drawing in the same sweet yoake of loue. Now all this is performed by the same loue, if the soule do make it selfe like to God by her will, as already she is like him by nature; and if she loue him, as she is beloued by him. For only loue, amongst all the mo∣tions, passions & feeling senses of the soule, is the thing whereby a creature may answere the benefits of a Creatour; and repay, after a sort, what it oweth, though it be not in any equall manner. Where loue entreth in, it draweth & captiueth all other affections of the mind, to the dominion therof. Loue alone, is sufficient, & is plea∣sing of it selfe, and for it selfe. Loue is the merit, it is the reward, it is the cause, it is the fruit, it is also the vse of the fruit; for by loue, we are con∣ioyned to God. Loue maketh that two spirits grow to be one. Loue
maketh that the same thinges, be willed, and not willed by them. Loue maketh vs first to order and compose our liues; afterward it en∣ableth vs to consider of all thinges which are present, as if they where absent; and, in the third place, it enableth vs to behold internall, and supernall thinges, with a cleane and pure eye of the hart. By loue we are first taught how to vse those conten∣tements well, which may be taken in the world, afterward those worldly contentements grow to be despised; and at the last euen the secretes of God come to be disclosed. CHAP. XIX. What it is which God requireth of vs, that so we may be like him selfe. GOD the Father is loue, God the Sonne is loue, God the holy Ghost, is the loue of the Father, and the Sonne. This charity, this loue, doth require somewhat of vs which is like that; that is to say, it requireth
charity, whereby (as by a kind of coniunctiō in bloud) we may be asso∣ciated, and ioyned to him▪ Loue forgets that supreme dignity, it con∣siders not the reuerence which it is bound to beare. He that loues, doth of himselfe draw confidently neere to God, and expresseth himselfe in a familiar manner, without perturba∣tion or feare: He looseth his labour and liues in vane, who loues not. But he that loueth, doth still carry his eyes erected towardes God, whome he loueth, whom he desireth, vpon whom he meditateth, in whome he delighteth, by whome he is fedd, and euen made fat. Such a louing and deuout person, doth so sing, and so he reades, and in all his actions he is so ful of circumspection, and care, as if God were euer present before his eyes, and so indeed he is. He doth so pray, as if he were taken, and pre∣sented before the face of that Ma∣iesty, in his soueraigne Thron, Where thousands of thousands are seruing him, and a million of thou∣sands are present with him. When loue visiteth a soule, it awaketh her,
if she be asleep; it counselleth, & softneth, and doth wound the hart. It illuminateth those thinges which are darke; it vnlocketh those thinges which are shut vp; it inflameth tho∣se things which are cold; it mitiga∣teth a harsh, vntoward, & impatient minde; it puts sinne to flight; it re∣presseth all carnall affection, it amen∣deth manners, it reformeth and re∣neweth the spirit, and it bridleth the light acts, and euill motions of slip∣pery youth. All these thinges are done by loue, when it is present, but vpon the departure thereof, the soule begins already to be faint, & weake, as if the fire were withdrawne from vnderneath a pot which had beene seething. CHAP. XX. Of the confidence of a soule which loueth God. A Great thing is loue, wherby the soule, of her selfe, doth confi∣dently approach to God, doth con∣stantly inheare to God, doth fami∣liarly
aske questions of God, and consulteth with him, vpon all occa∣sions. The soule which loueth God can neither thinke, or speake any other thing, she contemneth all thinges else, she loatheth all. What∣soeuer she considereth, whatsoeuer she saith, it smells of loue, it sauours of loue; so truly doth the loue of God, make her all, his owne. Whoso euer desires to haue the knowledge of God, let him loue. In vaine doth any man giue himselfe to reading, to me∣ditating, to preaching, to praying, if he do not loue. The loue of God, begetteth loue in a soule, & makes her bend her selfe towards him. God loueth, to the end that he may be loued againe. When he loueth, he desireth no other thing, but to be beloued; as knowing that they who loue him, are to be made happy by that loue. The soule which loues, doth renounce al her owne particu∣lar affections, and doth wholy ap∣ply her self to loue; that so she may be able to pay loue, with loue. And yet when she shall haue spent what∣soeuer she either hath, or is, vpon
the loue of that torrent which flowes out, from that ouer tunning fon∣taine of loue; we must take heed of thinking, that there is any equality of springing plenty afforded bet∣weene that loue, and this loue: bet∣weene God, and the soule; bet∣weene the creatour, and the creatu∣re. And yet, on the other side, if the soule do loue, as much as it can; there can be nothing said to be wanting, where al is giuen. Let not that soule feare, which loues; but let that other tremble, which loueth not. The soule which loues, is caried on by praiers, she is drawn by her desirs, she dis∣sembleth her merits, she shuts her eyes against his Maiesty, she opens them to delight in his beauty: she lodgeth her self in him, who is her sauing health, and she treateth with him after a confident manner. By loue the soule doth step aside, and doth grow into excesse, beyond the senses of the body; so that she which feeleth God, doth no longer feele her selfe. This is done, when the soule (being allured by the vnspeakeable sweetnes of God) doth steale her
selfe, as it were, from her selfe; or rather when she is forcibly carried, and so doth slip from her selfe, that she may inioy God with supreme delight. Nothing were so highly sweet, if withal it were not extreme∣ly shorte. Loue giueth familiarity with God; familiarity giues a daring to aoproach; that daring giueth gust; that gust giueth hunger. The soule which is touched with the loue of God, can think of nothing els, can desire nothing els; but doth often sigh and say, As the Hart desireth the fountains of water, so doth my soule desire thee, O my God. CHAP. XXI. What God did for man. GOD for the loue of men came downe to men; he came into men, and he was made man. The inuisible God, was drawne by loue, to become like his slaues, Through loue, he was wounded for our sinnes. Weake and wicked men, may finde a safe & strong retreate in the woūds
of our Sauiour. There do I securely dwelle; for I see his very bowells through his wounds. VVhatsoeuer is wanting to me, I fetch from those wounds of my Lord, which flow with mercy; nor want they holes, through which it may be able to flow. By those holes which were made in his body we may discerne the very se∣crets of his hart; we may discerne a great mystery of goodnes; we may discerne the bowells of the mercy of our God where with that Orient from on high hath visited us. The wounds of Iesus Christ are full of mercy, full of pitty, full of suauity, and full of charity. Men digged through his handes and feet, & they transpierced his side with a launce. By these ouertures, I haue meanes to tast how sweet my Lord God is; for indeed he is meeke, and sweet, & of aboundant mercy, to all such as call vpon him in truth; to all such as seeke him, but especially to them that loue him. A copious redēption is giuen to vs in the wounds of Iesus Christ our Sauiour. A great mul∣titude of sweetnes, a fullnes of grace,
& the perfection of vertues, CHAP. XXII. Of the remembrance of the woundes of Iesus Christ our Lord. WHEN I am sollicited by any impure thought, I make my recourse vnto the woundes of Christ; when my body oppresseth me, I recouer strength by calling the wounds of my Lord to mind; whē the Diuell is laying some ambush whereby to take me, I flye vnto the boweles of my Lords mercy, and so the Diuell departeth from me. If the ardour of lust make any alteration in my body, it is quenched by the memory of the wounds of our Lord, the Sonne of God. In all the aduersityes which I haue beene sub∣iect to, I neuer found so effectuall à remedy, as in the wounds of Christ. In them do I sleep secure, in them do I repose voyd of feare. Christ dyed for vs; there is nothing so deadly bitter, which may not be cured by the death of Christ. All
the hope I haue, is in the death of my Lord. His death is my merit, my refuge, my sauing health, my life, and my resurrection. My merit is his great mercy. I shal neuer be voyd of merit as long as he who is the Lord of mercy, shall not be wanting to me. And since my merits goe after the rates of his mercyes, looke how much more mighty he is towardes the sauing of me, so much the more may I be secure. CHAP. XXIII. The remembrance of the woundes of Christ our Lord, is our remedy in all aduersity. I Haue committed a grieuous sinne, nay I am guilty of many sinnes; neither yet wil I despaire, because where sinnes haue abounded, there hath beene superaboundance of gra∣ce. He who despaireth of the pardon of his sinnes, denieth God to be mercifull. He much wrongs God, who distrustes in his mercy Such a one doth his best, to deny that God
hath Charity, Verity, and Piety, wherin all my hope consisteth. Na∣mely in the Charity, of his adoption, in the Verity of his promise, & in the Piety of his redemption. Let therfore my foolish thought be mur∣muring as much as it will, whilest it is saying: What a poore thing art thou; and what a great glory is that, and by what merits dost thou hope to obtaine it? For I will confidently answere: I know well who it is, whome I haue trusted. And because he hath adopted me for his sonne, with excesse of Charity, because he is true in his promises, and powerfull in his performances; & because he may doe what he will, I cannot be frighted by the multitude of my sin∣nes, if withall I be able, to call the death of my Lord to mind; for those sinnes of mine cannot conquerre him. Those nayles, & that launce, doe cry out to tell me, that in deed I am reconcyled to Christ, if I resolue to loue him. Longinus opened the side of Christ with his launce, there doe I enter in, and there I do safely rest. He that feares, let him loue; for
charity will put feare away. There is not so potent and effectuall a re∣medy against the ardour of lust, as the death of my redeemer. He stret∣cheth forth his armes abroad vpon the Crosse; & he spreads his handes which are ready to imbrace vs sin∣ners. Between those armes of my Sauiour, I resolue to liue, & I de∣sire to dye. There will I securely sing, I will exalt thee O Lord, be∣cause thou hast taken me vp, & hast not giuen myne enemyes their plea∣sure ouer me. Our Sauiour bowed downe his head, at his death, that he might kisse his beloued, & so often do we giue à kisse to God, as we haue compunction of our sinnes, for the loue of him. CHAP. XXIIII. An exhortation of the soule to the loue of Christ our Lord. O Thou my soule, which art di∣gnified with the image of God, redeemed by the bloud of Christ, espowsed by faith, endoweth with a
spirit, adorned with vertues, ranc∣ked with Angells, be sure thou loue him, by whome thou art so much beloued. Make him thy busines, who hath made thee his. Seeke him who seeketh thee, loue thy louer, by whome thou art beloued; by whose loue thou art preuented, and who is the cause of thyne. He is thy me∣rit, thy reward, thy fruit, thy vse, & thy end. Be thou carefull to∣gether with him, who is so carefull of thee; be attentiue to him, who is attentiue to thee, be pure with him who is pure; be holy with him, who is holy. Such as thou dost appeare in the sight of God, such art thou to expect that he will appeare to thee. God who is so sweete, so meeke, and so full of mercy, doth require that thou shouldst be sweet, and meeke, and gentle, & humble, and full of mercy. Loue him who hath drawne thee out of the lake of misery, and the filth of durt. Choose him for thy friend, aboue all thy friends; who when all they shall fayle thee, will be euer sure to make good thy trust, at the day of thy death. When
all thy friends are departing from thee, he will not leaue thee, but he will defend thee, against those roa∣ring lyons, who are sharpe set vpon theyr prey. And he will leade thee by a Country, wherewith thou art not yet acquainted, and he will bring thee to those streets of the celestiall Sion; & there he will place thee, to∣gether with his Angels, before the face of his owne Maiesty, where thou shalt heere that Angellicall Musicke of., Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth. There is the Canticle of ioy, the voyce of exulta∣tion, and saluatiō, and thanksgiuing; the voyce of prayse, and that euerla∣sting Alleluya. There is that high heape of happynes, that supereminēt glory, that superaboundant gladnes, & all good thinges put togeather. O sigh thou ardently, O my soule; & desire vehemently that thou mayst arriue at that heauenly citty, whereof so glo∣rious thinges are sayd, & where of all the inhabitants, are so full of ioy. By loue thou mayst ascend. Nothing is impossible, nothing is hard to one who loues. The soule which loues as∣cendeth
often; and doth familiarity runne too & fro, through those streets of the Celestiall Hierusalem. Sometimes visiting the Patriarkes & the Prophets; sometymes admi∣ring those armyes of Martyrs, and Confessors; & contemplating som∣tymes the Quires of Virgins. The heauen and the earth, withall which is therein, doe neuer cease to let me know, that I ought to loue my Lord my God. CHAP. XXV. That nothing can suffice the soule, but the supreme Good. THe hart of man which is not fixed in the desire of eternity, can neuer be stable and firme, but is more wauering then the wind; and it passeth from one thing to another, seeking reste where it cannot be foūd. For in these fraile & transitory thinges, where the affection the∣reof is imprisoned, it can neuer finde true repose. Because our soule is of so great dignity, that no Good, but
only the supreme Good can satisfy it; and withall it is of so great liberty, that it cannot be constrained to com∣mit any sinne. It is therefore the proper will of euery one, which is the cause of his saluation or damnation; so that nothing more rich, can be giuen to God, then a good will. A good will draweth God downe to vs, & it addresseth vs vp to him. By a good will we loue God, we chuse him we runne to him, we arriue to him, and we possesse him. O how excel∣lent a thing is this good will, wherby we are reformed, according to the resemblance of God, and are made like to him. So amiable to God is this good will, as that it refuseth to inhabit that hart wherin a good will is not to be found. A good will doth make that supreme Maiesty of the Trinity stoop downe to it For, wise∣dome doth illuminate it towards the knowledge of truth; Charity doth inflame it towards the loue of good∣nes, and the Paternity doth preserue, that which it did create, that it may not perish.
CHAP. XXVI. VVhat the knowledge of truth is. WHat is that knowledg of truth? It consisteth first in a mans knowing himselfe, & in being that which a man ought to be, and in reforming that which should be amended. It doth therefore consist in knowing and louing the Creatour, for this is the whole good of man. See then how vnspeakable the loue of this diuine loue is. It made vs of nothing; and it gaue vs whatsoeuer we haue. But because we loued the guift, more then the giuer, we fell into the snare of the diuell, and be∣came his slaues. Then did God, being moued to mercy, send his Sonne to redeeme those slaues, and he also sent the holy Ghost, to the end, that he might make those slaues his sonnes. He gaue the Sonne as a price of our redemption, and the holy Ghost, for the priuiledge of his loue; and so he imparteth his whole selfe, as the inheritance of
our adoption. So doth God, as being most pittifull, & most mercifull, through the desire which he hath of the loue of man, not only impart his mercyes, but his very selfe, that so he might recouer men; not so much to him, who is God, as to them∣selues. That men might be borne of God, God was first born of man. Who then is he that hath a hart so hard, as that it cannot be softned by this loue of God? this loue I say of his so preuenting, & so vehe∣ment which made him be content to become man for the loue of man? Who now wilbe able to hate a man, whose nature and resemblance he seeth in the humanity of God? In∣faillibly whosoeuer hateth him, ha∣teth God, and so he destroyeth whatsoeuer he doth. For God was made man for man; that as already he was mans Creatour, so also he might be his redeemer, and that he might purchase him, out of his owne stocke. And to the end that God might be beloued by man, in a more familiar manner, he appeared in the similitude of man; that so both
his externall and internall senses, might be made happy in God; the eye of his soule being intertained, & fed by his diuinity, & the eye of his body by Gods humanity; to the end, that whether he should worke in∣wardly or outwardly, this human na∣ture which he created, might be able to feed deeply, & sweetly vpon him. CHAP. XXVII. VVhat the mission of the holy Ghost doth worke in vs. THis Sauiour of ours, was borne for vs, he was crucified and he died for vs, that so by his death he might destroy ours. And because that bunch of grapes of his flesh and bloud, was carried to this wine-presse of the Crosse, & because the ex∣pression thereof being made, the new winer of his Diuinity began to flow from thence, the holy Ghost was sent downe, wherby the vessels of our harts were to be prepared, and new wine to be put into new skins; that first our harts might be cleansed,
least els the wine powred in, should be polluted; and that afterward, they should be tyed vp, least otherwise when it were infused, it might be spilt. That they might (I say) be cleansed from all ioy, which could be taken in sinne; and that they might be fastened against all ioy which could be taken in vanity. For that which is good, can neuer come, vnles first that be sent away, which is euill. The ioy which is taken in sinne, polluteth; and the ioy which is taken in vanity, scattereth vs. The ioy which is taken in sinne, maketh the vessell fowle, and the ioy which is taken in vanity, maketh it to be full of holes. Ioy is taken in sinne, when sinne is loued, and ioy is taken in vanity, when transitorie things are beloued. Cast the refore away, that which is euill, that thou mayst receaue that which is good. Powre out all bitternes, that thou mayst be filled with sweetnes. The holy Ghost is ioy & loue. Cast out the spirit of the diuell, & the spirit of the world, that thou maist receaue he spirit of God. The spirit of the
Diuell, breedeth a ioy in sinne; and the spirit of the world, breedeth a ioy in vanity. Now both these ioyes are naught; for the one of them hath vice in it, the other giueth occasion to vice. The spirit of God will come when these wicked spirits are cast out; and it will enter into the taber∣nacle of thy hart, and will produce a good ioy, and a good loue, whereby the loue of the world, & the loue of sinne, shall be put to flight. The loue of the world, doth intice and deceaue; the loue of sinne, doth pollute, and carry on to death. But the loue of God doth illuminate the mind, it doth purify the conscience, it makes the soule reioyce, & it de∣monstrates God. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the working of that soule which loueth God. HE, in whome the loue of God remaines, is euer thinking how he may arriue to God; how he may leaue the world; how he may decline
the corruption of flesh and bloud: and to the end, that he may find true peace, he euer hath his desire, & his hart erected towards heauenly things. When he is sitting, when he is walking, when he is resting, & in fine whatsoeuer he be doing, his hart departeth not from God. He exhorteth all men to the loue of God, he recommendeth it to all men, & he proueth to all the world, both by his hart, and by his tongue, and by his workes, how sweet the loue of God is, and how bitter that is of the world. He despiseth the glory of the world, he discouereth it to be full of affliction; and he declareth how fond they are, who place their con∣fidence therin. He wondreth at the blindnes of men, for louing such thinges as those; he wondreth, how it is possible for all men not to forsake these transitory, and fraile things of the world. He conceaueth that euery one should find tast in that which is so sauoury to himselfe, that euery one should loue that which he likes so well; that euery one should desire that which is so plainely discerned
by him. He doth frequently con∣template his God, and by that con∣templation he is sweetly fed; so much more happily, as more frequently. For that is most delightfully conside∣red, the louing and praysing wher∣of, is so full of delight. CHAP. XXIX. Of the Harts true Repose. THen indeed is the hart in true repose, when it is all fixed by desire in the loue of God; & when it couets nothing els, but in him, in whom it delighteth with sweetnes, and whom it enioyeth with delight. And if perhaps it be a little diuerted from him, eyther by any vaine thought, or els by busines, it retur∣neth instantly againe at full speede; esteeming it for no better them ba∣nishement, during the tyme that it remaineth any where but in him. For as there is no moment of tyme, wherin a man hath not experience of the diuine goodnes, so ought there not to be any moment, wherin it
should not be present to our memo∣ry. He is not lyable to a little fault, who in prayer, whilst he is conuer∣sing with God, doth easely wander out of his sight, as if God did nether heare, nor see him. Yet this is done, when he followeth his owne impor∣tunate and euill thoughts, and when he preferreth any poore and base creature (towards whome the sight of minde is easely withdrawne) before God. Reflecting & rowling, as it were, that creature vp and downe in his minde, by oftner thin∣king on it, then vpon God, whome continually he ought to remember, as his redeemer; to expect as his Sauiour; & to feare as his iudge. CHAP. XXX. VVhatsoeuer doth withdrav the sight of the mind from God, is wholly to be auoyded. WHosoeuer thou be, that louest the world, consider well, whither, it hath a meaninge to carry thee. That way whereby
thou goest, is a most wicked way, and full of misery. Fly therfore for a while, O man, from all worldly bu∣sines, and hide thy selfe from those tumultuous thoughts of thine. Now cast away thy weighty cares, dismisse those laborious imployments; be a little at leasure for God, and repose with him a little, in the closet of thy hart. Exclude all but God, and those things which may helpe to∣wards the finding of him. Let all thy hart now say to God, I seeke thy countenance, and yet agayne I seeke it O my God. Come therfore O Lord my God; teach my hart, both where, and how it may seeke thee, and where and how it may finde thee. O Lord, if thou be not heere, where shall I finde thee being absent; and if thou be heere, why do I not see thee, being present. But thou indeed dost inhabite inaccessible light, yet how shall I then approach to that light, if it be inaccessible; or who shall lead me, & admit me to it, that I may see thee in it? And againe, by what signes, or by what addresse shal I seeke thee? I neuer saw thee,
O Lord my God; nor was I euer ac∣quainted with thy countenāce, What thou most high God, shal this creature who hath bee exiled so farr off from thee, what I say, shall he be able to do? VVhat shall thy slaue be able to do; who on the one side, is so deadly taken with the loue of thee, and yet on the other, doth find him∣selfe to be cast so farre off from thy face? Behold how he doth euen pant to see thee, whilest yet thy face is so farr remote? It desireth to draw neere to thee; but thy habitation cannot be approached vnto; It desires to find thee, but it knows not where; it striues to seeke thee, but it is a stran∣ger to thy presence. CHAP. XXXI. How the vision of God was lost by sinne, and that misery came so to be found out. O Lord, thou art my God, and my Lord. I neuer saw thee & yet thou didst create me, & redeeme me, and thou hast giuen me all good things; but yet still I neuer saw thee
nor doe I know thee. And though it be true that I was made of purpose, for the seeing of thee, yet hitherto, I neuer did that for which I was made. O miserable condition of man, who lost the thing to which he was ordained. O woefull heauy chance! Alas what is it, that he lost; & what is it that he found? What departed, & what remayned. He lost felicity, to which he was orday∣ned; and he met with misery, to which he was not ordayned. That departed, without which nothing can be happy; and that remayned, which of it selfe is nothing but pure misery. Then did man feed vpon the bread of Angells, after which now he hath such hunger; and now he feeds vpon the bread of sorrow, to which then he was a stranger. O thou my Lord, how long wilt thou forget vs? How long wilt thou turne thy face from vs? When wilt thou regard, and heare vs? VVhen wilt thou illuminate these eyes of ours, and shew vs that face of thyne? When wilt thou restore thy selfe to vs, and heare vs? Behold vs, O Lord, and
hearken to vs, and enlighten vs, and shew thy selfe to vs, and restore thy selfe to vs; that once we may be happy in thee, without whome we are so truly vnhappy. O Lord, I beseech thee, inuite and help vs. My soule is all made bitter, by her deso∣lation; sweeten it by thy consolation. I beseech thee, O Lord, since I haue been hungry in search of thee, let me not be forsaken in being vnfed by thee. I come faynt with hungar towardes thee, let me not depart empty from thee. I come poore to thee who art rich; miserable to thee who art mercifull. Do not send me away needy, and disgraced. O my Lord, I am all bent downeward, nor can I looke but downeward, doe thou erect me that I may looke vpward, and that with great atten∣tion. My iniquityes haue ouer∣growne my head; they haue ouer∣whelmed me; and they hang vpon me like a huge weight. Vnfold me, & empty me, and let not that VVell stretch out his mouth to swallow me. Teach me to seeke thee; and when I seeke thee let me see thee; for neither
can I seeke thee, if thou dost not teach me, nor can I find thee, if thou dost not manifest thy selfe to me. Let me seeke thee by desiring thee; let me desire thee by seeking thee. Let me find thee by louing thee; & let me loue thee, by finding thee. CHAP. XXXII. Of the Goodnes of God,. I Confesse to thee, O Lord, and I giue thee thankes, in that thou hast created me after this thyne Ima∣ge, that so being mindfull of thee, I may consider, and loue thee. But so is my soule defaced, with the cor∣ruption of vice; and it is so obscured with the smoke of sinne, that it cannot performe that for which it was made, vnlesse it be renewed & reformed by thee. O Lord, thou who impartest the guift of spiritual vnderstanding, I beseech thee grant that I may vnderstand as much as thou knowest to be expedient for me. For thou art as we beleeue, & thou
art that very thing which we beleeue & wee beleeue that thou art some what, then which nothing greater, and nothing better can be conceaued. What therfore art thou, O Lord God (since nothing can be cōceaued either greather or better then thou art) but only that soueraigne good, which existing by it selfe alone, did create al other things of nothing? VVhat good can therfore be wanting, to that soueraigne good, whereby all good thinges are. Thou art there∣fore iust, & true, & blessed; & whatsoeuer els, which it is better to be then not to be, that thing thou art. But yet if thou be all supremely iust, how commeth it to passe, that thou pardonnest sinners? Is it be∣cause thy goodnes doth exceed our vnderstanding? This mistery lyeth hid in that inaccessible light, which thou dost inhabit, yea in that most deepe, and most secret profoundity of thy Goodnes, that fountaine doth lye hid, from whence the riuer of thy mercy floweth. For although thou be wholy, and supremely iust; yet therefore art thou mercifull to
wicked men, because thou art also wholy and supremely Good. And thou shouldst be lesse good, if thou wert not good to any who is wicked. For he is better, who is, good both to the good & to the had, then he who is good, but to the good. And better is he who is good both in par∣doning, and in punishing wicked men, then another who is only good in punishing. And therefore art thou also mercifull, because thou art wholy and supremely Good. CHAP. XXXIII. Of the delightfull fruition of God. O Thou immense goodnes, who exceedest all vnderstanding. Let thy mercy, which so aboundantly preceedeth from thee, descend downe on me, let that flow into me, which floweth from the. Pardon me by thy mercy, least els thy iustice be forced to take reuenge vpon me. Styr thy selfe vp, now, O my soule, & erect thy whole vnderstanding, and con∣sider (to the vttermost of all thy
power) what kind, & how great a good that is, which is God himself. For if euery particulier good thing do carry with itsome delight doe but seriously consider how delightful that good must needs be, which con∣tayneth the delight of all good thinges; & that too, no such kind of delight, as we experience in thinges created, but a delight so very different, as the Creatour, is more excellent then the creature. Now if that life which is created be good, how good is that other life, which created this? If this health be delight∣full, which is made; how delightfull must that needs be, which made all this health? If the VVisedom be a∣miable, which is exercised in the consideration & knowledge of crea∣ted things; how amiable must that other VVisedom be, which created & framed all of nothing? And in fine, if the delight which is taken in de∣lightfull things be very great, and of great variety; how various, & how great is that delight, which is taken in him, who created all these de∣lightfull thinges? O how happie
shall he be, that shall arriue to, & ēioy this good; Yea how happy shall he not be? Infaillibly whatsoeuer he would haue to be, shall be; and what∣soeuer he would not, shall not be. He shall there, be so endued with such felicity, both of body & soule, as neither the eye hath seene, nor the eare hath heard, nor hath it entered into the hart of man. CHAP. XXXIV. That this supreme good is to be desired. WHY dost thou therfore wander, O thou man, in the search of any good, concerning either thy body or thy soule? Loue thou that one good, wherein all good things are, & it is inough. Desire thou that one single good, which conteyneth all good, and it will suf∣fice. For what dost thou, O boby of myne, desire, what dost thou desire, O my soule? There is in that good, whatsoeuer thou canst desire or loue. If thou be delighted with beauty, the iust shall shin bright like the Sunne.
If speed or strenght, or ability to do what thou wilt with thy body; no∣thing shall be able to resist thee, since the. Saints shal be as the Angels of God: For a corporall body is sowed, but it shall rise vp a spirituall body; not that it is so by nature, but by participation. If thou desire a long & healthfull life, in heauen there shalbe a health full eternity, & an eternall health for the iust shall liue for euer; & their saluatio is of our Lord. If thou desire to haue a satiety, & fullnes of all things; Men shalbe satisfyed when the glory of our Lord shall appeare. If thou desire to be inebriated, mē shall there be inebria∣ted, by that euer growing plenty of the house of God. If musicke; the Angells shalbe singing there, for all eternity. If pleasure which is chast & pure, our Lord shall giue then to drink of the torrent of his pleasure. If wisedome, the very wisedome of God will to them declare himself who is wisedome. If friendship they shall loue God more then themselues, & God will loue them better them they can loue themselues; because
they loue him, & themselues & one another, in him; & he loueth him∣selfe, & them, by himselfe. If con∣cord with one another be esteemed; they haue all but one will, because they haue no other will, but the su∣preme will of God. If power, they shall haue the same dominion ouer their owne will which God hath ouer his. For as God can do what he will by himselfe, so shall they be able to do what they will by him. And as they cannot will any thing but what he wills; so wil he will, whatsoeuer they will; & so what they will cannot chuse but be. If wealth & honour, God doth place his good and faythfull seruants ouer many goods; yea they shall be called the sonnes of God, and Gods; and they shalbe his heires, & the coheirs of Christ. If true security, they shall be as certainly assured, that no good thing shall be euer wanting to them, as they shall be sure that neither they wil forgoe it willingly, nor that he who loueth them, will take it away against their will, whome he so lo∣ueth; nor yet that there is any thing
mightier then God, which is able to separate him and them from one another. Now what kind of ioy, and how great must that needs be, where such a good as this, is to be inioyed. CHAP. XXXV. Of the mutuall Charity of the Saints in Heauen. O Thou hart of man, thou poore hart, thou hart which knowest what belonges to cares and miseries, by experience; or rather which art euen ouer-welmed by them, how much wouldst thou reioyce, if thou didst abound with all those blessings. Aske thy most inward powers if they would be able to containe the ioy, which would grow to thee, by such felicity as that. But now if any other, whom thou didst absoluty loue, as thou didst loue thy selfe, should pos∣sesse the selfe same beatitude, with thee; thy ioy would be doubled, be∣cause thou wouldst reioyce no lesse for him, then for thy selfe. And if two or three, or many more were
possessors of it, thou wouldst reioyce for euery one of them, as for thy selfe; supposing that thou louedst euery one of them as thy selfe. What kinde of thing, will therfore, that perfect Charity be, of innumerable Angels, & blessed men, since no one loueth another lesse then himselfe; & no otherwise will euery one reioyce, for any other then for himselfe. If therfore the hart of man will scarce be able to containe it self for the sin∣gle ioy, which himselfe will takes in so great a good; how will he be capa∣ble of this so great ioy, of so many others? Againe, looke how much more a man loues another, and so much more doth he reioyce at his good. And now, as in that supreme felici∣ty, euery one will, without com∣parison, loue God better then him∣selfe, and all the rest; so also will he, without comparison, reioyce more in the felicity of God then in that of himselfe, & of all the rest of his fel∣low-Saints. And if they shal loue God withal their hart, all their mind, and al their soule, in such sort as that
yet all their hart, & all their minde, & all their soule cannot sufficiently comprehend the dignity of that loue; without faile they will also reioyce with all their hart, withal their mind, & withall their soule, so that all their hart, mind, & soule, shall not be able to containe the fulnes of that ioy. CHAP. XXXVI. Of the fulnes of the ioy of Heauen. O My God, and my Lord, my hope, & the ioy of my hart; tell my soule, if this be that ioy, wherof thou hast said by thy sonne, Aske, & you shall receiue, that so your ioy may be full. For I haue found a certaine ioy, which is full, and more then full; the hart, the mind, the soule, and the whole man being full thereof: But yet in heauen there will be another ioy beyond measure, greater then this is. There, they who are to enioy it, shall not enter into all that ioy; but they, being all full of ioy, shall enter into
that ioy of their Lord. Tell me O Lord, tell thy seruant, & tel it to my hart within, if this be that ioy, into which those seruants of thine shal enter; who are to enter into the ioy of their Lord? But euen that ioy wher with thy elect shall reioyce, hath neither bene seen with the eye, nor heard by the eare, nor hath it en∣tred into the hart of man. So that yet, I haue not bene able to say, O Lord, how great that ioy is, which thy Elect shall enioy. It is certaine, that they shall ioy as much as they loue, & they shall loue as much, as they shall knowe thee O Lord. But how great shall that loue be? It is certaine that neither the eye hath seene, nor the eare hath hard, nor hath it entred into the hart of man, in this life, how much they shal knowe & loue thee, in that other life, O my God, I beseech thee that I may knowe thee; that I may loue thee, that I may ioy in thee. And if, in this life, I may not do it to the full, yet at least make me profit in it more, & more, that at last I may ar∣riue to that fullnes. Let the know∣ledge
which heere I haue of thee, proceed further that so it may there, be full. Let my loue of thee increase heere, that so it may be full there; & that heere, my ioy, may be great in hope, & there, full, in deede. O Thou true God, I beg, that I may receiue what thou hast promised, that so my ioy may be fulfilled. In the meane tyme, let my minde medi∣tate vpon it; let my tongue speake of it; let my hart loue it; let my dis∣course worke vpon it; let my soule be hungry and euen my very flesh thirst after it; and let my whole sub∣stance desire it; till such tyme as I shall enter into the ioy of my Lord, where I may remaine for euer. Amen. FINIS.
