B1380 12320257 59462
Sacrilegious Desertion OF THE HOLY MINISTERY REBUKED, AND Tolerated Preaching of the GOSPEL VINDICATED, Against the Reasonings of a Confident Questionist, in a Book called [Toleration not to be abused.] With Counsel to the NONCONFORMISTS, And Petition to the PIOUS CONFORMISTS. By one that is Consecrated to the Sacred Ministery, and is resolved not to be a wilful Deserter of it, in trust that any underta∣kers, can justifie him for such desertion at the Judgment of God; till he know better how those can come off themselves, who are unfaithful Pa∣stors, or unjust Silencers of others. 1 Cor. 9. 16.For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of: For necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. 1 Tim. 1. 12. & 2. 9. & 3. 6.For which cause I suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed, &c. 1 Thes. 2. 15, 16.Who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, &c. Printed in the Year, 1672.
Tolerated Preaching OF Christs Gospel VINDICATED. CHAP. I. Of the Author and the Title. SECT. I. I Am one my self that am so greatly desirous of His Maje∣sties Clemency, and that this present Toleration should not be abused by any, espe∣cially silenced Ministers; that if this had been all that Author endeavoured, I should earnestly e seconded him. And I am not without fear
of the Weakness, Rashness, Injudiciousness and Imprudence of some that yet are earnest and profitable Preachers. But when I find that by not-abusing our Liberty, he meaneth, not-using it, and that he hath the face to exhort us to desert our Office, when the King doth hin∣der them from forcible restraining us; and that, when it is Gods work which we are vowed to, he cometh to us (as the old Prophet) in Gods name, to charge us to forbear it, my Conscience bids me help to save the weaker sort that need it, from such pernicious fallacies. And if I speak plainly of the quality of his ar∣guings, I desire the Reader not to interpret it, as if I had not the heartyest desire of Peace, and all Brotherly Love and Concord with all conformable, godly, faithful Ministers. But words are not answered according to their nature, when the nature of them is not o∣pened. Sect. 2. Who the Author is, and why he resolveth his Question on the Presbyterian Principles, and passeth by the Episcopal Non-conformists, as if he were so ignorant of the present State of England, as not to know that there are many such (when at the Kings re∣turn, 1660. it was Bishop Ushers Form of Epis∣copal Government which they all offered for Concord, who were employed in that work) these are little matters, not to be insisted on. Only I shall tell him that I have met with few
Presbyterian Ministers in England: though most have that name given them in their Li∣censes. A Presbyterian is one that is [For the Di∣vine Right of Ruling-Elders, unordained, having no Power to Preach and Administer Sacraments; and for the Government of the Church by Presbyteries, Classes, and Synods, composed of Teaching-Elders in Parity with these Ruling-Elders Conjunct, so that a General Assembly of them is the true Ecclesiastical Head of a National-Church.] Of late, a Presbyterian is like the Puritan of old: A word which hath as many and as bad significations, as speakers have diversity of designs or intents. In one mans mouth a Presbyterian is an Episco∣pal Protestant of the soberest sort, who is nei∣ther for Sects, nor for Church-Tyranny; and so impudency hath called them Presbyterians many years, who offered the said Episcopal Form, which A. Bishop Usher proved to be the true Government of the ancient Churches. And so we have made Episcopal Presbyterians, who are against unordained Elders, and for Bi∣shops. In anothers mouth a Presbyterian is one that is resolute against Popery. In anothers mouth a Presbyterian is one that is for the serious pra∣ctice of a holy life. In another mans mouth a Presbyterian is one that is against Bishops. And so Independents and many others Sects would be Presbyterians too. And in other mens mouthes a Presbyterian is one that is of
Bishop Reynolds, and Dr. Stillingfleets judg∣ment, that no Form of Government (besides the meer Pastoral Office, and Church-As∣semblies) is prescribed in the Word of God, but variously left to variety of occasions. Among all these, when you speak with a Railing Ruffian, he must tell you which he means himself: But when we meet with a Divine that understandeth the common use of the Word, we must take him to use it in the first proper sense. In which sense I say again, that I am acquainted with few comparatively that are for Presbytery; but I know many that are for Pastoral Administration without Church-Tyranny or Schism. Sect. 3. As the Author honoureth himself with the praise of being a Lover of the Truth and Peace (which commendation all the con∣tending parties, from the Papist to the Quaker are as ready to give themselves) so I hope I shall the easilier obtain his pardon, if (belie∣ving him) I shall prove that it is Truth and Peace which he opposeth. And if I offer him a better way to secure them; assuring him that I agree with him in his main design, to bring the Conformists and Non-conformists nearer, and to a more amicable concord in the Work of God, and not to drive any further from mutual Communion than they are.
CHAP. II. The Nonconformists Resolutions, and the true State of the Case to be debated. Sect. 1. BE it known to the Reader, that the name of Nonconformists was not made by our selves, but by others, (as the names of the four Confessors, Dan. 1. was). The Titles which we assume, as signifying our own professed Religion, are but these, our Religion is Christian, and no other; In oppo∣sition to dividing Sects we are Catholicks▪ In contradistinction from Hereticks, we cleave to the Scripture as our Rule; In contradistincti∣on from the Roman Schism and Corruptions we are Protestants, that is, we protest to cleave to simple Christianity, and to the Primitive puri∣ty and simplicity against their introduced No∣velties and Vanities. Sect. 2. As to the Point of Church-Govern∣ment & Worship (the quarrel of the present age) 1. We easily confess that we are not all of a mind; which is no cause of alienation of af∣fections, nor should be a cause of mutual per∣secutions; It being our judgment that Christi∣ans are to bear with one another in greater matters, than Episcopal, Presbyterians, Inde∣pendents,
and Anabaptists disagree in. And if any among us have done otherwise hereto∣fore, it was from a Vice Homogeneal to that of the present Conformists, which now they smart for; and the Conformists may repent of in due time. Sect. 3. We take not the name of Noncon∣formists to be such a Cothurnus or Hose drawn over the several parties by your prudence as shall make them one, or tye them closer toge∣ther than Conformists and Nonconformists are. I pray you try, if you will not believe us, whether Papists or Quakers take us or you for their greater Adversaries. Remember how after the Fire of London the Papists in Print did court you as men much nearer unto them than we are, and much liker to befriend them. And I doubt you will never make them think otherwise. We take you for men of the same Religion with us, and much fitter for our Communion, than such Nonconformists as Pa∣pists and Quakers are. Sect. 4. But we that suffer from you (Hear it now, for you shall hear it from God ere long,) all the Poverty, Confinements, Cala∣mities, Silencings that have been inflicted on us, because we would not subscribe, say, swear, and do—you know what; can no more go against our Consciences, in Conform∣ing to one another, than to you. Therefore you must not think that Episcopal, Presbyteri∣an,
Independent, and Anabaptists, will be ever the more of a mind for this Toleration. Till Reason change their Opinions, they will live according to their different Principles, though they love each other, and live in peace. And because you seem to be ignorant of their Prin∣ciples and Purposes, I will tell you some of them, that concern the matter in hand. Sect. 5. 1. They take a Ministry to be ordinari∣ly necessary to the propagating of the Gospel & the saving of Souls, Rom. 10. 14, 15. Act. 20. 17, 18, &c. 2. They suppose that this Ministry doth not save men, as Wizards think that Charms do heal men, by their Presence, Titles, Names, or Habits; By standing in the Reading-place, or Pulpit, or being called the Parson of the Parish, or saying his set words over them when they are dead: But by such publick and personal, frequent, plain, serious Instructions, as are suited to their ignorance security, presump∣tion, hardheartedness, and love to sin; and such as in other cases would be thought fit to change mens minds and lives. 3. They sup∣pose that when a well, commended Speech hath been said to ignorant impenitent people, one day in a week, without any personal fa∣miliar conference to set it home, and make it more intelligible, the most make but little more of it, than if it had been said to them in an unknown Tongue, or at least remain still ig∣norant and impenitent. Yea, if Forms of Ca∣techisms
themselves be taught them, it is ordi∣nary with them year after year to say the Forms, and never understand the matter sig∣nified. 4. They suppose that a greater number of the conformable Priests, than they are wil∣ling to mention, do Preach so ignorantly and dully in the Pulpits, and do so little of this personal or private work besides, as that there is great need of a far greater number of assist∣ants, than all the present Nonconformists be. 5. They find that some places, of many years past, have had no Ministers at all. 6. They are not able to confute the people in too many places, who tell them that their publick Priests are so defective in their necessary qualifications for their Office, as that they hold it unlawful to own such for true Ministers, and to encourage them by their presence, or commit the care of their Souls to such. 7. They think that some other places have godly, able Con∣formable Ministers, whom the Christian peo∣ple love and honor. 8. They think that Pa∣rish bounds of Churches, are of humane pru∣dential Constitution, and not of Divine In∣stitution, or unchangeable. 9. They think that a Parish, quatenus a Parish, is not a Church; nor a Parishioner, as such a Church-member; for Infidels, Papists, Hereticks, Schismaticks and Dissenters may be Parishioners. 10. They think that the Magistrate hath the power of the Temples and Tythes, and publick Mainte∣nance
and Liberty, but that he hath not the power of Ordination or Degradation; but a man may be a true Minister without his consent, and so I think all Christians hold. 11. They think that some of the Nonconformists were true Pastors of their several Flocks, before they were silenced and cast out. 12. They think that the ejecting them from the Temples and Tythes did not degrade them, nor make them no true Pastors to their Flocks. 13. They think that the Magistrates putting another Pa∣rish Minister in possession of the Temple and Tythes, did not dissolve the foresaid relation of the former. 14. They think yet that pru∣dence requireth Minister and People to con∣sent to such a Dissolution of their Relations, where they cannot hold it without greater hurt than benefit: Yea, and to consent that the imposed Minister be their Pastor, when he is fit himself, and the Worship performed by him fit for them to joyn in. 15. But where both are fit, they know no reason but they may take both the Ejected and the Imposed Person conjunctly for their Pastors, each being to Ad∣minister to the same Church, according to their various Liberties & Capacities. 16. They greatly difference between London & such like populous Cities, & Country Parishes, because the burn∣ing of Churches, the greatness of Parishes, and the paucity of Ministers in London is such, that the tenth person in several Parishes cannot
come to Church if they would. 17. In such places therefore they purpose to hold their Meetings at the time of the Parish meeting, because it will be no hindrance to it. 18. So they do also in those Parishes where the Parish Priest is unfit to be owned in that Relation. 19. Where there is a faithful Pastor in the Pa∣rish Church whom yet half the people cannot hear, they will not draw the people from him, nor disparage him to hinder the success of his labors, but rather perswade them to honor him, hear him, and obey his Doctrine; and to judge of the Tolerated Minister but as of his fellow servant, of the same Religion, helping in the same Work, where all our la∣bours are too little. 20. Where the Parish Minister is faithful, and the Parish small e∣nough, and neer enough to Assemble in one place, and the people satisfied with the Li∣turgie, I suppose the soberest of the Nonconfor∣mists (for they are not all of a mind) will gather no Church out of that Parish, but will joyn with that Parish Church and Minister (supposing them united by consent) and will use their own Ministerial Assistance, at such other times, and place, and manner, as shall best tend to keep up Love and Concord, and to further and not hinder the successes of the publick Minister. 21. I hope no man worthy the name of a Minister, will dream that England should have no more Teachers,
than there are (or are like to be) Nonconfor∣mists: Or will think it his duty to hinder the Labors of any sober Protestant Ministers: Nay, I hope they will all understand, that it was never more their Duty nor their Interest to cherish all brotherly Love and Concord with such; and woe be to that man who ever he be, whether a Selfish envious Conformist, or a Schismatical factious Nonconformist, that after all such sins and sad experience of the fruits, shall yet hinder the Concord of Protestant Chri∣stians, I had almost said, or that doth not hear∣tily and diligently promote it. 22. He that had rather ten thousand persons stay'd idlely at home, or went to Sports or Drinking, in Stepney parish, or Giles Cripplegate, or Sepul∣chers, or Martins in the Fields, or Giles in the Fields, or Clement Danes, &c. than a Non∣conformist should preach to them, I will not soul my paper by calling him as he deserveth, though he pretend that gathering a Church out of a Church, is a thing that he opposeth. 23. In all these Cases following, the Noncon∣formists will hold distinct Church-Assemblies from the Parish Churches. 1. Where the Parish Church is not capable of them, as was last instanced, by reason of the number. 2. When the Parish Priest is one to whom wise men may not commit the care of their Souls, and one whose Ministry is not to be owned, (I would there were none such.)
3. When the Ejected Minister in foro consci∣entiae & Ecclesiae verè sic dictae, retaineth still his Ancient Relation to his Flock, and part of them Schismatically separate from him, and joyn with an intruder publickly, that never had a lawful Call, and the other half separate not from their ancient Pastor. Its possible the obtruder, though he have the Temple, may be the Schismatick. Ask Dr. Wild, and Dr. Gun∣ning whether they thought not so 14. years ago. 4. It may be some that are more com∣plyant than my self with good peoples weak∣nesses and humours, when there is none of the foresaid Reasons, may rather choose to be Pastors to honest Separatists, or Anabaptists, than by deserting them to leave them to do worse. And what great matter of injury or provoca∣tion should this seem to any peaceable man? Envy is too odious a thing for any Servant of Christ to own. Is it in the power of Anabap∣tists to bring all their judgments to yours. And till they can, must they be quite cast off. Who knoweth not how many Ages the Nova∣tians were tolerated by the wisest and godly∣est Emperors and Bishops; yea, what black characters are given by pious Historians, of Ithacius, and his fellow Bishops, who first in France did set the Sword awork even against Heresies, and of Cyril at Alexandria, who first as a Bishop used it himself. 5. But that's not all: What if any number of persons as good as you,
shall think that the Liturgie is guilty of all the Disorders and Defects which once were charged on it, and of some Doctrinal Corrup∣tions since: And what if they think that the Parish Churches are void of Christs true Dis∣cipline, and are under an Alien, one which they judge unlawful. What if they say that yet your Churches may be true Churches, and all this may be submitted to, when we can have and do no better; but he that can serve God in a manner more agreeable to his Word, is bound to do it; and not to offer God the worst, when the King alloweth us to do our best. And if withall they say, that you refuse them and they refuse not you: You will not give them the Lords Supper, unless they take it kneeling (which I think they may do, but they think otherwise) you will not Baptize their Children without the transient Image of the Cross as a dedicating sign, &c. If in this case they choose a distinct Church-Assembly and Pastor, and Mode of Worship; what harm s this to you or any one, and why should it break Love and Peace? 24. But in this last Case I suppose the most of the Nonconformists that live in Country Parishes which have good Ministers of their own, will not call themselves a distinct Church (totally) but will hold their meetings as Chappel-Meetings are held; Preaching the Word and Communicating in the Sacraments in the best way they can among
themselves; but so as not to unchurch the Pa∣rish Church as none, or to withdraw them∣selves from their Communion; but will keep all loving correspondence with them, and sea∣sonably sometimes Communicate with them, to shew their principles by their practice. For the benefit of Christian Love and Concord, may make it best for certain seasons to joyn even in defective Modes of Worship, as Christ did in the Synagogues & Temple in his time. Though the least defective must be chosen when no such accidental reasons sway the other way. And perhaps some Nonconformists own Administra∣tions may be as defective as the Liturgie. 25. Where the people are satisfied with the Parish-Church Communion, I suppose the Nonconformists will only help to instruct them at seasonable times, and not meddle with the Sacramental Administrations. 26. The same practice may be done on various Prin∣ciples; and many Nonconformists may gather Churches in the forenamed Cases, without turn∣ing Separatists, or forsaking any of their for∣mer principles. Their differences will ap∣pear in these respects. 1. They will not pro∣nounce any of your Parish Churches Null, which have lawful Ministers. 2. They will not say that your Worship is such as no man may lawfully Communicate in. 3. They still hold that Parish-bounds are very conve∣nient (though not absolutely necessary) to be
Church-bounds: not taking every Parishione to be of the Church, but none (ordinarily) but Parishioners to be of the Church. 4. They are driven from the Parish-Ministry against their wills, and had far rather hold their an∣cient stations. 5. They will thankfully re∣turn to them when ever they have leave; And earnestly pray that these seemings and shews of separation may cease, the occasion of them be∣ing taken away. 6. They prefer their own manner of worshipping God, as better than the Liturgy in their opinion, and therefore to be chosen when they may choose; but they ac∣count it not the only acceptable Worship, but are present with you in spirit, desiring a part in the prayers of all true Christians in the world. 7. They set not up the Church-Government of the People over the Pastors, or themselves, nor any of the rest of the Separatists proper princi∣ples of Church-Government. 8. Lastly, they desire nothing more than as Neighbour-Mini∣sters in love and concord to carry on with you the same work of Christ. And in all these they differ from Separatists, though they gather Churches. 26. The grand Difficulty to the Noncon∣formists in their present condition, lieth but in this one case, Whether in competent Parishes, which have able and godly Conformable Mini∣sters, the obligation to hold Union and Communion with the Parish Church, or the obligation to ex∣ercise
a more regular way of Church-Discipline and Worship than the Parish Churches do or will do, should be judged the more prevalent; And consequently whether they should gather Churches out of Churches in this case. For in the other forementioned cases the answer is more easie. I shall give my own opinion as follow∣eth: 1. It is lawful and a duty to be a mem∣ber of such a Parish-Church, when we can have and do no better. 2. We cannot have or do better, when it cannot be without a greater hurt to the Publick Interest of the Gospel, the Church, and the Souls of other men, than the benefit to us and others is like to countervail. That cannot be done lawfully which cannot be done without doing more hurt than good, and destroying the end. Obj. We must do that which God bids us, and leave it to him what shall be the success. Ans. True. But you must prove then that God bids you do it; for we will not take your word. Amatives bind not to all times: No duty is at all times a duty; Nay, out of sea∣son it is a sin. He that saith, Pray continually, would not have you pray when you should preach or hear, or be quenching a Fire in the Town: He that commanded Sacrifice, set some to learn the meaning of these words [I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.] There is few of you but would forbear a Sermon or Prayer to save your own or others Lives: And you receive the
Sacrament but once a moneth (at most) which the Primitive Churches used every Lords Day. 3. The same practice than in one place (where it will do more good than hurt) is a duty, which in another place (where it will do more hurt than good) is a sin. 4. The Case is now of so great moment that no Mini∣ster should rashly determine it for himself, nor upon the desires of some of the people only, but should consult with wise and sober men that are impartial. 5. The benefits to be expected and compared, are these, 1. The pleasing of God (when we know it is his will) and the profit of mens Souls, by the most regular manner of Discipline and Worship. 2. The setting up an imitable example of right Disci∣pline and Worship to other Churches (but then woe to them that set up a worse.) 3. The satisfying the Consciences of some honest mi∣staking people, who think (erroneously) that a Conforming Minister may not be Com∣municated with, or at least not in the use of the Liturgie, or in a Parish Church, or that the Sacrament may not be received kneeling. 6. The evils to be feared, and compared with the benefits, are these. 1. The exasperating of the minds of persons for number or quality considerable, and so alienating them from their brethren, and hindring their good. 2. And thereby weakening the Protestant interest, in a time which requireth our greatest Concord.
3. And the setting of parties against parties, and Churches against Churches, and turning Re∣ligion into contentions and mutual oppositions. 4. And the countenancing of unlawful sepa∣rations, which will all shelter themselves under such examples; and the dividers will not see the different principles on which we go, while our practice seemeth to be the same. 5. And so it may be injurious to future Ages, by seeming to give them presidents for unlaw∣ful separations. 6. And it is not the least evil consequent, that we shall cherish not only the Error of those that think worse of the Pa∣rish-Worship & Assemblies than there is cause; but we shall also accidentally nourish their pride, who will think themselves a holier peo∣ple, because they Erroniously over-censure the persons and practices of others. 7. The prime great obligation for the cure of all this, doth Ile upon some of the conforming side; It were ea∣sie for them, not to silence Christs Ministers that are as wise and good as themselves. It were easie for them, not to punish a godly person so hea∣vily as an Excommunication comes to, for the weakness of scrupling a Sacrament-gesture; and not to punish their Children with being unchristened, or themselves with Excommuni∣cation, who think the dedicating Image of the Cross unlawful, or think it their own duty to enter their own Children into the Covenant of God, rather than Godfathers that have no
propriety in them, and they are sure never in∣tend to take them for their own, or use them as they covenant to do. 8. If on such oc∣casions, true godly Christians are cast out of their Parish-Churches, whether they err or not, all Ministers are neither obliged, nor al∣lowed to desert them, and so to add cruelty and affliction to the afflicted. 9. They that think they answer all by saying that these peoples scruples are but Errours, do but 1. Shew their self-esteem, who can call that Errour which they have said so little to prove to be so (in some of their instances.) 2. And he talketh neither like a Pastor nor a Christian, nor a Man, that thinketh all that err should be cast out of the Church. 10. To discern whether in this case a distinct Church is to be gathered or not, is a work of meer Christian prudence and must be determined by com∣paring the good and evil consequences together, and discerning truly which preponderateth. And he that through Imprudence misjudgeth either way, doth sinne. 11. Therefore it is folly, and sin for Ministers (Conform∣able, or Nonconformable) to expect that in this, all should go the same way, and to cen∣sure those that differ from their Opinion, when they may be under different circumstan∣ces. 12. They that live in London, where it hath ever been usual to go to Neighbour Pa∣rish-Churches from their own, and where
custome, and abundance of accidents make the inconveniencies less, have not so much a∣gainst their different Church-meetings, as those in Countrey Towns and Parishes have, 13. Those that live where the Nonconformists are the main body of the people, and the rest are such for number and quality, whose dis∣pleasure is of less publick consequence, have the less against their distinct Church-meet∣ings. 14. Those who live where the Non∣conformists are few, and the Conformists for number and quality most considerable, and are like to be greatly exasperated by distinct Churches, must deny their own personal conveniencies, rather than hinder a greater good, and may not do that which others may do. 15. When the publick good forbids it, the tolerated Ministers must not gather distinct Church-Assemblies, but joyn with the pub∣lick Churches, and help the people by their instructions at other times. 16. When the publick good forbids it not, the tolerated Mi∣nisters must hold distinct Assemblies, for assist∣ance in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, as near as they can to the will of God. But so as to further, and not disgrace nor hinder, the ho∣nest Parish-Ministers; living with them in Unity, Love, and Peace: and whether de nomi∣ne their Assemblies shall be called distinct Churches, is a case of no great moment, though I think that it is fittest to take them for
distinct Churches, secundum quid, and not sim∣pliciter, as many Chappels be: Seeing though in the Assemblies they distinctly worship God, &c. yet they hold personal Communion in a godly conversation with the rest of the Christians in the Parish, and should some∣times also assemble with them. And so much for my own opinion in this case. 27. If Christians would but give over the censoriousness, contentions, and abuse of others, which different Assemblies in the same Town are usually employed in, I see not what great hurt it would do any, for Ana∣baptists, Separatists, &c. that cannot joyn with the Parish-Churches, to have leave to meet among themselves, and worship God to∣gether in peace. 28. As the weakness of the people incli∣neth them to causeless separations and disjuncti∣ons, so the doleful Pride and Selfishness of the carnal part of the Clergie, hath in most Ages made them too impatient with the peoples weakness; and make such a noise and stir in the World, if a few do but withdraw from their Communion, as if all that disowned them, disowned Christ. And all, because Pride would make every man a God to the World, on whom all must depend, whom all must honour and obey, and no man must contra∣dict; and all that depart from them, are supposed to accuse and undervalue them. And
thus as of our own selves, some men arise to draw Disciples after them, so others set the Churches in a flame, for fear of losing any of their Disciples or esteem; and between both, how sadly and for how many Ages, have the people of Christ been torn in pieces. What harm doth it me or any other (if my Pride will let me be quiet) if men that differ from me in some Points of Judgment, do quiet∣ly Worship God, by themselves. But it is so rare for Separated Assemblies, not to make it their Religion and work, to make others odi∣ous, and factiously to draw Disciples and asso∣ciates to themselves, that they must also thank themselves, that others are so impatient with them; so certain it is that all sides are too blame. 29. The right Diocesan holdeth that a Bi∣shop is essential to a Church, and consequently that we have no more Churches than Diocesses, and that Parish-Churches are properly no Churches, but Chappels, or Parts of the Dio∣cesan-Church: And if so, 1. Then he that separateth from a Parish-Church, separateth from no Church (though we think other∣wise.) 2. And as he that went to any Pa∣rish in the Diocess, kept still in his own Church, so a tolerated Church may be as good, a Church, as such a Parish, and it should not be made a hainous matter for any to go to it, by them that allow men to go from Parish to Parish.
30. The Nonconformists hold that the Mi∣nisterial Office is not to be taken up on tryal, or for a time, but durante vitâ cum capacitate; And that it is no less than, 1. Horrid Sacriledge; 2. Perfidious Covenant-break∣ing; 3. Disobedience to God; 4. Cruelty to Souls; 5. And unthankfulness for great mer∣cies, if any of us shall desert our undertaken Offices (yea though a silencing Diocesan should forbid us the exercise of it, unjustly.) Therefore Preach and Officiate while we can, we must. 31. Having told you thus far the Noncon∣formists Principles, I will add, that [If there be any such Conformable Clergie men, as first will do all they can to silence and eject us, and forbid us to Preach the Gospel of Salvati∣on, whil'st many hundred thousands that lie in ignorance and impenitency, need more help, and then will do all they can to hinder our Restauration, and to keep us silent: And lastly, when His Majesties Prudence and Cle∣mency giveth us liberty to Preach, when they can no longer hinder us by force, would stroak us into silence and neglect of our Office, by a few such silly and confident reasonings as this Author useth, as if to hinder our Ministry and Labour one way or other were their in∣terest and work, I will not offend the Readers Ears, by giving them the name that I think they deserve; but wish them to read, 1 Thes.
2. 15, 16. And to tell them (by what names or Titles soever they be distinguished) that I that am a dying man, would be loth to stand in their case before God, and that if they and I were well agreed, that there is indeed a God, a Christ, a Heaven, and a Hell, I think we should the easilier be agreed in all the rest of our differences. Some Teachers need these plain Admonitions. CHAP. III. The Questionists stating of his Question considered. Sect. 1. HAving disclaimed the Approving and Censuring His Majesties De∣claration, he questioneth [Whether it be ad∣viseable, especially for the Presbyterians, either in Conscience or Prudence, to take advantage from His Majesties Declaration, to deny or re∣bate their Communion with the Parochial Con∣gregations, and to gather themselves into di∣stinct and separate Churches. Sect. 2. Here note, 1. That the Episco∣pal, or Erastian Nonconformists, have none of his especial advice. 2. That he seemeth to speak to none in London or elsewhere who denied their Communion with the Parish-Churches
before; but only to those that would take advantage so to do from His Maje∣sties Declaration. 3. That he calleth them not Parochial Churches, but Congregations. 4. That he joyneth two questions into one, which therefore must be distinctly an∣swered. Sect. 3. My Answer is, 1. It is not advise∣able for any Nonconformists, who before held the Parish Congregations to be true Churches, and their communion lawful, and used to communicate with them, to change these principles, nor to renounce, or totally forbear such communion. 2. But it is adviseable for them, when they are cast out of the Parish-Ministry, and forbidden to Preach in the Pa∣rish-Temples, but have leave to exercise their Ministry elsewhere, accordingly elsewhere to exercise it; either in stated, or occasional As∣semblies, that shall be parts or no parts of the Parish-Congregations, as the variety of places and cases shall require, which Assemblies shall be distinct and separate from the said Perish-Congregations, either as Chappels be, or (somewhere) as one Parish-Congregation is separate from another, being not one, nor in one place, if you will call that separation. But this but for a time, with Profession of great unwillingness, and of a desire to return into the Parochial Ministery, as soon as you can procure them leave: But resolving not to be
Idle, Cruel, Sacrilegious, and Perfidious till then, but to live with all godly conformable Ministers, with Christian Love, and Peace, and Concord, if it be possible, and you will give them leave. Sect. 4. When you say [They cannot but understand the Declaration to be a very strict Prohibition of all such private Meetings as the Law stiles Conventicles] you know not whose understandings you talk of. 1. We know not, that the Law doth not call our House-Meetings, now tolerated (though the door be open) Conventicles: If not, it had been well for us, if you would have proved it sooner. 2. And if you are sure that the Law calleth none of the Papists tolerated private Meetings, Conventicles, we knew not so much: And why should you feign us to be as wise as your self. Sect. 5. As to your three wayes, I answer ou; 1. I believe the Presbyterians will joyn with the Independents, not as a Sect (as you call them) but in all that they think good and warrantable. 2. That they will exercise their Ministery, as they are by Covenant engaged, for Christ and mens Souls, and will bear with you, if you call that [setting up for themselves] (hoping yet that you set not up wholly for your selves that speak so.)
3. And they will worship God with the Sect of the Diocesan Prelatists in the Parish-Churches also, as far as will stand with the due exercise of their proper Ministery: But will not promise you to give over Preaching to be∣come your constant Auditors or Disciples. Sect. 6. You understand neither the Men that you talk of, nor their Cause: they take not the Independents Assemblies to be [the Tents of Enemies;] they leave terms of Enmi∣ty among Brethren, to those that have enmi∣ty in their hearts. Nor do they [tamely de∣liver up the Cause.] The most Nonconform∣able Ministers of my acquaintance, whose judgment I ever asked of that matter, do seem to think as I my self do, that the Epis∣copal, Pretbyterians, Independents, and Erasti∣ans, have each of them some Truth and Good which above the rest they do defend; and each of them some special mistake, where they err above the rest: And if we could know it, we would take the Best from among them all, and leave the worst: And not maintain Church-quarrels, under pretense, that we must not flie to the Enemy, and give up the Cause. Sect. 7. O the confidence of this Adviser in his own understanding; that dare say [That he is sure that the Presbyterians have no reason to engage in a way of publick Worship contradi∣stinct to our Parochial Congregations.]
1. That is contradistinct which is not oppo∣site, or adverse, but either co-ordinate (as one Parish to another) or subordinate (as a Chappel). 2. And what man! Is a Vow and Dedication to Preach the Gospel, no reason to Preach it elsewhere, when its forbidden us in your As∣semblies? Is the alienation of Consecrated persons no Sacriledge? Is the notorious need of many hundred thousand Souls no reason? Is the exercising of a Worship and Discipline more agreeable to Gods Word than yours (we are ready to give you the proof when we have leave,) no reason? Is the relieving of many godly Christians, who are cast out of your communion, because they dare not Con∣form, no reason? Had we had leave to have con∣ted the silly reasonings of Mr. Fulwood and some such other Pamphleteers, produced a∣gainst the Nonconformists, we had long ago shewed you cause to repress such self esteem, which dare say [I am sure they bave no reason]. Sect. 8. And this man that is sure they have no reason for it, could instance in no greater than the Objection, that It will seem an undervaluing their liberty, and ingratitude to the King. 1. We have no reason to be ungrateful to the King, nor to undervalue our Liberty. 2. But did that move the London Mini∣sters
and others, to Preach all this while, before the Declaration. 3. When you have proved that Greater Hurt than Good, will follow our Preaching and Ministry; and when you have proved that though all the Papists in England, do use the liberty of the Toleration in the Declaration, yet the Nonconformists must not, but silently leave our sufficient Conformists to do all the work against Ignorance, Infidelity, Popery, and Sensuality themselves; I say, when you have proved this well, you may again bless the people with our silence, and perswade us to silence our selves, when you cannot do it otherwise. Sect. 9. But he saith (p. 6.) Their inge∣nuity and gratitude to God and the King will be better expressed by their Conformity, and Loy∣al obedience to the known Laws, than by the use of the Liberty permitted to the contrary. Answ. He knoweth that we must not give him our Reasons against Conformity. He cannot but know that many that Conform nor, in all the matters of Subscriptions, Decla∣rations, Oathes, Discipline, &c. (not medling with other mens Consciences,) do think it would be in them a composition of such hai∣nous crimes, as they do forbear to name them, for fear of seeming to be accusers of others, and to be unpeaceable: And if he think that such toys, as Mr. Fulwoods, Mr. Stilemans, and Mr.
Hinkleys, &c. should satisfie them, he thinks contemptibly of their understandings. And he that by such poor temptations as those, will yield to what their Consciences fear, can scarce tell what he may not yield to before he dieth. Let him procure us leave, but to publish ours Reasons against Conformity, and then let him tell us that we were better Conform, when he hath answered them. It's easie to talk when none must confute him, and to brave it against one whose tongue is tyed. Sect. 10. His next Supposition is, that the matter of this Liberty is evil. I am glad it is not evil for the Conformists to Preach and Worship God, lest it would have been lawful to none at all. We are glad that Christ is Preached, even by them that do it contenti∣ously, in envy and strife, to add to our Afflicti∣ons and Bonds: But we will not our selves give over Preaching, Praying, nor the rest of the Christian Religion, because such men can call it evil. He that saith our Preaching is evil, may tempt men to think that the Gospel which we Preach is evil, or that Infidelity, Atheism, Sensu∣ality, and Wickedness which we Preach against is good or harmless. Is it good in you, and evil in us to Preach the same Gospel? If you turn to them that Calumniate us of Preaching Errour, or Sedition, the Law is open, our Writings and Doctrine are easily tryed: If we say evil, bear witness of the evil:
If not, take heed of calling it evil, Isa: 5. 20. CHAP. IV. Whether to gather themselves into distinct and separate Congregations, is unlaw∣ful in the judgment of the Presbyteri∣ans themselves? Sect. 1. THe proving the Affirmative is his work, pag. 7, &c. But the Pres∣byterians do not love confusion, nor to dispute such blindly-stated Questions. They distin∣guish, 1. Between bare Local distinction, and separation; and that which is eminently called Separation in England, and denominated from the Separatists, which is [separating from the Parish-Churches, Ministry, & Worship, as being no true Churches, Ministry and Worship; or at least such as no Christians may lawfully Com∣municate with, in Doctrine, Prayer, and Sa∣craments, when they can have no better.] In the former sense (as is said) one Parish-Church is separate from another. And if there be any difference in their Forms or Modes of Worship; so was there between Ba∣sil
at Caesarea, and the Church at Neocesarea, and between Rome and Millane, and between almost all the Catholick Bishops for many hundred years. And so now, one Parish-Mi∣nister prayeth freely in the Pulpit after Ser∣mon, and before; another by a Form; a third biddeth prayer before; and a fourth prayeth not afterward at all. And yet these are not separated Churches, any otherwise than Local∣ly and in such Modal differences. 2. They distinguish between a Parish-Church that imposeth nothing on the Mini∣sters or People that God forbiddeth, and one that doth. 3. And between a Parish-Church that is Reformable▪ in that which notoriously need∣eth Reformation; and one that solemnly Co∣venanteth against Reformation. 4. They distinguish between a Parish-Church that is such, and owneth it self for such: And a Parish-Congregation that hath no proper Bishop, nor Pastor who hath the power of the Keys of Government, but is cal∣led by its Rulers only a part of a Church, (Di∣ocesan) and the Minister, but the Diocesan Bishops-Curat. 5. They distinguish between a Parish-Church where the Ministers in question are forbidden to preach, and the People to have the Sacrament, or their Children to be bapti∣zed, unless they will say and do such things, as
they dare not do for fear of God's displeasure; And a Parish-Church, that driveth none such away from Ministry or Communion. And now will this Adviser prove that what any Presbyterians ever said in one case, must reach to all others, that are so different. Sect. 2. He next questioneth, 1. [Do you not allow our Parochial Churches to be true Churches?] Answ. Yea, those of them that have true Pastors, but no others, (in a political or orga∣nized sense.) 2. Quest. [And will you not account such Congregations as shall be gathered to your allowed places to be true Churches also?] Answ. In some places we will, and in some we will take them but as parts of the Parish-Church; And in some we will take them but for temporary Assemblies, waiting for a fixed better state; And in some we will take them for Churches secundum quid, but not simplici∣ter; Even as the case of each particular place requireth. Sect. 3. And hence follows the cry of Schism, Independents, Brownists, rank Separa∣tists, &c. As if the Ministers of Christ did know no difference between noise and sense. Yea, we are told of Schism from the Church of England, when I would give him all the mo∣ney in my purse, to make me understand what the Church of England is.
1. I know that the King is the Civil-Head or Governour of it. But it is a Constitutive Ecclesiastical Head that must denominate it, as an essential part. 2. I take it for granted he speaks of a Church organized in a proper political sense, as consti∣tuted of a Pars regens, and a Pars subdita; and not as an ungoverned Community. 3. I take it for granted that we have two Archbishops, and they tell me, that one is not under the Government of the other. And if that be true, we may have a Church of Canter∣bury, and a Church of York, but no one Church of England as denominated from one of them as Head. 4. I take it for granted that the Convoca∣tion is not the Constitutive-Head, 1. Because it is so seldom in being, that then we should seldom have a Church of England: For the Essence ceaseth with the essential part. 2. And the Canon thundreth against them that deny the Convocation to be the Representative-Church of England. If it mean of the whole Church, Pastors and People, then the People rule, and make Canons by them (as the Sepa∣ratists hold:) And it is the Head of the Church only that we enquire after. If they mean the Clergy, then the Representative-Church or Head must be somewhat distinct from the Real represented. If it be the whole Clergy that is the Real Represented-Church or Head,
then we are Popular, or Presbyterian; for the Presbyters are the major part by far. And what Rulers are they that never rule the Church as one, by themselves, but only by Representatives. I confess easily that many Churches united under one King, and living in one Kingdom, and having thereby special opportunity for Synods, and Correspondence and Concord, may be called one Church, by a denomination, 1. accidental, 2. and hu∣mane, not used in Scripture; And we will not be so quarrelsome as to avoid that language where men will needs use it: But it is the Thing, and not the Name, that we enquire of: What is that One Essential Constitutive-Head which maketh the Churches of England to be all one Church, in a proper political sense, that is, as a Governed-Society? None questi∣on the Civil-Head; none question the need of Communion and Agreement among all these Churches. But the Question is only of the one Ecclesiastick Constitutive Head. And if you will have the Question to be de nomine, pardon us for holding that forma denominat. But if you will denominate many Churches [One] from One Accident, instead of One In∣dividual Form or Essence; and if you will use terms in Divine Matters, which God never so used in his Word, we contend not against you, but only desire to understand you, when you charge us with Schism from the Church of Eng∣land.
We have observed what hath been the effect of such another enterprize in the Roman Empire: It was thought meet by Princes that where the Empire was One, the Church should be in some sort One also, which was under them. Whereupon Rome had the chief Patriarchate. But in time, 1. this Humane-Unity (name and thing) is pretended to be Di∣vine; 2. And this One Imperial Church (un∣der one Emperour) is taken to be One Vni∣versal Church; as if the Indians, Persians, and all other Christians (even the Abassian Em∣pire) had been part of it, and the Orbis Ro∣manus had been Orbis Universalis. 3. And then no man is a Christian that is not baptized into this Papal Church, and made a Subject of the Pope. Tell us what you mean by our Schism from the Church of England? We di∣vide not our selves from the King or Kingdom, or from the particular Churches as concordant in any necessary thing. If it be only that we agree not with the Major Vote in all Subscrip∣tions, Oaths, Discipline or Ceremonies: No more did the Bishops in the Roman Empire, who had various Liturgies; nor Gildas with the Britains, nor Ambrose and Martin with the French and Italian Bishops; nor the Epi∣scopal party in Scotland heretofore with the Presbyterians, when they were the major part. Is every difference in things unnecessary from the major part, a Schism from them? The
Bishops thought not so in England fifteen years ago: We do not go so far with you, as Gildas with his British Clergy, who pronoun∣ced him non eximium Christianum, no ex∣cellent Christian, that called them Priests or Ministers, and not rather Proditores, Traitors, as he himself did. Nor do we make such a Schism as Martin seemed to do, who renounced Communion with the Bishops and their Sy∣nods (all his life) who had prosecuted the Priscilianists with the Secular Sword. Yet neither of these holy men are called Separatists or Schismaticks. But perhaps it is our Disobedience to the Church that is our Schism from it. 1. But every one that maketh himself an Ecclesiastical Governour over other Pastors and Churches, is not therefore their rightful Lord. The King we know, and his Officers we know, but we know not all that call themselves our Lords or Masters. Not but that obedience is the easiest course of life, to a quiet humble mind: But fidelity to our King commandeth the dis∣owning of Usurpers. 2. We confess that we do not actually obey the Civil unquestionable Power in every particle about Gods Worship which hath been commanded us; I need not tell you why. No more did the Christians for three hundred years after Christ; nor the Ortho∣dox Bishops in the dayes of Constantius,
Valens, &c. nor the Protestants now in France, nor the Calvinists now in Sweden, Denmark Saxonie; nor the Lutherans under Calvinist Governours, &c. We compare not our Rulers to any of these, in any other re∣spect, but only as Rulers; but if you your selves are resolved to say and subscribe, and swear, and do whatever lawful Rulers bid you, its possible that before you dye, you may shew that indeed you are not of our minds. 3. But who ever took every act of disobe∣dience in a Circumstance, in a Family or Kingdom, to be a Schism from that Family or Kingdom? Do you rule by such a Law of Works or Innocency, which cuts off men for every diso∣bedience, and censureth him that obeyeth not perfectly in all things? 4. And methinks this should not be your meaning, because by Nonconformity, we more disobeyed our Rulers before their Toleration, than since; and yet it is our preaching after that you call our Schism from the Church. You see what trouble you put men to, to un∣derstand you, because you speak unintelligib∣ly and confusedly. If you tell me that the Presbyterians owned a National Church in Scotland. I answer, 1. So do I, as before described, that is, as denominated, 1 From an accident, and not from an Individuating Form, and therefore equivocally and improperly, 2 And humanely, and so unnecessarily,
2. And if Scots or any Presbyterians do it otherwise, that's nothing to me, who am no more bound to their Opinion than yours. And sure the Church of England is not called One in the Presbyterian sence, as an Aristrocracie, or as Headed by the whole Clergie con∣junct. Sect. 4. The rest, p. 8, 9, 10. need no other answer, then 1. That the old Puritanes never held it un∣lawful for them to preach in houses, even when they had no Toleration. 2. As they held it lawful to hold Lay-com∣munion with Parish-Churches that have true Ministers, so do we. 3. They never said, it was unlawful to hold communion with any besides the Parish-Chur∣ches; no more will we. What Law tyeth us to be such Schismaticks as to renounce com∣munion with all other Churches, except Paro∣chial and Conformists, or what Nonconformists ever held it? 4. Whose conscience should sooner accuse him of Schism; A Conformists, that will hold Communion with none but his own party, but separateth from all the other Churches in the Land? Or ours, that resolve to to hold com∣munion seasonably with all true Christian Churches among us, that teach not Heresie, nor preach down Holiness, Love or Peace, and deny us not their communion, unless we will
sin? Let the impartial judg which of us is the Schismatick and Separatist. 5. Do you not hold it lawful for a Minister to remove from one Parish to another; and for any man for his souls edification, to re∣move his dwelling into another Parish where is a better Minister? And what if forty Fa∣milies do so? who calleth any of this Separa∣tion? And what if it had been into the Pa∣rish of Dedham, Ashby, Whitmore, Preston, when John Rogers, Arthur Hildersham, John Ball, John Dod, all Nonconformists, were al∣lowed to preach there without Conformity. Had this been Separation and Schism, or not? If yea, what Law of God or Man forbad it? What Church did they divide from? If nay, why then is it Schism to joyn with such men in other places? Where lyeth your Point of Schism or Separation? Is it for going out of their own Parishes? 1. So Men in London have ever done to other Parish-Churches. 2. And who ever made a Parish and a Church Syno∣nymal, Jure Divino? Shall mutable conveni∣encies be turned into immutable necessities? What then? Is it for going to a Nonconformist? so did those before mentioned. Is it for go∣ing to a private house? 1. So did many Epis∣copal Pastors fourteen years ago. 2. And some in London since the Fire. 3. And its an ill argument against them, that would
fain Preach in the publick Temples, if they could have leave. As far as I discern, this dust of Schism which you would cast into other mens eyes, obligeth you to wink hard, lest it be blown back into your own. Sect. 5. The love of peace, and the fear of frightning any further from Parish-commu∣nion than I desire, do oblige me to forbear so much as to describe or name the additional Conformity, and that sin which Nonconfor∣mists fear and fly from, which maketh it harder to us that desire it, to draw many good people to communion with Conformists, than it was of old. But when both Law, and Love of Peace and Concord forbid us, so much as to name the Causes, it is disingenious for the culpable to take that advantage against us, and to urge us to do that which they them∣selves cannot bear. Sect. 6. But with full sail of self-conceit∣edness he next comes upon us, with this as an undeniable proof, that [our Members are ta∣ken out of true Churches.] Who would gain∣say a man of such understanding? But 1. Do not those, as aforesaid, that re∣move from one Parish Church to another, re∣move from true Churches? 2. How many Bishops have written that the Church of Rome is a true Church (as Halls Collection against Burton sheweth you) and must no Churches therefore be gathered out of them?
3. What advantage then hath every fool∣ish Superstitious Priest above God, and over all good Christians? God bids us worship him according to his Law, and to do all things in order and decently, and to edification. And must not God be obeyed? No, if the Priest will not consent: For if he will worship God foolishly, with non-sence, undecently, disor∣derly, against edification, you cannot help it; his followers may be a true Church still, and then no man must remove to worship God bet∣ter than pleaseth the Priest. He that is fal∣len under such drunken Readers, as I was bred under in my youth, that were drunk many times oftner than they preached (I am ready to prove it, for they never preached, but were drunk oft;) this poor man and his Family must venture their Souls on this sottish Drunk∣ards conduct, because it is a true Church, and they must not go from a true Church; What a trick hath the Devil found to bind men to con∣stancy in his service, so it be done in a true Church! Alas poor England, whose Teachers talk confidently at this rate, because they can say that they do it in a true Church, & did not the Parliament take a Church out of a true Church, when they separated Covent-Garden from Martins Parish. And so it is when Parishes are divided into two, one part is separated from the other. Sect. 7. But factious Disputers see but on
one side. You thought not that you your self were all this while proving your selves Schismaticks. I undertake to prove that Pa∣stors and People are the Constitutive Essentials of a true Church: That Dr. Seaman, Mr. Calamy, Dr. Manton, Mr. Gouge, Dr. Bates, Dr. Jacomb, and abundance more such, with the people subject to them, as Pastors, were true Chur∣ches. Prove you if you can, that on Aug. 24. 1662. they were degraded, or these true Churches dissolved, on any reason, which any Chur∣ches for 600 years after Christ would own. 4. If not, you seem your self to accuse their Successors, of Schism, for drawing away part of the people from them (meerly by the advantage of having the Temples and Tythes) and so gathering Churches out of true Chur∣ches; so ordinary is it for self-esteeming men to talk to their own reproach and condem∣nation. Sect. 8. But as to his second Objection, I will take his part; and though we differ not at all from the Doctrine of the Church of England (till the new Doctrine about Infants was brought into the new Rubrick) yet it is not in minutioribus that we differ from the Confor∣mists; gather from it what you can. God knoweth we think the matters in difference, ve∣ry far from things indifferent.
CHAP. V. Whether the Declaration make the Non-conformists preaching more lawful, or their duty, than it was before? Sect. 1. HIs Sect. 2. Pro. 2. is impertinent. For, 1. He knoweth little, if he know not, that the Nonconformists did before take such preaching and meetings to be lawful, and a duty in respect of the Law of God, where they had opportunity to use them. 2. But they take it for a double sin, to neg∣lect a duty, when they have Liberty granted them by the King to perform it. But he knoweth we take God for our absolute Sove∣raign, and think that none can repeal his Laws, because that none hath any power but from him; and we suppose that he will pass the final sentence on Kings and us. To what pur∣pose is it then among Christians to question, whether Men make it lawful for Christs Con∣secrated Ministers to preach, when God com∣mandeth it. Sect. 2. But pag. 14. he thinks he may safely say, [that the Declaration doth not so much as uncommand and uninjoyn any thing, which the
Law properly commands or injoyns]. Answ. Say you so? 1. The Law com∣mandeth Magistrates to execute the penal Laws. The King forbiddeth them: Is not that to uncommand them? 2. The Law commandeth us not to meet above four in a private house for worship, o∣therwise than, &c. The King suspendeth, or dispenseth with this Command, and not only with the penalty. And is not a suspension of a Precept an uncommanding, though not a commanding of the contrary? I will not in∣stance in Juries indicting Papists, &c. Sect. 3. But he subtilly tells us that the Declaration meddles neither with the Pre∣ceptive nor Punitive parts of the Law, but only with the Execution, which is extrinsick to both. All Lawyers must come learn anew of him, what it is to dispense with a Law. As if the Command [You shall examine and punish such & such men,] and the prohibition [You shall not punish them, but protect them] were not contrary. Nor the prohibition [You shall not meet above four &c.] and the dispensation, [You may meet, &c.] Sect. 4. But all this is utterly impertinent to them whose Consciences never allowed them to forbear their Ministry in formal obedi∣ence to any mens prohibition, but only when they had not power or opportunity to exer∣cise; It's no duty which cannot be done. And
License maketh that possible which was impossible▪ He that untieth my feet, accidentally maketh it my duty to go. Sect. 5. pag. 16. Let Mr. Crofton answer for himself, but the other two named by you, Ball and Baxter have much against you, but nothing for you; and understand themselves better than you understand them; and he that surviveth, taketh himself to be abused by your Allegations, and provoketh you to cite any of his words, which are against Nonconformists preaching as they have opportunity. If you had rather that we were all used as Mr. Jos. Allein was, you may see by his Preface to his Life, whether he was not for such sufferings ra∣ther than silence. Sect. 6. His reviving his pitiful Objection, That we have the approbation of Authority for separation, is but a contemptible sporting of himself at the game he is best skilled at; Object∣ing nothing, that he may seem to answer it with something. Sect. 7. But p. 18. he will bring us to Vto∣pia (Morus invented it) and there he will suppose [the Villanies of Theft, Murder and A∣dultery unpunished, and publick Meetings allow∣ed where they should be practised.] Answ. 1. What should the poor Noncon∣formists hear, if they thus Commented on the Clemency of the King?
2. But because you will force dumb men to speak, suppose that in the same Utopia, the Philosophy Schools which had faithful Teach∣ers, and the Christian Churches that had faithful Pastors, were deprived of near 2000 of them at once, and those that came in their places, had the consent but of the least part of the people; and that they were such as did Do∣ctrinally declare to the people that millions may be PER• without sin, & that they, ex ani∣mo, approve of all the Gregorian Liturgie, and every thing therein, and of all the Lutherans Consubstantiation, and Church-Images; and when in Baptism they had vowed to fight a∣gainst the World, the Flesh, and the Devil under Christ, they should contrarily upon deliberation make a solemn publick Covenant, that in their places, & callings, they would never endeavour to reform Cardinals, Inquisitions, High-places, Consubstantiation, Church-Ima∣ges, or Church-tyranny, & so in part renounce their Baptism: And suppose a clement Prince should release the ejected Teachers from their restraints, and allow them to set up private schools of Philosophy and Divinity, and the people should say, We cannot in conscience cast our Souls on the guidance of the PER• and therefore crave the benefit of your conduct: If these suffering men shall seek to reconcile them to the PERS•
and desire them to have a better opinion of them, but yet tell them, that they will not deny them their own best help; Quaere, whether they sinned by not being PER• themselves, or by not being cruel deserters of mens Souls? and which side is to be compared to the Murderers and Adulterers? I know this is not our Case in England; but if we must follow you into Utopia or Moria, let us have the equitable judgment of the place.
CHAP. VI. Of the Inconveniencies of our Tolera∣ted Meetings. Sect. 1. NOthing more easie than for men that have some great advanta∣ges, to force inconveniencies upon other mens greatest Duties. And we look to do nothing in the World scarce that shall have no incon∣venience. I eat not one meal of ten that doth not make me sick. But must I therefore give over? I can tell you of more than a few in∣conveniences of your own preaching, and Church-worship; and yet you will not give it over. But if any shall make those inconve∣niencies against our wills, and to the grief of our hearts, & then tell us that to avoid them we must Sacrilegiously and as Soul-murderers de∣sert our Ministery, we shall easilier answer them, then they will shortly answer God. Sect. 2. His first inconvenience is, that [We shall lay down the Cudgels and beg the peace, &c. of the rest of the Sectaries, as well as the Inde∣pendents.] Answ. A hard point to that Sect that is
Turba gravis paci, placidae{que} inimica quieti; who know not how to lay down the Sworn. But if we have been at Cudgels, we mean not to live and die at a work so unsuitable to our Religion and our minds. Reproach not him that said [If it be possible, as much as in you lyeth, live peaceably with all men] But if it be our dislike of Schism that are the Cudgels you mean, you are answered already. Pretend not to know our minds better than our selves. When were we against our own Preaching, as we had opportunity? Sect. 3. He would next raise a suspicion, [That our Principles change with the times,] and yet saith [It is a thing not easily observed in us in any thing else;] Condemn not your self then by suspecting it in this, till you bet∣ter know our minds: [Or else, which is worst of all, that our interest lay at the bottom, and was the only Spring and Wheel of our zeal, and all our motions, &c] Answ. Who had been the more accusable of this Carnality and Hypocrisie, in the eyes of any standers by, the Conformists that take up the Principles that go along with Safety, Wealth, Preferments and Dignities? or the Nonconformists, that have near ten years been deprived of all Ecclesiastical maintenance? some lived in extream poverty, and some lain in Jails, &c. Sure, if we accuse not you, even
you, of hypocritical following carnall interest, one would think a little modesty might have cured the Canker that moved these suspicions or accusations of us, either as to these or for∣mer Opinions. But my expectation of mo∣desty, I see by the following words, needs a pardon. Sect. 4. He addeth [Consider I beseech you, how like to Independent-Ape your new Con∣gregations will make you look, &c.] Answ. That is to say, Come Nonconformists, if you will not be beaten from your Masters work, we will try whether we can scoff and scorn you out of it; if that will not do, we will pretend Christs Name and Authority as forbid∣ing you. For as Christ, Matth. 4. so you must encounter a three-fold temptation. But we take pleasure in infirmities, and can bear to be made as the off-scouring of all things, remem∣bring who was cloathed in Purple, and then mockt as being like a King. If you will take my Spoon and Knife from me, and then say that I eat like an Ape or a Beast, I will not be so prated and fooled out of my meat. If with Diogenes I had cast away my Dish to use my bare hands, or forsaken my House to live in a Tub, I had deserved your derision; but if you take my house & all my goods from me, you shall not mock me out of my poor Tub also; We would avoid all appearance of evil; But only in things indifferent, we will not
cease Christianity preaching or praying, when you can make it by your Artifice appear like evil: Let's hear the instances. Sect. 5. [1. Your Churches will be gather∣ed as theirs.] Answ. As much as all the Churches for three hundred years were; or the Meetings of Flavianus, Meletius, and others at Antioch, when they were prohibited the Temple. And as Dr. Wilds and Dr. Gunnings were fifteen years ago. Or if you will, as the Joannites were in Constantinople, till Chrysostoms name and bones were honoured by wiser men than those that cast him out. Sect. 6. [2. You can administer Baptisms or the Lords Supper, to none but those of your se∣lect number.] Answ. 1. Is it because we will not, or be∣cause you will not give us leave? Who then is it long of? O for modesty! Tye mens feet, and reproach them for not going! 2. But is it not better to give an Alms to the bodies or souls, of some men, than of none at all? Argue thus with your Physicians, You can medicate none but your select Patient; Ergo, you are to be scorned if you medicate any at all. And I profess, were it not for the poor peoples sake, and my duty to God, I would give you (that desire it) all my practice, and all the gains.
3. But why may we not in the allowed places exercise our Ministry, in baptizing the Children of any one of your Flocks that shall de∣sire it, or giving them the Sacrament? I yet understand it not, unless for the avoiding of your envy and displeasure. Sect. 7. [3. You cannot exercise Discipline but by the consent of your people.] Answ. 1. We cannot be Pastors to any a∣gainst their wills: If you can, and take that for your honour, keep it, for we will have no part with you. We find indeed that it is your Opinion to exercise your Discipline on us against our wills. 2. But though we cannot take men for Christians, nor for our special Flock, nor bring them to repentance, nor yet absolve them against their wills, we can admonish and ex∣communicate them against their wills, and de∣ny them the Lords Supper from us; if they first voluntarily submit to our Ministry. We take it not for our part or honour to do in these things so much as you can. Sect. 8. [4. Neither can you have any Church. Government but in your single Congre∣gations, and that too Independent on all o∣thers.] Answ. 1. Who is that long of? Is it not you that forbid it us? 2. But indeed we never desired to play the
Bishops in other mens Diocess: If we pretend∣ed to govern you, would you take it for our Or∣thodoxness? I think not. I would you were of the same Opinion, & I would the Pope were of the same Opinion, and would let other men alone, and exercise his Discipline over none that he hath nothing to do with. Bax∣ter whom you name hath told you, that Bi∣shop Usher profest his Judgment to him, that even Bishops in a Council (though they are there Governours of the Flocks, yet) meet not for Government of one another by Vote, or of other Bishops, but for Concord. And Grotius de Imp. sum. pot. hath shewed you that Canons are not Laws but Agreements. 2. But why may not many of us Ministers meet in one allowed place, for such Agreements in our Pastoral Government? And no great∣er dependance do we desire: I assure you we should be glad if all the silenced Ministers these thirty years had been less dependant on the Diocesans. Sect. 9. He addeth [Thus as others are Independents by choice and Profession, you will make your selves so by necessity; and that necessi∣ty such, as you wilfully throw your selves into a∣gainst all the light of Presbyterian-Conscience, Prudence and Interest, by a needless and sinful, a scandalous and mischievous separation.] Answ. 1. Such confidence upon such in∣significant
reasonings, is a great dishonour to the wit and humility of the Author. He that no better knoweth their judgments, can tell you, what all the light of the Presbyterian con∣science is. 2. He can prove that our Ministery is needless, sinful, &c. because he can call the exercise of it separation: As if the paucity of ignorant and ungodly Souls, and the sufficient number, abi∣lity, zeal, and diligence of the Conformists made us and our Labours needless indeed. Alas, what thoughts have these men of souls, of sin, of holiness, of repentance, and of their own sufficiency and labours. But, Sir, who made you a fitter Judge of the need of souls, than themselves and all others? Next perswade us that Tutors are needless, because all in Eng∣land are born learned. I have much ado to get servants in my own Family that have tolerable knowledge and piety: And can our Conform∣ists alone sufficiently teach many hundred Fa∣milies, and prove that other mens help is needless? Try first whether you can perswade men, that you alone are sufficient to teach all the Children in your Parishes to speak, and to dress them, and feed them, and that all other persons help is needless. Get them to fast all till you seed them your selves, and make them believe they need no other meat. We that have conferred with all the people of
our Parishes when we were permitted, found that multitudes were almost as ignorant as Hea∣thens: And yet our excellent successours, that do no such thing (as to any two of them that ever I knew or heard of) but see their faces in the Church, can prove all our Teaching needless to these poor ignorant souls: Is this humility, and Ministerial fidelity? Its sin in us to preach, and duty to the Conformists: I am glad they take it yet for a duty to any. 3. But is it not as easie for us to say, That you have needlesly, and sinfully, and scanda∣lously taken our places, (I mean as to the Church-Relation, & not as to the Temples and Tythes,) and drawn some of the people to separation from those that were before true Churches? We say not so; but put not your selves on the hard task of disproving it, if you are wise. 4. But our necessity Sir, hath visible Causes. 1. God and our own consent at our Ordi∣nation, made our necessity of exercising our Ministry; We are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, nor that it was our choice: But God hath laid this necessity on us, and wo be unto us if we preach not the Gospel, as we have opportu∣nity. 2. The Bishops to some of us, and senior Pastors to others, by Ministerial Investiture im∣posed this necessity on us.
3. The great necessity of multitudes of fouls (which nothing but gross ignorance de facto, Infidelity, or Impudency can deny) concur∣reth to cause this necessity. 4. The Law imposeth a necessity on us, not to preach among you in the Temples: If then God say, Preach, and the Law say, Preach not in the Temples, we may conclude we must preach out of the Temples; if we have but as much wit as King James's Hounds had, that at a double way, if they find the Hare hath not gone one way, will take it for granted he is gone the other. Here is then but two makers of our necessity, the Imposer and the Restrainer; Reproach neither of them if you will take our council. Sect. 10. He addeth [In vain do you think to help your selves, and to satisfie the World, by pleading the moderation of your Principles, and that you do believe our Parochial Congre∣gations are true Churches, which the other Sectaries deny: For besides that many of the Independents acknowledge the same, this is the great aggravation of your Schism: For why then do you seperate from us?] Ans. 1. We are glad that you confess the Independents themselves are so moderato to∣wards you. 2. We perswade none to separate from you.
3. Do you silence us, and depose us from the Ministry, and forbid Baptism and the Lords Supper to all that have not as wide a swallow as your selves, and then ask, Why separate you from us? 4. Do you draw Churches to your selves out of our true Churches that were be∣fore you, and then charge your act on us? 5. Why come not you to the private Chur∣ches among you that have all this while been kept up? e. g. In London, why may not Dr. Manton, Dr. Annesley, Dr. Jacomb, and a∣bundance of such, as fairly charge those that go only to the Temples, for separating from them? They say, They are as true Chuches as you. If their not hearing you is separation, why is not your not hearing of them so? Big words when men are got into the Saddle make not their Cause good. 6. But it seemeth that acknowledging you true Churches will not satisfie you, without (what?) actual hearing you. But doth not every Chappel, and every neighbor Parish then, and all the World besides your Auditory, sin∣fully separate from you? Some men can tri∣umph in such reasonings for themselves, as would make another sick to read them.
CHAP. VII. Of the inconvenience from our Brethrens sence of Toleration. Sect. 1. HIs next Section, pag. 21, &c. is as meer delusion as any of the rest. First, he argueth from the Presbyterians be∣ing always against a Toleration. Reader, all sober Divines that ever I met with, use here to distinguish between Tolerable and Intoler∣able things and persons, and to conclude that the Tolerable must be Tolerated, and the other not, though they all agree not how much is Tolerable. Now what doth this man but talk confusedly, as if they had been against all To∣leration. Look up man without blushing, and tell the World, Whether ever the Presby∣terians maintained it a sin to Tolerate Presbyte∣rians. Alas, for those poor people, that can∣not try sence from nonsence! with what stuff will such men carry them away? If you talk of the Toleration of any that are Intolerable, what have we to do with it any more than you? Sect. 2. Any more than you, did I say? Sir, vilifie not the wits of those Clergy men that chiefly contributed to our—so as
to imagine that they did not know what they did, and foresee this day. Honour their un∣derstandings more, than to take them for so ig∣norant, (especially being lowdly foretold it,) as not to foreknow, 1. What number and sort of men would be laid by. 2. How the people would judge of them and their Cause. 3. How both they and the people would go through their sufferings. 4. How wise, sensible, and merciful His Ma∣jesty would be, when he saw all this stir, and dis∣satisfaction of his people. 5. And that the preaching of silenced Mini∣sters in private, would encourage all other Sects. 6. And when ever the door was opened for their Liberty, all others would endeavour to thrust in with them. Who then I pray you hath done more for Toleration, you or we? Sect. 3. But his next hath no bounds, and grieveth me to read it (O posterity, how will you know what to believe?) viz. p. 22. [Have not you lately refused the comprehension, and denied so great an advantage to your selves, because you could not have it without a general Toleration.] Answ. No, Sir, we have not; nor should you have by a question vented such a falshood.
Name the men that offered us a comprehensi∣on, and the men that refused it? If you tell us that you, or such another offered it to one of your neighbours, you may possibly make your words ridiculously true: But if you mean that either the King or Parliament of∣fered it, tell us when, and and who were the refusers. If you mean any Parliament Speeches, it is not fit for us to talk about them. But you will not I suppose presume to say that the Parliament ever offered either Toleration or ac∣ceptable comprehension (that is, to take in Nonconformists;) much less both. There was a Rumor of one Mans Speech, cal∣led a Presbyterian, as if it had sounded like a refusal of some abatement, but if you will talk with him as I have done, he will soon shew you the falshood of that Rumor. If you could have proved that any secret person ever refused such an offer, can you thence say to the Presbyterians that they refu∣sed it? If you mean an offer that by a great Mini∣ster of State was made, be better informed of it your self. 1. That it was not refused, but very thankfully accepted. 2. That for the Toleration of other men, be∣sides themselves, those two or three that meddled in it, answered.
1. That it was their desire that all Tole∣rable Dissenters might be tolerated. 2. That it was His Majesties work and not theirs. 3. That therefore those that were to be To∣lerated, were accordingly to be spoken to of the Terms, for we were capable of treating of the Case and Terms of none but our selves. And after this the endeavour for our Com∣prehension went on to our content, till the Parliament sate, and presently shut the door against it. I know of no other offer but this, which those few that dealt in it well know was far from being refused; so that a greater slander could scarce have been laid on men that have stil so greatly desired A COMPREHENSION OF ALL SOBER PROTESTANTS IN THE PUBLICK MINISTRY, and A TO∣LERATION ALSO OF ALL TOLE∣RABLE DISSENTERS, under Laws of peace and safety: This was still the thing which we begged for in vain: But who should be accounted Tolerable, we were never called to give our publick Opinion or Advise, that I know of. Repent of such Calumnies, and study not to aggravate your Fault by Ex∣cuses. Indeed, if the offer had been made to them of a Comprehension on condition they them∣selves
would have APPROVED of an Vni∣versal Toleration of all those whom they ac∣count Intolerable. I doubt not but they would have said, We thankfully accept Com∣prehension, but cannot approve of such a Tole∣ration, but leave your own work to your own wisdom; we cannot go against our Consciences for any Liberty: But other mens actions, are not ours. Sect. 4. And he addeth old speeches against Toleration, Universal intolerable Toleration: Wherein we lament his want of common sense or modesty. 1. If he would insinuate that we are for an Vniversal Toleration, because we preach when we have liberty and opportunity, What dealing is to be expected from such men? When he confesseth that we have been still against such a toleration? When we have almost twelve years ago, cryed out, even to un∣mannerliness, that if possibly we might have been heard, to the Reverend Prelates, Cast not out so many in the necessities of the people? O drive not godly people from your Communion for nothing! If you can prove Crossing, and your Sacrament-kneeling lawful, with Subscriptions, Canonical-swearing to you, &c. yet all that think otherwise should not be excommunicated, or forbidden to preach Christs Gospel: We have Fornicators, and Drunkards, &c. enough to
excommunicate: O drive not upright consciona∣ble Christians from your Churches! Force not Ministers to private preaching and sufferings, which will certainly occasion Sects, and open a door to you know what. And when we can no whit prevail, if these very men themselves shall say, that it is we that are for Universal Tole∣ration, with what Forehead— What man that hath not lived in a dream these 12 years, hath made any doubt but that it hath been the interest and desire of Infidels, Papists and Quakers, that our ejections and pressures might be as great as might be, that so the Pro∣testants might be weakned & broken by their own Divisions, and the chief opposers of these men be either consumed, or forced by misery to petiti∣on for Toleration, or at least that it might be granted as for our sakes, and we might be said to open to them the door, that they that confess we have been most against it, might be able (but quâ fronte) to say that it was our doing and not theirs. But when mens wits have thus play'd the game to the utmost, they are but abusing themselves: For they must dye, I tell you, they must dye, & be judged by that God that hateth Malignity, Cruelty, and Hypocrisie, and will detect all frauds before the World; when all that is now admired by the dreaming World, shall be levelled, obscured, and appear contemptible, even to them that sold their Souls to obtain it.
Sect. 5. Once more Reader, peruse all the Citations of this Author, out of Mr. Edwards, Mr. Trap (a Conformist, yet numbred with us) or the Jus Divinum Presbyterii (said to be written by Dr. Roberts, a Conformist;) only read them not with this Authors Spectacles or Eyes, and then tell me like a man of truth, whether thou dost believe that their meaning was, [An Universal Toleration is unlawful: Ergo, Presbytery must not be Tolerated, if any others get the power] or whether ever the Nonconformists said, [We are not to be Tolerated] or, Whether the Episcopal men told Cromwel in his Usurpation, [It is unlawful to tolerate us?] It is strange that any party who think them∣selves only or chiefly fit for Legal possession, should yet think themselves intolerable. But if he talk of the Tolerating of others, that are indeed intolerable, let him talk to them that have to do with it; and let him first talk his friends into the tears of true Repent∣ance (if they be not past learning) even from the greatest EXPERIENCE it self. Sect. 6. But the man will seriously prove what he saith, p. 25. [Can you more signally own, recognize, or more expresly give your un∣feigned assent and consent unto, and approbation of both Toleration and Schism, than not only desring to escape the penalty of the Laws, and to live quietly in a state of separation by vertue
of it, but also by taking the utmost advantage of it, for the erecting distinct and separate Con∣gregations to your selves.] Ans. 1. If he mean that we approve of the To∣leration of our selves, & all the Tolerable; sure we never did deny it: Let the enemy of man∣kind glory in the contrary, as his proper ver∣tue. But if he mean (as he plainly seemeth) that we approve of the Universality of Tolera∣tion; Come, weigh his proof. 1. By desiring to escape the penalty of the Laws. Answ. Now you speak sense, we feel your meaning. It is a crime worthy the name of Schism, to desire to be unpunished, when you desire our punishment: We do not toto pectore telum recipere: What if you were for hanging and burning us? were it Toleratio∣nism & Schism to be unwilling to be hang'd or burnt? While we have such Ithacian Masters in our own Coats, blame us not to desire Toleration, and to thank the King for saving us from our Brethren. The penalty of poverty, and losing all Mi∣nisterial maintenance, we never escaped since you succeeded us: Yet God that bids us ask for our daily bread, would not have charged our desiring it, on us as our sin, if the Law had forbit it us. Poor Joseph Alleine and many another are gone, and did not escape the pe∣nalty:
I never heard that Bradford or Hooper, or Latimer were accused for desiring to escape penalty. Was it Josephs sin that the Ishmae∣lites and Egyptians were more merciful to him than his Brethren? But, Brother, what good will our suffer∣ings do you? What harm wil it do you if we escape? Do you feel your self ever the more at liberty when we are in the Common-Jayls? Are you the fuller, because some Nonconfor∣mists wants Bread? We have been heinously accused by others, for coming within five miles of any City, Corporation, and place where we lately preached (when Christ said, If they persecute you in one City, flee to ano∣ther:) As if it were lawful to desert all the Souls in Cities and Corporations, or to take you alone for sufficient, where the very num∣ber of Souls proves you least sufficient. But would you be at more hearts-ease, to think that none of us are within five miles of you, nor teach any of the people the Gospel of Christ? You have with less noise endured Infidels and Papists enough within five miles of you? Alas, when the Stone is set on rolling down the Hill, where will it stop? Sect. 7. But this is spoken conjunctively with what followeth: And what's that?
2. [To live quietly in a state of separati∣on—] that is, Not to be your subject hear∣ers: But, 1. Have not many of us, some constantly, some at times, sat at your feet as your Dis∣ciples. 2. If Ministers be judged by you unwor∣thy to preach the Gospel, have they not reason to think you judge them unworthy to receive the Sacrament? 3. Are you Separatists for not hearing them? If not, why are they such for not hearing you? But of this before. Sect. 8. But the utmost is [Erecting sepa∣rate Congregations to your selves.] Answ. 1. You mean, it is sin in us to exercise the Ministry which we are vowed to, and not to be Sacrilegious and cruel to Souls: For can we Preach without Au∣ditors? And can those Auditors be no Con∣gregation? And can that Congregation be out of your hearing, and not be locally sepa∣rate, as every Parish-Church and Chappel is? Must two Congregations be one, or else be Separatists? I know two Churches so near that the people may hear each other, and yet they are two, and therefore one is separate: And I pray, which of them is it? It may be all in England save Canterbury, or ra∣ther
Glastenbury, are Separatists, for sepa∣rating from the first Church: As if Pytha∣goras justly cursed the number of two, be∣cause it was the first that durst depart from unity; and all Churches in the World were Separatists except Jerusalem. I pray you Sir, tell me, What if a Tolera∣ted Presbyterian should read the Common-prayer in his Church, and use all your Ceremonies (though he fear Perjury, and Lying, and Violating his Baptismal Vow): were this a Schismatick or not? If yea; Then so is every neighbour Parish-Minister, or Chappel Curat. If not; than it is not a distinct Congregation that maketh Separa∣tists. And then what if he do not use the Liturgie; doth that make a Separatist? Were you all Separatists that used it not fifteen years ago? I shall next expect to hear that he is a Se∣paratist that readeth in his own Common-Prayer-Book, and not in yours. But I doubt the Separation is in this, that the Tolerated Minister will not be your Curat, and ruled by you: But remember that some are Presbyterians, and therefore for Parity of Ministers; and I and many o∣thers are so much for Episcopacy, as that we would not have Prelatical Jurisdiction given to those Parish Priests, who themselves are against Presbyters, and for Prelacy.
CHAP. VIII. Of Inconvenience from the Nature of the Practice. Sect. 1. IN all this Section, let the Reader consider, 1. How few words there be, which a Papist Priest in Paris might not say against the Protestants. 2. Whether this be not the summe of all, [Preaching the Gospel hath hazards, incon∣veniencies and likelihood of frustration; There∣fore it is your folly and sin to Preach it.] 3. Whether there be not much that would not almost as handsomly have served Celsus, Julian, Porphyry, Eunapius, or Symmachus a∣gainst Christianity? Sect. 2. Do not you excommunicate and drive from your several Parishes the Members of Christ, for not eating with your Spoon, and then repreach them that will take them in whom you cast out? Sect. 3. We still hold that Members of the same particular Church, should not live at a
distance so great, as to make them uncapable of ordinary Personal Communion. Sect. 4. We take your Warning: Indepen∣dents, as you say, may over-reach us; Peo∣ples inconstancy and weakness may frustrate much of our Labours; Quakers and Papists may deceive some; We adde, And you and others may keep us after all in Poverty, and in Jayls, for ought we know. And what of all this? Therefore preach not. Next say, Therefore be no Christians; Therefore damn your own souls, if your temptations be so great. No, Sir, But, therefore we will serve Christ the more resolutely, and trust him for our preser∣vation and reward. The God whom we serve is able to deliver us: But if he will not, be it known unto you, that we will not cease to preach his Gospel, while we can, and we fear not being losers by him. Sect. 5. But your Will seemeth to bear down your Experience, while you would tempt us, by the discouragements of Difficult Assemb∣ling, and the Peoples Poverty. Have those kept us from doing what we could till now? Will our Poverty be greater than you Conformists have made it? Have we served God about twelve years without one bit of the Levites por∣tion? and cannot we do so till we die? There is an harmony in all your discourse: To tell us of the discouragement of Poverty from o∣thers,
that would help us, were they able, when your Party hath so long kept us with∣out a bit of Bread, but what Alms, or some mens own Stocks afforded them, is just like the rest. It sufficeth us to tell you, that we preach not for Riches, and we will not cease through Poverty. Talk at this rate to one another. Sect. 6. When you say, that a Toleration may reduce the common sort to an indifferency in Religion. I answer, Get your friends together then that have brought it to that pass, as that [It must be this or worse] and bring them to weep over their sins before God; That if a miserable Nation may not be saved from the Fire that you have kindled, your Souls yet if possible may be saved. Sect. 7. But, (pag. 29.) you too boldly make your selves the Stewards of God's Bles∣sings; and as Magisterially, without proof, pronounce that we are out of his way, and in opposition to his Church, and contrary to his Word. Answ. For my self I have long been of an opinion, which one day you will pardon, that, Perjury, Perfidiousness and Persecution, proud contending who shall be greatest, and covenant∣ing never in certain points to obey Christ against the World and the Flesh, is not the way of God:
If you take me for singular, there is no re∣medy. 2. And what Word of God is it that we contradict? I reade in the Rubrick of some∣thing about Infants, Certain by the Word of God; but I never heard in what Chapter or Verse it was. 3. And which is Christ's Church which we oppose? What Chapter and Verse saith, that only Subscribers, Swearers, Declarers and Con∣formists are the Church of Christ; and those that fear an Oath and Conformity are none of it? CHAP. IX. Of Inconvenience from our present Conformity. Sect. 1. HE next confesseth that [most of us have hitherto held some measure of Communion with the Church of England] And now [if we depart and fall quite away] (when we purpose to go no further from them, but rather come nearer if they will give us leave) then saith he [You will publish to the World, that your comply∣ance
with us before the Toleration, was not out of sense of Duty, or love of Peace and Unity, or any other good end; but meerly out of slavish fear of Punishment, &c.] Answ. 1. We will not reflect by recrimi∣nation, because we would not provoke you more than needs. 2. As far as I can promise, we will judge of you no worse than we have done, nor de∣ny any Communion with you which we have used, and can use without neglecting our own work. As I constantly joyn in my Parish-Church in Liturgy and Sacraments, so I hope to do while I live (if I live under as honest a Minister,) at due times. But what if I had leave without Conformity to preach in the next Parish-Church? I cannot then be in yours at the same time. He that preacheth not, may hear you constantly: But he that may preach himself, must not cease his Mini∣stry, to be still one of your Flock. We long ago published our Judgments, that It is a sin not to joyn with a less-worthy Minister, and a less-orderly Mode of Worship, when we can have no better; And that it is a sin to tye our selves ordinarily to such when we may have better law∣fully, that is (consideratis considerandis) upon terms whereon it will not do more hurt than good. You see then on what terms we may vary our practices, without the crimes recited by you.
If now when we are preaching our selves, you will say that we are departing from you, (be∣cause we cannot be in two places at once), and then come on with all these Calumnies, we take but this to be your meaning; 1. To tell us that you think we so value the honour of our Names and Reputations with you, as that you can make us false to our Callings, rather than be censured by you. 2. That you have alwayes a Quiver full of such Arrows provided, and resolve, that if we will not give over our Ministry, and be ru∣led by you, you will make as many as you can believe, that we never had sense of Duty, love of Peace or Unity, or any good end, but meer slavish fear. So men, it's like, would say of Christ, when sometimes he preached openly, and sometimes departed from mens fury into the Wilderness or obscure places; Or of Paul that was let down by the Wall in a basket, and when he departed from the Jews Syna∣gogues which he had before frequented; or those that fled from one City to another. It is a duty to preach when I can, and no duty when I cannot: And if others make the [can] and the [cannot,] is it I or they that change my practice? But if you teach men such ap∣parently causless Censures and Reproaches, you may have many Disciples, but not very good ones. And some will thus paraphrase your
words, [If the King will not let us persecute them for preaching, we are resolved we will slander them, and make men believe (on how hard terms soever they serve Christ) that they do it all but as cowardly self-seeking Knaves.] What abundance have called me Rogue of late years, that never knew me, or spake one word to me before, or heard one from me! As to the rest [That we proclaim our cowardise, or a love of licentiousness, or put on liberty for a cloak of ma∣liciousness] it all signifieth but what you have a list to say, and calls to us to long for the judg∣ment-day of Christ, but yet to look well to the integrity of our hearts, and try our way before we go it.
CHAP. X. Whether our Ministry by divisions will let in Popery. Sect. 1. I Love this Author much the bet∣ter, because he speaks against di∣visions, and because he seemeth willing to draw those men towards him, whom others drive from them, and because he seemeth careful of our Protestant Interest, and desi∣rous of some kind of unity to that end. But, alas, have we so many years ago besought his party with all humble petition and importu∣nity, and disputed it with them; that they would have pitty on the consciences of thou∣sands fearing God, that they would have mercy on the thousands of ignorant souls that need all our Teaching; that they would not cast out so considerable a part of the Prote∣stant Ministry that should hinder Popery, and would not necessitate unavoidably those divisions, which by weakning the Protestants, would do the Papists work; and under the sad denial of our petitions, must we now hear that (the Pope shall come on the Puritans back?) That word [shall] we have bin long hearing and feeling. To be Masters of the Game is a great advantage for the disposal of other mens reputations in this World, a little
while; but in the next, the sport is spoiled. Sect. 2. And really, Will Popery come in ever the more for our Preaching? (do you think we shall Preach for it?) or ever the less, if we renounce our Ministry? Why then will not your silence too prevent it; and so we may all be silent let we preach in Popery. Sect. 3. But it is Divisions that will do it. No doubt of it, if it ever be done. Come and impartially debate the case with us, Who have bin the great causes of Protestants divisions, Conformists or Non-Conformists? But I am ashamed to say that it needeth a debate. But O that you would yet repent of what is past, instead of reproaching those that you have afflicted; And for the time to come, if we hav not unity and peace, for my own part I can say, it shall be your doing, and wilful do∣ing, to refuse it.
CHAP. XI. Counsel to the Non-Conformists, Ministers and People. BRethren, you hear by this Author that the Conformists are greatly afraid of Popery, and that the danger by some will he said to be from you: but who ever taketh you for the Papists friends, the Papists themselves will never so esteem you. You see that some Comformists are desirous of peace and concord with you, for the common end, the Churches strength against all adversaries. God forbid that you should not be as forward to love and peace as they. I have these following counsels to give you before I go out of the World, expecting to have you ere long in a condition, which will require more wisdom, holiness, and fortitude, than I fear the most are yet possessed of. 1. Resolve by the grace of God, against all temptations, and through all difficulties, faith∣fully to ply your Ministerial work You see how much Satan is against it, and how he tryeth every way to hinder it: sometimes by force and fears, sometimes by flatteries, sometimes as that old Prophet seduced the other, by coming as in Christs name, as an Angel of Light, and by Ministers of Righteousness.
He maketh not light of your Ministry, else he would not do so much against it; O do not you make light of it. Our Ordination, Vow and Covenant is Holy! If Ananias and Sapphira dyed for alienating consecrated mo∣ney by a lye, what shall we expect, if we alie∣nate consecrated persons by a lye: Souls are precious, sin is strong, Satan is subtile, the World is deceitful, the flesh is unreasonable, deceivers have great advantage, time is short; O therefore work while it is day, for the night cometh when none can work; Our own floath and sin is the most dangerous silence. How many souls feed or famish, live or die, as we do our duty, or neglect it? Can you spare your flesh or labour, when you think what impenitent souls must feel for ever; and what the Sanctified shall enjoy? Would you not shine your selves as Stars in the Firmament? Would you not be found by Christ so doing? Would you not convert Sinners from the er∣rour of their way, when it is the saving of a soul from death, and covering a multitude of sins? What ever Word of God deceivers may abuse to stop your mouths, be sure that holy Covenants must be kept; that Sacrilege is a sin; that nature it self tells you, no man hath power to nullifie your Obligation to Charity it self in the work of mens Salvation; that the love of God dwelleth not in you, if you see your Brother have need, and shut up the
bowels of your compassion from him: Men may regulate your charity for good, but not destroy it. If the poor were famishing about you, no Law can disoblige you from reliev∣ing them. Be sure that necessity is laid on all the Ministers of Christ (though not by the same way as it was laid on the Apostles;) and woe be unto them if they preach not the Go∣spel. Fear none of those things that you shall suffer: they are the prognosticks of your Crown: You shall judge the world that judg∣eth you: It will be joyful to hear, These are they that came out of great Tribulation, &c. Even Dr. Th. Jackson notably concludeth, that the reason why Martyrdom among Chri∣stians now, is rarer than among Unbelievers heretofore, and that more suffer not, as John Baptist did of Herod, is not because Great ones among Christians are not ready to do as Herod did, but because Ministers more omit their duty; The dearest duty is the most gain∣ful. 2. I beseech you, Study harder that you may now so preach, as that you may convince men practically, that you are really useful & needful to the World, and that your silence is a real loss. They that now take your labours to be need∣less, are tempted to it by the weakness of too many. They can scarce find in their hearts to say so of any Eminent judicious Men; If when you have so long made the World be∣lieve
that silencing you is a most heynous sin, you shal now preach so rawly, so incongruously so injudiciously, & unskilfully, or coldly, as to confute your selves, & harden those that were for your silence, how great will your shame be? If you will be thought more useful than o∣thers think you, preach better now than others do. I really fear, lest meer Non-conformity have brought some into reputation as con∣sciencious, who by weak preaching will lose the reputation of being judicious, more than their silence lost it. What now will you do better and more than others to prove that the Nati∣on cannot spare you? I expect not great Judgement & Learning in all the younger sort, nor those that in these times have bin kept from study, by labouring to get their chil∣dren Bread: but verily the injudiciousness of too many among you, is for a lamentation. But the grand calamity is, that the most inju∣dicious are usually the most confident and self-conceited; and none so commonly give way to their ignorant zeal, to censure; back bite, and reproach others, as those that know not what they talk of. I impute not this to you as Non-Conformists, but as sons of Adam: for ex∣perience hath convinced me, that PRIDE OF UNDERSTANDING, when men have little to be proud of, or confidence of all mens own apprehensions, is the vice of Men, Women and Children, when they are
past eighteen years of age, which seemeth to be most desperately uncurable. Few sorts so silly, but are always in the right, and others erroneous in comparison of them: as Bed∣lams pitty the ignorance of their Keepers; So that I fear not the prevalency of scepticism in the world (though I fear infidelity:) Self-conceitedness, I warrant you will keep it un∣der. Such ancient as Ephrem Syrus, Macarius, Martin, &c. who were of little Learning but holy and humble, and presumed not above their knowledge, were honoured in the Churches: but when the Egyptian Holy Monks would shew their humble pride and ignorance, by tumults and zealous madness, to seek the blood of the Bishops, that belie∣ved not that God had Hands and Feet like Men, and to destroy those as ungodly that were not as foolish as themselves, what could have bin more scandalous against the honour of Godliness and Christianity? 3. Over value not your own Preaching▪ and under value not other mans, because they are Conformists. The number and necessities of the ignorant and ungodly indeed do make your la∣bours necessary, were you less fit than many of the Conformists: but that proveth you not more able, or your preaching better than theirs. Partiality may make some of your own mind, think all well that you say, and all weak that others say: but the rest of men
will the more despise you. Be not wise in your own conceit; Look not every man at his own gifts and worth, but at the gifts and worth of others: In honor prefer one another: Pride is the first born of the Devil: and pride of knowledge and goodness is more common and pernicious, than pride of Comelyness, Wealth, or Greatness. Mark that Preacher Conformable or Non-conformable, who stri∣veth hardest for his own honour, and would raise it by dishonouring others, and is most im∣patient of all that clowdeth him, and is onely for those that set him up; and look out no further for a mark of badnes, but take that man for one of the worst, how well soever he preach or pray. Except Christs Apostles had bin converted to the teachable humble state of little Children, they could not have entered into the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 18. 3. You wear not the Livery of Christ, if you are not humble, and apter to think meanly of your own gifts and doings, proportionably, than of other mens. How unsavoury is it to hear a Non-conformist come from a profita∣ble Sermon of a Conformist, saying (to hin∣der the peoples benefit,) This is poor dry stuff, and carping at every incongruous word; as much as to say, I can do much better: Through Gods Mercy, some Conformists preach bet∣ter than many of you can do.
4. Yet difference between Conformable Mi∣nisters, and own not the Ministry of any that are utterly incompetent and intolerable; Hear them not ordinarily: for though I say not that all their Ministrations are nullities, yet I say that you should not encourage an intol∣lerable undertaker, to destroy himself and o∣thers. By into crable men, I mean, First, Such as are ignorant of, or erroneous a∣gainst the essentials of Christianity. Secondly, Such as are utterly unable to teach them others. Thirdly, Such as malignantly Preach down the practice of a holy life. Or in a word, those whose Ministry is such, as really tendeth to do more hurt than good; from such turn away. Yea, where the Conformable Minister may be tolerable, in case no better could be had, yet if indeed his teaching be so trifling, and sap∣less, as is like to do but little good, let compassion move you, to take more liberty your selves to teach the people there, than under worthyer Men. Too many such young raw triflers, I confess I have heard my self: and I would not have order or humility pretended, to turn Preaching into a Ceremony, lest all Religion be next taken but for a Ceremony. It is a serious work, and must be seriously done. 5 If you live where the Conformable Parish Minister is faithful (truly endeavouring the salvation of his Flock) I charge you in the
name of Christ Do not onely, if possible, as much as in you lyeth, live in love, familiarity and peace with him, but also do all that you can to maintain his honour, and promote his work. Be not Strangers to him: Distance breedeth uncharitable thoughts. If you hear or see a∣ny thing that you dislike, go privately and lovingly, and tell him of it: If any behind his back dishonour him, rebuke them. If he look for some superiority over you, and some observance from you, deny it not: It is a duty to submit to one another. You can tell a Prelate, that he that will be the greatest, must be the Servant of all: Practice as you preach. He that scorns to stoope is proud, as well as he that would have Men stoope to him. Live with him as a Brother and as a Ser∣vant, in meekness, humility, and gentleness of behaviour: And do not like our young passionate Persons, trample upon him, as if his Conformity had put him, as a sinner, below you as more Holy than he, and under the Magistery of your Reproofe. You and I think that he hath sinned: But he thinks that it is we that sin: And he that is without sin, let him cast the first stone. I charge you Love him, as your selves, and behind his back say nothing, and do nothing, but what is fit to testifie such love. Let all men thus know that you are Christs Disciples; For all your Nonconformity, you are no better
than he, if you be not more Charitable than he. If you set your selves in a dividing way, secretly to rejoice at his Disparagement, and to draw as many from him as you can; you are but Destroyers of the Church of God: Call your selves what you will, I will call you Destroyers if you are Dividers. Yea much that else would be your Duty, must be omitted to avoid Division. The work of God, the good of Souls, the Defence of the Protestant Re∣ligion agaist Papists, require your most con∣joyned strength. And you are be rayers of all these, if you are Dividers. Suppose your selves as Chappel Curats under the Parish Mini∣sters, and so in concord perform your work. 6. Therefore go as oft as you can to his Con∣gregation, and hold Communion personally with him, and lead the people with you. Do not say, Now we have opportunity to do better, it is unlawful to joyn with them that do worse: For thoug it be not lawful for you to neglect your own Duty and opportunity, it is lawful for you by Deed as well as Word, to shew your Christian Concord and Communion: and so to do, may make it at that time much better which else in regard of the manner would be worse. Otherwise if one Preacher, pray and preach better than all the rest, all the people should be bound to forsake their Ministers & go to him as one that doth better. But bonum est ex causis integris: Disjunction and ill effects,
your better mode of Worship worse. 7. Therefore in Parishes where all may well hear the Parish Minister, I would not have you, without necessity, preach at the same hour as he doth, but at some middle time; that you may not seem to vie with him for Auditors, nor to draw the people from him; But let them go with you to hear him, and after come and hear you (or before;) But in London and great Parishes where all cannot come to the Parish Church, as also in Parishes where the Minister is not to be owned, I perswade you to no such observation: It is so inconvenient to the people there, to be cast upon unmeet hours, that I perswade you not to do it. 8. Where the Parish Minister is to be heard by you and your hearers, I think it best to preach ther but once a day, and at some neighbour place that hath most need, the other part. My rea∣sons are, First, Because the people cannot hear and digest four Sermons a day, nor three well: and those that hear you twice, will not go to the Parish Church; and so you will but draw them away, from that which might profit them as well as yours. And it is preach∣ing well that more affecteth people, then Preaching long or often. Secondly, Because, alas, you will hardly live, where some Neighbour Parish hath not so bad a Minister, as that the people have
more need of help; and the rest of your pains may be bestowed on Week-day Le∣ctures, as the people have leisure. 9. Therefore I greatly desire, that in such places you would bestow the greater half of your labour in private, in skilful exhorting people from house to house? If you did not so before you were silenced, repent betime; If you did, you have found the benefit of it. This is it, which few Conformists do, and in this you may best live as their true Assistants. Publick hearing without personal conference, seldom bringeth men to understand well what you say. Brethren, let me ask you, as before God: Why hath no more of this bin done while you were silenced? Is it not too much Hypocrisie, to cry out against them that forbid us Preaching, which is one half of our duty, and in the mean time wilfully to neglect that part which none forbad us? I speak not of them that were driven from all Cities and Corporations where their ac∣quaintance enabled them, and forced to live where they had no such opportunity; nor of them that through poverty had not time. But most men might have done more this way than was done; This way the Papists have done their work. And it is very consi∣derable, that most that come to your Chappel Meetings, are such as you take for the least needy, as being already turned unto God
But from house to house you may speak with the more ignorant: for some of them its like will hear you. And sincerity inclineth men to that way of duty that hath least ostenta∣tion. 10. Preach Faith and Repentance, the common Catechism principles, (which are of greatest need and use, and require the greatest skill in Preachers,) and do not on pretence of going higher, trouble the peoples heads with unnecessary things, nor turn them after vain janglings: much less against Conformity, or any thing that reflecteth upon the Parish Ministers. You may quickly kindle in your Religious Hearers, a factious opinionative kind of zeal, that shall make them fire-brands in the Church, and no whi tend to save their souls. And you may deceive your selves by exercising such an opinionative zeal, while you think you are doing the work of Christ. O how happy had the Churches bin, if in∣stead of all the Schoolmens & old contenders curiosities of the Trinity, and all the blind disputes of Predestination and Free-will, and all the busle about Episcopacie, Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptistry, &c. the Churches had heard the Baptismal Covenant it self, with the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Dalogue well opened, and mens hearts had bin more fired with the love of God in Christ, rather than their heads heated with
such controversies, as the poor people cannot manage, but only by unskilful Teachers, are tempted by them to be disturbers of the Church. 11. If there be any among your people, that by such a sinful unpeaceable zeal, will be censuring & deriding Conformists, Independents, Anabap∣tists, or any honest tolerable dissenters, and will be reproaching them behind their backs, and ma∣king them odious to the Hearers, rebuke them sharply, and cherish not their sin; And if they hear not, rebuke them before all, and if they amend not, cast them out of your Com∣munion: and as you love your selves, the Church and others, let not the proudest cen∣serious people be your Masters: Take heed of that base complying humour, that maketh some they dare not displease them, least they should call them as bad as they do the Con∣formists. For if you come to this, it is the Women and Boys that have least knowledge, and most proud censorious passions, that will be the Church Governours. Keep your Au∣thority, let them take it how they will, and be not servile followers of the peoples errours and irregular ways. 12. Possess your Hearers with true Gospel principles of Love, that they may be first pure, then peaceable and gentle. Preach zealously for Love, against love-killing envious zeal. Teach them to know that all men are imper∣fect
and faulty, and so is all Mens Worship of God; and that he that will not commu∣nicate with faulty Worship, must renounce communion with all the World (and all with him.) Unteach them that false conceit, that all Book-prayers are unlawful, yea, or all that is imposed: Read over to them those Psalms that have frequent repetitions and re∣sponses, that they may know that such are not unlawful. If it be lawful for the people to sing Gods praise, it is not unlawful to say it. Do you doubt of the consequence: Prove to us, what difference there was between the ancient singing, and our Laudatory saying, and you will find your task too hard. Unteach them that paultry principle, of placing Re∣ligion in being cross to the rest of the Congre∣gation. As when they will not stand up at the Creed, or at all the Hymns of praise, when reason and use tell us, that standing up is a convenient praising gesture; and when the primitive Churches (from an unknown original, calling it an Apostolical Tradition) unanimously commanded standing only, in all the Lords Days Adorations; which because we cannot now well observe, it is decently confined to praises only. And in this the Conformists do better and more decently than you: and it is sorry perversness to fly from a better way, because that others use it. Un∣teach them their unwarrantable self-made
Tests of Church Communion; as if there must be any other proof of Holiness needs gi∣ven, besides a sober profession of Christianity, (that is, of the Baptismal Covenant) not provedly contradicted by Heresie, or a wicked life: If we are Non-Conformists, because we cannot comply with all that we think to be invented uncapable terms of Communion from others, why shall we make such engines to divide the Churches our selves, and do the very things which we condemn in others. Unteach them their expectations, that all the Church must be satisfied of the sincerity of each Communicant; or that the presence of the un∣worthy, who are admitted by their own false profession, or by the Ministers fault, doth make it unlawfull to others there to commu∣nicate. The Book called, The Cure of Church Divisions will tell you more such dividing principles, which you must unteach them. The Ministers that have bred and cherished these, have bin our subverters, and are our shame: and such principles are the shame of too many well meaning honest people. Woe to the selfish Teachers, that for their per∣sonal interest, dare not contradict them, but cherish them into their dividing errours; when their eyes are opened, and they see their mistakes, they will be tempted to shew their own dislike of them, by running as far on the extreame of formality; In a word, help to save
and faulty, and so is all Mens Worship of God; and that he that will not commu∣nicate with faulty Worship, must renounce communion with all the World (and all with him.) Unteach them that false conceit, that all Book-prayers are unlawful, yea, or all that is imposed: Read over to them those Psalms that have frequent repetitions and re∣sponses, that they may know that such are not unlawful. If it be lawful for the people to sing Gods praise, it is not unlawful to say it. Do you doubt of the consequence: Prove to us, what difference there was between the ancient singing, and our Laudatory saying, and you will find your task too hard. Unteach them that paultry principle, of placing Re∣ligion in being cross to the rest of the Congre∣gation. As when they will not stand up at the Creed, or at all the Hymns of praise, when reason and use tell us, that standing up is a convenient praising gesture; and when the primitive Churches (from an unknown original, calling it an Apostolical Tradition) unanimously commanded standing only, in all the Lords Days Adorations; which because we cannot now well observe, it is decently confined to praises only. And in this the Conformists do better and more decently than you: and it is sorry perversness to fly from a better way, because that others use it. Un∣teach them their unwarrantable self-made
Tests of Church Communion; as if there must be any other proof of Holiness needs gi∣ven, besides a sober profession of Christianity, (that is, of the Baptismal Covenant) not provedly contradicted by Heresie, or a wicked life: If we are Non-Conformists, because we cannot comply with all that we think to be invented uncapable terms of Communion from others, why shall we make such engines to divide the Churches our selves, and do the very things which we condemn in others. Unteach them their expectations, that all the Church must be satisfied of the sincerity of each Communicant; or that the presence of the un∣worthy, who are admitted by their own false profession, or by the Ministers fault, doth make it unlawfull to others there to commu∣nicate. The Book called, The Cure of Church Divisions will tell you more such dividing principles, which you must unteach them. The Ministers that have bred and cherished these, have bin our subverters, and are our shame: and such principles are the shame of too many well meaning honest people. Woe to the selfish Teachers, that for their per∣sonal interest, dare not contradict them, but cherish them into their dividing errours; when their eyes are opened, and they see their mistakes, they will be tempted to shew their own dislike of them, by running as far on the extreame of formality; In a word, help to save
Religious people from being superstitious while they cry out against superstition; and make them know that a Religion which con∣sisteth in our own modes and ways of worship, and in decrying other mens, may stand with all unmortified sin; and that the flesh is no more denyed by sitting, than by kneeling, and that to say I am Godly because my gestures, and orders are more Scriptural than the Con∣formists, is a pittiful way for an Hypocrite to cheat his soul: and make them know that few things have hardened men against Reli∣gion, and made Non-Conformists a scorn instead of being helpers of mens souls, so much as to see that many place their Religi∣on in superstitions of their own, Touch not, tast not, handle not; and make it piety to a∣void that as sin, which is no sin: and then men judge of all the rest by this. 13. And I will presume to tell you my opi∣nion, as of a matter, not absolutely necessa∣ry, but at this time, of such convenience, as if I were to keep a Church Meeting, I would resolve upon it, as my duty: and that is, that your own practice now shew a sound and healing judgement about that Church troubling Contro∣versie of Praying freely, or by Forms; even that now you would seasonably do both. The contention about this hath bin childish, and yet a fire not yet quenched in the Church: while one belyeth God, as if he had forbidden
all FREE Prayer in the Church; and o∣thers belye him as if he had forbidden all Forms or Book-prayer: when God hath left both free, to be done as edification most re∣quireth. His understanding is low that thinketh either of them simply unlawful; and he knoweth little in such matters, that knoweth not, that both ways have many and great conveniences, and both have many and great accidental inconveniences, (which having enumerated else where I must not now re∣peat.) And they that are all for the one only, or the other only, shall have all the inconve∣niences with the benefits: but he that will seasonably use both, shall have the benefits of both, and the least part of the inconveniences of either; Therefore in the Churches of Eng∣land, free prayers were allowed in the Pul∣pits, after the Liturgy. And pardon me for saying, that when this petty controversie hath so much distracted us, those Ministers▪ that use but one way onely, seem scandalously to the people to be onely for that way, and so do harden them in their errour, and keep the fire burning in the Church. He that prayeth only by Book or Form, perswadeth the poor people that free prayer is Fanatical, uncertain and unlawful: and they that never pray otherwise, perswade the poor people, that all Forms or Book-prayers are unlawful; if a whole party agree
in forbearing all Forms at such a time as this, when so many take them for unlawful. And so they corrupt mens very Religion, and teach them to make duties and sins to them∣selves which God never made, and thereby set them in a way of Hypocrisie, Self-delu∣sion, and endless quarreling with others. I prescribe to no man; and toleration so far taketh off publick Impositions, as that none can now say, This Form is imposed on me, and therefore unlawful. But (though I will not bind my self) I here tell the world, That if my strength and toleration, and a call should ever more give me opportunity for the free exer∣cise of mine Office, I would sometimes pray free∣ly without Forms, and sometimes use some part of the common Liturgy, and sometimes use the Reformed Liturgy, which in 1660. was agreed on by the Commissioned Non-Conformists, (though being done in extream hast, it should be reviewed and perfected:) I would ordina∣rily pronounce the Creed, (as the Faith which the Church Assembleth in the profession of,) and ordinarily recite the Lords Prayer and Decalogue, and read two Chapters and the Psalms: And they that would not joyn in this way of Worship, should freely go choose them a Teacher more agreeable to their opi∣nions: for I would not serve the humours of any in their dividing errours.
And Brethren, endure me to tell you, 1. That pleasing the ignorant professors humours, is a sin that sheweth us too hu∣mane and carnal, and hath always sad effects at last. 2. And that I confess to you I think your day is short; and that it is now of more im∣portance, what the future effects of your course will be to posterity, or those to come, than how it will take with your present followers. And when the History of this Age is written, do that now which you would have there re∣corded. My chief meaning is, This will be a controversie when we are dead and gone: Do that now, which being recorded may best tend to the right decision of it then. Leave to Posterity now you have liberty, that example (as well as words) which thou would have them follow. Tempt not future Contenders to plead that all Forms are unlawful by your examples. If any say, We shall thus loose our people, and the Separatists, who will cherish all such humours, will have them all: I answer, We have too long tryed the pleasing way already, and see that we cure not, but cherish their disease. Take Gods way, and let us deny our selves, as well with the humourous people as we have done with the Conformists, and then leave the issue to God. And if they will follow Separatists, it is fitter that they be mislead by such erroneous persons, than by you.
14. And on this occasion let me say a word to this kind of Religious people: Is it not a shame to you that your worthiest Mi∣nisters should be fain to go besides their own judgement in Gods Worship to humour you? And that they must tell the world, We would mix Free-prayer and Forms in publick, but the people then will be gone to the Separa∣tists. I say not that they go against their Consciences; For their consciences have di∣rected them to omit what else would have bin fittest, lest crossing your humour, it should drive you away to your own subversion: But how came you to be so much holyer and wiser than the Holyest and wisest of your Teachers? Mark, is it not more of the Wo∣men and Apprentices that are of this mind, than of the old experienced Christians. Is it not a high degree of Pride for persons of your standing and understanding, to conclude that allmost all Christs Churches in the World for these thirteen hundred years at least to this day, have offered such worship unto God, as that you are obliged to avoid it, and all their Communion in it; And that all∣most all the Catholick Church on earth, this day, is below your Communion for using Forms? And that even Calvin and the Presbyterians, Cartwright, Hildersham, and the old Non-conformists, were unworthy of your Communion: Would you have run away
from Dod or Perkins, or from Cyprian or Augustine, and said, They are formal Fel∣lows, not to be joyned with? Doth God use by Miracle to make self-conceited Women and young Men, so much wiser than the most ancient studious experienced Divines. It is best then to turn Preachers before we grow old, and to avoid study and experience lest it make us more ignorant than we were. Brethren and Friends, I profess for your sincerity many of you are our joy, and it is not a little that we have done and suffered for your sakes; But I must tell you (for Adver∣saries will tll if you) that for your ignorance, injudiciousness, pride, self-conceitedness, you are our grief and shame. We are hit in the teeth with such self-wise ignorant giddy un∣peaceable followers, And we have nothing to say, but to blush, and say that you mean well, and that it is not long of us. Can Gods Spirit which ordaineth Elders to be Pastors in his Church, be the Guide of your judge∣ments, when with such shameless pride you set up your errours against the knowledge of your Guides? If you are wisest be you the Pa∣stors, (which some are prone enough to ar∣rogate.) It shameth us, it grieveth us, to see and hear from England, and from New-England this common cry. We are endangered by Divisions, principally because the self con∣ceited
part of the Religious people, will not be ruled by their Pastors, but must have their way, and will needs be Rulers of the Church and them. Yea, I tell you with truth and grief, I am confident (next to mens own sin, which lea∣veth them to a judicial delusion,) nothing hath done more to set up Popery, and the Prelacy you dislike, than the scandalous instances of your un∣ruliness and Church tearing humours: And that you have made more Papists, than ever you or we are like to recover. Nothing is any whit considerable that a Papist hath to say, till he cometh to your case and saith, Doth not experience tell you, that without Papal uni∣ty, and force, these people will never be ruled or united? It is you that tempt them to use fire and Fagot, that will not be Ruled nor kept in concord, by the wisest, and holyest and most self-denying Ministers on Earth. Even Ainsworth the Learnedest and Godlyest Pa∣stor of the Separatists, though he went with them beyond Sea, and was of their opinion, and carded wooll to maintain himself while he was their Teacher, yet could not keep that one separated Church in peace. And must you, even you that should be our comfort, become our shame, and break our hearts, and make men Papists by your temptation. Woe to the World, because of offences, and woe to some by whom they come.
I thank God, I speak not my own case; I think those many Religious people that I have had the oversight of, are as ready to be ruled by me, and as undivided, as any that ever I have known? But alas, in too many places it is otherwise: Should the Ministers in London, that have suffered so long, but use any part of the Liturgy and Scripture Forms, though without any motive, but the plea∣sing of God, & the Churches good, what mut∣tering and censuring would there be against them? And woe to those few Teachers that make up their designs by cherishing these di∣stempers. One would think that their warn∣ing had bin fair. But—si nati sint ad bis perdendam Angliam—The Lord have mercy on us! 15. Seeing places and numbers and other Church-circumstances are matters left to hu∣mane prudence, be sure that you prudentially discern the divesity of duties, according to the diversity of places and occasions. These things I here include. First, That you be not of those Church-tearers opinion, who must have all go just one way, in all those undetermined variable things; And will censure all, and take them for dividers, that do not as they do. Secondly, That Edification or the Publick good is the end, rule and measure of these Pru∣dential actions.
Thirdly, That in looking to this rule and end, you must not look only to your pre∣sent Congregation or the present Age, but to all the Churches abroad, and to posterity. Fourthly, That nothing here should be rashly done, but by great advise. Fifthly, That therefore other Brethren, (as well dissenting as consenting Ministers) should for safety be consulted with, not to be your Governours, but for Counsel and for Concord. Sixthly, To which end correspondencies of Ministers is necessary. 16. In those places where the name of a di∣stinct Church, and that your administration of the Sacraments is like to do more harm than good, it is your duty to forbear it, and only to Teach. How to discern this, Prudence and Counsel must direct you: If there be a wor∣thy Parish Minister, and the people are all or almost all satisfied (or may be satisfied by you) to communicate with him according to the liturgy, and if your own administration would stir up so much offence and hurt, as that the benefit cannot countervail it, the case is plain. But if you live in London, or where all the peo∣ple cannot come to the Parish Church, or the Minister is intollerable, and the good is like (on prudent advise) to be apparently greater then the hurt, I know not but you may 1. Know your flock by name.
2. And take it either as a Chappel (in some places) or as a distinct Neighbour Church (in other places.) 3. Duely Administer the Sacraments. 4. And soberly and wisely use Christs Dis∣cipline. 17. Be sure that the Concord of all the true Protestant Non-Conformists Churches, be esta∣blished upon the simple ancient Catholick terms, and not upon any self-devised Additions: That is, that all that own the Scripture in ge∣neral, and the Baptismal Covenant, the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Decalogue in par∣ticular (as the summary of Holy Belief, holy Desires, and holy Practice,) be taken for fel∣low Christians, till it be proved against them that by Heresie or wickedness they nullifie this profession. This is the Rule and Test of uni∣versal concord. Here all agree: And if after this one Church will use Forms of Prayer, and another will not, one will Baptize Infants, and another will delay it, &c. they are dif∣ferences that must be born, where Love and Reason cannot heal them, without breach of Charity, Concord or Communion; yea in the same Church, such different opinions may be born, further than as those that dis∣sent from the Pastors mode of worship, will separate themselves when none rejecteth them. We have all naturally a Pope born in us, and when men have never so much talkt against
Popery and Prelacy, too many censure or run away from all that are not of their way. If any tell you that so wide an enterance will let into the Church Socinians and other Hereticks, who will mis-expound the words, Ask them again, First, Whether Baptising men is not a taking them into the Church? And whether the Apostles and Churches for many hundred years, required any more of those that were Baptized? And whether their business be to shew themselves wiser than the Apostles, and the primitive Church? Secondly, Whether Hereticks will not sub∣scribe to all the Scripture, while they misinter∣pret it; And whether all the Scripture there∣fore be not big enough for a Creed? Thirdly, Whether all Heresie be not a con∣tradiction of some of the aforesaid Articles of Faith, and he that saith, I believe this Creed and all that is contrary to it, renounce not all Heresie. Fourthly, Whether all Laws be faulty which men can misinterpret; And whether the Law must be changed and enlarged as oft as any break it. Fifthly, Whether all the Volumns of Ge∣neral Councils, be not yet too little by that rule, the sence of many being still contro∣verted? Sixthly, If we must have new Creeds and
Church Articles as oft as Hereticks misex∣pound the old, whether it be not in the power of the Devil and Hereticks to make our Faith ridiculously alterable every year, till it grow intolerably voluminous? Seventhly, And who is it that must be still the Creed-makers or menders? And where will they stop? And how shall we know when we have all? Eighthly, Is he a wise Pastor, that readeth how the Churches have ever since the Coun∣cil at Nice bin distracted with new Creeds, and yet will take no warning? Read how Hilary Pict. inveigheth against them. When they vexed Hierome himself with suspicions of Heresie about the Trinity, (because he was not for the term Hypostasis as a person) his answer was, They ask me of my Belief (or Faith) as if I had bin New-born (or Baptized) without a Belief: As if he should say, Is it not a true and sufficient Creed or profession of Faith, which we all make at Baptism? Why else are we Baptized? Ninethly, Tell them, that Pastors indeed must know more than all the people: but not by having a new Creed or Scripture, but at their Oraination they are to give an account of a fuller understanding the same Creed than the people must do: And the Ordainers must examine them where they suspect them of He∣resie.
Tenthly, Lastly, Tell them that no more than this is necessary, at the door; but if any after prove an Heretick, the accuser must prove it by him; and what is the use of Church-Discipline, but to reform him or cast him out? And Laws will not serve alone in∣stead of Judgement. If they say that a Heretick may do much mischief before it can be proved against him, Tell them. 1. That it must not be Thoughts but Words that do mischief in the Church; And Words are proveable. 2. That such proud tyrannical overdoers, have bin the Churches undoers? And it is they that have done as much mischief as most He∣reticks: And that they that will be so much wiser and better than God, as to keep out all Heresie by their self-conceited ways, are the men that let in Heresie and Impiety, and keep or cast out faithful Pastors, and are the Officers and Agents of the great Divider and Destroyer of the Churches. Let me add, Brethren, we that have lived in an Age, when the Engines of Church-Divi∣sion have so sadly prospered, and have smar∣ted thereby, and born our Testimony against them, are doubly obliged to leave this Testi∣mony of ours to Posterity to warn them, that if possible they may escape the snare; And therefore TO PUBLISH THIS OUR
JUDGEMENT, and OUR OWN CONCORD ON THESE PRI∣MITIVE TERMS to all the World, as against the Romish tyrannical-uncertain-con∣founding Church-dividing, and still growing Articles of Faith; Remembring that the same men that have made their Religion so big as that the French Impression of it (viz. their Councils) is too dear for the purse of a Non-conformable Minister; can yet tell you that even aith in Christ himself (explicite) is not absolutely necessary, at least to justification, and that the knowledge even of much of the Law of nature as well as of the Gospel may not be absolutely necessary, as Sancta Clara, Deus-Nat-Grat. Problem. 15. and 16. proveth out of the Schoolmen at large. 18. Manage your Ministerial converse pru∣dently and piously. The converse of Ministers is of great use, and therefore frequent Meet∣ings needful: Use them to these ends. 1. To advise and prevent the effects of rashness or imprudencie in Church affairs: when every weak man hath the use of the wis∣dom of all his seniors, it is safe. 2. To preserve Concord, and prevent back∣bitings, animosities and sactions, and discor∣dant scandalous singularities. 3. That young Ministers may be Learners as well as Teachers, and may grow up under the Helpes of their Seniors.
I think therefore you may best thus im∣prove your Converse. I. Often meet for fasting and prayer, to lament our former and later sin, and to pray for the Church of Christ and for all men; for the King and all in Authority, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and honesty. II. Set up constant regular Disputations, (not about trifles, nor with litigious licen∣ciousness) But about the grounds of our Religion, especially the differences between us and the Socinians, and Papists; And this with School order, under Moderation. Be∣cause, 1. Too many of us are young and unstu∣dyed in these matters, and little fit to deal with the Philistins Goliahs, and have great need to increase in holy defensive skill. 2. It will by the bounds of order prevent all contentions and wranglings, and medling with Rulers or other mens matters, and all loss of time by impertinent discourse. III. Counsel and Concord about Church practice must take up the rest of your time. And these three seasonably used Prayer, Dis∣putation, and Counsel will conduce much to your growth and strength. But see that Ministerial Meetings turn not from Counsel and Agreement to Formality and Vsurpation of a Ruling power over one an∣other,
and so degenerate not into Synodical Church-tyranny; much less usurpe the Ma∣gistrates right: For Synods ill managed have bin the Fevers and Pleurisies of the Churches. 19. Therefore be sure to keep out, both the Ty∣ranny of Major Votes, and of the proud Ma∣gisterial self-arrogations of any individuals, that think all others must stoop to them. 1. When it is once thought that the Major Vote must carry it, an Ithacian Synod, will tyrannize; and every weak self-conceited man, that hath nothing of sence to say against you will charge nine Learned judicious grave Divines with Insolency, if they will not be go∣verned by ten that are unlearned or injudici∣ous self-esteemers. Voteing is not for govern∣ment, but for Concord; And not to be used, (lest it seem an appearance or introduction of usurpation,) except in cases where meer Con∣cord is your work. 2. But nothing hath more plagued the Church than the Pride and Arrogancy of some of the Pastors, that think they are wronged if they may not Rule. Think not that this Spirit is only in Papists or Diocesans; Pride is the heart of the old man, and born in all; And doleful experience telleth how it survi∣veth in too many Antiprelatical Ministers, of humbling principles, and unhumbled souls. Do we not know that the Pride of some among
our selves, that must be All, and do all, till they have undone all, is the very thing, that hath silenced so many Ministers, and brought us to the state that we are now in? There are some men that must only be heard in all debates, and seldom hear; who are angry if they be gainsaid; who think that nimble Tongues, or popular Interest, or grey hairs, must pass for uncontrolled reason. And they study to make parties, and set up their own Dictates, by passion or indirect contrivan∣ces: They can seldom debate a cause, but their spleen swelleth against those that say not as they say, but contradict them, and they secretly back-bite them to blast their names! They note those that follow them, and those that oppose them, and make two parties of them. And all cometh from the common sin of man-kind, An unhumbled overconfident understanding. These men must first be meekly desired to be quiet, and to let you be quiet, and to re∣member that Non-conformists are not for self-obtruding Prelacy; And that they are Brethren and not Lords: If that will not do, try by Prayer to prevail with God, for more of humility and peace in his Ministers. If that will not do, silently bear their importunity with neglect: If that do not, Meet without them:
3. And yet there is as great a mischief as any of these to be avoided also: Which is the self-conceitedness and Pride of the younger and the more injudicious Sort of Ministers, hindering them from following the Counsels of wiser experienced men. For though we must have no arrogant Lordly Usurpers a∣mong us, yet all that know any thing must confess, that in all professions wise and ex∣imious men are few: It is but to few Divines that God giveth clear and accurate judgments; And undoubtedly there is a three-fold Supe∣riority and submission of divine obliga∣tion, 1. Of Subjects to men in Office over them. 2. Of the younger to the Elder. 3. Of them that have less knowledge, to them that have more. For Office and Seniori∣ty are but formalities, did they not suppose an eximious fitness by Superior knowledge. If therefore God endow here and there one man with extraordinary judgement, it is the wisdom and happiness of the times to know him, and to kindle their Torches at his fire: So did one Luther, one Melanch∣thon, one Calvin, one Erasmus, one Jewel, Whitakers, Reignolds, Davenant, &c. profit many. You may go a hundred miles amongst the less judicious sort, and miss of that light which one Amesius ne Camero, one Stran∣gius, one le Blanch &c. could shew the
world. And it is the Plague of corrupted nature that Ignorance keepeth men from know∣ing it self, and not one of a multitude (even of Religious men) who are injudicious will believe that they are injudicious; but every man is so much the more confident that he is in the right and others erre, by how much the more he erreth himself: so that few ignorant Ministers are teachable, but think that they are too wise to learn, because by office they undertake to teach: But through Gods mer∣cy, my own converse hath bin with an hum∣ble sort of Ministers, which was the occasion of our unity and peace. And London and the Countrey have many such, who I hope will be able to resist the dividing attempts of the self ignorant and self-conceited. 20. Lastly, Spend this little time as in the way to speedy sufferings and death: Your pre∣sent Winters day is short. Work hard: Live wisely: Suppose your tryal were the next year: Behave your selves as men that stand in prospect of the Grave: It is not like∣ly that God will pass over twenty years wil∣full divisions, wantonness, proud contention, self-distraction, scandals, and great sins so little repented of, that men cannot endure to hear them named, with so short or small a suffering as we have undergone. And the same Spirit yet blinding the guilty, and keep∣ing some of the separating party in Impeni∣tence,
and working still by unlawful means to their unlawful ends, is the fearful Progno∣stick, that more of the old effects are to be produced by the old uncured cause. O be not partakers in the guilt and blindness lest you partake of the destruction, and dementa∣tion be the sure prognostick of perdition. But O Lord spare thy people, and bless thine In∣heritance, and let not the weakness or will∣fulness of the Pastors or people, deliver it up as a prey to the Destroyer. And though our folly and scandal have made us a scorn, let it not turn to the extirpation of true Religion, and to the further advantage of Church-ty∣ranny, Ignorance, or Malignity in the world. And if we the foolish sinful Pastors, have for∣feited our honour and station in thy Church, let not the Tyrannical Foolish and Wicked, but those that shall be wiser, holyer and more faithfully and succesfully diligent succeed us.
CHAP. XII. An humble Petition to the Conformists. Sect. 1. FAthers and Brethren, though I presumed to counsel the Non-Conformists as my equals, I will presume no higher with you, than to lay my self at your Feet, and humbly a second time to become your Petitioner for the souls of men, for the Gospel, the Church, and the interest of Christ. It is your Office to be Petitioners to mankind for Christ, and to beseech them in his stead to be reconciled to God. And a man might hope that one that should become a Peti∣tioner to you, that your selves would not de∣stroy that Church, might find acceptance and prevail. But Satan hath got so great advan∣tage, that the wisest man living is uncapable of speaking rightly to you without offence. He that can draw men into great disgraceful sin, hath thereby raised a Bulwark to defend his work. To be silent and comply, is to be cruel to the sinner and himself, and who can do it that believeth Death and Judgement: To call men to repentance, is utterly to lose them by implying that they have sinned. O little did I once think that Repentance had bin so hard a work, when God offereth pardon of all other sins, against the Law of innocen∣cy,
on so low and reasonable a condition. Sect. 2. It is not in my thoughts to con∣found all Conformists, as if there were no difference among your selves. I know that there are many sorts of you: I. There are some Learned zealous high Conformists, who think they have done good service to God, by all that they have done already; and no doubt, were wise enough to foresee what they were bringing to pass, and are not, by any sober man, to be accused of doing either they knew not what, or what they did not suppose was good, and would countervail all that it should cost to procure it. Their work hath prospered; And the hinder part of it is yet in their hands; But it is also in the hands of God. To these Reverend persons, I have formerly spoken to their great of∣fense. Sect. 3. II. And I would there were no Ministers so pittifully dark, and young, and raw, or so much out of love and relish, with things Spiritual, through the prevalency of a stronger appetite, as that their incapacity convinceth me, that I am not to expect much regard from them, as knowing with what ears they hear. Sect. 4 III. There are also some called Latitudinarians, who love not Fopperyes or violence, but are men of Reason and sober Con∣versations, though they are not so tender and
scrupulous as the Non-conformists, but can break over greater rubs. Sect. 5. IV. And there are other Godly sober unwilling Conformists, who by the bene∣fit of subscribing in their own sence, have stretcht themselves to do what they have done; who conform on the terms of Mr. Sprint, sub∣mitting to what would else be evil, onely to obtein the liberty of Preaching; (Far be it from me to put in any selfish ends.) Who are unwillingly Conformists, as the Westminster As∣sembly were, that after took down Prelacy. Sect. 6. To all of them that yet have ears to hear, I humbly present these following Requests. I. O be not too angry with those that censure you as sinners. I detest rash censoriousness: But you know men that differ in this world, about Speculatives, may differ about matters of Practice too: The Jesuists, Fryars and Jan∣senists do so, in not a few or little things. And in such a difference, one party must needs consure the practisers of the contrary, as sin∣ners. If you and I differed about Usury, Stage playes, Gaming, &c. one party must needs think that the other side do live in sin. And who liveth and sinneth not? Either the censure is true or false: If true, should you not be as thankful as to one that would save you from the Plague? Will sin do you less hurt than censure? If it be false, Consider
1. You are fallible; and the notice of a possible pernicious danger, should be received with self-suspicion and thanks. 2. And you should love them the better for their aversness to sin, though they should mi∣stake the matter of it. A proud heart saith swellingly, Am I to be accounted herein a sinner? A humble person will say: Alas, I am too likely to mistake and sin: but if I do not, I will love, even a mistaken enemy of sin. And to deal faithfully with you, Had those honest Conformists of my acquaintance, but come first to the ablest dis∣senters, and impartially heard and weighed all that they had to say, and not secretly slipt into Conformity, as if they had bin afraid of hearing all, I should have bin the more of∣fended with their Censurers. But God hateth sin, and so must all that truely love him. And they are our best friends that do most to preserve us from it. And they are our greatest enemies, that would flatter us in∣to it. To Preach against sin, is your Mini∣sterial Office: And if any man thinks that you make a solemn Covenant to sin, that you may have leave to preach against sin; Yea, that you deliberately commit a great one, that you may have leave to preach against a less in other men, this man deserveth to be heard though he mistake. At Death and Judgment, nothing in the world but sin will be your dan∣ger: Unjust censures will be none. If we
say nothing to you yet its easie to gather by the costly terms on which we avoid it, that we take conformity for a sin. And if any of the people carry it censoriously or contemptuously towards you (which we abhor) remember that you take them for weak and pievish persons: And honour or contempt is valuable according to the quality of the ho∣nourer or contemner: You take your follow∣ers to be the wiser as they are the more: And we bear their censures of us, and much more: And cannot you bear the censures of a few that you judge weaker? You will proclaim the Non-Conformists to be the stronger Christians, if they can bear poverty and re∣straints, with the censure of the most, when you cannot bear the censure of the fewest, with liberty and Ministerial maintenance and honour. II. For your souls sake and for the Churches sake, Take heed of selfishness and Pride, lest it fill you with envy against your Bre∣thren that serve the same Lord, when you think they any way diminish your reputation and ho∣nour. I would have others keep up your Re∣putation to the utmost; which in the name of God, I charge upon them; Yea, and in honour to prefer you: But if you think they do not, remember that you are the Servants of a Crucified Christ, who made himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a Ser∣vant,
and yet this way got a name above eve∣ry name. As sure as you live, contending for honour, is one of the readiest ways to loose it, and giving it to others, and con∣temning it your selves, is one of the surest ways to get it, It is its motto, Quod sequitur fugio; quod fugit ipse sequor. Self-esteem, and Pride is odious in all: but in a Minister of Christ more odious, than in any man: but never so odious as when it riseth to such malignity, as to envy or hinder the work of God, because another more esteem∣ed doth it. It is a sin that I am readyer to tremble to think of, than further to re∣prove. And remember what work it hath made in the Churches of Christ already. Read but what Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, Evagrius, Nicephorus, &c. say of the fewds of the old Bishops: Read but the Acts of the Councils at Ephes. 1, & 2. of Chalcedon, at Ariminum, at Sirmium, at Nice, 2d. &c. and if hor∣rour and shame do not overwhelm you, to think what Christian Bishops did, and that so early in the face of the Heathens, you are not men. Read but how Nazianzene was used at Constantinople, by a Synod of Ortho∣dox Bishops, when he had overcome the Ar∣rians: Read the Controversies between Ba∣sil and Anthymius, and others: Read the dole∣ful story of Theophilus Alexandrinus, and
the Egyptian Monks, and of the same Theo∣philus his manner of dealing against the Ori∣genists, and of his double Letters and Present which he sent by Ifidore a Priest, to the Empe∣rour and Maximus, to be given to him that got the better: Read the odious story of the said Theophilus and Epiphanius his proceed∣ings against Chrysostome, and his ejection by a Councel of Bishops: Read the proceedings of Ithacius and Idacius and their Synods in Sulp. Severus: There is no end of instan∣ces: Read but the destruction of the many hundred Brittish Monks at Bangor, and the great suspicions that Augustine caused it. Look but on the face of the Greek and La∣tine Churches to this day, from the begin∣ing and cause of their divisions: And see what the Lutherans have done oft times against the Calvinists in Saxony, and other parts of Ger∣many, (as in Gasp. Peucers sufferings for one:) And see what the Roman Papacy and Clergy have done in the world by Lordly Pride and selfishness: And lastly, See what hath bin done by it in this Land; and at last learn by experience, and judge of Church-mens Pride by the effects. Brethren, what harm will it do to you, if a Non-Conformist preach by you? if many follow him? If some prefer him before you? Do not others prefer you before him? What if his followers think Conformity to be sin?
Do not you and yours think so of our Non-Conformity? It is not your selves that you preach for, but the peoples Souls: And why may not Christs Gospel profit them from an∣other as well as from you? Nature teacheth men to relish their own food, and partly to feel what doth them good? Clemens Alex∣and. Strom. 1. giveth it as the reason why the Church (then, not now) left it to every Com∣municant at the Sacrament, to Take their own part, Because man having free will, shall be the chooser, or refuser of his own good. If they choose a worse Teacher than you, it is not you but they that are the loosers: If they choose a better, you have your end, if you are Christians; If you preach not so well as another, you are not fit to be Ministers of Christ, if you be not glad that another doth better, and is a blessing to the Flock. If you preach better, its two to one but good∣ness will have an insuparable attraction: Or if mistake make them more capable of good from another than from you, should you not desire that they might have it? Will you say, It is their partial humour? I have heard ma∣ny Ministers say so, that had reason to have said, It is my unskilfulness or dulness: But suppose it be so; A Physician will let his pa∣tient take his Medicine from one mans hand, if he refuse it from another. The Father will not let the Infant famish if he will take no
meat from him, but from the Mother. If the people had no faults or weaknesses, what need were there of you or other Ministers. I am as apt to speak sharply against the humours and weakness of Religious people, as most that are not envious and malignant. But I must give them this Testimony, that though many of them cannot well judge of judicious∣ness in their Teachers, yet most of them love a serious Preacher and a Godly Liver; And few of them distast either Prelates or Confor∣mists, if they preach seriously, and live Holi∣ly. But when in all the Countreys they see such Preachers and Livers chosen out for si∣lencing, all the world cannot keep them from disliking such Bishops as shall do thus. I am most confident for those of my old acquain∣tance, that if they had seen Bishops (after their long disacquaintance with them) to have Preached and Prayed in a sound and se∣rious Holy manner, and set themselves to promote the labours of Godly Preachers, and to encourage piety in the people and repress iniquity, they would generally have loved and honoured them, without respect to Pres∣bytery or Independency: It is Godliness that Godly people care for. But since I and abundance about us were ejected, and since many of themselves have bin laid in Goals, it is no more in my power to make them love
such Bishops, than to make them love the Goal it self. Yea further, Brethren, what if the Non-Conformable Minister do give the Sacrament to some, as you do to others? What if they think their way best, as you think yours? What if they call themselves a Church and exercise Discipline, (which without need I would not have them do,) What harm will this do to you or others? If it do them harm, let them thank themselves: But to you it can do none, unless the unchristian sin of pride and envy cause it: or unless by reproaches and contentiousness they hinder the success of your labours; which is another thing. I confess I have ever bin jealous of such Arbitrary Churches, where there is room for all in one Church, lest they should turn Anti-Churches and Theatres of emulation and contention; (which I charge all conscionable persons to abhor:) But all this may be avoided at cheaper rates, than silencing so many labori∣ous Ministers, or excommunicating all the peo∣ple that are Non-conformists. III. Joyn lovingly with your Brethren, as Servants of one Lord, to promote one work. Look not strange at them, if they desire your friendship; Yea, if any of them prove censo∣rious and pievish, if you are the more pa∣tient, condescending, and forward to love and unity, and to further the peoples good, I shall
take you for better men than them; And so will all that judge by the fruits of the Spirit. Try this way instead of wrath, and I dare undertake that it shall more maintain your honour, with your peace of Conscience. Brethren, our great account is near: The Judge is at the door: It will be then comfor∣table to give a true account of Ministerial fi∣delity, and hear, Well done good and faithful servant; rather than to hear, We have beaten our fellow Servants, or unfaithfully kept the Key of knowledge. The souls of your charge are many and precious: It is a hard and great work to cure one: to make one Ignorant per∣son understand, one proud person humble, one infidel to believe, one worldling to be∣come Heavenly, or one sensualist to be a mor∣tified Saint: What help then do you need; what labour is requisite, to bring a Parish of many hundred or thousand persons to this change! As our weakness must make us all cry out, Who is sufficient for these things, so when one man hath ten mens work to do, he may well say, He is insufficient: In the first three Centuries, when one Congregation had a Bishop with a Colledge or Company of fellow Presbyters, they were not too many, though one onely could preach at once. I speak not uncertainties: We have tryed the Pastoral work; and know by experience that a Parish of a thousand (much more of many
thousand) families, hath work enough for many the most able and diligent Ministers in the Land: Yea, a Parish of an hundred Fa∣milies, needeth more help than any one Mi∣nister is able to afford them: Try them all by personal conference house by house as we have done, and judge. Would you then have the people taught, reformed and saved, or not? If yea, Would you not have necessary help to do it? I cannot believe that man to know truely what it is to be a Minister or a Christian, that perceiveth not a necessity of help if he can have it: And if you had con∣verted all now living, those that are born next will have need of as much labour as their Parents: For ignorance, sensuality and pride will be born with them. Thank God therefore that you may have help, and take it, whether you meet in one or two Assemblies: Help your tolerated Bre∣thren in their work, as those that more de∣sire the good of the peoples souls than they. Consult together for the removing of impe∣diments, and for the strengthening of each other. And if any factious, or froward Non-conformist should happen to be your Neigh∣bour, go to him, and by love and familiarity seek to win and cure him; and you will win the hearts of all good people. And if he be really turbulent, and do more harm in the place than good, I am perswaded the rest of
the Non-conformists will rebuke him, and dis∣own him. I add, IV. If any difference between you cannot be composed, instead of troubling the people about it, quietly refer it to some indifferent Arbitra∣tors. Is there not a wise man among you? Must Abrahams and Lots Servants, separate them for a Well? Must Paul and Barnabas part for different censures of another mans omission? Shall Christians, Protestants, Mi∣nisters, the Teachers of Love, and Concord and Patience, be so weak, so selfish, so bad, such contradicters of their daily Doctrine, as not to be able to carry on Christs work in peace; nor to make an amicable composure of their differences? If you are Christians indeed, the difference is not who shall have the most followers, applause or honour, but who serveth God and saveth souls, in the right and true effectual way? And may not prayer and consultation reconcile such a controver∣sie? For my own part I am conscious of pride and selfishness; Yet I can confidently say, that when I had a Pastoral charge, where I needed many Assistants, if I had known where that man lived whom the people would have loved, honoured and profited by, more than my self, I would have rid night and day to get him to be the man: And when I have heard my Neighbour Ministers that were younger men (I can scarce forbear naming
them) preach much more affectionately and profitably than my self, I have sate under them with tears of joy. But alas, What hath ten years silence of such men, deprived the souls of the poor people of! I never it meet with Saint Francis and the Frys, to abase my self by going naked, or by taking on me to be an Awfe, or by filthiness, or ridi∣culous behaviour; As if Heaven and a Swine∣sty were most like: (See Foulis his History of Popery.) But I have thought it my duty to cast away deliberately and knowingly much of my Reputation, even with Religious peo∣ple, by the discharge of such duty as I knew would do it; Believing that Reputa∣tion is one thing to be resolutely denyed for Christ, and that he that saveth his honour shall lose it, and he that loseth it for Christ shall have everlasting honour. Brethren, there is no great matters to be done in the Church of Christ in the midst of so many corruptions and temptations, with∣out confirmed Resolution: Resolve t be wholly the servants of Christ, and to seek mens Salvation, and to take no thought for your carnal interest and honour; And then the God whom you serve will take care of it. Think not that other mens selfishness or fro∣wardness is an excuse to yours: Who know∣eth man; and knoweth not that pride and selfishness is as common as sin, that is, Is the
last-dying heart of all our corruption? Will you expect none of it in others, when you know (if you know your selves) that you have much of it in your selves? dealing is not the Sign of enmity but love.  must tell you, that we cannot but think that you need Repentance, great Re∣pentance, for sinning more (and that by pub∣lick, deliberate, chosen, covenanted, Mini∣sterial sin, protesting against Repentance) in the day when Judgements called us all to re∣new our Repentance for our former sins. But yet we suspect our own understandings: We know what different apprehensions of things good men may have: We know that we are great sinners our selves: We take not all this to warrant our censorious separations from you. But we beseech you be not too angry with us, for differencing between good and evil, between him that sweareth, and him that feareth an Oath. As long as we do it to the cost and suffering of our own flesh, which disputeth in us more cunningly and strongly for Conformity, then all the Du∣rels, the Fullwoods, the Stilemans, &c. in England. We have naturally no more love to poverty, to scorn, to a prison, than you have: And why may not those that do no∣thing else almost say, that its like we study to know the truth, as hard as any of you all? And the love of beggery, scorn and imprison∣ment,
is not likely much to byas us. And if you think that our honour with our party doth it, you must needs think that we (who so sharply reprove them,) do think very high∣ly of that poor despised party, when we pre∣fer their opinions, not onely before your Magnates & Plures, but also before our Livelihoods, Liberties and Lives. Woe to the Hypocrite that hath no better a re∣ward! And why should we do it? Were we not as capable of the more Noble and General ap∣plause as you, if we could have taken your way? As we are none of your Judges then, Be you none of ours, but let us with Resolved unity (though not uniformity) serve that one God whom we are all devoted to. Remem∣ber that to Preach Love is your Ministerial work; And to practice it is your Christian work. Resolve as much to maintain Chri∣stian Love as inviolate, even to Martyrdom, as the Martyrs did to maintain the Christian Faith. Remember Ridley and Hooper: You may come to Ridley's Confessions ere you die. We purpose not to Unminister you so much a Gildas did his Brittains, nor to separate from you so much as Martin did to the death, from all the Neighbour Synods and Bishops, for a far lesser cause than the silencing of eighteen hundred Ministers. We take not
you whom I now write to, to be consenting to this work. (Though your silence and non-resistance, hath bred such thoughts of you in people, as we would fain have you cure by the contrary means.) We are for peace: Be not you against it: But we cannot buy it, by deserting the Ministry, to which we were consecrated and devoted, nor by neglecting so many thousand miserable souls. Bring things in England once to that pass, that re∣ally our labour may be unnecessary, in the judgement of those that are not Infidels, Igno∣rants, or Malignant enemies of a holy life, and we will presently gratifie all that desire our silence, or our banishment, and will not trouble men with needless work. Thus, Brethren, you see, I have presumed no higher than to Petition you; And that not to your cost or detriment; nor for our preferment, wealth or ease: We aske you not for food or rayment; We crave from you none of your Dignities, nor Estates: Though when I find this Author disswading us from our Ministry, because the people are poor, I think that reason might almost as aptly have served to perswade us to live no longer, be∣cause the world is too poor to keep us; We do but eat if we preach, and so we must if we do not: And I think it had savoured of no excess of Charity and Ministerial ingenuity, if he had rather said, Brethren, you must per∣form
your undertaken Ministry, and we and the peoples souls have need of all your help; And the maintenance is given for the work, There∣fore you that work with us, shall have part of the Church maintenance with us, at least a fifth part, as was allowed to the ejected by the Par∣liament, because the people cannot maintain you, and it is hard to serve God without anxiety, while your families are in want. This had better beseemed our Brethren; but we crave and expect no such thing from you; but only pa∣tiently to suffer us to live and labour by you, and let God provide for us as he please. And if we had expected that heretofore you had Petitioned our Rulers, for the liberty of our Ministry, it had bin no unreasonable expectation. All knew that our own Petiti∣ons had no hope: Ministers should of all men have bin most sensible of the Churches breaches, loss and danger, and most compas∣sionate of the peoples souls: If you had but humbly acquainted our Rulers, That all our labours conjoyned are too little; that you needed our help, and the ignorant our teach∣ing; That your own judgement was, that our Ministry was more necessary than our per∣sonal Conformity, 1. You know not but you might have bin heard: For no doubt our Rulers thought they did that which the Reverend Church-men
did advise or think best: I hope you do not think that our civil Rulers would have done all that they have done against us, if it had bin against the Bishops and conformable Cler∣gies judgment and advise: Civil Governours are never so cruel in matters of Religion, as the Ruling and exasperated Clergy are, as the Histories of all ages testifie. 2. Or at least you might have had the greater peace of Conscience, in all the confu∣sions that have followed, and said, It is not long of us. And you would have acquitted your selves in the judgement of all your hearers, and they would have bin the less prejudiced against your Ministry. Had you Petitioned and prevailed but for these two things, you had healed all our breaches, First, That the door of enterance might not have bin barred by any other subscriptions, professions or Oaths, than what were used in the Churches of Christ, till the exaltation of the Papacy (for 600 years,) besides the Oaths of Allegeance and supremacy, and the sub∣scribing the Doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land, in the 39. Articles, according to the 13th. of Queen Elizabeth. Secondly, That those (so subscribing) who dare not use the Liturgy and Ceremonies,
might have leave to preach in the Churches which use them, under Laws which shall re∣strain them from all unpeaceable opposition to what they dare not use, or to the Govern∣ment of the Church. And having mentioned this, What if I added yet this clause to my present Petition to you? V. That you will yet Petition for us, or ra∣ther for the Church of Christ, that upon the foresaid terms we may be, if possible, taken in to the established Ministry, If not, yet tolerated as Lecturers under you in such Churches, where the Ministers desire us, not taking any of their maintenance from them, but trusting God for our daily bread. By this means you shall have no need to fear our injuring of your wealth or reputati∣on; Nor the strengthening of the Papists by the weakening of Protestants through our-own divisions; (Onely let not the people who scruple Conformity, be therefore denyed Church-Communion and Sacraments.) And now as God will judge, so let the world judge, & let posterity judge whether we are unworthy in comparison of the present Ministers of England, to be permitted to preach Christs Gospel on these self-denying and self-abasing terms; And whether they that cry out of the danger of Popery. Infide∣lity, Profaneness and Heresies, and yet had
rather let them in all, than give us leave to ex∣ercise that Ministry to which we were conse∣crated, in poverty and subjection; and while they cry out of Divisions, will not lay by the Dividing-engines; should rather accuse us or themselves, if the evils overwhelm us, which they seem to fear? It is not pleasure, profit or worldly prefer∣ments, that we contend for: We would do no man hurt or wrong: If our lovers of Church-power do think us intolerable, be∣cause we obey them not as fully as they desire, we profess before God and Man, that it is not because we would not be subject and obedient to any, as far as will stand with our obedience to God, but only because we dare not, we will not do that which we believe that God for∣bideth us: And if we erre, it is not for want of studying, perhaps as hard and impartially as they, to know the truth: And to him that thinketh he doth evil it is sin. It is sin, and no small or tolerable sin, which our consciences fear, in our forbearing subscriptions and Conformity: If they also take it to be a sin to suffer us to preach the Gospel, and a grea∣ter sin, than to suffer the inundation of Infi∣delity, Popery and the rest which they say is ready to break in upon us, And if they think our not Subscribing, Swearing, &c. to be in us so great a sin, that the punishment laid on
Swearers, Drunkards, or Fornicators, will not serve turn to avenge it on our selves, nor any other of our personal sufferings, unless the souls of many thousands, and the Protestant Religion, and our Posterity also suffer for it, the Judgments of God must be endured. But remember not Lord our offences, nor the of∣fences of our Fore-fathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sins: Spare us good Lord; Spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever. And hasten O Lord Jesus thy more Righteous Judgement. FINIS.
ERRATA. P. 13. l. . the thing, p. 19. l. . del. , p. 28. l. 21▪ r. you, p. 45. l. 15. del. 4▪ p. 65. l. 6. r. work. p. 67. l. 8. r. by not only, p. 70. l. 3. for [?] r. [:] p. 89. l. . r. intolerable, p. 9. l. . r. make your, p. 108. l. 21. r. and renounce all.
