B3989 12770244 93647
Imprimatur, Novemb. 18. 1691. Robert Southwell. P. R. S.
Medicinal Experiments; OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice Remedies, FOR The most part Simple, and Easily Prepared. By the Honorable R. BOYLE, Esq Fellow of the Royal Society. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1692.
THE PREFACE OF The Publisher. THese Receipts, taken out of a large Colle∣ction, as consisting of a few safe Ingredients, commonly to be found at easie Rates in most places, were sent to a learned Physician beyond Sea:
To whom they were a wel∣come Present, and answer'd, without doubt, the Ends he had in desiring them. That Excellent Person, to whom these choice Prescripti∣ons are owing, did permit a few Copies of them to be Prin∣ted, and was pleased to put them in the Hands of some of his Friends, provided, as there was occasion, they would make Tryal of them, and faith∣fully report the Success. Divers of those, who on these Conditions had re∣ceived so great a Favour, held themselves obliged to enquire for Persons affected with any
of the Maladies against which the said Medicines were pre∣scribed; and, upon many Ex∣periments carefully made, ha∣ving found, that frequently they have relieved those who used them, and sometimes strangely outdone Expecta∣tion; they addressed them∣selves with much Importunity to the Noble Author, to suffer Things which were of such general Benefit, and so easily to be procured by the Poor, to be made more publick. And at length he hath been prevailed with not only to al∣low the former Receipts, which but few had seen, to be Re∣printed,
but hath, out of his rich Treasury, stored us with a fresh Collection, which, as in Number it exceeds what we had before, so in Quality and Virtue it falls not short of it. And if what here, with such an honest and kind De∣sign is offered to the Publick, be but candidly and favoura∣bly receiv'd, we may still hope for more Blessings of this sort from him, who has not only a constant Will and great Abi∣lity to do good, but hath, per∣haps, obliged the Age as much as any private Person in it.
The Author's PREFACE. THE following Prescri∣ptions are a part of a Collection of Receipts and Pro∣cesses, that from Time to Time have been recommended to me by the Experience of others, or approved by my own: Receipts that being Parable or Cheap, may easily be made serviceable to poor Countrey People.
For Medicines so Simple, and for the most part so Cheap, I have found all of them to be good in their kind: And though I think most of them safer than many other Medicines that are in great Request, yet I do not pretend that these should play the Part of Medicines and Phy∣sicians too; but that they may be usefully employed by one who knows how to administer them discreetly. I distinguish them into three Classes or Orders, annexing to the Title of each particular Me∣dicine one of the three first Let∣ters of the Alphabet; wherefore A is the Mark of a Remedy of
the highst Classis of these, Re∣commended as very considerable and efficatious in its kind. B, Denotes a second or inferior sort, but yet to be valuable for their good Operations. C, belongs to those Remedies that are of the lowest Order, tho' good enough not to be despised. Those Receipts, which were my own, are expressed in my own Terms; so also those which I received from others by word of Mouth: But them which were imparted to me in Writing, though I my self would not have worded them, as they did that I had them from, yet I often∣times made a Scruple to Correct
or Alter their Expressions, tho' not suitable to the Current Style of the Formularies of Receipts, being more concern'd that the Meaning should be close kept to, than the Style rectified.
THE TABLE OF DISEASES. Note, The Number answers to the Page. A AGues. Pag. 4, 13, 25, 74 Amulet against Agues. Pag. 13 Amulet against Cramps. Pag. 15 Acidities to Cure. Pag. 19 After-Birth to bring away. Pag. 21 Appetite to restore. Pag. 21 Antimonial Remedy for Leprosies and Fevers. Pag. 54
Antimonial Infusion. Pag. 56 Apoplexy to prevent. Pag. 6 Arthritick Pains. Pag. 7 Apoplectick Fits. Pag. 78 B Bloody-Flux. Pag. Bowels to Strengthen. Pag. 14 Blood to stanch. Pag. 16 Blood to Sweeten. Pag. 19 Brest Ʋlcerated. Pag. 23 Broken Belly. Pag. 33, 40 Black Jaundice. Pag. 44 Burns. Pag. 8 C Coughs. Pag. 1, 32 Convulsions. Pag. 9, 20 Consumptions. Pag. 12 Child to bring away. Pag. 14 Cramp. Pag. 15 Contusions. Pag. 28, 29
Cutis Excoriated. Pag. 30 Continual Fevers. Pag. 51, 52, 54, 79 Chilblains. Pag. 53 Colick. Pag. 55, 62, 78, 85 Childbearing to be cleansed after. Pag. 57 Cancer not broken. Pag. 67 Colds. Pag. 69 Childrens Jaundice. Pag. 70 Chin Cough. Pag. 74 D Dysentery. Pag. 7, 18, 59, 68 Diseases from Obstruction. Pag. 38 Difficulty of Hearing. Pag. 39 Drink for continual Fevers. Pag. 51, 52 Drink for the Scurvy. Pag. 64 Diuretick Medicine. Pag. 64 Decoction of Quick-Silver. Pag. 80 E Evil. Pag. 7 Eyes to Cure. Pag. 20
Excoriations. Pag. 30 External Piles. Pag. 63 Experiment for a Weak Sight. Pag. 73 External Remedy for Fevers. Pag. 79 F Fits of the Stone. Pag. 8 Fluxes sharp. Pag. 18, 26, 37, 59 Films to clear. Pag. 20 Fits of Agues. Pag. 4, 13, 25 Fits of the Gout. Pag. 40 Fits of the Mother. Pag. 50 Fevers continual. Pag. 51, 52, 54, 79 Falling Sickness. Pag. 75 Fits Apoplectick. Pag. 78 Fresh strain. Pag. 83 G Gripings. Pag. 26 Gout. 40, 50, 71 Gums to Strengthen. 69
H Hemorrhoids. Pag. 10, 17, 27, 63, 84 Heart Burning. Pag. 34 Hearing difficult. Pag. 39 Hoarsness on a Could. Pag. 69 Heat in the Eyes. Pag. 72 Heat of the Stomach. Pag. 87 I Jaundice Yellow. Pag. 5, 6, 70 Inflammations of Ʋlcers Pag. 31 Jaundice Black. Pag. 44 Itch to cure. Pag. 58 Internal Piles. Pag. 63 Issue raw to make. Pag. 86 K Kings Evil. Pag. 7 Kings Evil cured with Lime Water, &c. Pag. 82
L Lime Water to make. Pag. 11 Lime Water for Obstructions. Pag. 12 Legs Inflamed and Ʋlcerated. Pag. 31 Loosness. Pag. 37 Leprosie. Pag. 54 Lungs Stuffed. Pag. 74 Lime Water for the Kings Evil. Pag. 82 M Medicine for the Stone. Pag. 49, 76 Mother Fits. Pag. 50 Medicine for a fresh Strain. Pag. 52 Medicine to cleanse the Womb. Pag. 57 Medicine for a sore Throat. Pag. 60, 66, 77 Medicine for the Colick. Pag. 62 Medicine for a Cancer. Pag. 67 N Nitre, a Medicine of it for the Colick. Pag. 85
O Obstructions. Pag. 12, 38 Outward Contusions. Pag. 28, 29 Oil of Turpentine mixt with Oint∣ment of Tobacco, and Balls of Sulphur for the Piles. Pag. 84 P Pains of the Stone. Pag. 2 Pain of the Teeth. Pag. 4 Piles. Pag. 10, 17, 27, 63, 84 Pains. Pag. 31, 50, 71 Plaister to discuss Tumours. Pag. 43 Plaister to strengthen the Joynts. Pag. 50 Pleurisie. Pag. 68 Prolapsus Ʋteri. Pag. 71 Q Quick-Silver prepared against Worms. Pag. 80
R Rheumes. Pag. 1, 32, 68 Ruptures. Pag. 33, 40 Resent Strain. Pag. 35 Remedy for Chilblains. Pag. 53 Remedies for Fluxes. Pag. 7, 18, 26, 59 S Stone. Pag. 2, 8, 49, 76 Sharpness of Ʋrine. Pag. 3 Strengthen the Bowels. Pag. 14 Stanching Blood. Pag. 16 Stomach to Strengthen. Pag. 21 Strain. Pag. 34, 35, 37, 52, 83, 85 Strengthning Plaister. Pag. 31 Sores. Pag. 41 Sore Throat. Pag. 60, 66, 86 Sharp Humours. Pag. 62 Scurvy. Pag. 64 Strengthen the Gums. Pag. 69 Syrup for Rheums. Pag. 68
Sharp Humours in the Eyes. Pag. 72 Sight Weak. Pag. 73 Stomach Heat. Pag. 87 Stomachical Tincture. Pag. 88 T Tooth Ach. Pag. 4, 32 Tertian Ague. Pag. 13, 74 Tumours. Pag. 17 Tickling Rheum. Pag. 32 Teeth to keep Sound. Pag. 32 Tumours to discuss and ripen. Pag. 43 Throat Sore. Pag. 60, 66, 77, 86 Teeth to make firm. Pag. 69 U Ʋrine Sharp. Pag. 3 Ʋlcers of the Brest. Pag. 23 Ʋlcers. Pag. 41 Uteri Prolapsus. Pag. 71 Ʋrine stopt. Pag. 76
W. Women in Labour. Pag. 14 Wounds bleeding. Pag. 16 Weakness of the Joints. Pag. 37 Water for Ʋlcers. Pag. 41 Womb to cleanse. Pag. 57 Wash for the Iteh. Pag. 58 Weak Sight. Pag. 73 Worms in Children. Pag. 80 Whitloe to Cure. Pag. 81 Y. Yellow Jaundice. Pag. 5
A Catalogue of the Philosophical and Theological Books and Tracts, Written by the Honorable Robert Boyle Esq Together with the Order of Time, wherein each of them hath been Published respectively.
DECAD I. I. For Coughs, especially such as proceed from thin Rheums. B TAke of choice Oliba∣num, finely powder'd, from one Scruple to half a Dram, and mix carefully with it an equal weight of Sugar-candy, (white or brown,) or, in want of that, of fine Sugar; and let the Patient take it at Bed∣time in the Pap of an Apple, or some other proper Additament, for
several nights together: If it be found needful, it may be taken at any other time, when the Stomach is empty. II. To give Ease in the Pains of the Stone, even that of the Bladder. A TAke the transparent Sparr that grows upon the Veins of Lead-ore, and having reduc'd it to fine Powder, give from half a Dram to a whole Dram of it at a time, in a moderate Draught of some convenient Vehicle. N. B. Though there be (at least in most of our English Mines) two Tegu∣ments, as it were, of the Veins of Lead, that grow close together;
yet that which the Diggers name Cawk, which is white and opacous, is not the Medicine I mean, but the Transparent, or at least Semi-Diaphanous; which easily breaks into smooth Fragments, and in the Fire cleaves into several pieces, that are wont to be smooth and prettily shap'd. III. For Sharpness of Ʋrine. B TAke of the dry Stuff that divides the Lobes of the Kernels of Walnuts, beat them to Powder, and of this give about half a Dram at a time, in a draught of White-wine, or Posset-drink made with it, or in any other convenient Liquor.
IV. To Appease the Violent Pains of the Tooth-ach. B MAke up a Scruple of Pil. lulae Mastichinae, and half a Grain of Laudanum, into two or three Pills for the Patient to take at Bed-time. V. For Agues. A TAke Salt of Card. Benedict. and Salt of Wormwood and 15 Grains, Tartar Vitriolate half a Scruple; mix them, and give them
in a few Spoonfuls of Rhenish∣wine, or of some other convenient Vehicle, either before the Fit, or at some other time when the Sto∣mach is empty. VI. For the Yellow-Jaundice. B TAke an Ounce of Castle-Soap (the Elder the better,) slice it thin, put it into a Pint of Small∣beer cold, set it on the Fire, let it boil gently half away, after boil∣ing some time, scum it once; then strain it through a small Sive, warm it, and drink it all in a mor∣ning fasting; take a small Lump of Sugar after it, and fast two or three hours: The Party may walk about his Business, and eat his ac∣stomed
Meals: If at any time he drinks Wine, let it be White wine. N. B. If he be far gone in the Distemper; two or three day after, he may take it once or twice more, and no oftner. Refrain all other Medicines: It will keep a Week or longer. VII. For the Jaundice. B TAke two or three Ounces of Semen Cannabis (Hempseed) and boil them till the Seeds (some of them) begin to burst, and a lit∣tle longer, in a sufficient quantity of New Milk, to make one good Draught; which the Patient is to take warm, renewing it if need be, for some days together.
VIII. For the Dysentery. B TAke Pigs-Dung, dry it, and burn it to grey (not white) Ashes; of these give about half a Dram for a Dose, drinking after them about three Spoonfuls of Wine-Vinegar. IX. For the Kings Evil. B TAke Cuttle-bone uncalcin'd, and having scrap'd off the out-side or colour'd part, dry the white part; and of this, finely
powder'd, give half a Dram for a Dose in Aqua Malvae. X. A Safe and Easie Medicine in Fits of the Stone. B TAke Sack, or, in want of that, Claret-wine, and by shaking or otherwise, mix with it, as well as you can, an equal quan∣tity of Oyl of Wallnuts; and of this Mixture give from 4 or 6 to 8 or 10 Ounces at a time as a Glyster.
DECAD II. I. For Convulsions, especially in Children. B TAke Earth-worms, wash them well in White-wine to cleanse them, but so as that they may not die in the Wine: Then, upon hollow Tiles or between them, dry the Worms with a moderate Heat, and no further than that they may be conveniently reduc'd to Pow∣der; to one Ounce of which add
a pretty number of Grains of Am∣bergrise, both to perfume the Pow∣der, (whose scent of it self is rank) and to make the Medicine more Efficatious. The Dose is from one Dram to a Dram and half in any convenient Vehicle. II. For the Pyles. B TAke the Powder of Earth∣worms prepared as in the former Receipt, (but leaving out the Ambergrise,) and incorporate it exactly with as much Hens∣grease, as will serve to make it up into an Oyntment. Apply this to the Part affected, whose Pains it usually much and safely miti∣gates.
III. To make Lime-water Ʋse∣ful in divers Distempers. C TAke one Pound of good Quick-lime, and slake it in a Gallon of warm Water, and let it stand 'till all that will subside be settled at the bottom, and (Sepa∣ration being made,) the Water swim clear at the top: (At which time it will often happen, that a kind of thin and brittle Substance, almost like Ice, will cover the Surface of the Liquor:) As soon as the Wa∣ter is thus sufficiently impregna∣ted, delay not to pour it off wa∣rily, and keep it very well stopp'd for Use.
IV. A Lime-water for Obstru∣ctions an Consumptions. B TAke a Gallon of Lime-water made as above, and infuse in it cold Sassaffras, Liquorice, and Anyseeds, of each four Ounces, ad∣ding thereto half a Pound of choice Currans, or the like Quantity of slic'd Raisins of the Sun: The Dose of this compound Lime-water is four or five Ounces, to be taken twice a day.
V. An Amulet against Agues, especially Tertian. B TAke a handfull of Groundsel, shred and cut it small, put it into a square Paper Bag of about four Inches every way, pricking that side that is to be next the Skin, full of large holes; and cover it with some Sarcenet or fine Linnen, that nothing may fall out. Let the Patient wear this upon the Pit of his Stomach, renewing it two hours before every Fit.
VI. For Women in Labour to bring away the Child. B TAke about one Dram of choice Myrrh, and having reduc'd it to fine Pouder, let the Patient take it in a Draught of Rhenish-wine or Sack; or, if you would have the Liquor less active White-wine, Posset-drink, or some other temperate Vehicle. VI. For Strengthning the Bowels. B TAke Cloves or Chives (not Bulbs) of Garlick, and let the Patient from time to time
swallow one or two, without chewing. VIII. An Amulet against the Cramp. A TAke the Root of Mechoacan, and having reduc'd it to Powder, fill with this Pouder a little square Bag or Sacket of Sarcenet, or some such slight Stuff; which Bag is to be about three Inches Square, and to be hung by a String about the Patient's Neck, so as that it may reach to the Pit of the Stomach, and immediately touch the Skin.
IX. For Stanching of Blood especially in Wounds. A TAke those round Mushrooms that Bonatists call Crepitus Lupi, (in English Puff-balls,) when they are full ripe (which is in Au∣tumn); and breaking them warily, save carefully the Pouder that will fly up, and the rest that remains in their Cavities: And strew this Pouder all over the Part affected, binding it on, or proceeding fur∣ther, if need be, according to Art.
X. For the Tumours and Pains of the Hemorrhoides, not too much inflamed. B LET the Patient dip his Fin∣ger in Balsam of Sulphur, made with Oyl of Turpentine, and with his Finger so besmeared anoint the Tumours, whether ex∣ternal or internal, once or twice a day.
DECAD III. I. For the Dysentery and other sharp Fluxes. A TAke the Stalks and Leaves of the Herb call'd, in Latin, Coniza Media (in English, Flea-bane,) dry it gently, till it be reducible to Pouder; of this Pouder give about one Dram at a time, twice or thrice a day, in any convenient Vehicle or else incorporate it in Conserve of Red Roses.
II. To sweeten the Blood, and Cure divers Distempers caused by its Acidity. B TAke Coral, the clearest and reddest you can get; re∣duce it (by exactly grinding it on a Porphory, or Marble Stone,) to an impalpable Pouder. Of this Magistery made without Acids, give the Patient once or twice a day (as need shall require,) a large dose, viz. ordinarily about one dram at a time, or from two Scruples to five. N. B. Let him long continue the Use of it.
III. To clear the Eyes, even from Filmes. A TAke Paracelsus's Zibethum Occidentale (viz. human dung) of a good Colour and Consi∣stence, dry it slowly till it be pul∣verable: Then reduce it into an in∣palpable Pouder; which is to be blown once, twice, or thrice a day, as occasion shall require, into the Patients Eyes. IV. For Convulsions in Children. A GIve the Patient from 2, 3, or 4, to 5, 6, or 7 Grains, according to the Child's Age, of the true Volatile Salt of Amber, in
any proper Vehicle. N. B. 'Tis not near so Efficatious in full grown Persons. V. To bring away the After-birth. B GIve about 30 Drops, or any Number between 25 and 35, of good Essential (as Chi∣mists call it,) Oyl of Juniper, in a good Draught of any convenient Vehicle. VI. To Strengthen the Stomach, and help the want of Appetite. B MAke the Roots of Gentian (sound and not superannu∣ated,) pulverable, with no more waste of their moisture than is ne∣cessary.
Reduce these to Pouder; of which let the Patient take from 12 or 15 Grains to double that quantity (or more if need be,) twice or thrice a day. N. B. It may be taken on an empty Sto∣mach, or, if that cannot conveni∣ently be done, at Meal-times. To correct the Bitterness, one may add to it pouder'd Sugar, or make it up with some fit Conserve, or mix it with a Syrup. It is very good, not only for want of Appetite, but for Obstructions. And I (R B.) have usefully given it in Vertigi∣nous Affections of the Brain, and to lessen, if not quite take away, the Fits of Agues, and even Quar∣tans. But in this last Case the Dose must be considerably augmen∣ted. One may also, if one pleases, instead of the Pouder, give the Extract drawn with fair Water, and for those that like that form, made
up into Pills with a sufficient quan∣tity of Pouder'd Tumerick, or the like proper Additament; to which I have sometimes added some Grains of Salt of Wormwood with good Success in Fluxes that proceed∣ed from Crudities and Indigestion. Where the Winter-Season or the Patients cold Constitution invite, or the Medicine is to be long kept, I chuse rather to make the Extract with Wine moderately strong, than with Water. VII. For Ʋlcers in the Brest, and elsewhere. A TAke Millepedes, (in English by some called Woodlice, by others Sows,) and having wash'd them clean with a little White∣wine, and dry'd them with a Lin∣nen
Cloth, beat them very well in a Glass or Marble Mortar (for they ought not to be touch'd with any thing of Metal) and give the first time as much Juice, as you can by strong Expression obtain from five or six of them. This Juice may be given in small Ale or White-wine, in which the next time you may give as much as can be squeez'd out of eight or nine Millepedes; and so you may conti∣nue, increasing the number that you employ of them by two or three at a time, till it amount to twenty five or thirty; and if need be, to forty or more, for one ta∣king. And note, that if upon the Pounding of these Insects, you find the Mass they afford too dry, as it now and then happens; you may dilute it with a little White-wine or Ale, to be well agitated with it, that being penetrated, and so
softned, with the Liquor, the Mass may the better part with its Juice. VIII. For taking off the Fits of Agues. B TAke good common Brimstone (not Flores Sulphuris,) and having reduced them, by passing them through a very fine Sieve, to the subtillest Pouder you can; give of this Pouder one Dram and half or two Drams, either made up in∣to a Bolus with a little good Honey, or else in any appropriated Ve∣hicle; let it be given at the usual times, and reiterated once or twice if need be, especially if the Fits should return.
IX. For Fluxes, especially ac∣companied with Gripings. A TAke of Crude Lapis Cali∣minaris finely pouder'd two Scruples, of white Chalk on Scruple, mix them exactly, and give them in a Spoonful or two of New Milk twice, or, if the case be urgent, thrice a day.
X. For the Pains of the Piles. B TAke of Myrrh, Olibanum, and common Frankincense, of each a like quantity; having pou∣der'd them, mix them very well, and let the Patient receive the Fume of this Mixture, cast upon a Chaffen-dish with Embers, in a Close-stool, for about a quarter of an hour, (less or more, as he needs it, and is able to bear it.)
DECAD IV. I. For an outward Contusion. C APply to the Part affect∣ed, skim'd or purify'd Honey, spread upon Cap-Paper, to be kept on with some convenient Plaister, or the like Bandage, and shifted once or twice a day.
II. Another for the same. B BEat Aloes Succotrina (or else Hepatica,) to fine Pouder; then pour on it as much Rose-wa∣ter as you guess may dissolve a great part of it. This done, stir them well for a while, and when the Mixture is setled, pour off the Liquor, and in it dip Linnen Rags, which being applyed to the Part af∣fected, will soon stick to it, and seldom need be remov'd till the Pa∣tient be reliev'd; and then to get them off, the Rags must be well wetted with warm Water, which will soften and loosen the adhering Aloes.
III. For a slighter Excoriation. B MElt Mutton-Suet taken from about the Kidneys, and freed from its superfluous Fibres or Strings, and to about two Ounces of this add little by little about 16 or 18 Drops (sometimes 8 or 10 may serve) of Oyl (not Aethereal Spirit) of Turpentine; spread this Mixture on a Linnen Cloth, and by binding or otherwise, keep it upon the Part affected. IV. For an Excoriation, when the true Cutis is affected. B TAke Prunella (in English Self-heal,) and having pounded it very well in a Marble
or Glass Mortar, (not one of Metal,) apply it to the Part affe∣cted, renewing it but seldom, and not without need. V. To take off the Pain and In∣flammation of Ʋlcers in the Legs and elsewhere. B IN a Quart of Water boil about so much White-bread, as in ordinary years may be found in a Half-penny-loaf; then add to it two Ounces of good Sheeps Suet cut very small; and when that is boil'd a little, add to it one Ounce of finely pouder'd Rosin, and a little well searc'd Brimstone: Of these make a Cataplasm, which is to be kept constantly on the Part affe∣cted, and shifted once or twice a day, as need shall require.
VI. For a Cough, especially ac∣company'd with a Tickling Rheum. B TAke equal Parts of finely pouder'd Olibanum and Ve∣nice Treacle, incorporate them ex∣actly, and of this Mass form Pills of what bigness you please. Of these let the Patient take about half a Dram at Bed-time, or, if need be, one Scruple, (or more,) twice a day. VII. To prevent the Tooth-ach, and keep the Teeth sound. B LET the Patient frequently rub his Teeth moderately with the Ashes that remain in To∣bacco
Pipes, after the rest of the Bo∣dy hath been consum'd in Smoak; sometimes after washing (if need be,) his Mouth with fair Water not too cold. VIII. For a Rupture, especially in a Child or young Person. A TAke of that Geranium or Cranes-bill that is common∣ly called Columbinum, reduce the Root and Leaves to fine Pouder, and of this let the Patient take about half a Spoonful Night and Morning for three or four Weeks together, washing it down each time with some Spoonfuls of Red Wine.
IX. For the Heart-burning, as they call it. B TAke from 15 or 20, to 30 or 40, Grains of Crabs-eyes (known commonly in the Shops by the Name of Lapides Can∣crorum,) reduc'd to very fine Pou∣der, and either take it alone, or in any convenient Conserve or Syrup. 'Tis for the most part best to take this Medicine when the Stomach is empty. X. For a Strain. B TAke the strongest Vinegar you can get, and boil in it a convenient quantity of Wheat-Bran,
till you have brought it to the Consistence of a Poultess. Ap∣ply this as early as may be to the Part affected, and renew it when it begins to grow dry.
DECAD V. I. For a Recent Strain. B TAKE Worm-wood and pound it very well in a Mortar of Stone or Glass; then put to it as much of the Whites of Eggs, beaten to Wa∣ter, as may serve to make it up into such a Consistence, as may be applied like a Poultess to the Part affected.
II. A Strengthning Plaister af∣ter a Strain, or when there is any Weakness in the Joynt. B MEEL down together, and incorporate very well, two parts of Diapalma, and one part of Emplastrum ad Herni∣am; spread this Mixture, (but not very thick,) upon Leather, and lay it to the Joynt to be streng∣thened. III. For Loosnesses. C BOil a convenient quantity of Cork in Spring-water, till the Liquor taste strong thereof: Of this Decoction let the Patient
drink a moderate Draught from time to time, till he finds himself sufficiently reliev'd by it. IV. For Obstructions, and di∣vers Diseases proceeding thence. B LET the Patient drink, every Morning fasting, a mo∣derate Draught of his own Ʋrine newly made, (and if it can conve∣niently be,) whil'st 'tis yet warm forbearing Food for an hour or two after it.
V. For Difficulty of Hearing, from a cold Cause. B OUT of a Bulb or Root of Garlick, chuse a Chive of a convenient Bigness; then having pass'd a fine piece of Thread or Silk through one end of it, that thereby it may be pull'd out at pleasure, crush it a little between your Fingers, and having anointed it all over with Oyl of Bitter (or in want of that, Sweet) Almonds, put it into the Cavity of the Patients Ear at Bed-time, and draw it out the next Morning, stopping the Ear afterwards with Black Wool; but if need require, this Operation is to be reiterated with fresh Gar∣lick for some days successively.
VI. For Ruptures in the Belly, especially in Children. A HAving well cleans'd the Roots of Sigillum Salam∣nis, scrape one Ounce of them in∣to a Quart of Broth, and let the Patient take a Mess, or a Porrin∣ger full of it for his Break-fast; or else give half a Dram or two Scru∣ples of the Pouder of it at a time, in any convenient Vehicle. VII. To give checks to Fits of the Gout, and in some mea∣sure to prevent them. B TAke three Ounces of Sarsa∣parilla slic'd and cut thin; to these add an equal weight of
Raisins of the Sun, rubb'd very clean, but not broken: Put both these Ingredients into three Quarts of Spring-water, and let the Ves∣sel stand in a moderate heat, that the Liquor may simper for many hours, yet without bursting most part of the Raisins; keep this De∣coction well stopp'd, and let the Patient use it for his only Drink, till he need it no longer. VIII. A Water for Ʋlcers and Sores. B TAke a Solution of Veneti∣an Sublimate, and having made with very good Quick-lime as strong a Lime-water as you can, (so that, if it be possible, it may bear an Egg,) drop this upon the dissolv'd Sublimate, till it will pre∣cipitate
no more reddish stuff at all; (which will not so soon be done as one that hath not try'd will imagine): As soon as you per∣ceive that the Liquors act no lon∣ger visibly upon one another, pour the Mixture into a Filter of Cap-Paper, which retaining the Orange-colour'd Precipitate, will transmit an indifferently clear Liquor: Which is to be in a Glass Viol kept stop'd for its proper Use; namely, that the Part affected may be therewith wash'd from time to time, and, if need be, kept co∣vered with double Linnen Cloths wetted in the same Liquor.
IX. A Plaister to Discuss Tu∣mours, or Ripen them if it cannot Discuss them. B TAke of Yellow Wax, Fran∣incense, and Rosin, of each four Ounces, or a sufficient quan∣tity, melt them together gently, and being strain'd, make up the Mass into a Roll for Use.
X. For the Black Jaundice it self. A TAke a Spoonfull of Honey boil it gently, and scum it, till it come to a good Consistence; then add of Wheat-flower and Saf∣fron (reduced to a Pouder,) as much of each as you may take up upon the Point of a Knife; and having mix'd all well, put it over the Coals again, until it lose its smell: Afterwards you may put it into a little Stone or Earthen Pot, and keep it for Use; which is, that the Patient take the quan∣tity of a Pea, and anoint the Na∣vil, and fill the Cavity thereof with it; repeating the Application
for some days together, when the Stomach is empty, and abstain∣ing from Meat and Drink about two hours after the Medicine is us'd. The End of the First Part.
Medicinal Experiments; OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice Remedies, FOR The most part Simple, and Easily Prepared. The latter Five DECADS being A SECOND PART. By the Honorable R. BOYLE, Fellow of the Royal Society. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1692.
DECAD VI. I. A parable Medicine for the Stone. B TAke of the Seed of Flix∣weed, and give of it about as much as will lie upon a Shilling, either whole or grosly bruis'd, in any conveni∣ent Vehicle.
II. For Fits of the Mother. B DIssolve store of Sea-Salt in the best Wine Vinegar, and in this dip a soft Linnen Cloth, which being folded so as to make 3 or 4 Doubles, is to be applied somewhat warm to the Soles of the Patient's Feet, and kept on till the Fit be over. III. A choice Plaister to Streng∣then the Joints after the Gout, and hasten the going off of the Pain. A TAke of Paracelsus and Dia∣palma ana, melt them and incorporate them exactly to∣gether,
and spread the mixture ve∣ry thin upon fine Leather, to be us'd as a Plaister to the Part affe∣cted. IV. A very good Drink in con∣tinual Fevers. A MAke a Decoction of the Leaves of Rue in fair Wa∣ter, till the Liquor taste pretty strong of the Plant: This, being strain'd, is to be made somewhat Palatable with Liquorice or a little Sugar, or Aromatic Body: To half a Pint of this add about 10 Drops of Spirit (not Oyl) of Vitriol: Let the Patient use this for his ordinary Drink.
V. A good Drink to be fre∣quently used in Fevers, espe∣cially continual Ones. A GIve, in half a Pint of some small convenient Drink, half an Ounce of Harts-horn, burnt to great whiteness; which is to be a little boyled in the Liquor; and this, thus alter'd, is to be given from time to time. VI. An easie Medicine for a fresh Strain. B MAke up the Clay with which the Bungs of Bar∣rels are wont to be stopp'd, with as much Vinegar as will bring it to
the Consistence of an indifferently stiff Cataplasm: Then warm it a little, and apply it to the Part affected. VII. A Remedy much used for Chilblains. C TAke a Turnep, roast it well under the Embers, and beat it to a Poultice; then apply it very hot to the Part affected; and keep it on (if need be,) for 3 or 4 days, in that time shifting it twice or thrice, if occasion re∣quire.
VIII. A Simple Antimonial Re∣medy, that has often done much Good even in the Le∣prosie, and all continual Fe∣vers. A TAke Crude Antimony, well chosen and pouder'd; of this give about one, two, or three Scruples Morning and Evening, according to the Age of the Pa∣tient, in a little Syrup of Clove Gilly-Flowers, or any such Vehicle, or else mix'd with fine Sugar, enough to make it somewhat Palatable. This may be continued for 4 or 5 Months, if need require; and if the first Dose prove Beneficial to the Patient, in Cases not urgent, a Scruple or half a Dram may
serve the Turn, nor need the Ex∣hibition be continued for so long a time. IX. For the Cholick and divers other Distempers. B TAke four or five Balls of fresh Stone-horse Dung, and let them steep for about a quarter of an Hour (or less,) in a Pint of White-wine, in a Vessel well stopp'd, that the Liquor may be richly im∣pregnated with the more volatile and subtil Parts of the Dung; strain this, and give of it from a quarter to half a Pint, or some Ounces more, at a time; the Patient ha∣ving a Care not to take Cold af∣ter it.
X. An often Experimented An∣timonial Infusion. B TAke one Ounce of pouder'd Antimony, tied up in a lit∣tle Bag of clean Linnen, and hang it in a Gallon of Beer or Ale that is brought from the Brew-house, and is yet scarce fit to be drawn out, much less to be drank. Of this Liquor when 'tis ripe, let the Pa∣tient make use for his ordinary Drink; only having a Care, that if by Age or Accident it be per∣ceived to grow sour, that Vessel then be left off, for fear, least the Acidity of the Liquor, corroding the Antimony, might make it vo∣mitive.
DECAD VII. I. An easie Medicine to cleanse the Womb, especially after Child-bearing. B TAke a large white Onion, of about four Ounces in weight, if you can get so big a one, and boyl it in about a Pint of Water, with any thing fit to make a very thin Broth, till a third part or more of the Liquor be con∣sumed: of this Broth, which may be made a little palatable with Nutmeg, &c. the Patient is to take six or eight Ounces twice or thrice a day.
II. An Experienced Wash that quickly cures the Itch. A TAke strong Quicklime one Pound, and put to a Gal∣lon of Spring-Water, let them lie together for some hours, and then warily pour off the clear, filter the rest, and take two Ounces of Quick-Silver, ty'd up in a Linnen Bag, and hang it in the Liquor, and boil it for half an hour or more; then pour off the clear Liquor once more, and wash the Hands only with it twice, or at most thrice, a day.
III. A Remedy often us'd, with Success, in Fluxes, and even Dysenteries. B TAke fresh Roots of Bistort, cut them into thin Slices, and moisten them well with fair Water and Wine, to make them more soft and Succulent; then press out the Juice as strongly as you can. And of this give about three or four Spoonfuls, mingled with half a Dozen Spoonfuls, or somewhat more, of Red Wine, or some other convenient Liquor.
IV. A good Medicine for a sore Throat. B TAke the White of a New-laid Egg, and by beating it, re∣duce it into Water; and with this Water mix diligently so much Con∣serve of Red Roses as will reduce it to a soft Mass: Whereof the Pati∣ent is to let a little bit at a time melt leisurely in his Mouth. V. A choice Medicine for a sore Throat. A TAke a piece of greasie Lin∣nen Cloth, of such a big∣ness, as that, being doubled, it may make a Bag in form of a Stay,
to reach from one side of the Throat to the other, and contain as much matter, as may make it of the thickness of an Inch or more: This Bag being fill'd with common Salt is to be heated throughly, and apply'd to the Part affected as warm as the Patient can conve∣niently indure; and within 2 hours after, or when it begins to grow too could; another like it and well heated, is to be substituted in its room; and whil'st this is cooling, the other may be heated and made ready for use: So that the Part af∣fected may be always kept in a con∣siderable degree of warmth, for about 48 hours, if the Remedy be so long needed.
VI. An often experienc'd Medicine for the Cholick, especially produced by sharp Humors. A TAke a Quart of Claret, and put into the Vessel about two Ounces of Nettle-seeds, stop the Bottle, and keep it in Boiling Wa∣ter, till the Water has made three or four walms, to assist the Wines Impregnation with the finer part of the Seeds: of this Liquor let the Patient take a small Draught once or twice a day.
VII. To appease the Pain of the Haemorrhoids, whether In∣ternal or External. B TAke two Parts of Flowers of Sulphur, and one part of Sugar very finely pouder'd, mix them exactly together, and make them up with a sufficient Quantity of a Mucilage of Gum Tragacarth into Lozenges, of about a Dram apiece: Of which you may give one at a time, thrice in a Day, or if need be, 4 or 5 times.
VIII. To make an Excellent Drink for the Scurvy. A TAke two handsfuls of Water Trefoil, and let it work in about 8 Gallons of Wort, in stead of Hops, or of Small Ale or Wort, made for it: And let the Patient use it for all, or for a great part of, his ordinary Drink. IX. To make an easie Diuretick. C PEel off the Inner Skin of an Egg shell, then beat the Shell to a very fine Pouder: Give about a Scruple of it at a time in any convenient Vehicle.
X. A Powerful Application to prevent and check the Apo∣plexy. A MAke an Issue at the Meet∣ing of the Sutures, and keep it open for a good while; but if the Case will not admit delay, clap on a good Cupping-Glass, with∣out Scarification, or with it, as need shall require, upon the same Con∣course of the Sutures.
DECAD VIII. I. A choice Remedy for a sore Throat. A TAke Housleek, and having lightly beaten it in a Glass or Stone Mortar, press out the Juice hard between two Plates; to this Juice put almost an equal Quantity of Virgin Honey, mix them well, and add to the mixture a little Burnt Allom, as much as is requisite to give it a discernable Aluminous Taste: Let the Patient
take this from time to time, with a Liquorish Stick, or some such Thing. II. An Approv'd Medicine for a Cancer not broken. B TAke Dulcify'd Colcothar, and with Cream, or Whites of Eggs beaten to a Water, bring it to the Consistence of a Cataplasm; which ought to be made large, and spread about the thickness of half a Crown, and applyed warm to the part affected, shifting it at least once a day.
III. To make a very good Syrup for thin Rheums. A TAke Syrup of Jubibes, Syrup of Dryed Roses, and Syrup of Corn Poppy Flowers, of each a like quantity, mix and use them as the necessity of the Sick requires. IV. For the Dysentery and Pleurisie. B GRrate to fine Pouder the dry'd Pizzel of a Stagg, and give of it as much as will lie upon a Shilling, or thereabouts, once or twice a day, in any conve∣nient Vehicle.
V. To Strengthen the Gums, and make the Teeth grow firm. B TAke Catechu, Terra Japonica, or Japonian Earth, and dis∣solve as much as you can of it in a Pint of Claret, or Red Wine; then Decant the Liquor warily from the subsiding Faeces, and let the Patient now and then wash his Mouth with it, especially at Bed time. VI. For a Hoarsness upon a Cold. B TAke three Ounces of Hyssop Water, sweeten it with
Sugar-candy; then beat well into it the Yolk of one Egg, and Drink it at a Draught. VII. A choice Medicine for the Jaundies in Children. B TAke half an Ounce of choice Rhubarb made into Pouder; incorporate with it ex∣actly by long beating, two Hand∣fulls of well chosen, and cleans'd Currans. Of this Electuary let the Patient take every Morning about the quantity of a Nutmeg, for several days together.
VIII. A rare Medicine to take away Gouty, and other Ar∣thritick Pains. A TAke highly rectify'd Spirit of Mans Ʋrine, and anoint the Part with it, the Cold being just taken off, once or twice the first day; and no longer, unless the Pain continue. IX. For a Prolapsus Uteri. B APply to the Patients Navel a pretty large Cupping-Glass; but let it not stay on too long, not above a quarter of an hour, for fear of injuring the part
it covers, especially the Navel-String. X. To allay Heat in the Eyes, proceeding from sharp Hu∣mours. B BEat the White of an Egg, into a Water, in which dissolve a pretty quantity of Re∣fined Loaf Sugar, and then drop some of it into the Patients Eye.
DECAD IX. I. An Experienc'd Medicine for Strengthning a Weak Sight. B TAke of Eye-bright, sweet Fennel Seeds, and fine Su∣gar, all reduc'd to Pouder, of each an Ounce, Nutmeg also pulveriz'd, one Dram (at most;) mix these very well together, and take of the Composition from a Dram to two or more, from time to time.
II. An often try'd Medicine for Tertian Agues. B TAke Crude Allum and Nut∣meg finely scrap'd, of each about half a Dram, mix the Pou∣ders well together, and with about six Grains of Saffron; Give this in two or three Spoonfuls of White-Wine Vinegar at the usual time. III. For Stuffings of the Lungs, and the Chin Cough. B MAke Syrup of Penny Royal, or of Ground Ivy, mo∣derately Tart with Oil of Vitriol;
and of this let the Patient take very leisurely about a quarter of a Spoonful from time to time. IV. For the Falling Sickness in Children. B TAke half a Dram of choice Amber, finely pouder'd, and give it for six or seven Weeks together, once a day, when the Stomach is empty, in about four Ounces of good White-Wine.
V. An Approved Medicine to drive the Stone, and cure Suppression of Ʋrine, pro∣ceeding from it. A TAke the Roots of Wild Gar∣lick, (by some Country People called Crow Garlick) wipe them very clean, stamp them very well in a Mortar of Stone or Glass, and strain out the Juice; with which make a moderate Draught of good White-Wine considerably strong, and let the Patient take it once or twice a day.
VI. An Experienc'd Medicine for Sore Throats. A TAke of Scabious Water six Ounces, of Wine Vinegar a small Spoonful, of Mustard Seed beaten, and of Honey, of each a Spoonful; stir and shake them very well together; and then filter the mixture and keep it for Use.
VII. An often Experienced Ex∣ternal Remedy in Apoplectick Fits. A FIx a Cupping-Glass (without Scarification) to the Nape of the Neck, and another to each of the Shoulders, and let them stick on a competent time. VIII. An easie but approv'd Medicine for the Cholick. B TAke about half a Dram of Mastick, and mix it with the Yolk of a new laid Egg, and give it the Patient once or twice a day.
IX. To appease the heat of Feavers by an External Remedy. C APply to the Soles of the Feet a mixture, or thin Cataplasm made of the Leaves of Tobacco, fit to be cut to fill a Pipe with, beaten up with as much of the freshest Currans you can get, as will bring the Tobacco to the Con∣sistence of a Poultis.
X. The Medicine that is in such Request in Italy against the Worms in Children. B INfuse one Dram of clean Quicksilver all Night in about two Ounces of the Water of Goats Rue, destil'd the common way in a cold Still: And afterwards strain and filter it, to sever it from all Dregs that may happen in the making it. This quantity is given for one Dose.
DECAD X. I. A choice Medicine for a Whitloe. A TAke Shell Snails, and beat the pulpy part of them very well, with a convenient quan∣tity of fine chopt Parsly, which is to be applyed warm to the affected part, and shifted two or three times a day.
II. A Simple but useful Lime-Water, good for the Kings Evil, and divers other Cases. B TAke half a Pound of good Quick-Lime, and put it into one Gallon of Spring Water, and infuse it for Twenty four Hours; then decant the Liquor, and let the Patient Drink a good Draught of it two or three times a day, or he may use it for his or∣dinary Drink; this Infusion may be coloured-with Saffron, or Red Sanders; and if need be to make it stronger, add more Lime, and warm the Water and keep it well stopt.
III. An Excellent Medicine for a fresh strain. A TAke four Ounces of Bean Flower, two Ounces of Wine Vinegar; of these make a Cataplasm to be applied a little warm to the part affected; but if this should prove something too sharp, (as in some Cases it may) then take two Drams of Litharg, and boil it a little in the Vinegar; before you put it to the Bean Flower.
IV. For the Piles. A TAke Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil of Turpentine, Oint∣ment of Tobacco, equal Parts, in∣corporate them well, and Anoint the grieved place therewith. V. For a Burn. B MIngle Lime-Water with Linseed Oyl, by beating them together with a Spoon, and with a Feather dress the Burn seve∣ral times a day.
VI. For a fresh Strain. A BOil Bran in Wine Vinegar to the consistency of a Poul∣tis, apply it warm, and renew the Poultis once in twelve hours, for two or three times. VII. An Experienced Medicine for the Cholick. A TAke good Nitre one Ounce, and rub it well in a clean Mortar of Glass or Stone, then grind with it half a Scruple or more of fine Saffron, and of this mixture give about half a Dram for a Dose in three or four Ounces of Cold Spring Water.
VIII. To make an Issue raw, that begins to heal up. B TAke of Lapis Infernalis one Ounce, of Crown Soap an Ounce and half, Chalk finely pou∣der'd six Drams, mix them all to∣gether carefully, and keep them close stopt, except when you mean to use them. IX. For a Sore Throat. A MAke a Plaister of Para∣celsus, three or four Fin∣gers broad, and length enough to reach almost from one Ear to the other, and apply it to the part af∣fected, so that it may touch the Throat as much as may be.
X. For heat about the Orifice of the Stomach. B MAke a Syrup with the Juice of House Leek and Sugar, and give about one Spoon∣ful of it from time to time.
A Stomachical Tincture. A TAke Agrimony two Drams, small Centory Tops one Dram, Coriander Seeds bruised one Scruple, Sassatras Shavings and Bark, one Dram, Gentian Root half a Dram, Zedoary Root ten Grains; pour up∣on these three quarters of a Pint of boiling Spring Water, cover it, and let it steep twelve hours, then Strain it, and put it in a Bottle; then drop a drop of Oil of Cinna∣mon, upon a lump of Sugar, and put it into the Liquor. The Dose is three Spoonfuls twice a day, an hour or two before Meals. The END.
A CATALOGUE OF THE Philosophical Books and Tracts, Written by the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq Together with the ORDER or TIME Wherein each of them hath been Publish'd respectively. To which is added A CATALOGUE Of the THEOLOGICAL BOOKS, Written by the same Author. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1692.
Advetisements of the Publisher. I. Many Ingenious Persons, especially Strangers, having pressingly endeavour'd to procure a Cata∣logue of the Honourable Mr. Boyle's Writings; and the Author himself being not at leisure to draw one up; 'twas thought it might be some Satisfaction to those Inquirers, if I publish'd the following List, as it was drawn out, for his own use, of the Philosophical Transactions, as well as the Printed Ʋolumes, by an Ingenious French Physician, studious of the Authors Wri∣tings, some of which he Translated and Printed in his own Language. II. The Letter L affixt in the Margin, denotes the Book related to, to have been Translated, and Publish'd in the Latin Tongue also. Several of the rest having likewise been translated into Latin but not yet Publish'd. III. Those that have an Asterisk prefix'd to them, came forth without the Authors Name, tho' 'tis not doubted but they are His. IV. Such as have this Mark ☞ prefix'd to them, are Sold by Samuel Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Pauls Church-yard. V. Divers of those mentioned, as drawn out of the Transactions, did probably come abroad in La∣tin; some of the Transactions themselves having been publish'd in that Language.
A Catalogue of the Philosophical Books and Tracts. L ☜NEw Experiments Physico-Mechanical, touching the Spring and the Weight of the Air, and its Effects, (made for the most part in a new Pneumatical Engine) written by way of Letter to the Right Honourable Charles Lord Viscount of Dungavan, Eldest Son to the Earl of Cork, by the Honourable Robert Boyle Esq LA Defence of the Doctrine, touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, propos'd by the Author in his New Physico-Mechanical Experiments; against the Objections of Fran∣ciscus Linus, wherewith the Objectors Pu∣nicular Hypothesis is also examin'd. An Examen of Mr. Tho Hobbes's Dialogus Physicus de Naturâ Aeris, as far as it concerns the Authors Book of New Experiments, touching the Spring of the Air; with an Appendix touching Mr. Hobbes's Doctine of Fluidity and Firmness. These three together in a Volume in 4, being a Second Edition; The First at Ox∣ford 1662, had been publish'd, Anno 1660. The two others at London, 1662, had been publish'd, Anno 1661. The Sceptical Chymist, &c. 1661.
☞LPhysiological Essays, or Tentamina, Writ∣ten and collected upon divers times and Oc∣casions, with an History of Fluidity and Firm∣ness, in 40. 1662. LAn Experimental History of Colours be∣gun, 80. 1663. ☞Some Considerations touching the Useful∣ness of Experimental Natural Philosophy, propos'd in a familiar Discourse to a Friend, by way of Invitation to the Study of it: A Second Edition 40. Oxford, 1664. The first had been publish'd 1663. ☞Of the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy, the Second Part; The first Section, of its Usefulness to Physick, with an Appendix to this First Section of the Second Part, 40 1669. Of the Usefulness of Experimental Natural Philosophy, &c. the second Tome, contain∣ing the latter Section of the Second Part, 40, Oxford, 1671. The First Volume of these three Books contains Five Essays. The First, Of the Usefulness, &c. Princi∣pally as it relates to the Mind of Man. The Second, A Continuation of the for∣mer. The Third, A further Continuation. The Fourth, A requisite Digression con∣cerning those, who would exclude the Deity from intermeding with Matter. In the Fifth, The Discourse, interrupted by the late Digression, is resum'd and con∣cluded.
The Second Volume contains likewise five Essays. The first, Of the Usefulness, &c. As to the Physiological part of Physick. The second, As to the Pathological part of Pphysick. The third, as to the Semeiotical part of Physick. The fourth, As to the Hygicinal part of Physick. The fifth, as to the Therapeutical part of Physick, in 20 Chapters. The Third Volume contains six Essays. The first, General Considerations about the Means, whereby Experimental Phyloso∣phy may become useful to Human Life. The second, Of the usefulness of Mathe∣maticks to Natural Philosophy. The third, Of the usefulness of Mechanical Disciplines to Natural Philosophy. The fourth, That the Goods of Mankind may be much increased by the Naturalists in∣sight into Trades, with an Appendix. The fifth, Of doing by Physical Know∣ledge, what is wont to require Manual Skill. The sixth, Of Mens great Ignorance of the Uses of Natural Things. ☜An Experimental History of Cold, and some Discourses concerning New Thermo∣metrical Experiments, and Thoughts about the Doctrine of Antiperistasis; with An Examen of Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine touching Cold, a second Edition, Quarto. 1665.
Attempts of a way to convey Liquors im∣mediately into the Mass of Blood communi∣cated in the Philosophical Transactions of December the 4th 1665. Observations and Experiments upon the Barometer or Ballance of Air, invented, di∣rected, and begun, Anno 1659, communica∣ted to Dr Beal that continued them, and mentioned in the Transactions of February the 12th and March the 12th, 1666. LHydrostatical Paradoxes made out by new Experiments, for the most part Physical and easie, occasioned by Monsieur Paschal's Tract of the Equilibrium of Liquors, and of the Weight of the Air, 1666. An Account of an Earthquake near Oxford, and the Cocomitants thereof, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of April 2d, 1666. New Observations and Directions about the Barometer, in the same. General Heads for a Natural History of a Country, great or small, communicated in the same. LThe Origine of Forms and Qualities illu∣strated by Considerations and Experiments, in two Parts, Octavo, 1666. A way of preserving Birds, taken out of the Egg, and other small Faetus's, communi∣cated in the Philosophical Transactions of May the 7th, 1666. An Account of a new kind of Baroscope, which may be called Statical, and of some advantages and conveniences it hath above
the Mercurial, communicated in the Philo∣sophical Transactions of July the 2d, 1666. A new Frigorific Experiment, shewing how a considerable degree of Cold may be suddenly produced, without the help of Snow, Ice, Hail, Wind or Nitre, and that at any time of the year, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of July the 18th, 1666. Tryals proposed to Dr. Lower for the im∣provement of transfusing Blood out of one live Animal into another, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of February the 11th, 1666. Free Considerations about subordinate Forms, being an Appendix to the Origine of Forms and Qualities published last year, and reprinted with this, 1667. In Octavo. A Letter to the Author of the Philoso∣phical Transactions, giving an Information of some Experiments which he had made himself several years ago, by injecting acid Liquors into Blood, upon the occasion of those communicated by Signior Fracassati, in a Letter written from Oxford, October the 19th, 1667. New Experiments concerning the Relati∣on between Light and Air, (in shining Wood and Fish) in a Letter from Oxford to the Publisher of the Philosophical Transactions of January the 6th, 1668. A Continuation of the same Letter in the Philosophical Transactions of February the 10th, 1668.
A Continuation of new Experiments, Physico-Mechanical, touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, and their Effects; The first part. With a Discouse of the Atmospheres of Consistent Bodies, Oxford, 1669. An Invention for estimating the Weight of Water with ordinary Ballances and Weights, in the Philosophical Transactions of August the 16th, 1669. LCertain Philosophical Essays and other Tracts, second Edition; with a Discourse about the Absolute rest of Bodies, Quarto. London, 1669. The first Edition had been published, Anno 1662. New Pneumatical Experiments about Re∣spiration, upon Ducks, Vipers, Frogs, &c. communicated in the Philosophical Trans∣actions of August 8. 1670. LA Continuation of the same Experiments in the Philosophical Transactions of Septem∣ber the 12th, 1670. L Tracts: About the Cosmical Qualities of Things: The Temperature of the Subter∣raneal and Submarine Regions, and the bot∣tom of the Sea; together with an Intro∣duction to the History of particular Quali∣ties,Octavo, Oxford, 1670. Tracts: A Discovery of the admirable Rarefaction of the Air (even without Heat:) New Observations about the duration of the Spring of the Air New Experiments touching the condensation of the Air by mere Cold, and its compression without Mechanical En∣gines,
and the admirably differing extensions of the same quantity of Air, rarified and compressed, Quarto, London, 1670. L ☜An Essay about the Origine and Virtues of Gems, Quarto, London, 1672. Some Observations about shining Flesh, both of Veal, and Pullet, and that without any sensible Putrefaction in those Bodies, communicated by way of Letter to the pub∣lisher of the Philosophical Transactions, in the Transactions of December the 16th, 1672. A new Experiment concerning an effect of the varying weight of the Atmosphere upon some Bodies in the Water, the De∣scription whereof was presented to the Lord Broncker, Anno 1671. Suggesting a con∣jecture, that the alterations of the very Weight of the Air, may have considerable Operations, even upon Mens Sickness or Health, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of February the 24th, 1673. ☜Tracts: Containing new Experiments, touching the Relation between Flame and Air, and about Explosions. An Hydrosta∣tical Discourse, occasioned by some Objecti∣ons of Dr. Henry Moor, &c. to which is an∣nexed an Hydrostatical Letter about a way of weighing Water in Water: New Experi∣ments of the positive, or relative, levity of Bodies under Water: Of the Airs-Spring on Bodies under Water, and about the differing Pressure of heavy Solids and Fluids, Octavo, London, 1672, 1691.
LEssays of the strange Subtilty, great effi¦cacy, and determinate nature of Effluvins; to which are annexed new Experiments to make the parts of Fire and Flame, Stable and Ponderable, with Experiments about arrest∣ing and weighing of Igneous Corpuscles; and a Discovery of the perviousness of Glass to ponderable parts of Flame, Octavo, London, 1673. A Letter of September the 13th, 1673. concerning Ambergreece, and its being a Vegetable Production, mentioned in the Philosophical Transactions of October the 8th, 1673. L ☞Tracts: Observations about the saltness of the Sea: An account of the Statical Hy∣roscope, and its Uses, together with an Ap∣pendix about the force of the Airs Moisture, and a Fragment about the Natural and Pre∣ternatural state of Bodies. To all which is premised a Sceptical Dialogue about the po∣sitive or privative Nature of Cold, Octave, London, 1674, 1691. LA Discourse about the Excellency and Grounds of the Mechanical Hypothesis, oc∣casionally proposed to a Friend, annexed to another, Entituled, The Excellency of Theo∣logy, compared with Natural Philosophy, Octavo, London, 1674. An account of the two sorts of Helmon∣tian Laudanum, together with the way of the Noble Baron F. M. Van Helmont (Son to the famous John Baptista) of preparing his Laudanum, communicated in the Philo∣sophical
Transactions of October the 26th, 1674. L ☜Tracts: Containing, 1. Suspicions about some hidden Qualities of the Air, with an Appendix touching Coelestial Magnets, and some other particulars. 2. Animadversions upon Mr. Hobbes's Problemata de vaco. 3. A Discourse of the Cause of Attraction by Suction, Octavo, London, 1674, 1691. Some Physico-Theological considerations about the possibility of the Resurrection, an∣nexed to a Discourse, Entituled, The Recon∣cileableness of Reason and Religion, Octavo. London, 1674/5. A Conjecture concerning the Bladders of Air, that are found in Fishes, communicated by A. J. and illustrated by an Experiment, suggested by the Author in the Philosophical Transactions of April the 26th, 1675. A New Essay-Instrument, invented and described by the Author, together with the Uses thereof, in 3 Parts. The first shews the occasion of making it, and the Hydrostatical Principles 'tis founded on. The second describes the Construction of the Instrument. The third represents the Uses; which, as relating to Metals, are 1. To discover whether a proposed Guinea be true, or counterfeit. 2. To examine divers other Gold Coins, and particularly half Guinea's.
3. To examine the new English Crown pieces of Silver. 4. To estimate the goodness of Tin and Pewter. 5. To estimate Alloys of Gold and Silver, and some other Metalline Mixtures. All this maketh up the Philosophical Transacti∣ons of June 21. 1675. Ten new Experiments about the weaken'd Spring, and some unobserved Effects, of the Air, where occur not only several Tryals to discover; whether the Spring of the Air, as it may divers ways be increased, so may not by other ways than Cold, or Dillation be weakened, but also some odd Experiments to shew the change of Colours producible in some Solutions and Precipitations by the Operation of the Air, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of December 27. 1675. An Experimental Discourse of Quicksilver, growing hot with Gold, English and Latin, communicated in the Philosophical Trans∣actions of February 21. 1676. L ☞Experiments, Notes, &c. about the Me∣chanical Origine or Production of divers particular Qualities, amongst which, is in∣serted a Discourse of the Imperfections of the Chymists Doctrine of Qualities, together with some Reflections upon the Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum, Octavo, London, 1676, 1690. This Discourse comprehends Notes, &c. about the Mechanical Origine and Producti∣on of Cold.
Of Heat. Of Tasts. Of Odours. Of Volatility. Of Fixtness. Of Corrosiveness. Of Corrosibility. Of Chymical Precipitation. Of Magnetical Qualities. Of Electricity. New Experiments about the superficial Figures of Fluids, especially of Liquors con∣tiguous to other Liquors: Likely to conduce much to the Physical Theory of the grand System of the World, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of January the 29th, 1676/7. A Continuation of the same Experiments in the Philosophical Transactions in February the 1676/7. ☜The Sceptical Chymist, or Chymico-Phy∣sical Paradoxes, touching the Experiments whereby vulgar Spagyrists are wont to en∣deavour to evince their Salt, Sulphur and Mercury to be the true Principles of Things; to which in this second Edition are subjoin∣ed divers Experiments and Notes, about the Producibleness of Chymical Principles, Octavo. Oxford, 1680, 1690. L ☜A second Continuation of new Experi∣ments Physico-Mechanical, in which, various Experiments, touching the Spring of the Air, either compress'd or Artificial, are con∣tain'd, with a Description of new Engines to perform them, 1680.
L ☞The Aerial Noctiluca, or some new Phae∣nomena, and a Process of a factitious Self-shining Substance, Octavo, London. L ☞The Glaical or Icy Noctiluca, with a Chy∣mical Paradox founded on new Experiments, whence it may be made probable, that Chy∣mical Principles may be converted one into another, Octavo, London, 1680. L ☞Memoirs for the Natural History of Hu∣man Blood, especially the Spirit of that Li∣quor, London, 1684. L ☞Experiments and Considerations about the Porosity of Bodies, in Two Essays: The former of the Porousness of Animal Bodies; The other of the Porousness of solid Bodies, Octavo, London, 1684. ☞Short Memoirs for the Natural Experi∣mental History of Mineral Waters, Octavo, 1685. An Historical Account of a strangely Self-moving Liquor, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of November the 26th, 1685. L ☞Of the Reconcileableness of Specifick Me∣dicines, to the Corpuscular Philosophy, to which is annex'd a Discourse about the ad∣vantages of the use of Simple Medicines, pro∣pos'd by way of Invitation to it, Octavo, London, 1685. ☞An Essay of the great Effects of Languid and unheeded Motion. To which is an∣nex'd an Experimental Discourse of some un∣heeded Causes of the Salubrity and Insalu∣brity of the Air and its Effects, Octavo, Lon∣don, 1685, 1690.
*L ☜A free Inquiry into the vulgarly receiv'd Notion of Nature, in an Essay address'd to a Friend, Octavo, London, 1685/6. *☜A Disquisition about the Final Causes of Natural Things. With an Appendix of some Uncommon Observations about vitiated Sight, Octavo, London, 1688. ☜Medicina Hydrostatica: Or, Hydrostaticks, applied to the Materia Medica, shewing, How by the Weight that divers Bodies us'd in Physick, have in Water; one may disco∣ver, whether they be Genuine or Adulterate. To which is subjoin'd, a previous Hydro∣statical way of estimating Ores, Octavo, Lon∣don, 1690. ☜Experimenta & Observationes Physicae; wherein are briefly treated of several Sub∣jects relating to Natural Philosophy in an Experimental way; to which is added, a small Collection of strange Reports, in two Parts, Octavo, London, 1691. ☜Medicinal Experiments: Or, a Collection of Choice Remedies, for the most part sim∣ple and easily prepared, Twelves, London, 1692. Price 1 s.
Advertisements. Because among those that willingly read the Author's Writings, there are some that re∣lish those most, (as most suitable to their Genius, addicted to Religious Studies) that Treat of Matters relating to Divinity: The Publisher thinks fit to gratifie them with a Catalogue of those Theological Books that pass for Mr. Boyle's, because they were as∣cribed to him, and never positively disown'd by him; tho' such of them as are mark'd with an Asterisk, come abroad without ha∣ving his Name prefixt to them. SEraphic Love, five or six times Printed but first Published in the year, 1660 Octavo. ☞ LConsiderations about the Stile of the Scripture, whereof the first Edition was Publish'd in the year, 1662. in English, and afterward turn'd into, and several times Printed in Latin, Octavo. *☞Occasional Reflections on several Subjects, with a Preliminary Discourse of the way of meditating there Exemplified; First Publish'd in the year, 1665. and afterwards turn'd into Latin, but not yet Printed in that Language, Octavo. *☞Of the Excellency of the Study of Theo∣logy, compared with that of Natural Philo∣sophy. Printed in the year, 1674. Octavo.
* ☜ Considerations about the Reconcileable∣ness of Reason and Religion. To which is annex'd a Discourse about the Possibility of the Resurrection. Printed in the year, 1675. Octavo. *A Treatise of Things above Reason. To which are annex'd some Advices about Things that are said to transcend Reason. Printed in the year, 1681. in English, and afterwards Translated into Latin, but not yet Printed in that Language, Octavo. L ☜Of the Veneration that Man's Intellect owes to God. Printed in the year, 1685. *The Martyrdom of Theodora, and of Di∣dymus. London, 1687. ☜ ☜The Christian Vertuoso: Shewing, That by being addicted to Experimental Philo∣sophy, a Man is rather assisted, than Indis∣posed, to be a good Christian. The First Part; To which are subjoin'd, 1. A Dis∣course about the Distinction, that repre∣sents some Things as above Reason, but not contrary to Reason. 2. The first Chapters of a Discourse, Entituled, Greatness of Mind promoted by Christianity, Octavo, London, 1690.
A Catalogue of new Physick Books Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church Yard. PAarmacopeia Bateana. Quâ nonginta Cir∣citer Pharmaca, plerâ{que} omnia è Praxi Ge∣orgii Batei Regi Carolo secundo Medici Prima∣rii excerpta, ordine alphabetico conciè exhi∣bentur. Quorum Nonnulla in Laboritorio Pub∣lico Pharmacopoeano Lond. fideliter parantur Venalia: At{que} in usu sunt hodierno apud Medicos Londinenses. Editio Altera Priori multò Locu∣pletior: Cum viribus ac dosious annexis. Huic accesserunt Arcana Goddardiana ex Autographo Authoris desumpta. Item ad Calcem Orthoto∣nia Medicorum Observata: Insuper & tabula Poso∣logica Dosibus Pharmacorum accommodata. Cum Indice Morborum, Curationum, &c. Curâ J. S. Pharmacopoei Lond. In Twelves. 1691. Praxeos Mayernianae in Morbis internis Prae∣cipue Gravioribus & Chronicis Syntagma, ex Ad∣versariis, Consiliis ac Epistolis ejus, summâ Curâ ac Diligentiâ concinnatum. Londini. In Oct. 1690. Phthisiologia seu Exercitationes de Phthisi Tri∣bus Libris comprehensae. Totumque Opus va∣riis Historiis illustratum. Autore Richardo Morton, Med. D. & Regii Collegii Medicor. Lond. Socio. Londini. In Octavo. 1689.
Osteologia Nova, or some New Observations of the Bones, and the Parts belonging to them, with the manner of their Accretion, and Nutri∣tion, communicated to the Royal Society in se∣veral Discourses. I. Of the Membrane, Nature, Constituent parts, and Internal Structure of the Bones. II. Of Accretion, and Nutrition, as al∣so of the Affections of the Bones in the Rickets, and of Venereal Nodes. III. Of the Medulla, or Marrow. IV. Of the Mucilaginous Glands, with the Etiology or Explication of the Causes of a Rheumatism, and the Gout, and the man∣ner how they are produced. To which is added, A Fifth Discourse of the Cartilages. By Clopton Havers. M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society. London. In Octavo. 1691. Synopsis Methodica Stirpium Brittannicarum, in quatum Notae generum Characteristicae tradun∣tur, tum Species singulae breviter describuntur: Ducentae quinquaginta plus minus novae Species ptim suis locis inseruntur, partim in Appendi∣ce seorsim exhibentur. Cum Indice & Virium Epitome. Auctore Joanne Raio è Societate Regia. Londini. In Octavo. 1690. Pharmacopaelae Collegii Regalis Londini Reme∣dia Omnia succinctè descripta, at{que} serie alpha∣beticâ ita digesta, ut singula promptius primo in∣tuitu investigare possint, Editio Altera Priori Castigatior & Auctior: Huic Annexus est Cata∣logus Simplicium tum locupletior tum compen∣diosor quàm antehàc editus; Accedit in Calce Manuale ad forum nec non Pinax posographicus, Curâ Ja. Shipton Phamacop. Lond. In T'welves. 1689. THE END.
