B4731A R210555 8844812 41952
TEARS FOR IERVSALEM; OR The compassionate Lamen∣tation of a tender hearted Saviour over a rebellious and obdurate people. A subject entered upon on the late day of solemn Humiliation, De∣cember 6. 1655. afterwards pro∣secuted, and now published, as useful at all times, but very sea∣sonable for the present. By John Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel at Great Yarmouth. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children, Luke 23.28. LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Tho. Newberry, 1656.
To the Mourners in Sion, Such as being truely sensible of, are cordially affected with the present sad and ca∣lamitous condition of the Church of God in the Island of Great Britain. (Much esteeemed in the Lord.) THe last year, I sent forth a Groan, a Groan for Is∣rael; I now here second it with Tears, Tears for Jerusalem. And whe∣ther there be cause for both these, I appeal to you, whom God hath in any measure made sensible of the present state of the
land of your Nativity, and specially of the Church therein. When Nehemiah heard that sad report concerning Jerusalem, that the remnant which were left therein were in great affliction and reproach, and that the Wall thereof was broken down, &c. It came to passe (saith he) when I heard these words, that I sate down and wept, and mourned, Neh. 1.4. And is not this the Condition of the poor Church of God among us in this Nation at this day? Is not the Wall thereof broken down? All Church-Government levelled? By rea∣son whereof all kind of dangerous and damnable Errours and Heresies, and en∣ormious practises, with unbrotherly and unchristian divisions, have broke in upon us, to the rendring of us a scorn and derision to the Nations round about. Thus doth Englands sore run in this night of her Affliction, and ceaseth not, her calamity every day increasing. And yet (which is no small addition to her misery,) how few are there who so lay it to heart, as to seek out for cure and remedy? Nay, how many who refuse it being offered? not indu∣ring to hear of any such thing as Church-Government.
Insomuch as the servants of God, some and many of them, may take up the like complaint concerning this Nation, that Babylons friends once did concerning her (Jer. 51.9.) We would have healed her, but shee is not healed. Nay, that which is far worse, shee re∣fuseth so to be. So deplorable, and almost desperate, is her condition now become. Now in this case what shall Sions friends, do? What? desert and forsake her? This indeed is the resolve of Babylons friends there. Let us forsake her (say they,) and let us goe every man into his own Coun∣trey, for her Iudgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up unto the skies; They will give her over, and every one shifteth for himselfe. But far be such thoughts from all the servants of God in this Nation. How ever (it must be acknowledged) they have cause enough to feare the event, having so many sad symptomes before their eyes, yet (not knowing but that there may be hope in Israel concerning this thing) let them not in the day of her adversity forsake their Mother, in whose womb they were conceived, and whose breasts have given them suck; But let
them with faith and patience, yet looke out, look up (for from thence must come Englands cure,) being importunate with the God of Israel, that he who hath in his just judgment for our unfruitfulnesse, broken down the hedge of his Church a∣mongst us, so as the Boar out of the wood doth waste it, and the wild beast of the field doth devour it, would in his free grace and mercy, return and look down from heaven, and visit this vine, and the vineyard which his own right hand hath planted. Which that all may be excited to do, is the design of this small Treatise. To which end if it may be in any degree serviceable to any. I have that I aimed at. In the hopes whereof I rest, Your Brother and Companion in the Kingdome and Pati∣ence of Jesus Christ, John Brinsley. Great Yarmouth, Feb. 2. 1655.
TEARS FOR IERVSALEM; OR The compassionate Lamen∣tation of a tender hearted Saviour over a rebellious and obdurate people. Luk. 19.41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept over it. 42. Saying, If thou hadst known; even thou, at the least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes. THis portion of Scripture I now take up,The text upon what occasion taken up. not that I look upon it as Prophe∣tical to England. So indeed it was to Hierusalem, to which it is, was spo∣ken. I wish it may not be so to this Nation.
But as concerning it both useful and seasonable for the present times, and as proper to the pre∣sent occasion as any I can meet with, finding it put into my hands by that Declaration, which hath upon this day called us together, where we are directed to make this one chief part of our arrand at the throne of grace, to beg it of God that he would give his people in this nati∣on to know the things which belong unto their peace,Declarati∣on Novem. 21. 1655. which is the very thing which our bles∣sed Saviour here wisheth to Hierusalem, and that with tears in his eyes. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, &c. In the words we have a short History, report∣ed onely by this one Evangelist,Division. setting forth unto us the Passionate lamentation of our blessed Saviour over Hierusalem; wherein the occasion of it,Parts three. the expression of it, the ground or cause of it. We may take notice of three things. First, The occasion of that lamentation; his approaching and beholding of the City [And when he was come near, and beheld the City.] Secondly, The expression of it, by tears [He wept over it.] Thirdly, The ground or cause of it; the sad state of the City in regard of a two-fold evil, the one of sin, the other of punishment: of sin, the stupidity and blindnesse of the inhabitants of that City in not laying hold upon the offers and ten∣ders of grace and mercy held forth to them. [If thou hadst known, &c.] The punishment first ge∣nerally
declared [But now they are hid from thine eyes] Then more particularly explained in the verses following. These are the severals, some of which I have now to deal with. Begin with the first. The occasion of this lamentati∣on. And when he was come near,Part 1. The occa∣sion of this lamentati∣on. he beheld the Ci∣ty] So he did, and that Oculis tam animi quam corporis, with the eye both of his body and mind. With the eye of his body he beheld the place. And beholding it wept over it. Thus is the eye of the body oftimes as a window to let in affectionThe eye lets in af∣fection to the heart. and passion into the soul. Love and ha∣tred, joy and grief, they often enter at this door. Among other; in this way is pity and compassion often let into the heart. The good Samaritane, he saw the man that was fallen among theeves; And when he saw him (saith the text) he had compassion on him, Luk. 10.33. And thus our Sa∣viour here saw the City of Hierusalem, and when he saw it, he was thus affected with it. Seeing it, as with his bodily eye, so with the eye of his mind, considering the state and condition of it. Q. But what was it that he there saw,What Christ looked upon in Jerusalem, that so affected him. or looked upon that did so affect, and move him. A. Why,1. The City it sef, magnificent for structure. first with his bo∣dily eye he took notice of the place, the City it self; where he beheld as goodly a prospect as the earth could afford. A magnificent City, beautiful for sci∣tuation.
Beautiful for scituation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Sion, Psal. 48.2. Beautiful for edifices and structures, which were rich and stately. Among which the Temple rebuilt by King Herod was the most sumptuous and mag∣nificent pile; that then the world was owner of. So as had there been nothing else, this alone had been enough to move compassion; to think that so goodly a City as that, should within a short time be ruined: such stately edifices laid level with the ground. This is conceived to have affected the Disciples of Christ, as the sto∣ry sets it forth, Matth. 24.1. His Disciples came (saith the text) to shew him the buildings of the Temple. This they did, as by way of ad∣miration, being much taken with the rich mag∣nificence of the structure, so also out of pity and commiseration, in as much as their master had but a little before given them a hint of the de∣struction thereof; cap. 23.38. [Behold, your house is left unto you desolate] intimating that both the City and Temple should be destroyed. Hereupon they now shewed him the buildings thereof, as pittying that sad fate, that so stately a fabrick should be ruined. This moved them; And I will not say but it might also at the pre∣sent affect their master, when he had this good∣ly prospect in his eye: to think what after∣wards he speaks verse 44. that the enemy should lay that City and Temple even with the ground, not leaving one stone upon another. This possibly might move some compassion in him.
But this was but the least grain in the ballance: There were divers other considerations besides this of greater importance, which our Saviour might then have in his thoughts: As viz. In the second place, the number of peopleThe num∣ber of peo∣ple devoted to destru∣ction. Magis ta∣men sub∣versionem planxit ani∣marum quam rui∣nas pare∣tum: Car∣thus d lot. in that City, which was great and populous. All these generally he looked upon as destinated to ruin and destruction either by sword or famine or pestilence (Gods three stringed whip,) or by exile, or else miserable slavery. And this que∣stionlesse, could not but much affect him. So it did in another case, as the Evangelist reports the story once and again, Matth. 9.36. When he saw the multitude he was moved with compassion in them because they fainted, and were scattered abroad as sheep having no shepheard. And again, cap. 15. vers. 32. he tells his Disciples: I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three dayes and have nothing to eat. Thus did he pity the condition of the people, having compassion both on their souls and bo∣dies; the one because they wanted instruction, the other because they wanted refreshment. How much more then might this stir the like affecti∣on in him, when looking upon this populous City, he considered how many were like to pe∣rish in that desolation which hung over the head of it. As it is reported of that great Com∣mander Xerxes, that from a hill beholding his numerous Armies consisting of some hundreds of thousands of able fighting men, and conside∣ring how that with in a short time, 40. or 50.
years, not a man of them should be left alive, he could not refrain from weeping. And even alike consideration might here draw tears from the eyes of our blessed Saviour; Which also himself gives a hint of in that 44. verse after the Text, where speaking how the City should be laid level with the ground, he adds, and thy chil∣dren within thee.] meaning that they also should perish, the very little ones being (as the Psal∣mist saith of the Babylonians, Psal. 137.) dashed against the stones. The quali∣tie of the people: Gods peo∣ple.Thirdly, To this (in the third place) add the quality of the people, which as they were nume∣rous, so also they were a select, a choice people, Gods people. A people whom God had chosen out of all the nations in the world; whom he had adopted, and taken into Covenant with himself. To whom belongeth the adoption and the Covenant (saith that Apostle, reckoning up the priviledges of the people,) Rom. 9.4. Now that they through their own ingratitude and ob∣stinacy in refusing the offer and means of grace held forth to them, should perish so miserably. This (as Calvin noteth upon it) could not but exceed∣ingly affect him who came into the world to seek and save them.Quum populum qui in spem vita aeternae ad opius erat, suae ingratitudine & malitia misere perie videret, nihil mirum si lachrymas non te∣nuit. Cal. ad. loc. This thought exceed∣ingly affected the blessed Apo∣stle, as he tells his Romanes, Rom. 9.1.2. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, &c. That I have great heavinesse, and continual
sorrow in my heart.] viz. for his countreymen the Jews; to think of their obstinacy, and con∣sequently their rejection. So it followeth. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh.] So was Paul affected with the mis∣carriage of that people, that he could even have wished the greatest of evils to himself, so as he might have prevented it in them. And the like thought (no question) could not but exceed∣ingly affect our blessed Saviour, to think that such a people, the hope of the world, the onely people in Covenant with God at that time, that they should miscarry, they should perish Fourthly,Ierusalem the metro∣polis, the head city upon which the whole Na∣tion had a depen∣dance. To this add (in the fourth place) that that City as it was the Metropolis, the head City of the Kingdome of Iudaea, so the whole Kingdome was concerned in it, and depended up∣on it. Yea, the whole Nation of the Jews. As it went with that City so it was like to go with the whole body of that nation. If that mis∣carried, it could not but prove fatal to that whole kingdome, and to all the people of God in it, who had all an adventure in that bottome, nay were themselves imbarqued in it. And so were like to swim or sink with it. As it was with Babylon, being the head City of the Persian Mo∣narchy, the peace of the whole Kingdome and all the subjects in it depended upon that; And therefore the Prophet adviseth the Jewish cap∣tives, to seek the peace of that City, and to pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace thereof shall
ye have peace, Jer. 29.7. Even thus was it with Jerusalem. Yet again (in the fifth place;) This City it was the City of the great King, so called by the Psalmist, 48.2. The great King;Ierusalem the City of the great King, the city of God. but what king? why not onely the City of David (as it is some∣times called, Luk. 2.4.11.) the Emperial City, where David and his successours had sate upon the throne for many Generations, almost five hundred years together before the Captivity of Babylon. There are set thrones of judgement (saith the Psalmist) the throne of the house of David, Psal. 122.5. Not onely so, but it was the City of the great King, of the King of hea∣ven, the City of God. So our Saviour meaneth it, Matth. 5.35. where forbidding to swear by Hierusalem, he giveth this reason for it, for it is the City of the great King, i. e. of God. So the Psalmist explains himself in the 8. verse of that psalme, (Psal. 48.) As we have heard so have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hosts, in the City of God. As also in the first verse, God is greatly to be praised in the City of our God. So was Hierusalem, There God dwelt. The Lord hath chosen Sion, he hath desired it for his habitation▪ This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, Psal. 132.13, 14. This was the place, the onely place upon earth, where God manifested his presence in a fixed and constant way. Here formerly was the Ark of the Covenant, the pledge and token of Gods presence; The glory of Israel, and of the world, and therefore called, The
glory. Rom. 9.4. Here was the Sanctuary, where God dwelt betwixt the Cherubins, and from whence the light of salvation went forth unto all the world. This was urbs sacris dicata (as Gro∣tius saith of it) a place dedicated to the worship and service of God, a place which God had chosen to put his name there; the place whither the tribes came up to worship, Psal. 122.4. where the Ordinances of God were set up in their glo∣ry, majesty, and held forth in a publick way. So as this place miscarrying, it could not but go ill with the Churches of God, and with the Re∣ligion of God. And this it was (as Gualter and Calvin note it upon the Text) which above all other things our blessed Saviour took to heart.Quum expenderet illam divinitus electam esse sacram sedem, in qua resideret salutis aeternae foedus; Sanctuarium unde prodiret salus sa∣las toti mundo, fieri non potuit quam ejus interi∣tum graviter▪ doleret. Cal. ad loc. The other considerations might move him, but this above all, to think that that place, which God had made choice of to put his name in, where he had dwelt, where his Temple,Part 2. the place of his publick worship was, that that should be brought to such a miserable desola∣tion;The expression of Christs compassion, by weeping. Lachrymae sunt legati doloris. Cyprianus lib. Ep. 7. as he by the eye of his divini∣tie saw to hang over the head of it; this, this it was that pierced his heart, and stirred up his compassions in him, drawing tears from his eies. When he beheld the City, he wept over it. Wept over it] There is the expression of his
compassion. Let me touch upon that also, and I shall put the application of both these together. He wept] This PassionWeeping a passion not unsutable to Christ. Mutarunt homines te∣merarii & delicati, qui∣bus flere Christo indig∣nis videbatur Grotius ad Text. some look upon as unsutable to the person of Christ. And thereupon (as both Be∣za and Grotius take notice of it from Epiphanus) in divers of the ancient Copies this passage was left out. But without any just cause.Gorranus ad Text. & alli. Alii septies Chri∣stum flevisse asserunt: Gerhard Harm. ad loc. To hear of Christs weeping, is not such a ra∣rity, that any should boggle at it. Four several times (saith one Wri∣ting upon the Text) we read hereof. The first at his Nativity, his Birth. For this he citeth that Apochryphal Text, Wisd. 7.3. Where wise∣dome (whereby he understandeth Christ, who is so called, Prov. 8.) saith, that she was Borne crying and weeping, as all other do. Thus Infants are commonly born, crying; whether weeping or no, I will not say. And thus that pretend∣ed Solomon is conceived to set forth the birth of Christ, who was therein conformed to the rest of the sons of men. But that (being Apocry∣phal) I leave it, as I find it, uncertain, so as it may be believed or rejected without any preju∣dice to the faith. The three other are clear. The first, at the raising up of Lazarus; where we read, Joh. 11.53. And Jesus wept. The second here, in this his Procession to Hierusalem (as he calleth it) He wept over it,] The third and last in his Passion in the Garden, concern∣ing
which the Author to the Hebrews tels us, that he offered up prayers and supplications, with strong cryings and tears, Heb. 5.7. Thus (saith he) did our blessed Saviour, who was the foun∣tain of life, water the world with his tears, which he compareth to the four Rivers, which went out of Paradise to water the earth. But letting that passe, as more witty then weigh∣tie. Weeping (we see) was no new or strange thing with our Saviour. That ever he laughed, that we read not; that he wept we meet with it more then once. Q. But it may be said;Why Christ lamenteth what he could have remedied. Wherefore should our Saviour here weep over Hierusalem? what ever calamities he saw impending, hanging over the head of it, he could have prevented them, if he had pleased. And why then doth he lament that, which with a word he was able to have re∣medied? A. To this it is answered: First, This he did, to shew the truth of his humanity:To shew the truth of his humanity. Carne humana circunda∣tus, vere humanos induit affectus, Cal. ad loc. Taking upon him our nature, he took upon him also all Passions and Affections common to that nature. Being made like unto us in all things, sin onely excepted, (as the Apostle hath it, Heb. 4.15.) subjected to all our not sin∣ful infirmities. Thus he slept, eat, and drank, which the nature of man requireth. And thus we read that he was weary, hungry, thirsty; and thus he wept. All to shew himself truly man;
and that, together with our nature, he had also taken our Infirmities (as the Evangelist Saint Mathew hath it, Matth. 8.17.) But secondly, Hereby he testi∣fied his affectionTo testifie his affection to the Iews. Hoc fletu testatus est fra∣terne se diligere eos in quorum gratiam fuerat homo factus, Calvin ad Text. Viscera miseri∣cordiae suae per fletum os∣stendit. Theophil. ad loc. towards those for whom he was made man, and for whose sake he came into the world. This he did first for the Jew; I am not sent save onely to the Lost sheepe of the house of Israel (so he tells the woman of Canaan) Matth. 15.24. His arrand was first to the Iewes, to seek and save them. And hereby he expressed his indeared affection unto them. This was the contrition which the Jewes made of his weeping over Lazarus his grave. Behold, how he loved him (say they) Joh. 11.36. And the same construction may we make of this his weeping over Hierusalem. Hereby he shewed that tender affection which he bare unto them, and the desire which he had of their welfare and happinesse. Why did he not then help and save them.Q. But if he loved them so, why did he not help them? Why did he not divert those inpen∣ding evils? This had been a greater expression of love to them, to save them, then to weep o∣ver them. A. True, as God he could have helped them.Christ here in acteth as man. He could have prevented all those evils and miseries. But we must here look upon him as acting the part of a Mediator. In the exe∣cution of which office the Divine nature often
rested, and hid it, not putting forth that power which otherwise it could. Thus in his Passion the Godhead slept, while the Manhood suffered. And thus here, the Divine nature rested, while the humane acted. And he act∣ing according to that nature, lamenteth the mi∣series of this people, which in respect of his ab∣solute power, as God, he could have prevented. He could have done it, but he would not. And why? Because he came not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. As he came to preach his Word, not his own, My doctrine is not mine own, but his that sent me, Joh. 7.16. So he came to do his work, his will, not his own. I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Fa∣ther which hath sent me, Joh. 5.30. Now this was the will of the Father, that that ungrateful people refusing and rejecting his Son, and the offer of grace and mercy through him, should smart for that their ingratitude. And this he, as man, here lamenteth and bewaileth, weeping over them. [When he saw the City, he wept over it.] And what shall we observe from hence that may be useful to our selves? Why here see,Obs. Christians to be ten∣derly af∣fected to∣wards the Churches of God. what affection there ought to be in all those that professe the name of Christ towards the Church and people of God. How they ought to be af∣fected, deeply affected, with their miseries, their calamities. So was our blessed Saviour, as we see, with Hierusalems. Foreseeing that cala∣mitie which hung over the head of it, the
thought thereof melts his heart, and wrings tears from his eyes, He wept over it.  (saith the Original) which word coming from  (as the Etimologist tels us) which signifieth to break, it imports a breaking of the heart with sorrow, which dissolveth it self into tears. And like affection should there be in all Christians. It is that which Paul presseth upon his Philip∣pians. Let the same mind be in you, which also was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. Now what mind was in him we see. He was affected not onely with his own private condition, but with the condition of others. He not onely wept when the bitter cup was coming towards himself, but he did the like when he saw it coming towards Hierusalem. And let there be the same mind in all the Lords people. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others; So the Apostle there presseth it in the verse foregoing, (vers. 4.) Thus should Chri∣stians look upon the condition of others, speci∣ally of the Church and people of God, with an affectionate eye: as rejoycing in their welfare, so condoling their misery and calamitie.The Chur∣ches msery to be mour∣ned over. So should they look upon private persons, pitying them in their misery. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends (saith Job to his kindred) Job 19.21. much more upon the Church. Not looking upon her calamity with delight, as a pleasing spectacle. So indeed the Edomites are said to have looked on the day of their brother, Obad. 12. When their brethren the
Jews were carried into captivity, they rejoyced at it; but this was in them barbarous inhuma∣nitie, for which the Lord there threatens to be, even with them, vers. 15. As thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee; But with pitiful and com∣passionate eyes and hearts, mourning over their miseries, whether present or imminent, felt or found. Thus shall we find the Saints of God to have been affected. That of Jeremy is well known ho wisheth his head waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he mt weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of his people, Jer. 9.1. So great was his compassion towards the peo∣ple of the Jews, that he thought he could ne∣ver sufficiently bewail the miseries, which by his prophetical eye he saw ready to befall them. So was he affected therewith as if they had fal∣len upon himself. So he expresseth  in the chapter foregoing, (cap. 8. vers. 21.) For the hurt of the daughter of my people, am I hurt (I am broken, his heart was broken) I am black (like a mourner clad in sable, or I am in heavi∣nesse) astonishment hath taken hold of me] Like affection, like compassion ought there to be in all Christians towards their brethren; they ought to sympathize with them; Weeping with them that weep, as the Apostle hath it, Rom. 12.16.Christians to mourn for those who do not mourn for themselves. Yea, weeping for them, whilest it may be they do not weep for themselves. This doth our Saviour here for Jerusalem. They thought their
state and condition good and happy. Being not sensible of the evils which hung over their heads, they were not affected with them. I, but our Saviour who foresaw those judgements as God, he weepeth over them as man. Thus should Christians be affected with those judgements of God which they foresee ready to fall upon o∣thers; they ought to mourn for them. This will the Prophet Isay do for Moab, as himself most pathetically expresseth it. Isai. 15.5. My heart shall cry for Moab, cap. 16.9. I will bewail with the weeping of er the vine of Sibma; I will water thee with my tears O Heshbon. Again, vers. 11. My bowels shall sound like a harpe for Moab, i. e. with pity and compassion. And the like will the Prophet Jeremy do. Therefore will I howle for Moab, &c. Jer. 48.31, 32. Now were the Prophets of God thus affected with the con∣dition of Moab, who were strangers, nay ene∣mies to God and his people. O how ought Christians to be affected towards Jerusalem, to∣wards the Church and people of God? Great reason why they should mourn with them, for them. In as much as they are members of the same body.Reas. Christians members of the same body. Now such a sympathy we know there is betwixt the members of the na∣tural body. If one member suffer, all the members suffer with it, (as the Apostle observes) 1 Cor. 12.26. And such a sympathy there ought to be betwixt the members of the Mistical Bo∣die. Appli.That it should be so I presume it will readily
be granted. But then, why is it not so?The present times to be mourned over. Let that be the first branch of the Application. How is it that there are no more mourners in this our Sion? Surely it is not for want of just cause of mourning, I presume that among those who are most in love with the present times, yet there are none that so doate upon them, but they will acknowledge there is yet somewhat a∣mong us, which deserveth both sighes and tears. So much that Instrument which hath this day called us together hath proclaimed to the world. And surely so we shall find it, if we seriously consider the state of things both a∣broad, and at home. Look a broad,In regard of the state of the Church a∣broad. we may see or hear of that which deserveth to be laid to heart. The sad state of our poor persecuted brethren in Pie∣mont; whose condition not long since hath been recommended to the needfull charity of this Nation. As also that hand of God which hath lyen so heavy upon our neighbours on the other side, where the destroying Angel hath been, and yet is at work, doing sad executions. To which I might add the present state of our brethren in Scotland. But we shall not need to go abroad:The presen state of England a matter of just lamen∣tation. It was that which our Saviour said to the woman of Jerusalem, whom he saw out of a feminine temper, and some of them happily out of af∣fection unto himself, lamenting him going to his Passion. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves and your children,
Luk. 23.28. And truly the like may be said un∣to us at this day; weep not so much for others as for your selves. Such is the state of this na∣tion that if rightly considered, it may be concei∣ved to deserve a weeping over▪ which that you may be brought to do, let me desire you to ap∣proach and take a veivv of it. This it was that drew tears from your Saviours eyes, viz. his ap∣proaching and beholding of Jerusalem. When he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it That you may be like affected to∣wards this your native countrey; let me give you a sight of it: Which I shall do in a three fold prospect,Englands condition looked up∣on three waies. desiring you to look upon it these three wayes; considering what it was, what it is, and what, unlesse God be pleased graciously to step in by a timous prevention it it is like to be. What it hath been.First, What it was, how happie under that long continued peace, which for so many years together it enjoyed, to the admiration, if not envy of other Nations. But again how unhap∣py under the late Civill Commotions, which like a fire breaking forth in our own bowels, what sad devastations did it make, to the effusion of much precious bloud, which is yet so fresh, as that the memory of it cannot but deeply affect the hearts of all those who bear any true love to the land of their Nativity. Such it hath been.What it is. Secondly, But what is it? Here I shall not go upon any private account, whether my own, or
yours; which if I should, I might draw up a large Catalogue of sins and judgements, under which at the present this nation lyes, and groans, deserving to bewept over. But I have a publick one put into my hand. That DeclarationSet forth in the late Declara∣tion, which hath occasioned this our meeting, I find it taking notice of three or four particulars. Be∣sides the late Rebukes, (those I suppose received on the other side of the world,Iamaika, where not a little English blood was shed, to the no small disho∣nour of the Nation, which hath not been ac∣quainted with such repulses (The tares of Di∣vision, Abominable blasphemies, Dreadful appo∣stacies,Four parti∣culars justly to be mourned over. with the Impediments of Settlement and Reformation. These are held forth as the just occasions and grounds of this dayes Humiliati∣on. And truly if rightly looked upon, as we see a reality in every of them, so we shall find that there is never a one of them but giveth the people of God to do over this Nation, what their blessed Saviour here did over Jeru∣salem to weep over it. First, The tares of Division,Tares of di∣vision. which vvhilest the Husbandmen slept, the envious man hath sowen; and that so thick, as the whole field is over run with them, insomuch that they threa∣ten to eat out the heart both of Church and State, Divisions of all sorts. Divisions both of Heads and Hearts, in jugdement and affection, in Church and State. So as it may novv be said of the people of England as once it vvas of Israel, Hosea .2. Their he arts is divided. God ha∣ving
taken away his spirit of unitie and concord from them he hath given them over to Sediti∣ons, Factions, Sects, & Schismes: And is not this a just cause of mourning? Such are divisions in the State. (In or for.) The divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart, Judg. 5.15. Much more in the Church. O what means that noise of Axes and Hammers in the Temple? In the building of it there were none of these heard, 1 King. 6.7. Surely this is for the break∣ing down of the carved work thereof at once, Psal. 74.6. Abomina∣ble blas∣phemies.Secondly, Abominable blasphemies; And those not onely the suddain eruptions of pro∣phane and impious tongs, by cursing and swear∣ing, for which the Prophet saith the land of Is∣rael mourned, Jer. 23.10. But deliberate blasphe∣mies, studied and resolved blasphemies. Blas∣phemies against Jesus Christ, and against his holy Spirit, divesting both of their Divinity; denying the satisfaction of Christ; blasphemies against Scriptures, Ordinances, Ministery; even spitting in the face all religion. And is not this a just ground of mourning? The Jews of old never heard a blaspemous word, but their manner was to rend their garments, 2 King. 18.37.19. 1. Matth. 26.65. Act. 14.14.) O what cause have Christians then to rend their hearts at the hearing and seeing of such blaspemies, as daily fly abroad among us! The like whereun∣to are not to be found in Rome it self, though she be the mother of abominations, Revel. 17.5.
And hath the name of blasphemy written upon her forehead, Rev. 13.1.17.3. Thirdly, Dreadful apostacyDreadful apostacy. and backsliding among many, who being like stars fallen from heaven; fallen from their Principles into dange∣rous, destructive, desperate, damnable errours and heresies, have not onely forsaken, but also persecute that truth, and that way, which them∣selves before made profession of and walked in. Fourthly, And (in the last place) The hin∣drances of settlement and reformationThe hin∣drance of settlement and refor∣mation. in the Church. This the people of God in this Na∣tion have desired, looked, longed for, earnestly wrestling with God and man for the obtaining of it. And they conceived to have had some return of their prayers in a hopeful beginning of it. But now, how are all those hopes dashed? Reformation being turned to Deformation: the wals of Jerusalem being broken down, and no Nehemiah as yet undertaking the rebuilding of them. And are not these just grounds of mourning? A sufficient cause why they who wish well to Jerusalem, to the Church of God in this Nation should with their Saviour here, weep over it? Such is the present state there∣of. Thirdly,What like to be. Beyond which if it be lawful for us to look, what can we see or expect, unlesse God in mercy step into us by vvay of a gracious prevention, but even Jerusalems fate, utter ruine and destruction? were there no other but
the first of these, those many and sad Divisions which are on foot, daily increasing among us, what do they presage? If we know it not, let our Saviour tell it us, Mark 3.24. If a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdome cannot stand. And the naturalist will tell us no lesse. Cor divisum mors est; If the heart be divided the body cannot live. Now then having thus approached to and looked upon this Nation, what remains but that our eyes should move our hearts to pity and compassionate it, to mourn over it. Little else it is that private persons can do. And this let them do. Preces & Lachrymae, Prayers and tears are the Churches weapons, which every one both may, and ought to make use of. And this let us, as at other times, so this day do. All of us powring forth our souls before the Lord in an humble confession of our own sins, and the sins of the Nation which have justly deserved, what ever we either feel or fear begging it from him, that he would graciously return unto us, under∣taking the Cure of this Sin-sick nation, healing our breaches; sanctifying and removing the judgements which lie upon us, diverting those which further threaten us: yet shewing us his salvation, in carrying on that great and blessed work of Reformation, in despite of all opposi∣tion from those accursed Balaamits, whether Romes emissaries, or others, who seek and en∣deavour to frustrate it, setting up the kingdome of his dear Son among us in a right way, so mak∣ing
us yet a people to praise his name. Thus have I done with the two first of these particulars. The third is yet behind, which my eye is principally upon, which we have in the verse following. VERSE XLII. Saying, If thou hadst known; even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace.] A Most Affectionate and Pathetical Excla∣mation;Part 3. The cause of Christs weeping. Pathetica est ratio, ideoque abrupta Calvin ad loc. Passionate expressions often abrupt. and therefore abrupt and defe∣ctive. Such oftimes are the speeches of men in Passion. Specially in the passion of grief and sorrow; wherein oftimes Vox faucibus haeret, the tongue cleaveth to the roof of the mouth, not able to expresse and utter what is in the breast. Sor∣row is a compression of the heart; whereas joy doth dilate and open it: grief doth compresse, congeal and straighten it, so as that which is within cannot readily get forth. Hence is it that the expressions hereof are abrupt and bro∣ken. And such is our Saviours here in the text. His heart being full of grief and sorrow for the sin and misery of this people, he expresseth
himself in such an abrupt and broken way. If thou hadst, &c. so leaving it with an Aposiopesis, a Reticentia, keeping in what should have made the sentence entire and full. This defect is variously suppliedThe defect here how supplied. by Exposi∣tors: By some thus. If thou hadst known, &c. Known so well as I, thou wouldst have wept as well as I. By others thus. If thou hadst known, &c. thou would not have done as thou hast done; thou wouldst not have gone on to die and perish in thy sins. By others thus. If thou hadst known, &c. thou wouldst have hearke∣ned to my counsel, thou wouldst have been more studious of thy peace. By Beza and Piscator (with whom I choose to go along) thus. If thou hadst known, &c. Quam foelix esses & beata. How happie and blessed then mightst thou have been! But this he leaveth out beaking off bruptly; which he doth to intimate the great∣nesse of his affection, to shevv hovv earnestly he both vvished their good, and bevvailed their misery. If thou (or O if thou as the former Translation hath it) hadst known; . Obser. Christs af∣fection to an unwor∣thy people the Iews.Behold here then the affection of a tender hearted Saviour towards an obstinate and unwor∣thy people. The people of the Jews a rebellious people. A people that had deserved as ill at the hands of Jesus Christ, as ever people did, or could have done. They had abused his messen∣gers, his Ministers. They had killed his Prophets, and stoned those whom he sent unto them (as he
chargeth it upon them, Matth. 22.37.) And they intended to do no lesse to himself. They had already rejected him, and all the offers of grace and mercy which he had made unto them. So unvvorthy of all grace & favour vvere they. Yet see hovv he pitieth and compassionateth them; hovv earnestly he wisheth their welfare, hovv passionately he bevvails their misery. Oh if thou, &c. Like affection shall vve find the Lord else∣where expressing to this people, breaking forth sometimes into such affectionate exclamations, professing his earnest desire of their happinesse and welfare. So he doth, Deut. 5.29. O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my Commandements alwaies, that it might go well with them, and with their children for ever! And again, Deut. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! How should one chase a thousand, &c. elsewhere we find him bewailing their obstinacy and misery, as Psal. 81.13. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my statutes! I should soon have subdued their enemies, &c. And the like Isai. 48.18. O that thou hadst hearkened to my Command∣ments! then had thy peace been as the river, &c. Thus doth the Lord as it were bewail the obsti∣nacy, and lament the misery of that people, wishing it had been otherwise with them. So far is he then from taking pleasure in the death and destruction of poor sinners.God not taking plea∣sure in the death of sinners. This do
tyrants sometimes, they take pleasure in their bloody executions, feeding their eyes there∣with, as with pleasing spectacles, But so doth not our God in the destruction of his creatures. To this purpose that of the Prophet Ezekiel speaketh fully, Ezek. 18.31, 32. Where the Lord bewayling the perversnesse of the people of the Jews in running on headlong to their own destruction, he expostulateth the matter with them, vers. 31. Why will ye die O ye house of Is∣rael! then he professeth that he was not de∣lighted in their destruction, or the destruction of any other, vers. 32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dyeth] No, though wicked persons, and so most worthy to die, yet God taketh no pleasure in their death. So he else∣where explains it, Ezek. 33.11. As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Object. Why, but doth not God will the death of the wicked?How God willeth the death of the wicked. Answ. True, he willeth it, but he taketh no pleasure in it. He willeth it as an act of Justice, ordaining them to just condemnation for sin. But he is not delighted in their destruction, their misery. Even as a just, but merciful Judge, he pronounceth the sentence of death upon a guil∣tie malefactor, but it is with tears in his eyes. God is delighted in mercy, mercy pleaseth him, (as the Prophet hath it, Micah. 7.18.) but so doth not the misery of his creature. Appli.Let it be taken notice of by every of us. Not
to the end that we should abuse this mercy,Gods grace not to be turned into wanton∣nesse. turn this grace into wantonnesse (as Saint Jude saith of some in his time did, Jude 4.) taking occasion thereby to go on and continue in sin. What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. (saith the Apostle) Rom. 6.1. Shall we therefore go on to provoke this God because he is so compassio∣nate towards us, so loath that we should perish; what were this but to abuse this his lenitie and goodnesse to our own just condemnation? But on the other hand, let this goodnesse of God lead us unto repentance.Gods good∣nesse lea∣ding to re∣pentance. This is the right use of it, (as we may learn from the same Apostle, Rom. 2.4.) Be we hereby provoked to break off the course of our waies provoking sins, and to come in unto this God by serious and unfeigned re∣pentance. This use will an ingennous child make of the indulgent affection of a tender hearted pa∣rent. When he seeth the bowels of his father or mother yearning towards him, bewailing his destructive courses, if there be any spark of in∣genuity left, this cannot but work upon his heart, and make him think of betaking him∣self to a new course, which may be pleasing and contentful to so affectionate a parent. Behold thus is our heavenly Father, and thus is our bles∣sed Saviour affected towards poor sinners. And therefore let it have the like work upon every of us, to provoke us to break off those sinfull wayes and courses, which are so offensive to those pure eyes; and come in unto our God by
serious and unfeigned Repentance. Christ still retaining the same affection towards poor sin∣ners.So doing, now doubt not but we shall have comfortable experience of his grace and mercy. What, was the Lord Jesus so affected towards a stubborn and rebellious people, that he so earnestly wisheth their good, and so passio∣nately bewaileth their calamity, and will he not shew the like affection to poor penitent sin∣ners? such as by coming unto him seek for mercy from him? Surely the Lord Jesus hath carried his bowels to heaven with him; still retaining the same affection tovvards poor sinners that here he had upon earth. Hovv ever he be not capa∣ble of expressing it in the like vvay: He can hence forth weep no more; All tears being wi∣ped from his eyes, as they shall be from the eyes of all his Saints, vvhen they shall be translated to that blessed and glorious condition. Yet still he retaineth the same affection towards poor sinners. He that wept over Jerusalem here, wish∣ing that it had been othervvise vvith them then it vvas, and vvas like to be, he doth earn∣estly desire that those tears, and that blood vvhich he here shed in the dayes of his flesh, may be made effectual for the vvashing avvay the sins of poor sinners; Which also they shall be to all those, who turning away from them, come unto him, receiving him as their Saviour and Lord. But I shall not any longer dwell upon this; which I take up from the general consideration of the words, or from the manner of speaking.
Come we now to the matter; taking a near¦er and more particular veivve of this Lamenta∣tion.The matter of this la∣mentation; where the evil lamen∣ted, Ag∣gravations of it. Wherein we shall take notice of two things: the Evil of sin it self which our Sa∣viour here bewaileth; and secondly the Aggra∣vations of that evil. The evil bewailed is their stupidity, their not knowing of what belonged to their peace. The aggravations of that evil are two, the one taken from the persons, the other from the time. The persons who were thus stu∣pid Jerusalem. [If thou, even thou] The time, the day of their visitation [At least in this thy day.] These are the severals, we have now to deal with. Begin with the first. The evil la∣mented;The evil lamented. their not knowing the things which be∣longed to their peace.] Here, by way of explication three thingsExpli. Three things. are to be unfolded. 1. What is here ment by peace. 2. What were those things which belonged to Je∣rusalems peace. 3. How it is said that they did not know those things. Q. For the first,What here meant by peace; viz. All kind of happinesse. by Peace here understand we prosperity, felicity. So the word was fami∣liarly used among the Hebrews. In as much as Peace is a comprehensive blessing, they set forth all blessings under this. Thus in their ordinary salutations they were wont to wish Peace. Peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thy house, and peace be unto all that thou hast. It is the sa∣lutation which David sends to Nabal, 1 Sam. 25.6. And thus our Saviour sending forth his Apostles, he puts this word into their mouthes,
directing them to salute the families where they came after that manner, with an apprecation of peace. Into whatsoever house ye enter, ye shall first say, Peace be to this hous, Luk. 10.5. i. e. all kind of happinesse. And so look we upon the word here in the text. By peace understanding here all kind of felicitie; Omnes foelicitatis par∣tes (as Calvin hath it) all the parts, and kinds of happinesse. Happinesse both present and fu∣ture; temporal and eternal. Q. 2. But what were the things which be∣longed unto this their peace.What were the things which be∣longed to their peace; viz. Christ and his Gospel. A. , why, in one word, Christ himself, and the do∣ctrine of salvation by and through him Christ and his Gospel. These were the things which conduced to their peace, to the making of them a happy people, and that both here and here∣after. Other things there were, which in a Political and civil way might have tended to the outward peace, the temporal prosperity of that place. But none like this, none like Christ who is the Prince of peace, Isai. 9.6. And our peace, Ephes. 2.14. In him is the salvation of a people bound up. This it is which maketh a people truly happy: The knowledge of Jesus Christ. And this knowledge the inhabitants of Jeru∣salem were destitute of. They neither did, nor would know this their Peace-maker. Moses they knew, he being read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act. 15.21. But Christ they knew not. Q. 3. But what did not they know him? had
they not heard of him?How they are said not to know these things, viz. in not own∣ing of Christ. Nay had they not both heard and seen him? heard his Doctrine, seen his Miracles? A. True, but they did not receive him. He came unto his own, and his own recived him not, Joh. 1.11. He came unto his own, to Israel his own peculiar peo∣ple, to the land of Canaan his own Countrey, he being of the seed of Abraham, to Jerusa∣lem his own City, he being the Son of David, but they received him not, they would not own him, they would not acknowledge him to be their Messias; they would neither believe on him, nor submit unto him. This it is truly to know God and Jesus Christ,To know God and Christ, what. to know them in an affectionate way. Not barely to know and be∣lieve that there is a God, and a Christ; no nor yet to know that Jesus is that Christ. This knowledge the Devils had and have. I know thee who thou art, even that holy one of God (saith that unclean spirit to our Saviour, Mark 1.24. But to know them affectionately with a know∣ledge of approbation. So the word (knowing) in Scripture is frequently used. In this sense Saint Paul saith of himself, Rom. 7.15. that the things which he did, he knew not. So the Original hath it, , I know not, meaning (as our Trans∣lation giveth the sense of it) that he did not al∣low, or approve of them. In this sense God is said to know, or not to knovv men. If any man love God, the same is known of him, 1 Cor. 8.3. that is approved of him. Verily I say un∣to you I know you not (saith the Bridgroome to
the foolish virgins, refusing to own them, Mat. 25.12.) And in this sense man is said to know God and Jesus Christ. This is life eternal, to know thee the onely true God, and him whom thou hast sent Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. O righteous Father the world hath not known thee, vers. 25. Novv in this sense the inhabitants of Jerusalem did not know Jesus Christ. A general know∣ledge they had concerning the Messia, that he should come. And many of them might know Jesus, but they did not know him to be the Messia, they did not acknowledge him to be the Christ. Christ ac∣knowledg∣ed by a small par∣ty.Q. No (it may be said) did not they ac∣knowledge him? What meant then that Ac∣clamation of the people who at this time brought him into Jerusalem in triumph, as Saint Matthew more fully reports the story, Mat. 21.8. where he tels us how a very great multi∣tude spread their garments in the way, &c. And they cryed, Saying, Hosanna to the Son of Da∣vid; Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. Now did not they own, and acknowledge him. How is it then, that he here exprobrates them with their disowning, sleighting of him? By whom it was.A. To this it is answered, True, Christ was thus acknowledged by some and many at this time. But by whom was it? Probably by some of the neighbouring villages not by the inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem. So much seems to be in∣timated in the tenth verse, where it is said,
when he came into Jerusalem, all the City was moved, saying, who is this? To whom the mul∣titude which came along with him return an∣swer, This is Jesus the Prophet, &c. But again, However some there were in Jerusalem, that did so acknowledge him; so did the Chil∣dren in the Temple, which sung the same song,A party in∣considera∣ble boh for quality and num∣ber. Hosanna to the Son of David, vers. 15. yet who, or what were they? No considerable party whe∣ther for quality or number. For quality, they were such as were of no account, being of the vulgar and meaner sort; Not any of eminent place, whether in Church or State that ap∣peared any more for him. Have any of the Ru∣lers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? (say the chief Priests to their Officers, Joh. 7.48.) At that time when those Queristers sung that Antheme in the Temple, it is said, that the chief Priests and Scribes were sore dipleased, Matth. 21.15. And it was no otherwise with the body of the people, who were generally led (as for the most part they are) by the example of their Rulers. They did not receive him and his Do∣ctrine. And this it is which here he so passio∣nately bewailes in them, that they had not done it, and so affectionately wisheth that they had done it. O if thou, &c.]Obser. Not to re∣ceive Christ and his Gospel, a most deplo∣rable thing. Lo then, How deplorable a thing it is, for a people not to receive Christ and his Gospel being offered and tendered unto them. This is the ob∣servation I am now to prosecute. For a peo∣ple not to receive Christ and his Gospel, not to
give entertainment to the messengers of peace, not to imbrace the offers of grace and mercy, being held forth unto them in the preaching of the Gospel, this is a most sad and deplorable thing. This is the thing which our Saviour here so passionately laments and bewails. And the same we find him doing again elsewhere, Mat. 23.37. where he breaketh forth into the like pathetical exclamation. O Jerusalem, Jerusa∣lem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens un∣der her wings, and ye would not.] O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! the word is doubled to intimate the strong affection of the speaker. How often would I have gathered thy children? meaning the people of the Jews, whose mother City was Jeru∣salem. This he had attempted by sending his messengers, his servants unto them, then com∣ing himself, to admonish them, warn them, ex∣hort them, so striving to bring them to faith and repentance, that so they might have been sheltred from the wrath of God, and secured from those imminent evils which hang over their heads. But they would not. They reject∣ed the offers of grace made unto them. And this is the matter of our Saviours, lamentation, the thing which drew these tears from his eyes. And indeed there is nothing more to be lament∣ed then this.This is that which be∣longeth unto the peace of a people. And will you have the Reason of it, take it from the Text. This is the thing which belong∣eth unto their peace. Upon this it is that the woe
or welfare, the felicity or misery of a people doth depend. This is their making or marring; the receiving or rejecting the Gospel of peace. This being entertained brings peace along with it. It was the commission and direction which our Saviour gave to his Apostles, when he sent them forth, Matth. 10.12, 13. When ye enter into a house, salute it, and if the house be worthy (that is, such persons as are willing and ready to entertain you and your message) now let your peace come upon it. Now preach the Gos∣pel of peace to them, and therewith wish all good and happinesse unto them: which also accordingly shall come and rest upon them. So Saint Luke expresseth it, Luk. 10.6. If the sonne of peace be there, (meaning such persons as were readily disposed to receive the doctrine of peace; the Gospel) your peace shall rest upon it, , God will bring upon that fa∣mily all the good that you wish unto it; your apprecation of peace shall be as effectual as your preaching of it. Thus is it with a family, And thus is it with a City, and thus is it with a Nation. The receiving of the Gospel is the happinesse of it. On the other hand, the rejecting of the Gos∣pel is the undoing of a people.The reject∣ing of the Gospel the undoing of a people. So it there fol∣loweth, Matth. 10.14. Whosoever shall not re∣ceive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house, or City, shake of the dust of your feet. This were the Apostles to do as a token of Gods shaking them off. Even as we read of
Nehemiah shaking his lap, Nehem. 5.13. Also I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his house, from his labour, that per∣formeth not this promise, even thus be he shaken out and emptied. Thus were the Apostles to shake off the dust of their feet against those that re∣jected them: Or to shake their garments at them. So did Paul against the Jews, Act. 18.5, 6. He preaching Christ unto them, when they opposed themselves and blasphemed, he shook his raiment, &c. Thereby intimating not onely his deserting, but Gods rejecting of them. Of such sad consequence is it for a people not to give entertainment to the Gospel, and the messengers thereof. This layeth them under a curse; rendring them justly obnoxious to the vengeance of God. I shall not dwell any lon∣ger upon Confirmation, or Illustration. Bring we it home to our selves by way of Applica∣tion. Applic. A just cause of mourn∣ing over this nation, the sleight entertain∣ment given to the Gos∣pel.Where (in the first place) see vve vvhat cause vve have to mourn and vveep over this Nation vvherein vve live, vvherein Christ and his Gospel have found such sleight and slender entertain∣ment as generally they have done, and yet do. A long time it is that the Gospel hath been held forth among us. Christ hath sent unto us his messengers, the Ministers of reconciliation, offering peace unto us upon Gospel tearms, upon our receiving him as our Saviour and Lord. But vvhat is the reception, vvhat is the entertainment that for the most part he hath
met with? Is it any more then a formal recep∣tion, a formal profession of his name? This indeed hath generally obtained. The name of Christ is called upon us. But is not this all? What is there more to be found among the grea∣test part, but a naked profession without any power? How few are there that have received Christ into their hearts? Truth is, our acknow∣ledgment of Christ hath been, and is generally more in Ceremony then in reality. Not unlike that of the Jews, many of which at his entrance here in to Jerusalem, were full of Ceremony and out∣ward expressions; They spread their garments in the way, as a Carpet for him to ride upon. They cut down branches of trees, and strowed the way with them, as tokens of festivity and solemnity. And they cry Hosanna; saluting him by the name of a Saviour. But yet they were far from taking him to be their King. No; when he was propounded to them under that notion, as he was by Pilate, John 19.14. the chief Priests make answer for the rest, we have no King but Caesar, vers. 15. And they who had even now cried out Hosanna, now change their note, crying out as loud Crucifige, Away with him, away with him, Crucifie him. And is it not so with the greatest part of this Nation? In a for∣mal way they have acknowledged Christ for a Saviour, complementing him with some Cere∣monial observances (such and no better have been the services which they have performed unto him, meer shadows without any substance)
but as for taking him to be their King, how are the greatest part resolved with those Citizens in the Parable, Luke 19.14. Nolumus regnare, we will not have this man to reign over us. Calling for deep la∣mentation.And O what a sad and deplorable thing is this! what cause have we to sit down and weep over England upon this account? This was the thing which belonged to our peace. Had we thus received Christ and his Gospel, had we yielded up our selvs to be governed and regulated by his Laws, how happy a people might we then have been? Then might we have hoped that God would have subdued our enemies, and turned his hand against our adversaries: Then had our race been as a river, and our righteousness as the waves of the Sea (as the divine Psalmist and Prophet have it in the places forecited, Psal. 81.13. Isaiah 48.18.) Then had there been peace within our wals, and prosperity within our Palaces. But sleighting and rejecting him, not submitting to his Government; not to his out∣ward Government (which the greatest part stand out against; having cast off those golden reines, they will not now endure any Government in the Church;) much less to his inward Govern∣ment, to rule in their hearts; what evil have we cause to fear? Nay, what may we not fear? In the fear of God let this be seriously laid to heart by every of us this day. We see how our blessed Saviour laid to heart this wretchlesness in Jerusalem. How he lamenteth over it, for it. O if thou hadst known the things which belong unto
thy peace! And have not we just cause to take up the like Lamentation over this Nation! O England! if thou hadst known in this thy day he things which belong unto thy peace, O how appy, how blessed hadst thou been! But now, what God intends towards thee, who knoweth? Should he remove thy Candlestick, take away he Gospel from thee, (which is cause enough o fear;) should he bring the like evils upon hee, as our blessed Saviour here threatens gainst Jerusalem; should he make our Houses, Cities, Temples, desolate; should he bring ut∣er desolation both upon Church and State; should he give a near and larger Commission to he Sword to eat flesh and drink bloud, second∣ng it with those ordinary attendants (which hrough a wonderful providence we have hi∣herto been freed from;) Famine and Pestilence, o sweeping us as dung off from the face of the earth, yet must we acknowledg the Lord to be just and righteous. In the humble acknowledgment whereof,Ʋse. 2. What to be done for the preven∣ting of judgment. ]  hic est uti∣nam. Gro∣tius ad loc. let all of us seriously set our selves for the diverting and preventing of these Judgments. To which end be we admonished and exhorted, yet to hearken to this wish in the Text. So some here ook upon the words in the Text, reading them Optatively, utinam nosses! O that, or would to God that thou hadst known! And O that England would yet hearken to this wish, so as to comply with it! Then which, what can be more de∣sirable for it? What those things are you
have heard; viz. to receive Christ and his Go∣spel; to give such entertainment to him and it as he requireth. Now let all of us, as we wish well to our own souls in particular, and to this Nation in general, seriously apply our selves hereunto. As yet through riches of grace the Gospel of peace is held forth unto us; As yet we enjoy the Ordinances of Christ, Word and Sa∣craments, with liberty and purity. O let us now make much of them, and make use of them: with holy care and conscience waiting and at∣tending upon them; thereby making it mani∣fest what esteem we have of them. Specially indeavouring to profit by them; to finde the power and life of them inwardly in our hearts in the changing and transforming them, and to express that power in the course of our lives and conversations by so walking as becometh the Gospel. So doing, now may we yet comfor∣tably hope that he who doth here so compas∣sionately mourn over a rebellious people reject∣ing him and his Gospel, will much more pitty spare a repenting people that is willing to hear∣ken to his voice; So pitty us, as to turn away those threatned evils, continuing the Gospel of peace, with the peace of the Gospel to us and our posterities after us, so long as the Sun and Moon endureth. Thus I have done with the substance of this Complaint, come we now to the circumstances; the AggravationsThe Ag∣gravations of this com∣plaint. Aggrava∣ton, 1. of this Evil. Which (as I shew∣ed you) are two, the Persons and Time. Begin with the former.
If thou hadst known,The Per∣sons. even thou] . Si vel tu nosses. Si cognovisses & tu. Not, If thou hadst even known] (as the former Translation renders it, putting the Emphasis upon the word, Known) but if even thou hadst known, with reference to the Persons, or Place. Even thou] Thou also (say some) thou Je∣rusalem, as well as others;Thou as well as o∣thers. Diodate An∣not. ad loc. as well as this poor troop of my Apostles and Disciples; or as di∣vers other lesser Cities and Villages have done; or as this company now doth, which acknow∣ledgeth me to be what I am, crying Hosanna; or as some other places heretofore have done; some of which have been so happy, as timely to take notice of what belonged to their peace. So did that great City Nineveh, at the preach∣ing of Jonah they repented, John 3.5. whose example elsewhere we finde propounded by our Saviour to the Jews, Mat. 12.41. The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment against this genera∣tion, and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonah. And the like had some other places and persons done. And O that Jerusalem had also done the like! If thou also hadst known! Thou as well as others. Or, Secondly, Thou rather then others.Thou, ra∣ther then others. So Cal∣vin, and divers other Expositors here conceive of it. As if our Saviour did here compare Jerusalem with other Cities of Judea; Yea with all other Cities of the whole world. All which Jerusalem excelled in respect of many
priviledges!] Vel tu urbs illa suprà omnes terrae urbes Deo dilecta, urbs David, urbs Regia, urbs sacris dicata. Grotius ad loc. Jerusalem a Non-such in respect of spiritual priviledges. This was the City of David, the Emperial City, yea the City of the great King, the City of God; a City beloved of God above all other places upon the earth; Coeleste in terris Sacrarium (as Cal∣vin saith of it) a heavenly Sanctuary upon earth; where God had be∣trusted his Oracles, his Ordinances; where he had manifested his presence after a special man∣ner, dwelling between the Cherubins, according to that of the Psalmist, Psal. 132.13, 14. For the Lord hath chosen Sion, he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell. Such was Jerusalem, Heavens favorite, Earths Non-such; a City paramount, preferred and advanced above all other Cities and places upon earth in respect of spiritual priviledges. And this our Saviour here taketh up as an Ag∣gravationAn Aggra∣vation. both of his Sorrow and her Sin. 1. Of his Sorrow.1. Of Christs sorrows. Even thou.] As for other places, other Cities, suppose Chorazin, Beth∣saida, Capernaum, the Gadarenes or Samaria, or the like, for any of these to perish and mis∣carry as they did, this were no other but a sad thing, deserving to be lamented over. But that Jerusalem should do so, this went nearer our Saviours heart then any other. Even as Brutus his stab did to Caesars, which made him cry out, , & tu Brute; what, thou my son, thou Brutus? Even so did Jerusalems ob∣stinacy and ingratitude here to our Saviour.
And thereupon he crieth out after the same manner. . Even thou.] Like as it is with a natural parent, he cannot but be offended with the miscarriage of any of his children, but that his darling, the son of his delights, whom he hath set his love upon and shewen most affe∣ction to, that he should miscarry, this goeth near him. So was it with Jacob, when he ap∣prehended some sad disaster to have befallen his son Ioseph, his dear son, the son of his age, to whom he had expressed more affection then the rest of his Brethren, (as appeared by his party coloured garment) this went near his heart, in∣somuch that he refused to be comforted, resolving to go down to the grave to him mourning, (as we have the story Gen. 37.3.35.) And so was Da∣vid affected with his Absolon; He being his darling, whom he had tendered and cockered, when he understood what a fatal end he by his Rebellion had brought himself unto, this makes David break forth into that passionate Lamen∣tation. O Absolon my son, my son, &c. 2 Sam. 19.4. Thus did Ierusalems carriage and miscar∣riage, her sin and punishment which our Saviour saw and foresaw; affect him more then if it had been any other place. O if even thou hadst known]. This was an Aggravation of his Sor∣row. 2. And so (secondly) of their Sin.2. Of her sin. This also our Saviour may well be conceived to insinuate in this passionate expression. If Even thou.] Thou which hast enjoyed such means, so many
mercies; that hast been lifted up to heaven, preferred before al places in the world in respect of spiritual favours and Gospel priviledges, that thou shouldest be thus stupid, thus blinde, as not to see, not to regard the things which be∣longed to thy peace and happiness, this renders thee of all others most miserable, and maketh thy ingratitude most superlative. So he here chargeth this upon them as a heinous aggrava∣tion of their Sin, calling for an answerable Iudg∣ment. Obser. Means and mercies not answe∣red, great aggravati∣ons of sin and judg∣ment.And so indeed it is, (as Calvin maketh the observation) the more means, the greater mercies a people enjoy, the greater is their sin, and the greater shall their punishment be, in case they do not walk answerably to them, and in some mea∣sure worthy of them. Mark it, this is the Obser∣vation which this passage naturally yieldeth; Means and Mercies, not regarded, not impro∣ved, not answered, are dreadful aggravations both of Sin and Judgment. For this, express and full is that obvious Text, Mat. 11.20. where our Saviour breaketh forth into a like Exprobration against those Cities which he had honoured with his presence and doctrine, as here he doth against Ierusalem. Then (saith the Text) began he to upbraid the Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repen∣ted not] verse 20. In the verses foregoing he had taxed the general morosity and frowardness of that people, upon whom no means could work, neither Iohns austerity nor his own Co∣mitie;
this he doth vers. 16, 17, 18, 19. But ow he cometh more specially to deal with those particular places, where he had been most conversant, taxing them as being most faulty of all the rest. Their sin was greater, and so should their punishment be. So it followeth, vers. 21. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes,] Cho∣razin and Bethsaida, two Cities upon the Lake of Gennezareth, where Christ conversed much, taught often, wrought many miracles; yet they repented not, they were not thereby wrought upon to imbrace the Gospel. What followeth? you have it in the next verse, v. 22. I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment then for you.] At the day of general Judgment, there shall be appointed unto men different measures of pu∣nishment. Now at that day, our Saviour gi∣veth them to take notice, that it would go worse with them, who had rejected the Gospel, then with those that never heard of it, though they lived more profanely then themselves did. and the like he chargeth against Capernaum in the verses following. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven (listed up above other places in this temporal condition, in regard of wealth &c.) shalt be brought down to hell] depressed, and brought to the lowest degree of poverty aad misery. So Grotius (not
amiss) expounds both these expressions, looking upon them as Proverbial phrases;Ad astra tolli. Sublimi feriens sy∣dera ver∣tice. the one signi∣fying the highest pitch of outward felicity, which is called a lifting up to heaven; the other the lowest degree of misery, which is called a cast∣ing down to hell. This the Prophet Isaiah spea∣king of Babylon, Isai. 14. describeth the change of her condition in the like langvage. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer; verse 12. Thou hast said in thine heart I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my self above the stars of God, verse 13. Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, verse 15. And so Hanna in her song, spea∣king of Gods various dispensations and dealings with the sons of men, she saith that he bringeth down to the grave (Sheol, (saith the Original) ad infernum, (to Hell) and lifteth up, 1 Sam. 2.6. In a like sense saith our Saviour here of Caper∣naum; though she was lift up to heaven, flouri∣shing with all kind of outward prosperitie, being a great Port Town, (not unlike unto this where we now are) famous for fishing, and other merchandize, yet she should be brought down to hell, brought to extremity of misery. Which accordingly afterwards came to pass in the days of the Emperour Vespasian, who over-ran the whole Countrey of Galilee, spoiling that place amongst others. And what was the cause of this so sad a change? why, her not answering the means afforded her; so it there followeth, verse 24. For if the mighty works which have been done in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained unto this day; (In all likelihood they would have been converted thereby from their wicked wayes, and so have escaped that judg∣ment;) But I say unto you it shall be more tolle∣rable for the land of Sodom in the day of Judg∣ment, then for thee, verse 24. Sodome, a place of monstrous and most flagitious wickedness, infa∣mously famous for those three things, Pride, fulness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness, Ezek. 16.49. besides many other horrid abominati∣ons which were therein, it being a sink of un∣cleanness, insomuch that God made it a specta∣cle of vengeance to all posterity, destroying it with fire and brimstone from heaven. Yet Ca∣pernaums portion of judgment at that day should be greater then hers. And why so? In∣asmuch as she enjoyed those meanes which Sodom did not. True, there was a righteous Lot in Sodom, whose Example might have had some influence upon them; But in Capernaum was Christ himself preaching unto them, and cofir∣ming his doctrine by miracles. And this it was which aggravated Capernaums sin, and so heightned her judgment. Thus the more light,The more light the greater sin. the more means a peo∣ple sin against, the greater is their sin. This is that our Saviour saith of the Jews, John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; that is, comparatively, their sin had been nothing in comparison of what now it is. Express to this purpose are those two known Texts of the Apostle to the Hebrews;
the former Heb. 2.2, 3. where comparing the times of the Law with those of the Gospel. If (saith he) the word spoken by Angels (the Law given upon mount Sina by the ministry of An∣gels, (as it is commonly expounded) or any other message sent by the Angels (as some conceive it) was steadfast (was of such force, and authority, that none who violated it escaped unpunished) and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward; How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first be∣gan to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed un∣to us by them that heard him,] that is, the doctrine of salvation, the Gospel, which is , the word of Salvation, Acts 13.26. being , the way of Salvation, Acts 16.17. bringing so great salvation as no other way can, even eternal salvation; which was preached and published first by Christ himself, then by his Apostles. This doctrine being of such con∣sequence, and so clearly held forth, it maketh the sin of those who shall not hearken to it to be more heinous then of those under the Law; for which they must expect an answerable judg∣ment. Consonant hereunto is that other place, Heb. 10.28, 29. He that despised Moses his Law died without mercy (the crime being Capi∣tal. and so declared by the Law, it was not in the power whether of King or Senate to pardon it;) Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the son of God, &c. and hath done despite to the Spirit of Grace? Thus sins against the Gospel
are greater and more heinous then those against the Law. The more light the more grace a man sinneth against, the greater is his sin, and the greater shall his punishment be. R:R. Grace abu∣sed a high contempt. And it must needes be so as Calvin giv∣eth the reason of it,) inasmuch as here is an addition of one sin which is greater then any of the rest, viz. Sacrilega caelestis gratiae profana∣tiò, a Sacrilegious profaning and abusing of the grace of God. Of all Sins none more heinous, none so heinous as this. This is the Attribute, which God is most tender of, his Grace; To have that sleighted, disregarded, trampled un∣der foote by a contemptuous disrespect, this is a heinous addition to all former sins and offences. As suppose a Malefactour standing guiltie of some capital crime, and adjudged to dye, should so far sleight the grace and favour of his Prince, as to reject his pardon being tendred to him, casting it away, and trampling it under his feete, so not accepting the benefit of it, who but would looke upon this as a high aggravation of his former offen∣ses, and adjudging him most worthy to die and perish in that his wilfull contempt, and refusall of mercy. Thus standeth the case. All the sonnes of men standing guilty before God by reason of Adams sin, and their own, and so obnoxious unto eternall death, it hath pleased God out of his abundant grace and mercy to grant a pardon to all those who
repenting of their sinns shall beleive on the name of his Son. This pardon he holdeth forth in the preaching of the Gospel. Now for any to sleight this Gospel, and the offer of grace and mercie in it, how can this be looked upon but as the highest contempt, and greatest in∣gratitude, against the Majestie of God, and as a dreadful addition to all other offences, so calling for a proportionable weight of Iudg∣ment? That it is so it cannot, (I presume) it will not be denyed. Bring we it home to our selves by way of Application.Applic. Let that be directed onely two waies, by way of Conviction, by way of Exhortation. 1. By way of Conviction, Reflect we upon our selves,Applicati∣on to the nation in generall. Jerusalem and Eng∣land para∣relled. In respect of spirituall privi∣ledges. we of this Nation, we of this place, in Ie∣rusalms glass beholding our own face; behold∣ing our ingratitude, our sin, what mercies, what favours, whether temporal, or spiritual, was Ie∣rusalem blessed with which England hath not been? Was Ierusalem lift up to heaven in re∣spect of Spiritual priviledges, hath not England been so? were the Oracles of God committed un∣to them, and have they not been so to us? was Christ clearly held forth unto them, & hath he not beene so unto us in the preaching of the Gospel, even evidently set forth, and crucified, before our eyes (as Paul tels his Galathians he was to them, Gal. 3). was Ierusalems light greater and clearer then that which shone upon other Cities, and hath not Englands light (I may speake it without flatterie) out shined
the light of any other Nation in the world? was God pleased to send a continued succession of Prophets and Apostles unto them, and hath he not done the like to us in this Nation, sent a succession of able and faithfull ministers to declare and make known his mind, and will to us? Thus hath England been exalted above other Nations in regard of special priviledges. To which also adde temporall favours,Temporall favours. which how many, how great? what nation under heaven might compare with England upon that account? what peace, what plenty of all things? what tranquillity and prosperity did England for many yeares together enjoy, to the wonder if not envie of most other nations. Thus was England for a long time the favour∣ite and darling of heaven, as Ierusalem. But now what returne hath she made of these mercies, these favours?Unanswer∣able re∣turnes. Is not that too like Ierusalems? Have we not generally beene an ungratful and rebellious people, as they were? A people that have not known the things which belong to our peace. Temporal, and Eter∣nall? A people which have not given that intertainment to Christ and his Gospell, that he expected. and other nations probably would have done? A people that have rather cast off the yoake of Christ, not induring his gover∣ment, any Goverment that lookes like his; And for our temporal mercies, our peace, our plenty, have we not been even forfeited with
them? have we not waxed wanton by their Abusing our peace to the making of us secure, setled upon our lees; abusing our plenty (as evill stomacks turne good meats into ill hu∣mours,) turning it into pride, Luxurie, riot, and Excess. Thus hath this nation under these long continued mercies been like unto a peice of ground, which being overmanured & grown too lustie, runs wilde, bringing forth a crop of weedes. Thus hath this abundance of mercies amongst us through the abuse of them brought forth abundance of sinnes. Neyther are we to this day bettered by all those sharpe rods, those severe corrections wherewith of late yeares God hath corrected us, but, Israel like, we even revolt more and more; as it were hating to be reformed. Such is the requitals such is the returne which England (I speake as to the grea∣test part therein) hath made unto her God. And what an Aggravation of her sin is this? That any nation should thus deal with their God,A great Ag∣gravation of Eng∣lands sin. to walk stubbornly and rebelliously against him, it is inexcusable; but that a people so fa∣voured, so honoured of God, as England hath been, should do this, this is a thing which God cannot but take more heynously at our hands, then at others. So the Lord maketh his com∣plaint concerning Israel Isaiah 1.2, 3. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The oxe knoweth his owner &c. But Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider. And may not he take up the like com∣plaint
against England? God hath nourished and tendred us as children, yet we have rebelled against him; England hath not known, England hath not considered. Now this he cannot but take worse at our hands, then at the hands of any other nation. ! And thou O England, that thou shouldest do this that thou shouldest make such a return to thy God, for all his mer∣cies and favours! This is an heinous aggravation of Englands sin. And aggravating the sinne,Threatning a proporti∣onable judgment. what can we ex∣pect but that it should also aggravate thy Judg∣ment? So it did Jerusalems here. Her sin being up∣pon this account greater then the sin of any other place, so was her Judgment (as the verses following set it forth.) No one place that the hand of God fell so heavy upon, as it did upon Jerusalem. And have not we of this nation just cause to fear the like; that in as much as our sins have exceeded the sins of other nati∣ons, our judgments should exceed also. And what is said of the Nation in general,Application to the Town of Yarmouth in special. let it be applied to this place in special. Upon which it cannot be denied, but God hath bestowed many singular mercies, both Spiritual and Temporal. Among other, preserving us in the midst of this late fiery furnace, which hath burnt so hot in most parts of the nation; to this day continuing our peace and liberty, not suffering the sword (though shakē over us) to break in upō us in an hostile way, as it hath don upon māy other Cities & Townes. Now shal we stil persist and go on in
our sinful provocations, in sleighting of Ordi∣nances, profaning Sabbaths, abusing creatures, &c. what can we expect but that as our sinnes upon this account shall be greater then the sins of other places, who have not enjoyed the like mercies, so should our judgments be. For the preventing of which suffer a word of Exhortation.Exhortati∣on. To in∣deavour an answerable return to mercies. All of us be we excited to indea∣vour an answerable return to the mercies and fa∣vours bestowed upon us. Publick mercies, Pri∣vate mercies; Spiritual, Temporal, Take notice of all, and study to answer all: Looking upon these differencing and distinguishing mercies, as so many obligations, and Engagements upon us, binding us to duty above others, let it be our care to walk answerably. In as much as God hath been pleased to exalt and prefer us above and before others, let it be our endeavour to go before others in all grateful and exemplarie obe∣dience. That so these blessings which through the mercy and goodnesse of our God we have, and do yet in so great a measure injoy, may not be (what otherwise they will) as so many testi∣monies against us, affording matter of a just Ex∣probration. Which is a sad thing, when God cometh to upbraid a people with his favours. Mark it. That is Jerusalems case, the Text, to whom our Saviour here speaketh (as both Cal∣vin and Beza (taking it from Budaeus) conceive of it) not onely by way of Commiseration,A sad thing for God to upbraid a people with his favours. but also of Exprobration. As pitying, so upbrai∣ding them. Pitying them in regard of the Ca∣lamitie
which he saw coming upon them, but withall upbraiding them with the mercies and favours which God had bestowed upon them above others, to which they had made a most unworthy return. Even thou!] Thou whom I have done thus and thus for; thou for whom I have done more then for any other place upon earth, O, it is a sad thing when God shall come thus to upbraid a people with his fa∣vours. A thing which he is not ready and forward to do. So much we may learn from St. James.A thing which he is not ready to do. Jam. 1.5. If any man lack wisedome, let him ask it of God, who giveth liberally, and upbraideth not; viz. those who receiving his blessings thankfully, indeavour to make a right use of them. But as for those who, being ungrateful for them, shall not walk in measure worthy of them, them he will upbraid, So he often doth ungrateful Israel; as elsevvhere, so Isaiah 5.1, 2. vvhere compa∣ring Israel to a vineyard,Yet being provoked by ingrati∣tude he will do it. he reckons up what offices he had done to it, in fencing, and plan∣ting, and mannuring of it, &c. accommoda∣ting it with all necessaries and conveniencies. And this he doth by way of exprobration, up∣braiding them with those favours for which they had made so ill a requital. And the like again Jer. 2.5. Thus saith the Lord, what ini∣quity have your fathers found in me? &c. Nei∣ther said they where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt; that led us through the wilderness. And so he goeth on, reckoning up
the many favours he had done for that Nation, which he doth in an upbraiding way; inasmuch as they had shewed themselves so ingrateful and forgetful as they had done. And the like doth our Saviour to those Cities in the Text fore∣named, Mat. 11.20. , He be∣gan to upbraid them.Be thank∣ful for, and walk wor∣thy of pub∣lick mer∣cies. O take we heed that we do not give God just cause to do the like by us. And therefore what special mercies and favours God is pleased to bestow upon us, take notice of them, be thankful for them, endeavour to walk worthy of them. This do we for publick. And this do we for private mercies.Private mercies. Is it so that God is pleased to bless any of us above other of our brethren in any kinde. Be it in our Bodies with health and strength; In our Estates, with larger portions of this worlds goods, advancing us above the common ranke; In our mindes, inriching us with inward gifts and indowments of wit, wisdome, knowledg, &c. O take we heed that these be not a matter of exprobration to us; that by our abusing of them, not improving them, not walking worthy of them, we do not give God just cause to up∣braid us with them. Considering that in this case every of these mercies will be as so many several aggravations of our ingratitude. This is that which the Lord by his Prophet Nathan tels King David, 2 Sam. 12.7, 8. Where recko∣ning up the many favours he had done, and was ready to do for him; how he had delivered him out of the hand of Saul, how be had set
him upon the Throne of Israel, giving him his Masters House and Wives, and the House of Israel and of Judah. And (saith he) if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things; then he cometh to expostulate the matter with him, why he should so deal by his God as he had done. Wherefore hast thou despised the Commandement of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? Thus God taketh the sins of his favourites more unkindly then the sins of any other. And therefore, is it so that God hath indeared any of us to himself by any special favours, wherein he hath preferred us before others, let us be so much the more watchful & careful over our walkings, that so he may never take up the like complaint against us, as our Saviour here doth against Jerusalem; O that thou, even thou shouldest do thus and thus! This it was that David took most heinously, that his favourites and familiars should prove treacherous to him, Psal. 41.9. Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lift up his heel against me.] Some of his Courtiers & friends. Which our Sa∣viour applieth unto Judas's dealing with himself. Joh. 13.18. He that eateth bread with me hath lift up his heel against me.] This did exceedingly ag∣gravate Judas's sin. Had some of the Scribes or Pharisees done what he did, it had been no strange thing. But that Judas should do it; one whom Christ had so far honoured as to admit him to so near an attendance upon his person, to
make him one of his Privy Counsel (as it were) this highly aggravated his offence. O take heed lest the like aggravation lie against any of us. And therfore, the more gracious God hath been or shall be to any of us, let us be the more grate∣ful, the more watchful, the more careful to walk worthy of his mercies. I have done with the for∣mer of these Circumstances, these Aggravations. Second Ag∣gravation, from the time.Come we now to the latter, which is taken from the Time, and the Season, [In this thy day.] Q. And what is here meant by Jerusalems day? The word (Day) ex∣plained.A. Day in Scripture it hath divers senses and significations. Literally and properly we meet with a Natural day, and an Artificial day. The one consisting of twenty four hours, the Suns Revolution; the other of the time of light, from morning to evening. Both which we finde in that one verse, Gen. 1.5. And God called the light day, and the darkness he called night. And the evening and the morning were the first day. By the first understanding the Artificial day, by the latter the Natural. But to let these pass as nothing to our purpose. Tropically and improperly the word is divers∣ly used. 1. Sometimes for the time of mans life, that space which he liveth upon earth. Your father Abraham rejoyced to see my day (saith our Sa∣viour to the Jews) John 8.56. the time of my manifestation in the flesh, and abode upon earth. I must work the work of him that sent me whilest
is day, John 9.4. that is, whilest I live here upon earth. 2. Sometimes it denotes the time of grace un∣der the Gospel. So the Apostle is conceived to use the word Rom. 13.12. where he saith, The night is far spent, the day is at hand.] The night, the time of the Law, which was a time of dark∣ness and Ignorance, wherein spiritual and hea∣venly mysteries were all clouded and vailed un∣der shadows and figures. In opposition there∣unto the time of the Gospel is called, the Day, in regard of the clear manifestation of the grace of God, and of the mysterie of salvation to all sorts, not onely to Jews but Gentiles, And so that other Text of the same Apostle is looked upon, 1 Thes. 5.5. Ye are the children of the day; living in Gospel times. As also that other pro∣phetical Text, Heb. 4.7. To day if ye will hear his voice, (saith David speaking of the time of the Gospel, as it is there expounded.) 3. Sometimes it denotes any special opportu∣nity, apt and proper season for any transaction. So that forenamed Text may be understood, John 9.4. I must work whilest it is day; that is, whilest I have opportunity. And so that o∣ther. To day if ye will hear his voice; whilest the time and season of grace lasteth, whilest sal∣vation is offered. 4. And lastly, by Day sometimes we are to understand a set time determined and appointed by God for some special purpose. In this sense we find the word frequently used by the Prophets.
Jerusalems Day, what, the time of special grace.And in these two last senses understand we the word here in the Text. Jerusalems Day was the time destinated and foreappointed by God, and foretold by the Prophets, wherein the light of the Gospel should shine forth unto her, and that more clearly then ever heretofore, and the offer of grace and mercy should be held forth unto her after a special manner. Of this day, this time, the Prophets make frequent mention. As the Prophet Isai. chap. 60.1. Arise, shine (or be enlightned) for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. So Zachary 9.9. Rejoyce greatly O daughter of Sion, for thy King cometh unto thee. Both which had their accomplishment in the coming of Christ in the flesh; and particularly in his coming to Jerusa∣lem at this time, in this manner, presenting him∣self to it as a King. So he himself applies the lat∣ter of these Texts, Matth. 21.4, 5. And here∣upon is this here called Jerusalems day; the day that had been so often foretold; the time wherein God did offer grace and mercy to her after a more special manner then ever he had done heretofore. Before he had often made of∣fers of that kind unto her (as to the whole Na∣tion of the Jews) by sending his Prophets to her. But now he doeth it by his Son. So our Saviour sets it forth in that known parable of the Vineyard, Matth. 21.33, &c. A certain man planted a vineyard.] This vineyard was the Church of the Jews (Isaiah 5.1.) whom God took to be a peculiar people to himself, perfor∣ming
like offices thereunto that the Husband∣man would do to his vineyard. Being thus planted he let it forth to husbandmen, and went himself into a far Countrey;] God seemed to leave that Church wholly to the care of the Priests. In process of time he sends his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits thereof, verse 34.] God sends his Pro∣phets to this Church, whom (by the Parable goeth on) they beat and slew, vers. 35. So they did the former Prophets many of them. Againe he sent other servants, moe then the first, and they did unto them likewise, verse 36. Before the Captivity he sent more Prophets to them then formerly, who found no better entertainment then the former. But last of all he sent unto them his son, verse 37. God the Father sends his Son Christ into the world, with a special messuage unto the Jews, to require from them the fruits of all that grace and favour which had been shewen to them. And this was Jeru∣salems day. The time of special grace and mercy offered unto them after a special manner. and that by Christ himself, wherein she had a special opportunity tendered unto her, if she had but had the wisdome to accept it, to lay hold of it, and make use of it accordingly. Even the time of her visitation, as the 44th verse after the Text explains it. But, hinc illae lachrymae, this was a matter of just lamentation. The day was come, and even now spent, but Hierusalem had not an eye
to see it, a heart to make use of it. And this i is which our Saviour here bewailes in them, and exprobrates to them; pities them for, and up∣braids them with. O if thou, even thou hadst known, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace.] At least] what it here im∣porteth.At least] There is yet a further Emphasis in that Interjection. . Et quidèm in hâc die tuâ (saith the vulgar) even in this thy day. Hoc saltem tuo die (saith Beza, whom our Translations follow) At least in this thy day] that is; though thou hast along time stood it out, refusing and rejecting many offers of grace, yet O that at the length thou wer't wise! Or [If at least] If after that thou hast slain so many Prophets, so many servants of mine, which have been sent unto thee with conditions of peace, yet thou wouldest receive me their Master, hearkning to the message which I bring. Or, [at least] If after all the unkinde and ungrateful repulses which my self hath hitherto met with, by thy obstinate reje∣cting of my Person and Doctrine, yet if now at the length in this my last Expedition, the last journey that ever I shall make unto thee, the last time of asking, now at the day of grace and salvation as to thee is expiring. If now at last thou mightest yet know &c. Thus our Saviour here maketh use of this circumstance as a further aggravation both of his sorrow, and their sin, their stupidity and obstinacy; that in this day of grace, wherein God was pleased to make such
a gracious offer of mercy to them, they should yet stand it out to the last, so neglecting and letting slip the present opportunity, (as they had done many other) by the imbracing where∣of they might yet have been happy. So sad a thing it is for a people not to take notice of the seasons of grace and mercy vouchsafed unto them,Obs. Not to take notice of the sea∣sons of grace, a sad thing. for their spiritual and temporal felicity and welfare, so as to make a wise use and improvement of them. This our Saviour here so sadly lament∣eth in Jerusalem. And this we shall finde the Lord elsewhere sadly complaining of in this people, the people of the Jews. As Jeremy 8.7. Yea the storke in the heavens knoweth her ap∣pointed times, and the turtle, and the crane, and the swallow observes the time of their coming, but my people know not the judgments of the Lord.] Those poor creatures, (with many other) meer∣ly by a natural instinct, they observe the times and seasons of the year, and so order their going and coming accordingly; but that people knew not the judgment of the Lord, they tooke no no∣tice of the seasons of mercy and judgment; they saw not the judgements of God hovering over their heads, that so they might use timely means for the diverting of them. And this the Lord there chargeth upon them as gross stupidi∣ty. And the like regardlesness of seasons and opportunities, and the workings and dispensa∣tions of Providence, he elsewhere complains of against them, for by the same Prophet, Jer. 5.4. Surely these are poor, they are foolish, for they
know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment o of their God. And by the Prophet Isaiah the like, Isai. 5.11, 12. Where he denounceth a woe upon that people for not regarding the wor of the Lord; not considering the operation of hi hands; they had no regard of providential dis∣pensations; no regard of times and seasons whether of mercy or judgment. This is a gros and deplorable stupidity; a just ground both of Lamentation and Exprobration. This is th thing which our Saviour upbraideth the Phari¦sees and Sadduces with. They were curious ob∣servers of times and seasons in natural things, but in spiritual and heavenly they were altoge∣ther stupid. So he telleth them, Matth. 16.2, 3. When it is evening ye say it will be fair weather, because the skie is red, &c.] They were very observant of the usual prognosticks of fair or foul weather, they could discern the face of th skie. But (saith he) can ye not discern the signs of the times.] they were not so wise as to take notice of the choisest times and seasons, such as that then was, being the time of the Messias his comming unto them. So Saint Luke hath it (as the Syriack also rendreth that of Saint Mat∣thew) Luke 12.56. How is it that ye do not dis∣cern this time?] This time of grace, wherein the promised Messia cometh unto you, whom you profest to have so long looked and waited for; and which the Prophets have so clearly pointed out to you, and is now evidenced unto you by so many manifest signs and tokens, as
were you not wilfully blinde, you could not but see this to be that time. This he chargeth them with, as grosse stupiditie. And so indeed it is, when men shall not take notice of the accepted time, the day of salvation; not see what belongeth to their peace in their day, in the times and seasons of Grace which God vouch∣safeth unto them. Especially when God is pleased to manifest and make known his minde and will to them after a more clear and evident manner.Especially when more clearly held forth. That was Jerusalems case here in the Text. God had made known to them the things belonging to their peace formerly; he had sent his Prophets to them from time to time for that purpose; but now he did it more clearly, by sending his Son to speak to them, to tender himself to them in person. Now this rendred their neg∣lect and contempt a great deal more heinous and inexcusable; that even in this their day they should not know, &c. For them to have been ignorant hereof at any time heretofore under the Law, had been inexcusable, but much more under the Gospel. Even as for men to stumble in the twilight, it argueth heedles∣nesse; but much more to stumble at noon-day (as the Prophet speaketh of Israel in another sense, Isa. 59.10). Thus where God is plea∣sed to afford men but a little light, (such as that was under the Law, which Saint Peter compareth to a Candle, a Light shinning in a dark place (as that place is by some expoun∣ded)
2 Pet. 1.19.) for men not to give heed unto that light, and take notice of the minde of God which is held forth by it, is a great neglect; but when the day-star ariseth, a clear light breaketh forth, such as Gospel-light is; now for men to shut their eies against the light, or not to make use of it by walking an∣swerably to it, this is an high contempt, of which Calvin here saith rightly, Contemptum manet severior vindicta; it hath a greater ven∣geance waiting upon it, then if it were a sim∣ple neglect. That it is so, I presume, it will not be questioned. Bring we it home by way of Application, which I shall direct (as formerly) onely by way of Conviction and Exhortation.Applic. Use 1. A just Ex∣probation to many.First by way of Conviction, how many are there who lie open to this just Exprobration? They have not known, they do not know, even in this their day, the things that belong to their peace. Not to speak of others; bring we it home to our selves, and see whether the charge do not lie too justly against many of us. None of us but have had our Day, a day of grace and salvation, a time which God hath allotted unto us to look out for our spi∣ritual and eternal welfare; which to some of us hath been a Summers-day, a long day. And not onely a long, but a clear day wherein God hath vouchsafed to us the means of grace and salvation in a comfortable manner, causing the light of his truth to shine forth most clear∣ly unto us. And yet how many of us are there
of whom it may bee too truly said, That yet even in this our day we have not known the things which belong unto our peace, to our eternal peace and happinesse. But still we remain in our natural blindnesse, and ignorance, and unbelief having made little or no improve∣ment of these precious times and means. Nay, notwithstanding God hath come un∣to some of us after a more special manner, come near unto us in a more clear manifesta∣tion of his Will to us by some special provi∣dences, visiting us with special mercies, or special chastisements, thereby calling us unto Repentance, yet have we not known the time of our visitation. Now what stupiditie, what blindnesse, what regardlesnesse, what wretchlesnesse is this? A heavie aggravation of our sin for present, and (if not timously prevented) of our judg∣ment for future. So doth many a soul in hell at this day finde and feel it; over whom (if it would any waies profit or advantage them) we might justly weep and lament, as our Sa∣viour doth herein the Text; O! if they had known in their day the things which belonged unto their peace, how happie, how blessed might they have been? But now how wretched, how miserable? these things being now for ever hid from their eies. Time was when they had their Day, they had their time of grace, where∣in they injoied the means of salvation, so as had they but had the wisedom to have made
use of them; happie, happie had they been to all eternitie. But letting slip that time, neg∣lecting those means, trifling away, that Day, now the night is come upon them, even a night of blacknesse and darknesse, an ever∣lasting night, so as the Sun shall never rise unto them again; they are put into a hopeless, helpless and remediless condition. Not ma∣king use of the light whilest they injoied it, they are now (as Saint Peter saith of the Apostate Angels, 2 Pet. 2 4. Cast down to Hell, and deli∣vered into chains of darknesse, to be reserved un∣to judgment. Such is their condition now. Use 2. All exhor∣ted to know what be∣longeth to their hap∣piness, in their day.Which that it may never be ours, give way to a word of Exhortation. Every of us suffer our selves to be awakened and stirred up to take notice of our day, and so to take notice of it, that therein we may see and know the things which belong unto our peace, to our welfare and happinesse, and that both tempo∣ral and eternal. 1. Temporall hapiness of the Na∣tion.1. For our Temporal happinesse. O! that we and all others in this Nation were but yet so wise, as in this our day to know the things belonging thereunto; so to know them as that we might complie with them. What be∣longeth thereunto.Q. But here (it may be) some of you will be ready to ask me, What are these things? A. A Question not unuseful. In the reso∣lution whereof I shall give you no other dire∣ctions then what the Text it self giveth me the hint of.
1. Seek Peace it self;1. Seek peace it self. I mean external peace. It is not for nothing (as I told you) that Peace is here, and so often elswhere in phrase of Scripture, put for prosperity and happinesse. Peace, as in it self it is one of the chief bles∣sings upon earth, one chief part of this exter∣nal happinesse, so it is a thing which doth much conduce to the compleating of it. As War maketh a people miserable; so Peace hap∣pie, making them flourish in all kinde of out∣ward blessings. And upon this account seek we after this Peace, making this our Motto, Pacem te poscimus omnes; all of us seriously de∣siring and indeavoring after peace. 1. Civil Peace; the Peace of the State.1. Civil peace It is the Prophet Jeremies Counsel to the Cap∣tives in Babylon, that they should seek the peace thereof, Jer. 29.7. Seek the peace of the Citie, whither I have caused you to be carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace thereof shall yee have peace. And the like do we for Englands Pray for the Peace of it. Upon that depends her welfare and happi∣nesse. Divisions hastened Jerusalem ruine. O! pray that Englands divisions may not do the like to her. Seek the peace of the State, Civil peace. 2. And as Civil, so Ecclesiastical,2. Ecclesiasti∣cal peace. the peace of the Church, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Psal. 122.6. Peace be within the walls, and pro∣speritie within thy palaces, ver. 7. Upon Jeru∣salems peace depended the peace of the whole
Nation of the Jewes. And surely upon the Churches peace in a great measure depends the peace of this Nation. And therefore seek after this peace; seek it from God; being earnest with him that he would heal our breaches, gi∣ving one heart and way to his people. And pro∣mote it by all holy waies and means. But I shall not dwell upon this which I do but meet with by the by, taking the hint from the word in the Text. For the procuring the welfare of this Nation, seek Peace it self. 2. Embrace the Gospel of Peace.2. And (Secondly) be we sons of Peace. It is the direction which our Saviour giveth to his Disciples when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel (in that fore-cited Text) Luk. 10.5, 6. Into whatsoever house yee enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it.] The Son of peace, , that is, (as before I have explained it) such persons as were disposed to receive and imbrace the Doctrine of Peace, the Doctrine of the Gospel; where they met with such persons, there their Peace should rest; all the happinesse which they had wished to them, should come upon them. Now would we in like manner that that peace which is to be wished unto this Nation might thus rest up∣on it; be we in this sense , Sons of Peace, readily imbracing this Doctrine of peace, the Gospel. This it was (as I have shewen you) which above all other things belonged to Jerusalems peace, her receiving of Christ and
his Gospel. Had she but done this, happie had she been. That England may be so, have we a regard unto this. In this our day make much of God's Religion, make much of the Gospel, which as yet through the goodnesse of God is continued unto us. Let that at the length find such entertainment amongst us as it deserveth. Let the Messengers thereof be received. Let their feet be accounted (as they are said to be, Isa. 52.7.) Beautiful, which bring good tidings, which publish peace. This do the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who are Messengers of peace, bringing those glad tidings of peace and re∣conciliation with God through Christ, pub∣lishing salvation O! let their feet be beautiful. Let their persons be welcom, much more their message. While you receive them into your houses, receive that into your hearts; shewing forth the power of it in your lives and conver∣sations, by so walking as becometh the Go∣spel. In this way seek we the External peace, welfare and happinesse of this Nation. However, in this our day,Use 3. Spiritual and Eter∣nal Peace to bee sought a∣bove all, and that whilest the Day of Grace last∣eth. seeke wee our owne peace, Eternall peace; being all of us wise for our selves, so wise as in this our day, to know what belongeth to our peace; the peace and happiness of our own soules, our eternall salvation. As yet through the mercie and goodnesse of God our day is continued to us. The day of our lives. Whereas the Sun is set upon many others be∣fore our eyes: every day it goeth down upon some or other of our brethren, our Relation,
our friends, our associates, and Companions. It is night with them. It is yet day with us. And as the day of our lives, so the day of grace and salvation is yet continued to us; Yet doth the Sun of righteousnesse stand over our heads; yet doth the light of the Gospel shine forth unto us; yet is the Golden scepter of grace and sal∣vation held forth unto us; our day is yet conti∣nued. Oh that in this our day, whil'st the meanes of grace are continued unto us, and we to the meanes, we might all of us see and know the things which belong unto our peace. Which word of Exhortation I desire it may come home to everie soule that heareth it. It may bee (and I feare it is so,) some and many of us have a long time shut our eyes against the light; we have not seen; we do not to this day see these things which do so narly concern us: How many offers of grace and mercie have we sleighted and rejected? God hath offered conditions of peace to us, intreating, beseech∣ing us by his Ministers to be reconciled unto him; striving with us by mercies, by chastise∣ments, by word, by the secret motions of his own Spirit. And yet for all this we still stand out against him, harden our hearts against him, so as we wil not receive Jesus Christ upon Gospel tearms, as our Saviour and Lord. Now unto all such be it spoken in the lan∣guage of the text. Oh that you even you, at least in this your day, did but know the things which belong unto your peace! How ever you
have most rebelliously and ingratefully with∣stood many offrs of grace, yet that now at the length, whil'st this day of grace last's, be∣fore the Sun set upon you, and your eyes be closed up with everlasting darkness, you would come in & accept of these offers of grace, not standing out any longer. To that end consider, first,Motives: that the time of your life, and of Gods grace, is but a day.1. The time of mans life and Ggds grace but a day. [This your day]. A day is of no long continuance, spe∣cially a winters day. A few houres the Sun is above the Horizon, but then it setteth, and leaveth a sable darknesse upon the face of the earth. Such is the life of man, a day; and that (to make the best of it) a winters day; stormy and short. Brethren the time is short (saith the Apostle, speaking of the time of mans life upon earth) 1 Cor 7.29. How short who knoweth? oftimes doth the Sunn go down upon man before it be well up. Oh therefore now up and be doing? The day is a time for Action, the night for rest. Man goeth forth unto his work, and to his labour untill the evening, Psal. 104:23. And so is the day of this life. This is the time for the working out of our salvation. And therefore now set upon this work. I must work the works of him that sent me whil'st it is day (saith our Saviour in that John 9.4.), the night cometh when no man can work. The night of death. There is no worke, nor device, nor know∣ledge, nor wisedome in the grave, whither thou go∣est (saith the Preacher) Eccles. 9.10. And there∣fore
(as he there maketh the use of it.) what∣soever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might. Thus do we the work of the particular cal∣ling, much more of the generall; the working out of our salvation, the making of our Cal∣ling and Election sure. This do we? and that in this our day. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, whil'st the day of life, and the day of grace lasteth; Behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, (saith the Apostle to his Corinthians) 2 Cor. 6.2. And therefore (as he there presseth it upon them ver. 1. Let not us receive the grace of God in vain. This do they who injoy the outward meanes of salvation, but are not bettered by them; like the earth which receiveth the seed which is cast into it by the hand of the Hus∣bandman, and drinketh in the former and latter rain, and yet remains barren; Let not us so receive the grace of God tendred and held forth unto us in the preaching of the Gospel. But let it into our hearts, that taking root there it may bring forth Gospel-fruits in our lives. And this do we now; Now whil'st it is called to day. Remembering that the time of grace, and of our life, is but a day. 2. Our Day.2. And (secondly) remember that this is our day. [In this thy day.] This was Jerusalems day, the Jews day wherein grace and mercie was offered unto them. The next was the Gen∣tiles day; or the next was Gods day, wherein he would visit them after another manner, in
judgment, not in mercy. And therefore saith our Saviour here. Oh if at least in this thy day! And hear we him speaking the like to every of us this day. Oh that you in this your day! The time of this life is our day; A day that hath no morrow. And the time of grace is our day. Shall we let slip this day, then expect we God's day, even that diem ultionem, the day of vengeance. Such days our Saviour foretelleth were coming upon the Jewes, Luke 21.22. These be the dayes of vengeance; speaking of the time of Jerusa∣lems destruction, wherein the Lord would se∣verely revenge all those indignities offered to his Son. And such dayes of vengeance God hath for all obstinate sinners. It may be in this life: If not, yet at that last day, which wil be a day of blacknesse and darknesse, a day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Now knowing the terrour of that day, Oh! that all of us would be perswaded now in this our day to look out, to take notice of what belongs to our peace and comfort at that day. This is our day,3. But one day. a time allotted us by God for this purpose, to husband for the good of our souls. And 3ly this is but one day. As for the Labouring-man he hath many dayes allowed him to do his work in. And so, if he have lost one, he may yet recover it, get it up again at an∣other time. But as for us, we have but one day. If that day be past, there is no recovery. Soles occidere & redire possunt; The Sunn setteth and riseth again upon the earth. But if the Sunn of
our life, and the Sun of God's grace be once set upon us, never look that it should rise upon us again. O! therefore, in the fear of God, be wee all of us awakened, and stirred up, that we may not sleep nor trifle away this our day, either in doing of nothing, or that which is worse, Remember that upon this our day de∣pends our Eternitie. And therefore now whil'st it is called to day, all of us look out to what belongs to our eternall peace. Behold, at this day the Lord Jesus is riding in triumph in the midst of his Ordinances, as here he did to Jeru∣salem, in the midst of his Apostles and Disciples; O that there were such a heart in every of us! that wee might now Lift up, set open those ever∣lasting doors, the doors of our souls that this King of Glorie might enter in; that the Lord Jesus might come and take a full possession of all our hartes, so as to rule thereby his Word & Spirit. Then quàm faelices & beati, how blessed and happie shall wee be? Such use make wee of this Generall day, this day of Grace. Particular days in the general day.Wherein there are also particular days, particular times and seasons, in which Christ cometh unto men (as here he did to Jerusa∣lem), offering himselfe to them after a more speciall manner. This is that which he tells the Laodicean Angel. Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the doore and knock. So he doth at the doors of mens Consciences, where he knocketh both by Outward means, by his Word, by mercies & Chastisements, every of which is a knock at
this door; and by inward motions of his Spi∣rit. Now is it so that Jesus Christ thus knock∣eth at any of our hearts, at this, or at any other time; let us forthwith open unto him. That is the meaning of every such knock. It is the voice of my beloved that knocketh (saith the Spouse) saying open unto me, Cant. 5.2. And this doe we, receiving him into our hearts by Faith, that he may dwel theare as a Saviour & a Lord. And this do wee forthwith. Not know∣ing but this may be the last knock (as this was the last time that ever our Saviour knock∣ed at Jerusalem's gates): which if it be and shall be sleighted, then what remaines but a just retaliation, even that which we meet with Luke: 13, 25. That the doore being shut, wee should stand without and knock, receiving no o∣ther Answer but that which is there returned, I know yee not, whence ye are. Or that which wee finde in the close of the Text, that the things which belong to our peace should be from thence∣forth hid from our eyes. So it followeth. But now they are hid from thine eyes].Jerusalems doom. In which words wee have Jerusalem's Doom, or Judgment, (the spirituall part of it, for that onely I intend to deal with). A Judgment answearing to their sinn. Their Sinn was, that they had not seene, they would not, when they might; Their judgment is, that as they did not, so should not see what they might have done, But now they are hid from thyne eyes] Q. But what was thus hid?
Vide Ger∣hardi Har∣mon. ad loc.A. . It is hidden. A verbe of the Singular number; admitting (say some) of a two-fold reference. Either to what went be∣fore, or what followeth after. Judgment hidden from Jeru∣salems eies.1. To what followeth after. So it is looked upon by some, as relating to what our Saviour in the subsequent verses foretelleth concerning the finall destruction and desolation of Jeru∣salem. The daies shall come upon thee, &c.] This was hid from their eyes. A truth. It was so, and that through their incredulitie. Often had they heard the judgments of God denounced against them, as by the Prophets, so by Christ himselfe, but they gave no credit to what they heard. Their eyes being blinded with their present temporall prosperitie, and with the spiritual privileges which they then injoying, looked upon as intailed upon them and their posteritie, they were readie rather to make a mock of all threatnings of that nature. Flat∣tering themselves, even as Babylon is said to do, Isa. 47.8. which said in her heart, I am, and none else besides me (she was a Nonsuch), I shall not sit as a Widow, neither shall I know the loss of Children. Thus did Jerusalem; what ever was told her, by whomsoever, yet shee did not, shee would not beleeve that ever such a change should happen unto her. This was hid from her eyes. And even this was a sad thing, deserving to be lamented over, in as much as hereby their condition was rendred the more desperate. But I shal not insist upon this.
2.Things be∣longing to Jerusalems happinesse hid from her eies. More properly these words are con∣ceived to look backwards, relating to what went before. And so much those particles doe intimate unto us; [But now], as looking back to the words precedent. If thou hadst knowen, even thou, at least in this thy day the things which belong to thy peace? But now they are hid from thine eyes; viz. the things them∣selves, or the knowledge of those things. Q. But how is this here said to be hid from their eyes? A. Why, it was so for the Present,And that both for the present and future. and it was so for the future. For the present, they did not see it; for the future, they should not see it. Q. But how came it thus to be hid? A. Hereof a double ground or Reason may be assigned. 1. Their owne willfullnesse 2.The groūd thereof double. God's righte∣ous judgment. Through the former it was, that they did not see, and through the latter it was they should not see what belonged to their peace. Upon these two I shall insist se∣verally. 1. This was hid from their eies,1. Their own wilfulness. through their own wilfulnesse. They would not see what belonged to their peace, their temporal and eternal happinesse. Notwithstanding that it had been clearly revealed and held forth unto them, yet they shut their eies against the Light. This is that which our Saviour char∣geth upon this people, the people of the Jews
in that known place, Joh. 3.19. Light is come into the world, but men loved darknesse rather then light. So was it with the generalitie of that Nation. Christ, who was the light of the world, he was come into the world, and in particular come unto them, declaring and making known to them what belonged to their peace. But they loved darknesse, the dark∣nesse of sin and ignorance, preferring it before the heavenly light of Divine Truth, which shone forth unto them. Such was their obsti∣nacie, that they even closed their eies, and would not see. So our Saviour himself sets it forth, Mat. 13.14. where citing the prophe∣cie of the Prophet Isaiah, he sheweth how it was verified in that people of the Jews in his time. In them (saith he) is fulfilled the pro∣phesie of the prophet Isaias, which saith, Behold, hearing yee shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing yee shall see, and shall not perceive. (though they daily heard the Word, & saw the Works of Christ with their bodily ears & eies, yet they did not believe him, or in him). How so? The reason followeth in the next verse. For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eies they have closed; lest they should at any time see with their eies, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, &c. Such was the wilful ob∣stinacie of that people, that they even stopped their ears against the Word of Christ, and clo∣sed their eies against his Works, they would
not see what belonged to their peace; and in this way it came to be hid from their eies. And this our Saviour here taketh up as a just mat∣ter of Lamentation to him, and Exprobration to them; bewailing them for it, and upbraiding them with it. And so it is,Obs. Wilful ig∣norance a∣sad and sin∣full thing. Wilful ignorance is a matter of just Lamentation, and Exprobration to a people. So our Saviour here taketh notice of it in Jerusa∣lem. But now these things are hid from thine eye. Hoc non dicitur ad levandam Hierosolymae cul∣pam (saith Calvin upon it.) our Saviour doth not speake this any wayes to excuse, or exe∣nuate Jerusalem's fault, but to aggravate and highten it. Such is wilfull and affected igno∣rance. True indeed, as for simple ignorance, where men are ignorant through the want of the meanes of knowledge, that excuseth a tan∣tô, in part. The servant which not knowing his Masters will, did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes (saith our Saviour in the Parable) Luke 12.48. In as much as he should have known it, and might have known it, had he enquired after it, (which he ought to have done,) therefore his ignorance doth not wholly excuse him, yet being an extenuation of his fault, it is so also of his punishment. Simple ignorance of the minde and wil of God as concerning what we do or beleive, is no just plea for any, no just excuse, in as much as they are by duty bound
to know it, & might know more of it then they do, were they not wanting in the inquiry af∣ter it. But wilful affected ignorance, when men re∣fuse to know, close their eyes against the light, & stop their eares against instruction, shutting it out of their souls, this is an high aggravation of the sin and punishment of those that are guilty of it. R. And well may it so be looked upon, in as much as it is not a meer neglect,R. Being a contempt against God. but carri∣eth a contempt with it. Now we know wih what an eye Contempts are looked upon in the Courts of men upon earth. When men refus to take notice of their Orders and decrees, this is highly taken as being an affrnt to the Court, and the offendors are severey proeed∣ed against. And so is it in the Court of heaven; when men shall refuse to take notice of the minde and will of God clearly intimated un∣to them, this being a contempt, an affront to heaven, God cannot but take it highly at the hands of those that are guilty of it, and make them know that he doth so. So much we have fully expressed in thoe words of Wisdome, Prov: 1.24. Because I have called and ye have refused &c. ye have set at nought all my counsell, and would none of my repoof; I will laugh at your calamity &c. And again vers. 29, For that they hated knowledge &c. Therefore shall they eat the fruit of their own ways &c.] Of such dangerous and desparate consequence, is it to shut out
any beam of divine light, out of the soul,To close the eyes a∣gainst Gos∣pel-light a-high con∣tempt. to stop the ear against any word of God. Specially when men shall close their eyes a∣gainst Gospel-light, stop their ears against the word of life, the word of grace and salvation. This was Jerusalems case here. She did not, she would not know the things belonging to her eternal peace, notwithstanding he who was the Prnce and Lord of peace, the great Peace-maker, the Son of God himself came to preach peace unto them, to shew them what it was that was of so great concernment to them, yet they would not hearken to him. And by reason hereof these things were now hid from their eyes. And upon this account the Lord Jesus, as a tender hearted Saviour, here so passionatly weepeth over them. And surely of all things that can happen unto man upon earth, there is no one thing more de∣plorable then this, when men are thus wil∣fully blinde, obstinately ignorant. And (to make some Application of this Branch) Is not this the case of too many a¦mong our selves at this day.Applica. Too many among our selves guilty hereof. Alass, how many such poor ignorant souls are every where to be found? Men and women willingly and wil∣fully ignorant of what concerneth their eter∣nall peace. They cannot say it is for want of light that the are blind; that they do not see. No, the light of the Gospel hath for a long time shone forth unto them. They have been
born and brought up in Gospel-times and places; where they have injoyed the meanes of grace and salvation in a plentiful manner: So as in this respect they may be called Chil∣dren of the light, and Children of the day. And yet for all that they walk in darkness; the things which belong unto their eternall peace are hid from their eyes. They do not see, be∣cause they will not see. They have no desire to be acquainted with the mysteie of salvation; and so continue strangers to it. A most deplo∣rable state and condition. So let it be looked upon by others; by those whose eyes God hath opened to see what they do not.A thing to be lament∣ed by o∣thers. Whil st they see these things hid from them which God hath revealed to themselves, let them, (blessing God for this his free grace which hath caused them thus to differ) in imitation of their blessed Saviours pittie and compassionate this their wilful obstinacie and blindnesse. This we may find the Lord som∣times sadly bemoaning in this his people, the people of the Jewes, Jer. 4.22. my people is fool∣lish, they have not known me; they are sortish chil∣dren, and they have no understanding. And the like wee may hear the Prophet doing in the Chapter following, Jer. 5. where complaining of the incorrigiblenesse of that people (the ge∣nerality of them) under the Judgment of God; how notwithstanding God hath strucken them yet they were not sensible, they had made their
face harder then a Rock, (as he speaks ver. 3.) he then bemoaneth and pittieth this their condition in the next verse, Therefore I sayd surely these are poor, they are foolish &c.] of all follie none like this; when men do (as it were) sanis insanire, they are wittingly mad or foolsh. They will not see what belongeth to their peace. O pitie we them that are in this condition! And O that they might be perswaded to pitie themselves!Much more by them∣selves. to mourn over this their desperate obstinacie. This they shall do, soon∣er or later; it may be when it is too late. So they may hear some of their Companions do∣ing; as viz. that impure Aduterer, whom the Wiseman speaks of, Prov. 5. Who having given his honour unto others, and his years to the cruel (as the 9 ver. hath it) having spent both his reputation, and estate, and strength upon Harlots, who seeking nothing but themselvs, care not how they make a prey of others, oft∣times with their honesty putting off also all kind of humanitie; then he cometh to mourn at the last, when his flesh and bodie are consumed (as it followeth ver. 11.), finding nature decaied and spent, and his bodie (it may be) seized upon by some foul and loathsome disease, (some of which (it may seem) were wont to attend this sin in those times, as well as in these,) feeling his hones full of the sin of his youth (as Zophar speaks, Job 20.11.) now he
cometh rugire in novissimis (as the Original hath it). Rugiit. pro∣prie Leo∣num; Bux torf: At his last, seeing how he hath by his lewd and dissolute courses brought him∣self to an untimely and infamous end; now he roareth, roareth as a Lion (as the word there properly signifieth). Seeing himself ready to go to hell, now his soul is filled with more horror, then ever his bodie was with pleasure. And mark what followeth, ver. 12. And say, How have I hated Instruction, and my heart despised reproof? And have not obeied the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ears to them that instructed me.] Lo here the true original of all his miserie; which though be∣fore he would not, yet now when it is too late he is brought to acknowledge, even his not hearkning to Instruction. O take heed that it may never be so with any of you! that you be not at your latter ends brought to mourn upon any such account. Instruction and re∣proof not to be slighted.Which that you may not, do not any long∣er what he did, hate instruction, despise reproof. Do not stop your ears against the truth of God held forth unto you in the Ministerie of his Word, discovering unto you the sinfulnesse of those waies and courses wherein you have walked, and shewing you how you ought to walk so as you may please God, do not shut the counsel which the word giveth you, out of your hearts. Do not any longer say unto God, Depart from us. This do all obstinate
sinners, who living under the means of grace, do yet go on in their sins. So Job describeth some of them, Job. 21.13, 14. They spend their daies in wealth, (living in jolitie, and mirth, & pleasure, happily injoying, an interrupted course of prosperiti, not being acquainted with those crosses and afflictions which befall others), Therefore they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy Law. This do too many even among our selves; though with their tongues they dare not, yet with their hearts, and in their lives they speak as much; plainly mnifesting to the world by their words and actions, what the thoughts of their hearts are; viz. That they do not dsire to have any acquaintance with God, or his Word; to know his minde and will that they may do it. And thus are the things which be∣long unto their everlasting peace hid from their eies. O most sad and deplorable condition!The despe∣rate con∣tion of ob∣stinate sin∣ners. what hope can there be of such an one? Upon this account our Saviour here looketh upon Jerusalems estate as most forlorn and despe∣rate. She neither had, nor would see what be∣longed to her peace. So as through her wil∣ful ignorance this was hid from her eies. And therefore let her now make account of what followeth; The daies shall come upon thee, when thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, &c. And even such is the condition of all wilful
and obstinate sinners, who shut out the light of Gods truth out of their hearts, will not give way to the admonitions, directions, con∣victions of the Word and Spirit, so as to be wrought upon by them, to be changed and reformed in their hearts and lives, let them make account that the like daies shall come upon them; daies of blacknesse and darknesse, daies of judgment and vengeance; it may be temporal, (which they have just cause to fear, continually hanging over their heads) how∣ever, eternal. And O that now the terrour of the Lord might fall and take hold upon every one of you,An alarum to such. whose condition this is! that being a∣wakened, you may be also perswaded to open your eies, to set open the doors and windows of your souls, to let in the Sun of righteousnesse, to let in that heavenly light which shineth forth unto you, that so the things which belong unto your peace, your eternal peace and happi∣nesse, they may be no longer hid from your eies; which if they still be through your obstinacie and wilfulnesse (for other cause you can as∣sign none), then take heed lest that God, whose patience you have abused, and whose grace you have rejected, do in his most righteous judgment seal up your eies, passing an irrevo∣cable sentence upon you, that seeing you will not see, therefore you shall not see, but that
these things be now from henceforth for ever hid from your eies. And so I am fallen upon the second Parti∣cular,2. The se∣cond cause of Jerusa∣lems blind∣ness, Gods righteous judgment. the second ground and cause of this blindnesse in Jerusalem.. The things belong∣ing to her peace were hid from her eies, as through her own wilful obstinacie, so also through Gods righteous judgment. And thus they were hid not onely for the present, but also for the future. , But now they are hid from thine eies;] That is, from henceforth; so as now thou shalt not see them, and that through the righteous judgment of God, hi∣ding them from thee. Thus it is, Daies of Grace have their dates.Obs. Days of grace have their dates. Mark it. This is the Observation which this passage naturally yieldeth us: Daies of Grace have their dates. Times and seasons, wherein the Grace and Mercie of GOD is offered and tendered to the Sons of men for their acce∣ptance; they are limited, they have their terms and boundaries, beyond which they shall not extend. Hence is it that they are called by the name of Daies, If thou hadst known in this thy day]. Now a Day is a deter∣mined time. However there are Winter-daies and Summer-daies, some shorter, others long∣er, yet each is limited and measured by the motion of the Sun. And so are the Seasons of Grace which God vouchsafeth unto the Sons of men upon earth: though some are longer
then others, yet all limited, all determined by God. What the Prophet Habakuk aith of Prophetical Vision, Hab. 2.3. The Vision is for an appointed time, the same may be said of these gracious dispensations, the offers and tenders of grace and mercie; they are for an appointed time. Daies of Grace have their dates, their limits. So have both National and Personal daies. 1. National daies,1. Nationall days. wherein God offers mercie to communities of men, these are limited. So it was we know with the old world, concerning which we may hear God declaring his pur∣pose, Gen. 6.3. My spirit shall not ever strive with man, for that he also is flesh, yet his daies shall be an hundred and twentie years. A long time God had striven with the men of that generation. He had so done, and that both outwardly and inwardly. Outwardly, as by his Works, so by his Word, which was preached to them by Noah, whom Saint Peter calleth, , a Preacher, or publisher of Righteousnesse; of the righteous judgments of God in case they should not repent, to which in the name of God he perswaded them. By him it was that Christ went and preached to the spirits in prison (as the same Apostle hath it) 1 Pet. 3.19. This he did by the Ministerie of Noah, or some others, who were inspired by him; In and by them he preached to the men of that generation, who were then alive, but
at this time, when Peter wrote that Epistle, dead, and their spirits, their souls (many of them) in the prison of Hell. And besides this Outward striving by his Word, he did also strive with them Inwardly by the inward motions and operations of his Spirit, pres∣sing and urging their consciences to Refor∣mation and Repentance. Thus he had striven with them, and that long, but he will not ever so do. My Spirit shall not ever strive with Man]. And thereupon hee limits them a time for their Repentance: The daies of Man shall be an hundred and twentie years]. Not that the time of man's life should not afterwards exceed that number of years, for we finde di∣verse after the Flood living much longer; but so long should their day of grace and mercie last. So long a time out of his gracious indul∣gence God would yet allow to that generati∣on to bethink themselvs, to reform their hearts and lives in; which if once past and not improved for the end to which it was al∣lotted them, then they must look for no more mercie, but a deluge of vengeance should sweep them off from the face of the earth. To this I might subjoin that of Nineveh, which had her fortie daies, and no more allowed unto her for the same end. Fortie daies and Nineveh shall be destroied, Jon. 3.4. viz. ex∣cept within that time they repented, which condition God reserved to himelf. Thus there
is a time appointed and determined by God, which though he do not declare to others, yet he hath set down with himself, how long hee will strive with a Nation, a people, how long he will wait for their Repentance; which time being past, then the date of mercie is out. So it was with Jerusalem here; she had had he Day, a day of grace, and that a long day; wherein she might have seen what belonged to her peace, but that day being now spent, Now these things are hid from her eies. 2. Personall days.2. And as Nationall so Personall dayes. The times and seasons allotted unto particu∣lar persons, for their accepting the offers of grace and mercie held forth unto them, these also are limited. So is not onely the Common and Generall day; The time of this life, be∣yond which the tenders of mercie do not ex∣tend.The gene∣rall day, the time of this life. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation (saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.2. speak∣ing (as he is conceived) of the time of this life). This is the day of grace. If this day be gone, mercy is gone. As for those who have here abused the patience and long sufferance of God, not considering that it should have led them to repentance; so sleighting the of∣fers of Mercie, let them look for nothing but Jutice hereafter. That rich Glutton who would not out of his abundance spare poor Lazarus a crum of bread, baing in hell may call and crie for a drop of water to cool his
tongue with, and yet go without it. The Sa∣crifices of Grace and Mercie are onely so long as this day of grace lasteth, during this life. If this be gone, then as the tree falleth (towards heaven or hell) so it lieth. Death closing up the eies of impenitent sinners, then are the things which belong to their peace, their hap∣pinesse, for ever hid from them. But also Particular daies,Particular days. particular times and seasons, and that during this life. Cer∣tainly such times and seasons there are: As there are appointed times for all other occasi∣ons. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every pupose under heaven, (saith the Prea∣cher) Eccl. 3.1. So it is to things Natural; however to us they may be Casual, and in themselvs Contingent, or it may be Voluntarie, left to the will of man; yet they are all de∣termined, as for other circumstances, so for the time, and that by God, who doth by his Providence order and limit them for their be∣gining, duration, ending. And surely so it is in things supernatural; he who hath thus bounded and limited all other things upon earth, hath not left his own gracious dispen∣sations sine die, at an uncertaintie; but hee hath also set down with himself a day, a time for them, beyond which they shall not extend; so as if that be expired, there is no more room for mercie. The truth of this we may see in those Rebellious murmurers amongst the Isra∣elites.
A long time God striveth with them. Fortie years long was I grieved with this gene∣ration (as the Psalmist hath it) Psal. 95.10. All that time they tempted God, and proved him, and saw his works (as the Apostle goeth on) Heb. 3.9. So long experience they had of the gracious presence of God in the midst a∣mongst them, manifesting his power and mer∣cie in delivering, protecting of them, and pro∣viding for them, yet they tempted and pro∣ved him, not believing what he had said unto them, nor yet so considering what he had done for them, as to trust in him, and rest upon his Providence. Thus did they err in their hearts, not knowing the waies of their God (as it there followeth, ver. 10.) Now herewith the Lord was (as well he might be) grieved, offend d, provoked, yet bearing with them; but so hee would not ever do. Having born it fo tie years, then he will bear it no longer; [So I sware in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest, ver. 11.] They should never come into the earthly Canaan, the land which he had promised unto Abraham as a resting place for his Posteritie. Which sentence was according∣ly executed upon those murmurers, whose carkases fell in the wildernesse (as it followeth ver. 17.). None of them who came out of Egypt, from twentie years old and upward, entering into Canaan, save onely Caleb and Joshua, (as you have it foretold Numb. 14.
29, 30.) So was it with them as to the Earth∣ly Canaan, and so shall it be with all obstinate and obdurate sinners as to the Heavenly Ca∣naan, that eternal rest (whereof the earthly Canaan was a Type): However God may strive with them for a time, and it may be a long time, yet there is a time when he will st ive no more, but will passe a peremptorie sentence upon them, that they shall never en∣ter into his rest; so shutting the door of mer∣cie against them. Which he doth,The door of mercy sometimes shut in this life. and that (as I said) often in this life. We know how it was with Esau, that profane Esau, so stigmatized and branded by the Apostle, Heb. 12.16. for his so far un∣dervaluing of that high privilege of his primo∣geniture, his Birthright, to which was anne∣xed the Covenant, as to sell it for a morsel of meat, (or a mess ef Pottage) when after∣wards he came to make suit for it, he was re∣jected. So you have it in the verse following, ver. 17. For yee know (saith the Apostle) how that afterwards when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. Thus however before he sleightly esteemed that privilege, yet being better advi∣sed, upon second thoughts, he seeketh it, & that earnestly, but all in vain, For he found no place for repentance; viz. in his Father Isaac, who had conferred that blessing upon his other
Son Jacob; he could not with all his tears move him to repent of what he had done, so as to recall his grant, and confer the blessing upon him. Herein was he a Type of profane obstinate sinners, who sleight and despise the grace of God when it is offered and tendered unto them. Afterwards it may be, when God cometh to open their eies, to awaken their consciences, and to convince them of what they have done, and to discover to them the miserie of that state wherein they are, then they seek and crie for mercie, and yet go with∣out it; the Decree then (as it were) falling in travel, and begining to bring forth (as the Prophet speaketh, Zeph. 2.2.) the door of mercie is shut against them: R. The con∣tempt of grace here∣by vindica∣ted.R. Which God doth (as I sayd) in his most just and righteous judgment; thereby vindicat∣ing the contempt of his grace and mercy: which is an attribute that God is tender of, and will not indure to have trampled upon. So as where that will not take place, Justice shall. Hence is it that God shuts the door of mercie against those that have rejected it when it was offered to them; refusing to hear them, who have refused to hear him. So wisdom sets it forth in that Text, which I willingly repeat, Prov. 1.24. Because I have called and ye have refused, &c. Therefore I will also laugh at your Calamitie, I will mock when your fear cometh.
When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlewinde, &c. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, thy shall seek me early, but shall not find me. ver. 28.29. A just retaliation and requital, that whilest men shall let Jesus Christ stand at the doores of their hartes and knock (as he tells the Church of Laodcea that he did Rev. 3.20) and yet not let him in, that he should shut the door against them, so as though they knock, yet they shall finde no audience, no enterance. Obj. 1.Obj. 1. The promise of opening to them the knock clered. But is not this directly contrary to the promise which our Saviour maketh, Mat. 7.7, 8? Where incouraging h Disci∣ples to Pray, he bids them, Aske and it shall be given you, seek and you shall finde, knock and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asketh receiveth; and to him that knock∣eth it shall be opened. A. 1.Answ. 1. This promise made to be∣lievers. For Answer to this, Take we notice (1) Who they are to whom our Sa∣viour here speaketh, viz. to his Disciples, such as had received him, and believed on him. Now such indeed have the promise of audience and acceptance at all times. Being favorites of heaven they have alwaies free en∣terance to the Throne of grace, so as they may come thither at all times with confi∣dence and boldness (as the Appostle exhorts hem to do, Heb. 4. last); This being a
privilege purchased for them by the blood of Christ (as the same Apostle sheweth, Heb. 10.19.) But not so others. Not so rebellious and obstinate sinners. What have they to do to take the name of God into their mouthes, by invocating of him? seeing they are such as hate to be reformed. What have they to do to presse upon the throne of grace, who are despisers of it, and ene∣mies to it. Answ. 2. God must be sought in due time.A. But (Secondly) this Promise must be looked upon not as Absolute, but as Condi∣tional, admitting of many restrictions and limitations. Among other, of time. They who would seek God so as he may be found, they must seek him timely, whilest he may be found. So the Prophet Isaiah directs the Jewes. Seek ye the Lord whilest he may be found. Isai. 55.6. with which agrees that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 32.6. For this shall every one pray unto thee, in a time when thou maiest be found: Tempore inveniendi, in a time of Finding. Clearly intimating, that there may be a time where∣in God, though he be sought, yet will not be found. This is that he tells the Jews, Isai. 1.15. When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. Not hear them when they pray; no, nor yet hear others praying for them. So the
Lord telleth his Prophet Jeremiah, upon that account willing him to surcease his intercession, on their behalfe. Therefore pray not for this people, neither lift up crie, nor praier for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee, Jer. 7.16. And elsewhere he tells the Prophet Ezekiel con∣cerning that Land, Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should deliver but their own souls, Ezek. 14.14, 20. So irrevocable is the sentence which God somtimes passeth upon obstinate and re∣bellious sinners, such as have despised his grace and mercie, that all means used for the procuring ana gaining his favour to∣wards them, shall be ineffectual, and to no purpose. Replic.Replic. Repentance at all times findes mercie. True, it may be said, so long as they continue in their sins, they can ex∣pect no other: but repenting and forsa∣king them, there is mercie to be found. So it there followeth, in that of Isaiah 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the un∣righteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercie upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. And the Lord giveth all sinners to know so much by his prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 18.21. & 33.14. which Texts for substance (though not in expresse tearms) speak what the former of them was cited
for in our late public Lyturgie, that At what time soever a sinner repenteth him of his sin, God will qut away all his iniquities out of his remembrance. Answ. Repentance not promised to men at all times.A. True plentie of such promises wee meet withall, assuring mercie to repenting sinners; but where is that promise that as∣sures unto them Repentance when they will. Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, non promisit peccanti poenitentiam; He that hath pro∣mised pardon to the sinner whensoever he repenteth, hath not promised to give him grace to repent whensoever he will. Saint Paul speaking of the Repentance of men ill affected to the truthes and Ministers of Christ, he puts in a Peradventure about it, 2 Tim. 2.25. If God peradventure will give them repentance. This is God's gift; and being so, it dependeth not upon Man's will, but His Will. And elsewhere hee tells us of an heart that cannot repent. So our former Translation (not amisse) ren∣ders that Text, Rom. 2.5. where the Apo∣stle speaking of, and to such as despise the riches of Gods goodnesse, not knowing that it should lead them to repentance, he saith that, After their hardnesse and impenitent heart, they treasure to themselvs wrath against the day of wraths, &c. , Cor resipiscere nesciens (as Beza translateth it) A heart that knoweth not how to re∣pent,
knoweth not how to go about this work. And elsewhere we read of some up∣on whom this doom is passed, That it is im∣possible for them to be renued again unto repen∣tance, Heb. 6.6. Such is the case of despe∣rate and malicious Apostates, whom God in his just judgment giveth up unto impe∣nitent hearts, that they cannot, at least shall not repent: Thus doth God in his just and righteous judgment (as I said) somtimes with-hold his grace from those that have sleighted and rejected it when it was offered: Thenceforth hiding from their eies the things that belong unto their peace. That he doth this, and why he doth it, you have seen. Q. But how doth he do it?Answ. 1. How God hi∣deth from men the things be∣longing to their peace. A. Here I shall not dare to attempt to follow God too close, in tracing of those paths of his, which Saint Paul calleth, , viae impervestigabiles, Rom. 11.33. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his waies past finding out! By the former [Judgments.] (as Grotius distinguisheth them) understanding the Decrees of God, by the latter, the waies and means which he useth in the executing and bringing those decrees into act. Both are to humane un∣derstanding inscrutable and untraceable; fitter to bee admired and adored, then cu∣riously pried into. Yet where God is
pleased to hold forth a light unto us, wee may safely follow him, though it bee a far off. And so shall I at the present in opening this great mysterie to you, shew∣ing you onely what is revealed, and so may safely be asserted concerning it. God hideth from the eies of men the things be∣longing to their peace. Answ. 1. By with-draw∣ing the light.1. By taking away the light, withdraw∣ing and with-holding the meanes of grace from them. This is one thing which the Lord threatneth against this unfruitfull Vineyard, the people of the Jews, sfaiah 5. ver. 6. I will also command the cloudes, that they rain no rain upon it. That is, (as some saf;ely, if not somewhat too curiously, expound it), the means of grace and salvation should not bee con∣tinued unto that people as formerly. He would bereave them of their Prophets, take away their Teachers. Which accord∣ingly he did; as may be collected from that Promise which the same Prophet ma∣keth to the Church, Isaiah, 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversitie, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy tea∣chers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. So it had ben with that people. Prophets had been very scarce among them. So much we may take notke of from that of the Psalmist,
Psal. 74.9. where the Church lying under a sad desolation, is brought in complaining; We see not our signes, there is no more any Prophet, neither is there a-mong us any that knoweth how long. They wanted their Seers (as the Prophets sometimes are called). And by this meanes were the things which belonged to their peace hid from their eyes. And by a like means came they here to be hid from Jerusalems;Means of grace with-drawn from Jerusa∣lem. by withdrawing those means of grace from them which formerly they had injoied. Christ himself being taken away, he also ordered his Apostles after a while to withdraw from them. So much is insinuated in that Parable of the Mariage feast, where the first guests that were invited, though sollicited by messenger after messenger, refu∣sing to come, the servants are then ordered by the Master of the Feast to go into the High-waies, and Hedges, and By-lanes, and to bid new guests, as the Evangelists have it, Mat. 22.9. Luke. 14.21.23. The meaning of the Parable seems to be obvious. This Marriage is the marriage betwixt Christ and his
Church. The first invited guests were the Jews; to whom God sends his servants one after another; first the Prophets, then John the Baptist, with the Apostles and Disciples of CHRIST, who perwaded them to come and receive Jesus Christ, and to have Communion with him: but they refusing, the Apostles, with their Successors, are afterwards sent to the Gentiles. Which ac∣cordingly, sometimes after our Sa∣viours Ascension, came to passe. For however at the first, accord∣ing to their Masters direction, they applied themselves onely to the Jewes, yet afterwards finding them unworthie, and being rejected by them, they shook off the dust of their feet against them, turning to the Gentiles. So Paul and Bar∣nabas expresly tell them, Act. 13.46. When they heard the Jewes contradicting them, and blaspheming their doctrine, Then they waxed bold (saith the Text) and said, It was necessarie that the Word of God should first have been spoken unto you; but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthie of eternal life, lo wee turn to the Gentiles, for so hath the Lord commanded us. Thus when
men do abuse the light of the Go∣spel, Christ often removeth the Can∣destick, (as hee threatens the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2.5.) taketh away that light, taketh away his Ministers and Ordinances, and so leaveth them in the darke, by which meanes the things belong∣ing to their peace are hid from their eies, and that through the want of means. 2.2. With-holding the Spirit. But (Secondly) sometimes the means are injoyed, but the Spirit is with∣held, not accompanying, not going along with the meanes. Even as the Church complaineth Psal. 44.9. that God did not go forth with her Armies. Her Armies went forth; but God did not go forth with them, as formerly, to direct, assist, blesse, and prosper them, to make them victorious. Thus God sometimes sends forth his Ministers, but hee doth not go forth with them; hee doth not accompany his Ordi∣nances with his Spirit. This is that which the Prophet Isaiah complaineth of; hee lift up his voice like a trum∣pet, hee spared not to his dutie, But who hath believed our report, to whom is the arme of the Lord revealed, Isai∣ah,
53.1. His Ministerie was for the most part ineffectual; few there were that were wrought upon by it, Hee had (as elswhere hee bemoans it, Isa∣ah 49.4.) even laboured in vain, and spent his strength for nought: Now whence was this? Why God did not concurr with him by the efficacious, work of his Spirit; hee did not put forth his power, reveal his Arme, hence was it that his indeavours be∣came so ineffectual to the greatest part. And thus God is pleased some∣times to enervate his Ordinances, by withdrawing his presence from them. Even as it was in Ezekiels Vision, hee saw the Glorie of the God of Israel go∣ing up from the Cherub to the threshold of the house, Ezekiel 9. Verse 3. The Cherub stood still in his place, but the glorie was departed, God had withdrawn his presence from it. Thus Ordinances may bee continued, and yet the Spirit withdrawn, whereby they become ineffectual. So as though the light shine forth unto men, yet wanting that Spirit of Illumination which should open their eies, and let that light into their hearts, they still remain to the dark. So fared it with
the Scribes and Pharisees; though the mysterie of Salvation was as clearly held forth unto them as unto others, yet whilest others saw it, it was hid from them. How so? Why this was God's work, to put a differencee be∣twixt the one and the other. So much our Saviour taketh notice of, and acknowledgeth, Matth. 11.25. I thank thee Father, Lord of heaven and earth (or, I confesse unto thee, or, ac∣knowledge before thee, ) be∣cause (or that) thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto Babes. The same Word was preached by the same persons unto both, but it had not the same effect in both. To the simpler sort of persons, men and wo∣men of weak apprehensions, altoge∣ther unlearned and ignorant, very chil∣dren in understanding, the mysteries of eternall Salvation were clearly re∣vealed by the Ministerie of Christ and his Apostles; but not so to the wise and prudent, great and learned Clerks, men wise in their own and others opini∣ons, as the Scribes and Pharisees were. To them were these things hid. Now whence was this? Why God
did not co-operate with the Word as to them; hee did not work upon their mindes by his Spirit, by which means the Word became ineffectual un∣to them. 3. Blinding the eye and hard∣ning the heart.Again (in the Third place), God concurreth in hding these things from the eies of men, not onely in Nega∣tive or Privative, but also after a sort in a Positive way. Not onely by not opening their eies and hearts, but by blinding and hardning them. So it was with this people, the people of the Jewes, as our Saviour also taketh no∣tice of it, giving this as a reason why they did not believe, John 12.39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, (saith hee) because Isaias said again, He hath blinded their eies, and hardned their hearts, that they should not see with their eies, and understand with their hearts, and bee converted, and I should heal them. Thus dealt God with that people, justly punishing their wilful obstinacie, by giving them up unto a reprobate sence, to a spiritual blind∣nesse and obduracie. In as much as they had first blinded themselves, clo∣sing their own eies against the light [Their eies they have closed] (so
Saint Matthew hath it, Matth. 13, 5. As also the Apostle, Act. 28.27.) there∣fore God in his just judgment blind∣eth them. They blinded themselves first, they would not see, therefore God in his justice blindeth them, that they should not see: So giving them up to spiritual blindnesse; which (as that Apostle tells us) still resteth up∣on that people untill this day. I would not, brethren, that yee should bee ignorant, that blindnesse in part is hap∣pened to Israel, untill the fulnesse of the Gentiles be come in, Rom. 11.25. , Blindnesse, or Hardnesse (for the word signifieth both) is happened [in part], unto the greatest part, the ge∣neralitie of that Nation; insomuch that they do not, nay, till the time appointed be come, they shall not see the things which belong to their peace. This is the reason which the same Apostle giveth, why those of that Nation did not see what was so clear∣ly held forth unto them in the prea∣ching of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.14. Their mindes were blinded, there was a veil up∣on their hearts (as the next ver. hath it). God hath given them up in his just judgment for their contempt of the
means of grace to a fearful excera∣tion and obduration, blinding their eies, and hardning their hearts. Thus the Lord is said to have done Pha∣raohs, Exod. 4.21. And the like is said of Sihon King of Heshbon, that refused to let Israel passe by him, Deuteronom. 2.30. The Lord thy God hardned his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him in∣to thy hand. This hee did, not one∣ly by with-holding his grace from them, but by delivering them up unto the perversnesse of their own spirits, and to Satan, to bee acted by him unto their ruine and destru∣ction. And after the like manner may God bee said to have hardned the hearts of this people, the peo∣ple of the Jewes; not onely by with-holding his Spirit from them, but also giving them up unto their own hearts lusts (as rhe Psalmist hath it, Psal. 81.11, 12. My people would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel would none of mee, So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts; (or, as the margin readeth it, to the hardnesse of their hearts) and they walked in their own counsels), and
to the power of Satan to bee acted by him, to bee blinded and hard∣ned by him. Yea, even giving Com∣mission to his Word to have such an accidental effect upon them; even as the Sun hath upon the Clay, to harden it. So much wee may learn from that Text of the Prophet Isai∣ah, cited by our Saviour, Isai∣ah 6. ver. 9, 10. Where the Lord giving him his Commission to go unto that people, hee bids him (or rather foretelleth him what hee should do) that hee should make their heart fat. Make thou the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavie, and shut their eies, &c. Now how shoula hee do this? Why onely by preaching the Word to them. But what then, had the Word any such proper o∣peration of it self? Not so: nei∣ther had the Prophet any such in∣tention in the preaching of it; but through their obstinate tempers it become so to them, an occasion of their further blinding and harden∣ing. God in his just judgment suf∣fering and ordering that his Word should have such a direfull effect
upon them, as that they should grow worse and worse by it, un∣till they should attain to that height of impenitencie, as should bee irrecoverable. This it is, The Word will have it work, one way or other, beeing (as the Apo∣stle saith) the favour of life, or of death, 2 Corinth. 2.16. Where it doth not open and clear the eye, it will close and blinde it: Where it doth not soften the heart, it will harden it. And in this way, and by this means doth God in his most righteous Judgment, hide from the eyes of men the things which belong to their peace, which they have refu∣sed to see. To these I might adde, his sending of False TeachersSending false teachers. among them; such as those the Prophet Jeremie speaketh of, who cried unto the people, Peace, Peace, where there was no peace, Jeremi∣ah 6.14. So lulling them asleep in carnall securitie, that they shall not see what belongs to their peace in truth.
As also his sending of strong delusions,Strong de∣lusions. that men should believe a lie, because they have not received a love of the truth (as the Apostle hath it, 2 Thes. 2.11. Sending a Spirit of Errour, a lying spirit to them, such as that was which seduced Ahab, to his destruction, 2 King. 2.22. These and ma∣ny other wayes God hath to carry on this his most just and righteous design. But herein I shall follow him no further. That which hath been spoken may be sufficient for doctrinal Con∣firmation and Illustration. What now remaines is Application. Where (in the first place) let me design you to make a stand a little,Applic. Application to the Na∣tion in ge∣neral. and look upon this Nation wherein we live as our Saviour did here upon this City Jerusalem, and see whether there be any just cause to do what he did, to weep over it, mourn over it upon any such ac∣count. Touching which let me first declare for my self that not having my Saviours eyes, a pro∣phetical eyeas he had: I dare not pronounce the like sentence upon this, that he doth upon that, viz. that the things which belong, unto Englands peace are now hid from her eyes. No, as my prayers have been and shall be, so my hopes yet are to the contrary; that God will yet be merciful to this Nation; and I want not some grounds to bottom these hopes upon. But yet let me shew you what two just causes of fear may be apprehended,Her sad progno∣sticks; para∣lelled with Jerusalems. that God hath a sad con∣troversie with it. In the declaring whereof I shall (as far as I may) parallel it with this City
of Jerusalem; which I shall do altogether upon a Religious account, not medling at all with the Civil of these sad prognosticks I might reckon up diverse. But. I shall content my self to single out some of those which are most ob∣vious. 1 Not seeing what be∣longed to peace in his day.Among which let the first and principal be, our not seeing the thing which betmged to our peace in our day. Where I shall not do (what happi∣ly with too much evidence of truth I might), de∣scend to those particular times and seasons wherein mercy hath been held forth and offered unto this Nation, in a more signal and remarka∣ble manner. Surely such Criticall daies Eng∣land hath had, and some of them, within our me∣memorie, seasons and opportunities, which had they been laid hold of, and improved as they might, how happy might she have been? I shall content my self with generalities. Onely taking notice of that long day of grace and mercy which this Nation hath had; during which the light of the Gospel hath shone forth to it, and that in so clear and glorious a manner as (I suppose without flatterie I may speak it) it hath not done to any other nation under heaven. Now, have we in this our day known the things which be∣longed to our peace? Hath Christ and his Gos∣pell found that intertainment among the genera∣lity which he expected, and it deserved? The Generalitie (I say) True it is, some there have been, and at this day are, who have sincerely imbraced both; And so there were in Jerusalem,
some that cryed Hosanna to the Some of David, Hosanna in the highest, Matth. 21.9, 15. But how is it with the greatest part? do not they yet love darknesse, rather then light? setting light, by the light of the Gospel, and the Ministery thereof; even Gadarene like pre∣ferring their swine before Jesus Christ. A charge, wherein I wish there were not too much truth, Such sleight and slender entertainment hath the Gospell, with the faithful messen∣gers thereof, found among the greatest part of this Nation. A sad prognostick. Specially if it be considered to what a height this disaffection is at this day improved,Disaffecti∣on to the persons and Calling of Ministers a sad prog∣nostick. and risen even to the disclaiming and crying down of the Ministery it self. So is it with some, and not a few. They are growen disaffected, not onely to the persons of Ministers, but even to their fun∣ction and calling, disclaiming that as Antichristian. Thus, are the feet of them who bring glad tidings of peace, which sometimes were, and in them∣selves are beautifull, now become in the eyes of many black and deformed. A sad symptome. So it was in Jerusalem, of which we read, 2. Chr. 36.16. The Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his Messengers rising up betimes, and sending them, because he had compassion on his people, on his dwelling place; But they mocked the Messen∣gers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, untill the wrath of the Lord rose a∣gainst his people, till there was no remedy, (no
Healing.) This made their disease incurable, and the wrath of God implacable. When sick∣men being distracted, shall flye in the faces of their Physitians, and there be none to bind them, what hope of Cure can there be? This was Je∣rusalems case, as the Parable sets it forth, Matth. 21.33. God the great Householder, ha∣ving planted a Vineyard, (the Jewish Church) and let it forth to Husbandmen, (so the Priests) he sends his servants, some after other, to receive the fruites thereof, (his Prophets former and lat∣ter, to require that people to bring forth fruits meet for repentance) but they beat one, and kil∣led another, and stoned another, (so did they use the Prophets) Hereupon he sendeth his sonne (Christ himself) who met with the like usage. Now what followe;h hereupon? That you may hear first from the mouthes of the Jews them∣selves, to whom our Saviour here propoundeth this Parable, making them judges in the cause, that so he might cōdemn them out of their own mouthes, They say unto him he will miserably de∣stroy these wicked men, and will let out his vine∣yard to other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruites in their season, v. 41. which afterwards you find explained and applyed by our Saviour to themselves, v. 43. Therefore I say unto you the Kingdome of God shall be taken from you, and gi∣ven to a Nation bringing forth the fruit thereof. When the Ministers of God come to meet with such intertainment, and that for doing their of∣fice, it is a sad presage that the Kingdome of
God, the Gospel shall not long continue there, and that Judgment is not far from such a peo∣ple. Upon this account our Saviour looketh up∣on Jerusalems condition as desperate. O Jerusa∣lem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; How often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your house is left unto you desolate. Matthew 23.37, 38. Here is a first Prognostick, and that a sad one. Secondly. Let a second be that which I have named and touched upon already.2 Gods with∣drawing the light, by putting out the Candles. Gods with∣drawing the light, by putting out the Candles, I mean taking away his Ministers, who are said to be the light of the world. Thus was it done to Je∣rusalem. And whether this be in any degree ap∣plicable to this Nation or no, I shall leave it to those who are privie to the present state of it, to judge. Of late how many able and faithfull Ministers taken away? Now when a Prince be∣gins to call away his Ambassadours, it is ordina∣rily looked upon as a Passing-bell to the peace of that Nation. Repl. But howsoever (it may be said) some be by Providence taken away, yet others by the like providence are substituted in their roomes. A. True it may be in some places,Many pla∣ces desti∣tute of true Gospel Mi∣nisters. but not so in all. Some Candlesticks there are at this day, (and I suppose not a few,) destitute of Can∣dles;
not well knowing where to find a supply. Again, as for those which are thus substituted by the providence of God, are they also all sub∣stituted by his Ordinance? Are there not some (and not a few) Ambassadours without their commission? men running before they are sent; not called nor impowred to do any Ministeriall act, which yet (Ʋzziah like) they attempt to do; that not onely to preach, (which the Apo∣stle will tell us none can do except they be sent, Rom. 10.15. speak they may, but not Preach, which is an act of office) but also (some of them) to administer the Seales, the Sacraments. And by this means the Church in many places co∣meth to be deprived of an Ordinance, upon which all other publick Ordinances have a dependance; I mean of a true Gospell Ministerie, with which Jesus Christ hath promised his special counte∣nance. Thirdly. To this add (in the third place) that where means are continued,3 The Spirit with draw∣en from the means. yet is not the Spirit withdrawen? So was it with Jerusalem; they injoyed Ordinances, but there was no life in them; the Glorie of the Lord was gone up from the Cherub. And is it not so in many parts of this Nation at this day. Ordinances remain, but is not the glorie of the Lord departed from them? where is that life, where is that power, which heretofore appeared in them? God hath yet his Armies of Prophets, many faithfull and power∣full Ministers, who may be looked upon as the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, but he doth not
go forth with these his Armies as formerly, gi∣ving such successe unto the labours of his ser∣vants as heretofore he hath done. How is it that in many places where the word is purely and powerfully preached, there are such thin Audito∣ries as there are (specially upon the week daies) in comparison of what they have been, some re∣fusing to come, not willing to lend an eare to any but their own; others neglecting to come out of an irreligious prophanesse: and among those that do come, yet how few constant con∣scionable attendants upon this Ordinance? A plain evidence that this ordinance hath lost much of that respect, as also of that power that some∣times it hath had. And what I say of the word, I may also apply it to the Sacrament, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Which though held forth in the pu∣rest and most comfortable way of Administrati∣on, according to Christs Institution, & the Chur∣ches primitive practise, yet how is it by many sleighted and neglected? So as those who here∣tofore were wont to come (as it now seemeth) for fear or fashion, being now left to themselves, will not come for love. The feast is prepared, and the Guests invited, but they find some excuse or other to keep them away. A thing which I wish there were not too just cause to complain of even in this place. Now surely, among other, this is also a sad token. 4.4 The eyes of many blin∣ded. To which let me add those other which I have also made mention of. Gods blinding the
Eyes, and hardning the hearts of many, sending so many false Teachers, with strong and strange delusions amongst us, giving up many to the believing of them. All sadly remarkable in this Nation at this day; I think never more in any. And what may we conceive these to portend? Surely, sad Omens they are; giving us too just cause to fear, lest God should be about to de∣part, to take away his Kingdom, his Gospel from us, which meeteeh not only with such sleight∣ings, but such affronts and oppositions as it doth. 5 Judgments not profi∣ted by.5. To which let me yet subjoyn, that which bodes as ill as any of the former; our not profit∣ing by Judgments, but rather being made worse by them. This is that which the Lord complaines of against Israel, Isai. 1.5. why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more. Gods judgments had a contrary effect upon them to what they were intended. He corrected them for their amendment, thereby to bring them home to himself, but they took occasion thereby to go further away from him; so as his Corrections were in vain to them, (as elswhere he complains) Jer. 2.30. In vaine have I smitten your children, they received no correction.] viz. so as to be bettered by it, but rather waxed worse & worse. And would to God that this did not lie as too just a charge against this sad Land and Nation wherein we live! That God hath stricken us, I suppose there are few but are in some kinde or other sensible. But
what effect have these Rods, these Judgments had upon us? Are we better by them? Are we thereby reclaimed, reformed, brought home to God? Are we made the more humble, the more careful, the more watchful, the more fruitful? O that these effects were to be found amongst us, But is it not clean contrary? Are we not grown more proud (a sin I think never so visible in this Nation as at this day) more remiss, more loose, more barren and unfruit∣ful then ever? And if so, what just cause have we to fear lest the Lord in his most righteous judgment do unto us, as there he threatens unto Israel; give us over, striving no longer with us, but leaving us to our selves, letting us alone (as elswhere he threatens unto Ephraim, Hos. 4.17.) to go on in our sinful provocations, until there be no remedy. These are some of those grounds upon which we may build our too just fears. To which I might yet have added some other. But I for∣bear any further charge: Coming rather to en∣quire, Q. What shall we now do for the Land of our Nativity?What to be done for this Na∣tion. A. 1. Do what our Saviour here doth for Jerusalem; Mourn over it, weep over it,1 Mourn o∣ver it. with compassionate and affectionate tears, laying to heart the sad state and condition thereof. This doth he, knowing how it was with that City, that the things belonging to her peace were now hid from her. And this do we over England,
fearing lest it should be so with it. 2. But tears alone will not help. When Joshuah was fallen upon his face,2 Take away the Action by feeling a National Reformati∣on. mourning for the discomfiture which had happened unto Isra∣el, Josh. 7.10. the Lord takes him up with these words, Get thee up wherefore lyest thou upon thy face? Intimating unto him, that it was not his humbling and afflicting himself, without some∣what else, that would heal that breach, which Israels sinne, their violating and transgressing the Covenant of their God, had made upon them (as it followeth in the next verse.) There must be some other course taken for the reconciling of them unto God, and making their peace with him. And what was that? Why the people must be sanctified, and the Accursed thing must be taken from among them, (as the 13. verse hath it.) And O that England might take the like course? It is not all our falling upon our faces before the Lord, all our daies of publick Humili∣ation (though that be a sacrifice acceptable unto God) that will serve to appease his wrath, and to procure his favour; that alone will not do it, unlesse also the people be sanctified, and the Ac∣cursed thing removed from among us. This then let every of us in our several places indeavour. Beginning first with our selves. Every one searching and trying our own waies, that we may find out the Action in our own hearts and lives, our own personal sinns. Which having found out, now take them away, putting away the evill of our doings from before the eyes of our God by se∣rious
and unfeined repentance and reformation; renewing our Covenant with our God, cleaving unto him with full purpose of heart. Then in∣deavour we the like for others; every of us in our places (as I said,) Magistrates in their places, Ministers in theirs, Masters of families in theirs, private Christians in theirs contributing what we may to wards a reall and Rational Re∣formation; that so the Accursed thing, even all kind of wrath, provoking abominations, may be taken away from the midst of us, and that we may be a people sanctified, dedicated and conse∣crated unto the Lord. So doing, now knew we for our Comfort,God not willing to cast off a people in Covenant. that we have to deal with a God gracious and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, ready to repent of what ever evill he intendeth a∣gainst a people; Especially his own people; not willing to reject and cast off a people that are in Covenant with him. So much he expressed to this people, the people of the Jewes before the Captivity, by making so many removes before his final departure from them, so the Prophet Ezekiel saw it in his Visions; in which the glo∣ry of the Lord removed not lesse then five several times before it took its leave; First, from the Cherub to the threshold of the house (the Temple) Ezek. 9.3. 2. It removed higher standing over the door; cap. 10.4. 3. From the threshold it returned and stood over the Cherubins, which were mounted up from the Earth as ready to take their flight, v. 18, 19. 4. From thence to the
midst of the City, and 5ly. From thence to the Mountain on the East side of the City, the Mount of Olives, Cap. 11. v. 23. Now what did these frequent removes import? Surely a great unwillingnesse in God to depart from that people. And so it is, so long as there is any remedy; God is not willing to forsake a people, whom once he hath taken into Covenant with himself. So much we may hear him passionate∣ly, declaring concerning Israel, Hos. 11.7, 8. My people (saith he) are bent to backsliding from me, (So was Israel, yet mark what followes.) How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee O Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Myne heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.] So loath is God (as it were) to cast off a people whom once he hath struck a Covenant with, if there be any hope of tetur∣ning unto him, and demeaning themselves as becommeth his people. And who knoweth what his thoughts may yet be towards this sinful and most unworthy Nation? Onely turn we unto him with all our hearts and soules. And then (as the Prophet Joel goeth on, Joel 2.14.) Who knoweth if he will return, and leave a blessing be∣hind him? And thus have I done with the first branch of the Application,Application in particu∣lar. as is directed to the Nation in general. Come we in the next place to bring it nearer home, applying it to every of our selves in particular.
And this I shall do (in the first place) by way of Terrour to some. Is it so,Ʋse. 1. Terrour to obstinate and obdu∣rate sin∣ners. that daies of grace have their dates? what terrour may this strike into the hearts of all obstinate and obdurate sin∣ners? of which kind. I wish there were none before me this day;) Despisers of Grace; such as have had their Day, their day of grace and mer∣cy, wherein God hath shewen unto them the things belonging to their peace; but they have not known them, they would not know them; they have done what the Jewes did, stopped their eares, closed their eies, hardned their hearts, refusing to hearken to the counsel which Wise∣dome gave them, to hearken to Jesus Christ speaking to them in and by his Ministers, not re∣garding the counsel which the word held forth to them, sleighting those offers of grace and mercie, tendred to them in the Gospell upon their receiving of Christ, but still going on in their wonted Rebellions. Now to all such be it spo∣ken, how do you know but that the date of your day may be out? the time of grace and mercy may be past, and the dreadful doom passed upon you in heaven, which our Saviour here denoun∣ceth against Jerusalem upon earth, that, Now the things belonging to your peace are hid from your eyes; so as you shall never see what you have refused to see. Certainly so it hath been with some others. And why not so with you for ought that you, or others know? How e∣ver, a just and righteous thing it is with God God that it should be so; that seeing you have
closed your eyes, and would not see, that he should seal them, so as you should not see. And if so, how deplorable, how miserable is your condition? So we loook upon a poor blind man whose bodily eyes are put out, past hope of ever recovering his sight again. What is it then to have the eye of the soul blinded? So as it shall never see, never se what belongeth to its peace & hapines, but is shut up under an everlasting dark∣ness. Miserable and deplorable is the condition of every such a soul, in as much as it is now despe∣rate, helplesse, hopelesse. So is it with a person upon whom this doom is once passed. Now he may call and cry for mercy, with Esau seeking blessing with tears, but all in vain. Neither his own, nor yet the prayers of any other shall be available on his behalf. Though Noah, Job, and Daniel, the chiefest favourites of heaven, should undertake to intercede for such a one, yet shall they not be able to procure a revocation and re∣versement of that sentence which is past upon him. Such was Sauls case upon whom Samuel denounceth that irrevocable sentence from the Lord, 1 Sam. 15.26. Thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected thee. A sen∣tence not to be reversed. So he tels him, v. 29 Also the strength of Israel will not lye, nor repent, for he is not as man that he should repent. No, though Saul himself sought God, by confessing and bewailing of his sinne (as he doth, v. 24.) begging pardon for it, desiring Samuel to go a∣long with him that he might worship God, (as it
followeth, v, 25.) which accordingly he did (v. 31) Yet would not all this avail. No nor yet though Samuel was an intercessour for him, praying, and mourning for him (as we find him, v. last.) So irreversible was that sentence which the Lord had passed upon Saul, that what ever he did, or Samuel could do, all could not change the purpose of God concerning him. Rejected he was for his Rebellion, and rejected he should be. O fear and tremble you obstinate and rebel∣lious sinners, who stand guilty of the same sin, that is charged upon him, of rejecting the word of the Lord, not hearkning to his voice, not yeilding obedience to his Commands, but doing what is good in your own eies, fear ye and trem∣ble (I say) least the Lord should have passed or should passe the like sentence upon you; which if once done, I and others may do for you what Samuel there did for Saul, mourn for you, but cannot help you. Obj. But what, is Gods decree so absoluteWhether Gods de∣crees be so absolute as not to be reversed. and peremptory concerning any particular person here upon earth, that what ever mean shall be used by themselves, or others for them, shall not be able to reverse it? It was not so with that barren Figtree in the Gospel, upon which the owner had passed his doom, that it should be cut down, giving order to the dresser of his vine∣yard that he should execute what he had de∣creed, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? Yet notwithstanding at that his servants request
it was reprived, and spared one year longer, Luk. 13.7, 8, 9. A. True, thus God is pleased to deal some∣times with some; to exercise great long suffe∣rance and forbearance towards them:Gods dea∣ling not a like with all. Yea sometimes reverting the sentence which is past upon them. Thence it is that he is said some∣times to RepentSometimes he is said to Repent. of what he hath done, or inten∣ded to do. So he did concerning the Ninevites, which Jonah supecting, taketh up as his excuse for his not going to the City according to Gods direction, to denounce that sentence against them, but rather fleeing to Tarshish, Jon. 4.2. Therefore (saith he) I fled before unto Tarshish, for I knew that thou art a gracious God, slow to an∣ger and of great kindnesse, and repentest thee of the evill; the evil intended and threatned, which accordingly he did, reversing that sentence which was passed upon them. And the like he did to Israel, at Moses's intercession, the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people, Exod 32.14. But it will not hence fol∣low,But not al∣waies. that because God dealeth thus with some therefore he will do so to all. However that Figtree was spared for a year, yet the other Fig∣tree which we read of was not spared an hour. So the Storie tels you, Matth. 21.19. Jesus passing by the way and espying a figtree on which he found no fruit, however (as St. Mark notes it, Mark 11.13.) the time of Figs was not yet, yet he presently blasteth it, passing that doom upon it, let no fruit grow on thee hence for∣ward
for ever. which sentence wag accordingly executed, and that forthwith. So it followeth, And presently the figtree withered away. Thus though God may for time spare some, and seem to repent of what he hath threatened concerning them, yet as he will not ever do so to any so neither will he doe so to all. He that spaed, Is∣rael at that time, yet afterwards sware in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest. And he who spared Aaron at Moses request, when he was angrie with him to have destroyed him (as you have it, Deut. 9.20.) would not spare Korah, and his Companie of whom you reade Numb. 16. Upon their Rebellion against Moses and Aaron there was a suddain and dreadful exe∣cution done upon them, The ground clave a sun∣der that was under them; And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, &c. So as They went alive into the pit v. 31.32.33. And so for those others who at the same time usurped the Priests Office, taking upon them to offer In∣cense presently, There came out a fire from the Lord and consumed them; v. 35: As it was also with the Sonnes of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu; they daring to offer strange fire before the Lord, presently there went out a strange fire from the Lord and confounded them, Lev. 10.1.2. Thus however God belong suffering towards some, yet not so to all. And however he doth (as it were) repent over some, yet not over all. Cain, Esau and Saul could finde no place for such repentance. And what knowest thou who takest
up this plea but that this may be thy case? thy lot? whereupon mans re∣pentance, God will alwaies repent.Obj. why, but hath not God ingaged himselfe to doe the like to all that shall repent and turne to him? This is that which Ieremie assures the Princes and all the people of Israel. Ier. 26.13. A∣mend your waies, and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the evill which he hath pronounced against you. And what he promised them, he likewise assureth unto others, all others in the like case: Cap. 18.7, 8 Where the promise is indefinite, At what instant I shal speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdome, to pluck up, and to pull down and destroy it, If that Nation against whome I have pronounced turn from their evill, I will repent of the evill which I thought to do unto them. If they repent of the evill of sin, he will re∣pent of the evil of punishment, And if it be thus with a Nation; why not with particular per∣sons? Repentance not in mans pow∣er.A: To this I answere as before. True, it is so, vpon mans repentance God will also repent. But how knowst thou (as before I sayd) whether ever God will give thee that grace or space to repent? How knowest thou but that in his just judgment he either already hath, or suddainly may give thee up to that impenitent heart, that shall not, that cannot repent; Not repent truely and sincerely. Possibly in an hypocriticall or Legall way thou maist; So did Cain, so did Esau, so did Saul, so did Iudas; being sensible
of what they had brought upon themselves, they bewailed their condition, yet were far from true repentance. Theire countenance was changed, (as it is said of Cain Gen. 4.5 his countenance fell) but not their hearts. And so may it be with thee. True Repentance, Repentance unto life and sal∣vation is Gods gift, which he bestoweth freely upon whome he will, and when he will. And be∣ing so, he may justly deny it, which hold it from those, who have sleighted and dispised his grace, when it was offered and held forth to them. To all such this doctrine upon this account speakes abundance of terrour.Ʋse. 2 Take heed of receiv∣ing the grace of God in vaine; by hardning the heart against it. Which let it serve (in the next place) as a Needle to draw in a thread after it, making way for, and now letting in a word of Advise and Counsell, and that to all that are here this day be∣fore the Lord. Take you heede that you doe not receive the grace of god in vaine. This is Paules Obtestation to his Corinthians 2. Cor. 6.1. Wee then as workers together with God, beseech you also that you receive not the grace of God in vaine. And let it now be mine to you, all and every of you, who heare me this day I, as a poore Minister of Christ, working together with him as his unwor∣thy Instrument, exhort and beseech you that you receive not the grace of God in vain, this Gospel grace, the offer of grace & mercy held forth ūto you in the Ministerie of the word; see that you do not receive it in vaine, by onely giving it the hearing, and so letting it dye and perish in the eare, not having any such affect in, and upon you,
as is intended by it, viz. to bring you home un∣to God and Jesus Christ, to receive and embrace him as your Saviour and Lord, to beleive on him, to submit unto him. This is the end of all our preaching, thus to some this good seede (as the doctrine of truth is called Math. 13.24.) the seede of the word, for the begetting of faith and obedience in the hearts of those that hear us. Now see you to it, that this seede doe not fall, like that in the Parable, which fell by the high way side, Math. 13.4. where the ground being hardned by the feete of the Passengers, the seede cannot enter, but lyeth above ground, and so is sowen in vaine, being spilt and lost. Take heede that the word be not so spilt upon any of you; that your hearts be not hardened against it, that you should not receive it into them. This is that which the Apostle presseth upon his Hebrewes, Heb. 3.7.8 wherefore as the Holy-ghost saith. To day if ye will heare his voice, harden not your hearts. And let me press the same upon you. To day if you will heare the voice of the Sonne of man the voice of Jesus Christ, so heare it as that you may live, doe not harden your hearts, doe not oppose, doe not resist the call of God, by shutting the word out of your hearts. This did the Israelites in the wildernesse. When God spake unto them by his servant Moses, they hardened their hearts, not regarding what was sayd to them. But what was the issue? Hereby they exceedingly provoked God against them. This was a day of Provocation, as the Apostle
there calleth it. Harden not your hearts, as in the Provocation, &c.  Sch was that day of Temptation in the wilderness, the time wherein the Israelites tempted their God, by not hearkning to his voice, it was a day of Exacerbation, and Exasperation. So it was not onely to Moses, betwixt whome and the people there was a sharpe contention, (as we find it Exod. 17.2.) But also unto God, who by that their not harkning to his voice was exceedingly greived (as it there followeth Heb.3.10,) yea so provoked and exasperated. that he sware in his wrath that they should never enter into his rest. v. 11. Now take you heede that it be not so with you, that you doe not thus provoke God by hardning your hearts, not receiving his word, not imbracing his Gospel. Which if you shall doe, know that this will be a greater Provocation then that of theirs was, So much you may learne from the Apostle, Heb. 12.25. Where upon this ground he exhorteth his Hebrewes to give eare to the Gospel. See (saith he) that ye refuse not him that speaketh, (viz. Christ speaketh to you his word,) For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, (the Jsraelites who hearkened not unto Moses) much more shall not we escape, if we turn from him that speaketh from heaven; viz, from Jesus Christ who came from heaven, and now speakes in and by his Gospel Ministeries. And upon the same ground let me perswade you. Take you heede how any of you turne away from
Jesus Christ thus speaking unto you; turn away your eares, turn away your hearts, so as not to receive, not to imbrace the doctrine of the Gos∣pel held forth unto you. This if you shall do, how know you but that God may justly retali∣ate, and requite this contempt of yours, by tur∣ning away his face from you, for ever hiding from your eyes the things which belong unto your peace? Offers of grace to be presently accepted.Which that he may not do, Know you these things: And that Now, in this your day. Now whilest it is called to day (as the Apostle there hath it, Heb. 3.13.) imbracing the present time; Not putting off this work till the Morrow. It is the Wisemans Councel, Prov. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. And St. James speaking to men, who lay out their businesse, what they will do such a day, and such a year, not consi∣dering what crosse providence may happen, Go too now (saith he) Ye that say, to day, and to mor∣row, we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain, whereas ye know not what shall be to morrow.Nemo lam Divos ha∣buit faven∣tes, Crasti∣nimut pos∣sit sibi polli∣ceri Senec. Such is the uncertainty of mans life, that no man can assure unto himself the succeeding day. And there∣fore now, whilest it is called to day, now harden not your hearts. Novv that God is pleased to knock at the doores of your hearts, to call upon you in, and by the Ministerie of his word, do not send him away as Foelix did Paul, with a complement, that you will hear him again ano∣ther
time. What know you whether ever he will vouchsafe to speak unto you again, so much as to your eares? Probably here are some present before the Lord at this time, who shall never hear him speak unto them again after this man∣ner; not speaking to their eares in the Ministe∣ry of his word. But if he do, hovv knovv you whether ever he vvill knock at the dores of your hearts by his spirit again? And therefore nevv hear and hearken, and set open those everlasting dores, the dores of your hearts, that the King of glorie, the Lord Jesus may enter in, and take a full possession of them, henceforth to rule and reign in you, and that for ever. Obj. But what need such haste?Some cal∣led at the eleventh hour. May not old age be soon enough? Do we not read of some who came into the vineyard at the eleventh hour, the last hour of the day, and yet received their pennie as well those that came in at the sixth, or third, or first houre? Matthew 20.6. A. True, there were so; But who were they? Such as had not been called before.Such as had not been calld before. That is their excuse, when they were questioned by the Lord of the vineyard, why they stood all the day idle, They say unto him, because no man hath hired us. v. 7. And so it may be with those who ei∣ther have wanted the means of salvation; or else have had no such workings upon their hearts at to awaken them; and convince them. Possi∣bly God may have mercie upon them, (as he had upon that penitent thief upon the Crosse,) calling
them home at the last houre of the day, in their old age. But let not others promise to themselves the like indulgence. Those who were brought into the vineyard at the eleventh hour were none of those that had been called at the first, third or sixt houre, but such as had not been hired before. What ever may happen to others who have not enjoyed the means of grace, or have not been acquainted with the Motions of the Spirit of God, It is not for you who have injoyed the former, an have been acquainted with the latter, and yet withstand both, to pro∣mise the like unto your selves. No, you that have rejected the call of God again and again, in your Childhood, Youth, Manhood, you have no ground to hope that God should come unto you, and bring you home to himself in your old age; but you may rather fear that if he do not cut you off before, he should then hide from your eyes those things, which formerly you have refused to know. Obj. But is there not still hope so long as there is life?The day of grace and life, how said to be of equal extent, how not. And is not the day of life, and the day of grace, of an equal latitude and extent? Doth not the Apostle say, Now is the Accepted time, now is the day of salvation? meaning the time of this life; 2 Cor. 6.2. doth not the one last as long as the other? A. Yes, in some sense they may be said so to do. And these two may be looked on as of an equal extent. 1. Because the one is the utmost limit of the
other; The day of grace is bounded by the day of life, not extending beyond it. When the one is ended, the other is en∣ded also. 2. As to others, they are so to judg of it. Not being of Gods counsel, not acquainted with his secret decrees; they are to hope well of others so long as they live: Not shutting the door of mercie against any while they are here. So long, as private Christians both may and ought to pray for them, so the Ministers of Christ are to hold forth the tenders of grace and mercie to them upon Gospell tearmes. 3. And (3ly.) as to themselves, so long as they live they stand obliged to accept of these offers, which still refusing to do, their sin is ther∣by aggravated, and heightned through that continued contempt. 4. But yet (in the 4th. place) If we speak of Gods secret decree and purpose, questionlesse the day of grace may determine unto a man be∣fore the day of his life. So it did there to Jeru∣salem. She still liveth and flourisheth for a time; Her day of prosperity was yet continued but her day of grace was now at an end. Now are these things hid from thine eyes. And questi∣onlesse so may it be with some particular per∣sons, whom God in his just judgment hath gi∣ven up to final impenitence, so delivering them up unto Satan and themselves, as that from thenceforth they never shall know the things be∣longing to their peace.
The doubt∣ful suppo∣sal of a des∣pairing sin∣ner answe∣red and sa∣tisfied.Obj. But what then (may some say,) may not this be our case? And if so, then it is in vain for us to strive, to seek for what is not to be found, to knock at that door which is shut up∣pon us as it shall not be opened. A. In answer to this I shall deal as tenderly as I may; so as I may not discourage or dishearten any soul that intertaines but a thought of retur∣ning, and coming in unto God; that begins so much as to cast a glance heaven-ward. Wherein I shall do no other then what the Lord Jesus himself doth, of whom it was prophecied that he should not quench the smoaking flax Matth. 12.20. Such was and is the gracious lenity and clemency of the Lord Jesus in his dealing with poor sinners, in whom there are as yet onely some weak desires after grace, some slender be∣ginnings of conversion and faith. And so shall I deal with all such. Gods re∣vealed will the onely Rule to walk by.1. Willing them (in the first place) to take notice what is their Rule to walk by. Not the secret but the revealed will of God. Secret things belong unto the Lord, but those things which are revealed, to us and to our children for ever, Deut. 29.29. This is that which we are to look at, and take notice of. And therefore let not any upon this account disquiet and trouble their own soules with such anxious disquisitions, as neither they, nor any other for them, whether man or Angel, is able to resolve. But apply themselves to the use of means. This will men do as concerning their temporall estates. They ne-over
stand prying into Gods decree, to enquire what portion in his secret purpose he hath layed out for them, but they set about the work of their calling, applying themselves to the use of means. And so do you touching your spiritu∣all and eternall estates. Stand not to enquire how God hath diposed of you in his secret pur∣pose; but go about the work of your general calling, apply your selves to the use of such means as God hath appointed to bring you home to himself by, so waiting upon his good will and pleasure. This is that which the Lord requires you to do. And therefore in obedi∣ence to his command, do it, with that Poor impotent person (John 5.) lying at the pool, untill the Angell shall come down and stir the waters; attending upon Ordinances, untill God by his spirit concurring with them shall please to work effectually by them, inclining your hearts to look towards himself; giving you a sight and sense of your own sinfulnesse and miserie; making you to see and feel the need you have of Jesus Christ, and heginning to draw your hearts towards him. Which when you find, let this be a comfortable evidence unto you that your day is not yet past. Onely be not you now wanting to this grace of God,The moti∣ons of the Spirit to be intertai∣ned. in giving intertainment to these motions of the spirit, in opening of the doore of your hearts, that so the Lord Jesus, who is now knocking at them, may enter in, Which, in
the feare of God, be ye now perswaded to do, Not knowing but that this may be the last knock; this the last sermon that ever we shall, heare, or the last mention of the spirit that ever you shall feele. Now therefore, even now before you goe from this place, strike up the Covenant betwixt Jesus Christ and your soules, accepting and receiving him in all those Gospell Relations, not onely as a Saviour casting your soules upon him, so as to rest upon the alsuffici∣encie of his merit for the pardon of sin and eternall salvation, but also as a Lord, a Husband, a Head, giving your selves up undo him to be guided and governed by him, by his word and Spirit, so receiving him into your hearts, as that he may dwell in you, and rule over you, and that for ever. This being done, now know you for your comfort that you are through grace and mercie exempted out of this black list,Where Christ is re∣ceived the day of grace is not past. out of the num∣ber of those from whose eies the things belonging to their peace are hid. God having thus revealed his Sonne Christ not onely to you, but in you (as the Apostle saith of himself Gal. 1.16.) not oneiy revealed him to your eares, but to your hearts, as by his word so by his spirit, inclining your hearts to close with him, to receive him upon these Gospel tearms, now he hath made you to know the things which belong unto your peace. Which whilest he hath hid from others, he hath revealed to you.
For which differencing mercie (to close up all in a word) blesse you God;Ʋse. Blesse God for his differenc∣ing mercy. giving unto him the glorie of this his free grace, which hath put such a difference betwixt you and others, This doth our Saviour in the behalfe of his Disciples, in the Text forecited. Math. 11.25. I thanke thei O father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. The great miseries of his Kingdome God had revealed them unto the poore and simpler sort of people, the poore received the Gospell, whilest in the meane time they were hid from the Scribes and Pharises, men worldly wise and learned. And this our Saviour there acknowledg∣eth to be his work, an art of his meere good will and pleasure. Even so father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. v. 26. And the like doe you for your selves. Seeing God hath now revealed unto you those things, which he hath hid from others, many others, who upon a Naturall, or Civill account, are far your betters. being pre∣ferred before you, as in place and estate, so in understanding and worldly wisedome. Give ye unto him the glorie of this mercie, acknow∣ledging it to be an art of his free grace, a sin∣gular favour vouchsafed unto you. For which let your soules for ever bless him; praising and magnifying him, who hath thus now made you Children of light, whereas others, the greatest part of the world, still sit in darknesse in the shaddow of death; some of them having their
eies already closed up, so as they neither do, nor ever shall see the things belonging unto their peace, being already doomed and adjudg∣ed to everlasting darknesse. You are now called into that marvellous light, (as Saint Peter calleth the grace of the Gospell. 1 Pet. 2.11)  not undeservedly so stiled, in as much as therein are revealed those  the wonderfull things of God As the Apostles auditors of them at the day of Penticost, that they heard them speake the wonderfull workes of God  magnifica, the mag∣nificent, great and admirable things of God. Such are the ministers of the Gospell, wherein those wonderfull acts and Counsels of God touching the salvation of his Elect by Christ are revealed and held forth. A misterie which the Angels themselves do earnestly desire to looke into (as Saint Peter telleth us. 1 Pet. 11.2.) Being much taken there with, when they sawe it more clearly revealed under the Gospel then it had been under the Lawe, they even stooped, bowed down (as it were, for so the word there used properly signifieth,  as desir∣ous to prie and looke narrowly into it. Now these are the things which God hath revealed unto you, And for this do you praise and mag∣nifie his name for ever. Taking this as a pledge, and assurance of what hereafter you shall see.Faith an assurance of Vision. Your eyes being thus opened to see Christ by faith here, you shall see him hereafter, when you shall have a full sight
of him, see him as he is, see him in his glory; Which when you shall do, then shall ye be made like unto him, (as St. John assureth you, 1 Joh. 3.2.) like him in glorie. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Col. 3.4. Which beautifull vision, the Lord of his free grace and mercie in Jesus Christ vouchsafe to everie soul of us; Amen. FINIS.
