C3982 12570298 63452
A LETTER FROM EXCETER, SENT To the Deputy-Lievtenants of Sommersetshire, Subscribed George Chudley, and Nich. Martin. Shewing how Colonell Ruthen sallyed out of Plymouth, and hath taken Sir Edward Fortescue, Sir Edward Seymore, and divers other Gentlemen of note prisoners. With the Covenant entred into by the Mayor, Deputy-Lievtenants, and Common-Councell of the City and County of Exceter. Also the true Copy of a Letter sent from Bristoll, declaring the manner and means how that City was secured from the Cavaliers. London, Printed for C. M. 1642.
A Letter sent from Exceter to the Deputy Lievtenants of Sommerset. Noble Gentlemen, YOur fears have been so often grated with the Relations of our miseries, ready to over∣whelm us, as we now think it a neighbourly office, and su∣ting our association to acquaint you with a blessing that God hath sent us yesterday, being the seventh of this instant. Colonell Ruthen sallyed out of Plymouth in the night, with five hundred Horse and Dragooners, and ferching a compasse about Plympton Northward, fell upon Modbury. where the Sheriff Sir Edward Fortescue, and Sir Edward Seymore, and others, whose names are un∣derwritten, were mustering the forces of the Coun¦ty, by vertue of the Posse Comitatis. At the sod coming of our Troops, the Souldiers fld, and  their Commanders in Master Champer H where they a while stood upon their defence,  upon the firing of an out-house, and the rest ¦roned, they at length yeilded, and are
Dartmouth, That you may be partakers of this en∣couragements sent us from God, is the end of these hasty lines; From your most assured friends, George Chudley, Nich. Martin. Exon the 7 Decemb. 1642. The Names of the prisoners taken. Sir Edward Fortescue. Sir Edward Seymore. Master Seymore Knight of the Shire. Master Arthur Basset. Master Shapcot. Master Row, and two or three more taken pri∣soners. Captain Peter Fortescue. Captain Bidlack. Captain Champernoon. Lievtenant Holigrove. Captain Pomroy. Captain Wood. Master Bayly of Barstable a Papist.
The Covenant entred into by the Mayor of Exceter, Deputy-Lievtenants of that County, and Common-Councell of the Citie. IN regard of the extraordinary danger the City and County of Exceter now stands in, by reason of the near approach of the ene∣my whom we understand to be on his March hitherward, and may within a few daies be before our Gates; We the Mayor, De∣puty-Lievtenants, and Common-Counsell of the said City and County, Do solemnly promise and vow according to our late generall Protestation, to defend His Majesties honour, and Person, the privi∣ledges of Parliament, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty and propriety of the Subject, all which, are declared by the Lords and Commons in Parlia∣ment assembled, to be actually invaded by Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Iohn Bartly, Sir William Ashburnam their accomplices and adherents, who have gathered to∣gether great Forces, for the accomplishment of their wicked Designes to the ruine of this present happy
Parliament, and in it to lay the Foundation of Ty∣rany and Popery; We therefore do firmly and con∣stantly resolve by the blessing and assistance of Al∣mighty God, as we shall one day answer the con∣trary before him at his great Tribunall, to discharge our duties and consciences in the exact perfor∣mance of the said Vow and Protestation by our un∣wearied labours and indeavours, though with the expence of our Lives and Estates, to defend, pre∣serve, and protect this City and County, against the said Sir Ralph Hopton, and his adherents in this their Rebellious Insurrections; And we do further pro∣mise, Vow, and Protest, according to the true intent▪ and meaning hereof▪ without any equivocation or mentall reservation▪ never to desert this cause, but mutually to joyn with and support each other in the maintenance of it; in testimony thereof, we have subscribed this Protestation. THe Exceter Covenant taken by the Mayor, and the well affected there; and I heer those that refuse to take this, shall be cast out; they have raised 3000 Vo∣ in Exon to withstand the Caveliers of Cornwall.
A Letter from Bristoll the tenth of December. 1642. IT is this day Written from Bri∣stoll, that whereas His Majesty had sent to that City acknow∣ledging their affections to His service, and out of a sence of the present distractions of the Kingdom, to give them order not to receive any forces whatsoever, which might come in to disturb their Peace; whereupon they understanding, that Colo∣nell Essex from Gloucester was ready to march to Bristoll, they sent 3 of their Aldermen to him, to de∣sire him not to advance; who upon treaty with them, finding the malignity of their Message, detained their persons, and set forward his march thither, where he found strong resistance; but setting these Aldermen in the Front of the battell, by that means abated their rage, and with the assistance of the good party in the City, they got entrance, which City and Castle they have now secured for the King
King and Parliament, and placing there a sufficient Garrison, are gone into Sommersetshire to joyn  the Voluntiers there to resist Sir Ralph Hopton in his march. The Marquesse of Hartford was at Mon∣mouth on his way to Bristoll, expecting admittance thither; but understanding that Colonell Essex was got in, he is again retreated into Wales. FINIS.
