C5388 12117547 54371
CHOICE and RARE. EXPERIMENTS IN PHYSICK AND CHIRURGERY OR  Discovery of most approved Medi∣cines for the curing of most diseases incident to the body of Men, Wo∣men and of Children, together with an Antidotary of Ex∣periments never before Published. ound out by the Studie and experience of Thomas Collins Student in Physick neer the City of Gloucester. LONDON, nted by I. T. for Francis Eglesfield, at the sign or the Mari-gold in Pauls Church-yard. 1658.
To the honourable and truly vertucus gentlewoman, Mistris URSULA BUCKE, health, honour, ha∣piness and Heaven. WHen I had compiled, and with much diligent and industrious Labour colected into one vo∣lume, most of all the choice, select and approved medici∣able Remedies, for most diseases as are ncident to the bodies of men, of women nd children, together with an Antidota∣y of Medicaments vniversal, all which eing the secret observable and approved xperiments of the most excellent Physiti∣ns, as well Modern as Ancient; I was then dvertized by certain friends no less Iudi∣ious then learned; who reviewing t me, and conceived it to be a piece of uch worth as is not ordinarily obvious of ny yet extant in the like kinde, to cause
it to be published; To whose importunacy I condescended, although otherwise in∣tended, and to private use; Considering Non nobis solum nti sumus &c. And as then revolving to whom I might devote this subject, and could Commemorate not any more then your worthy sel, since you are a favouress of the Muses, esteeming and honouring all good literature and learning so, that onely I desire to present it unto your Tuition, which resolving of your favour∣ble acceptation, that you would be pleas∣ed to let it pass forth under your worthy name, although the Quantity of the vo∣lume, the manner of handling, or the Au∣thor be not in any wise proportionable t your unvalued and unparalelled worth; ye the subject in it self is worthy and honou∣rable; All which I desire to refer unto your discreet censure and favourable approba∣tion who am, Mistress, yours devoted in all humble observance Tho▪ Collins
Courteous Reader, WHat hath been the Expe∣rience of the Ancients, and of those of latter dayes for the Beneit of the health of man, you are here Presented with. Cast but your eye upon the first part of this Ex∣perience, And youl'e see Remedies for the distempers of men and women from head to the Inferiour parts: And having seen how youth and old age are supplied with meet and convenient Remedies for health, Peruse the second part and there thou wilt, in like order, finde the helps of Infancy, that so Childhood may not altogether be lest remediless vnde the burden of its ma∣ny tedious and irksom distempers. From whence there is but one little stp to an Antidotary raught with many excellent Generl remedies; All which,
what ever hath been the Labour of the Author in collecting them, Take thou and Use freely to the commodious be∣nefit of the health of thy self and of thy friends and Neighbours. Farewel.
These Books are printed for Fran. Egles∣field, and are to be sold at the Mari∣gold, in Pauls Church-yard. THe Works of that famous Mathematician Edmund Gunter, sometime professor of Astronomy in Gresham Colldge, with correcti∣os and additions of Master Samuel Foster late professor at the same Colledge The Art of Dialling, by Master Samuel Foster, in quar. The Needles Excellencie, or a book of Cut-works in quar. Aesops Fables in Prose and verse, Grammati∣cally Translated, illustrated with Pictures, exactly translated out of the original Greek, together with the history of his life in twelves. The office and duty of Constables, Church-wardens, and other officers, by Nicolas Layer Counsellor at Law in octav. The Map of England, with the Kings of Eng∣land, excellently done by W Holler. School-books. Reusneri Symbola exactly corrected, & the de∣fects of the tables in ormer Editions rectified. Rhetorices Elementa. The english Rudiments of the Latine tongue, explained by Question and Answer. Vestibulum Linguae Latinae; all by William Du-gard, Master of Merchant-Tailor School. Formulae Oratoriae in usum Scholrum concin∣natae, by Iohn Clark of Lincoln. Phraseologia Puerilis, or select Latine and English Phrases, in octav by Iohn Clark Possclii Syntaxis, in Greek
Dux Grammaticus by Iohn Clark of Lincoln with Additions. Divinity Books. The excellency of a gracious Spirit, toge∣ther with Moses self-denial. The Saints inheritance, and the worldlings portion, by Ieremy Burroughs in octav. The Saints Dinity and Duty, with the dan∣ger of ignorance and hardness, by Tho Hooker. The souls possession of Christ, by Tho Hooker. Three treatises, 1. The young mans Memento. 2. Now if ever. 3. The danger of being al∣most a Christian; all published by Iohn Chishll of iverton in Devon. A Treatise of the Attributes of God unfold∣ed and applied, by Master Thomas Larkham Minister of Gods Word at Tavestock it Devon. A Philosophical discourse of Urines by Henry Hamond. These Books are now in the Press. Master David Dixon his excellent Exposi∣tion on all Saint Pauls Epistles, in English, in folio. A new Volum of Doctor Prestons, never be∣fore published. Choise and rare experiments in Physick and Chirurgery with variety of excellent receipts, never before published; discovered by the elaborate pains and industry of Master Thomas Collins, Practitioner of Physick neer the City of Glocester. Master Iohn Cotton on the Covenant of Grace, reprinting by a Copy much larger then the  riends hands, and exactly
Table of the Remedies for all disea∣ses of the bodys of man and woman, that are contained in this book. A oplexy to cure page 15 Aposthema, and to cure Aposthema persons 52 ppetite to procure 70 gue quartane 80 gue tertian 86 In time of the fit. ibid. gue of a long continuance 84 ch in the back 67 96 97 135 fer-pain of a woman delivered 17 fer-burden of a dead child ibid. reath that is stinking to destroy 41 reath to make swee 42 43 reath that is short 51 52 rest, the diseases 44 rest that is sore to break it, ibid. 56 57 rest to heal 53 rest to keep from breaking 53 54 rest to skin that is raw 54 rest that is hard ib. rest that is broken 55 oling in a womans brest 56 lood to cleanse 88 owes diseased 91 Back weak 97 Back over ho 98 Consumption 9 47 60 Chest stopped 48 Cough of the Lungs 58 Cataplasme 63
Choler to vid Collick Cawdle for one with child 1 Cough and Phlegm Deafness to cure 32 33 34 35 3 Dropsey to cure 74 75 12 Delivery of a woman quick 12 Deliver a woman of a dead child 12 Diarrhea, or the humeral flux 1 Epilepsy of children 1 Eye diseased with Gummy matter 1 Eye weeping ib. 18 23 25 2 Eyes to keep cleer and cool, and to take away th redness, and kill the itching 17 18 22 23 2 Eyid overturned 1 Eyes swelled 2 Eyes pained ib. 21 3 Eye grown hard Eyes troubled with a humor 2 Eyes cured by Mr Davis water 2 Eye troubled with a mote 2 Eye with a pearl in it 2 Eye sight to restore ibid Eye with a pin or web in it 3 Ear that hath a noìse in it 31 4 Ear pained ibid Ear that hath an impostume in it 3 Falling sickness 11 12 13 1 Fainting 6 Feaver 81 82 83 8 Feaver to cool ibid. Fundament to cure 92 93 Flux 102 103 Flux humoral to stop ibid. 104 119 Flux cured by an Irish Medecine ibid. Flux that is desperate and bloody 105 106 Flowers to suppress 120
Flux red in women 123 Flux of the Matrix 120 118 French Pox 100 Gall diseased 75 76 Gonorrhoea 98 100 Green sickness 12 Gout 128 131 132 133 134 Head ach 1 3 5 6 7 8 9 Head ach extream ib. 4 Head ach for ever to cure 7 Head, to purge 9 28 Head to expell cold out of it 9 Hearing hindered through pain of the head 33 Hearing 35 36 Hoarsness 50 Heart weak 64 Heart trembling 65 Heart beating ibid. Heart that hath an ach, or troubled with worms ib. Impostume 62 Iaundies 77 Iaundies black ibid. Iulep for the Liver 73 tching to kill 17 Kings evil 50 51 Liver diseased 72 73 Lues Venera 100 Legs swoln 113 Megrims 7 Mouth 43 Madness 66 Melancholy 78 Matrice 119 120 Matrice to cleanse 126 Mother 120 124 125 Menstruus overflowing 121 Menstruus to provoke 122
Miscarrying to prevent 26 Murre and cough 50 Milk coagulating in the brest 56 Nose that stinketh 41 43 Nature to restore 97 Nature to preserve from wasting 99 Oyl for an ach 135 Oyl for the Palsey 10 Oyntment for an ach in the back 97 Palse 10 Phegm 4 58 59 Phtysick 57 58 61 63 Pox 100 Piss well 111 Powder to restore Nature and preserve it 97 Plster for the Gout 131 Pulvis ducis for the stomach 70 Rheum 45 Rupture 92 93 Reines to restore that are sore 98 101 Running of the Rains 99 Rains to mundify 108 Sight to preserve 9 17 Sight dim 19 20 25 Sight decayed 26 Sight to get though blind 28 29 Sitch in the side 63 Swooning 66 Stomack that is weak 67 Stomack troubled with winde ib. 69 Stomack cold 68 70 Stomack pained ibid. Stomack to comfort after vomiting 68 Stomack to cleer 69 Stone 77 106 108 Ston in the Reines 107 Stone to break 109
An oyntment for the back, if the Stone come away painful 109 Stone to slip with a Pultis 110 113 114 Sir Traver Williams receit for the stone 114 Stone to prevent ibid. 115 Sone in the kidnies 117 Sciatica 134 135 Spee hiess with the Palsey 10 Tooth ach 39 37 40 Teeth rotten and stinking 38 Tooth ach never to vex you more 39 Teth loose 40 Teeth to leave aching, or fal out 40 Teats of a woman impostumed 57 Termes to bring down 122 Voice hoarse 44 Voice hoarse of long continuane ibid. Vein broken to knit 69 Vrin that is sharp 111 Vin that is hot and burning 112 Vrin that is foul or red 113 Vrin to provke ibidem Vomiting 68 White and Weaknesse of nature 124 125 Wheesing in the Chest 48 Water for the sight 18 27 Water that is pretious for many sicknesses 10 Walnuts preserved for a cough & a consumption 47 Windy Colick 91 Web in the eye 24 A Table of the Remedies for children Diseases. For the Diseases of the head 139
For the diseases of the eyes 143 For the diseases of the ears 145 For the diseases of the Teeth and Mouth 146 For the diseases of the neck throat and breast 149 For the diseases of the Stomach 151 For the diseases of the Navel 156 For the diseases of the reins and bladder 158 For ruptures 159 For the small pox and measels 162 For agues and feavers. ibid. For the diseases of the Cods 166 For the Shingls 166 For burning and scalding 169 For to kill and destroy lice. Also the manner how to make divers sorts of most pretious Waters, Balsomes, Oyles, with other rare and excellent Medicines, with their uses, Vertues, and wonderful Operation, page 175▪ to the end.
CHOICE and RARE EXPERIMENTS IN PHYSICK AND CHIRURGERY. The Head, the reme∣dies for its distempers. Head-ach. Here followeth the brief description of in∣ward and outward diseases of the body, with the most wholsom and expert Re∣medies for the Cure thereof. And first of the sickness of the Head. ANd it is to be noted, that the cure or remedy must be ap∣propriated according to the nature and cause of the grief, which if it be not rightly considered, it would be but vain to apply any Medicine: and therefore the right judge∣ment of an expert Physician is very requisite &
needful in such cases as you may plainly con∣ceive; for the multipliity or diversity of cau∣ses in some diseases, maketh the cure of more difficulty: as also the methodical way of apply∣ing the same, in observation of the circumstan∣ces of the Patients age, constitution, strength, sex and the like, which must of necessity be ob∣served in the administring or prescribing of all medicines, that should take effect perfectly to cure, &c. And now Headach chanceth often∣times of divers and sundry causes, as of blood, choler, flegm or melancholy, or of ventosity, and sometime of heat of the Sun, or of too grea cold of the air. If it come of blood; the Cephalick vain o the right arm is to be cut or opened; if the pai continue, on the vain of the forehead on tha side the pain is, then lay upon the place yl o Roses, Vineger and Rose-water, or a bagge wit Roses, sprinckled with Rose-water. And it is to be noted aswell in this cause a all other, that if his belly be hard and bound first ye must give him an easie Clyster, or else o Cassi newly drawn out of the Cane, or some o∣ther easie Laxative to provoke the duty of th Womb, else all applications of medicines wil be nothing worth at all. If the Headach proceed of Choller, there  sharp pain and heat, chiefly on the right side o the Head. Ye must give him morning and evening,  drink Srup of Violets, with a mean draught  Endive Water in a glass, or of Cummin wa sdden and cooled again: And instead of the Syrups you may drink water of Endive, Succ∣ry, Puslain and Nenupar mixed together,
one of them by himself, two or three dayes at even and morn: Then give a dram of Pilulae sine quibus at night to bedward, or about mid∣night, and the day following keep you i your chamber. Instead of these Pills▪ it is good every morn to take an hour before Sun a medicine to drink, that shall be made of half an ounce of Succo Rosarum, mixt with two ounces of En∣dive water. Instead of the said Succo Rosarum ye may take half an ounce of Dia prunis Laxative, and ye must take heed in giving such purgati∣ons, that the patient be strong, for if he be weak, ye may give him but half of the said pills or of the other Laxatives. And if in dimini∣shing the quantity of the said medicines it worketh not with the patient, as it should, it is convenient to give him a common Clyster. Another remedy for the same pain. Ye must lay thereon a linnen clothe moisted in Rose-water, Plantaine-water, Morrel-water & Vinegar, or else take the juice of Lettice and Roses and a little Vinegar, and warm it toge∣ther, and dip therein a linnen cloth, and lay it to the pain. For an extream Headah. Pound Euphorbium with Vinegar, and if the grief be on the right side of the head, then ay it on the left, or on the right when the pain s on the left side, for it mitigates all pain very excellently, but we must suffer the same to continue thereon no longer then the space of
saying a Pater Noster, and then wash it off. Another. Take nine or ten pieces of Zeduaria being smal, cut it in parcels, or else pound it somewha grossely; infuse thereon clear water, and the put it into a glass, and madesie clouts therei of the breadth of two fingers, and apply them on the forhead and temples of the same, and the same being dryed moisten them again. For burning Headach. Take a handful of Houslick, beat it with wo∣mans milk, and with a little Rose-water, ti' it be like unto a poultis or pap, and therewit anoint your head. For shooting in the Head. Pound Poppy-seed with yelks of eggs till  be like paste, and lay it on the grief. Against continual Headach, and singing of the Ears. Beat Elder leaves and Rose-leaves, with o of Ivy-leaves one amongst the other, and de∣press the juice thereout; tye these leaves o the head, and with the juice thereof anoint th head. For headach in the forepart. Take Eldre leaves made hot between tw
stones, and applied to the temples. And for the better understanding of the sickness, chancing in the head, ye shall know, that sometime it chanceth because of other diseased members, as of the stomack, or of the mother, of the rheums of the Liver, or of the Spleen, and not of any cause of the head it self; therefore ye ought to cure such sickness by helping of the same members as shall be shewed here fol∣lowing. And ye may know that the headach cmth of diseases; of the stomack, when the patient hath great pain in the stomack; of the Mother, when the woman feeleth great pain in her belly; of the reins, when there is a great pain in the back; of the Spleen when he feeleth pain and heaviness under the left side; of the Liver when the pain is on the right side, about the Liver which is beneath the ribs. Remedies appropriate to the head of what cause soever the pain is. Take a handful of Betony, an handful of Camomil, and an handful of Vervine leaves picked, stamp them and seethe them in black wort, or in Ale for lack of it, and in the latter end of the seething put to it a little Cummin braid, the powder of a Harts-horne and the yelks of two eggs, and Saffron a little, stir them well about, and lay a plaister hot over all his forehead and temples. This is an excellent re∣medy also for the Megrim, it shall pirce the better if ye add a little Vinegar.
Another. Make a plaister of Bean flower, Lineseed, and oyl of Camomile, or in lack of it Goos grease or Ducks grese, and rub the place with Aqua vitae, and after lay the plaister hot up∣on it. Another. Take Wormwood brayed well and boyled in water, and binde it to his temple upon the grief: It will mitigate the pain and cause him to have a pleasant sleep. Another. Take a sponful of Mstardseed, and ano∣ther of Bay berries make them in powder, and stampe them with a handful of earth worm split and scraped from their earth, and a little oyle of Roses or of Camomile, or Capcs grease, and lay it to the grief. Also it is good to take the juice of Ivy-leaves mixt with oyl and Vinegar, and so rub therewith your temples and your nostrils. Pills for al pain of the head although inveterate. Take Aloes epat. washed three ounce. Bryon▪ Mstic. elect ana. one ounce. Diagrv. hee drams. Let it e consected with juice of Coleworts. The dose from two Scruples, even unto four. It taketh away all pain of the head, and rejoy∣th and comforteth the memory.
To remedy all manner of Headach and Megrim. Camomile, Betony, Vervine leaves of each an handful, stamp them, seethe them in white Wine or Ale, adding therto pounded Cummin∣seed a little, three spoonful of Vinegar, the yelkes of two Eggs and a little Saffron, fiat Em∣plastrum & apponaur fronti, &c. & sanabis. A remedy teaching that one shall never feel Headach. Take Pills of Aloes succotrine made in powder, and mixt with the juice of Colewort, the bigness of a Bean at a time. For the Headach. Take Wormwood and Camomile of each like much, one handful, and as much of Maid∣en-wort, and a half penny wrth of Cummin, and make it into powder and cast it tgether, and put it into a cloth of the breadth of a span, and warm it against the fire, and then lay it to his head, &c. For the Headach or Megrim. Take Rosemary, Lavender flowers, winter Sa∣vory, Camomile, Bayes and Lavender, with both new and old Mintes and Fennil, seethe all these together in runing water, and put thereto a good handful of Bay Salt, then take some of the same liquor, herbs and all, and wash your seet twice therewith every morn and even, for the
sace of four dayes; and in so doing it will take away any pain of the head, although it be never so extream or grievous. This hath been proved. Another. Take Majerom-water, and hold your nose over it, and then draw your winde hard unto ou, untill such time as the winde hath entred into your ose divers times, and your head will cease aking speedily. For Dizziness in the head. Take Pilulae Cochiae one ounce, temper it with twenty drops of oyl of Anniseeds, and make seven pills of it, and swallow them and keep warm in your Chamber till it have done working, then eat any warm broth, made of Veal, Mutton, or Chicken, and comfortable Herbs. After this purge so used, this Electua∣y following. Take Betony-flowers, and Rosemary-flow∣ers, three ounces, powder of Carduus benedictu leaves, powder of Marigold leaves one ounce, boil them with one pound of beaten Sugar, and half a pint of Bugles-water, and Marje∣rom-water, and Betony-water, and Balm-water of each two ounce, boil together over a gentle fire to the thickness of honey, and use thereof as much as a Nut morning and evening till it be spent▪ Probat. Chew every morning Cloves fasting, or whole Mace, and use Coriander Comsits or the seeds prepared, and use after meat Marmalade of Quinces to clse the stom∣ack,
and repress the vapors that fume up thence to the brain. For the Headach and o stop the rheum. Dry Wheat-bran, and beaten Henbane seed, and put them in a bag, and lay them warm to the nape of the neck. To dry up and draw rheum out of the head. A quilt made with Bay-salt, dry Sage and Cummin is good for the rheum to draw it out and waste the humors, and in like case is the leaves and flowers of Mustard-seed, bruised and so laid to the crown of the head. To purge the head and preserve the sight. Drink Beer every morning a good draught fasting, wherein the roots of Dog fennel or Mo∣therwort is steeped, the roots somewhat bruis∣ed, and it will presently work in your eyes and head. To expel a cold stomack or head, and to expel a Consumption or either of them. Take a pint of white wine Vinegar, and half a pound of the best fine hard Sugar, mix them and a head of Garlick trimmed clean, & bruis∣ed to mash, then put them altogether into a pipkin and boil them softly till half be wasted, and take thereof morning and evening a small quantity. It will help the cold, and expel a consumption.
An oyl to cure the cold Palsie and shaking Palsie. Take a young cub Fox, case him and gut him, and chop him in peices and boil him in three gallons of water with a great handful of Her be-grace bruised, and ever as the first scum ariseth scum it of, and cast it away, and all the rest of the scum and fat which riseth, scum into a fair glass as long as you can get any, and co∣ver the glass close and anoint the place with the said ointment where the Palsie beginneth▪ and you shall be cured And to anoint the shaing Palsie cureth it in a short time. For quaking hands. Take Fennel, Rue, and Wheat-bran, seethe them in water and wash th hands therewith, also to wash thy hands in Claret wine is excel∣lent for the same, being often proved. For them which ae speechles with the Palsie. Take sharp Mustard and give it to drink in Ale or Beer warm; also Primrose roots cut in slices, and a slice lid under the tongue, will help in the like case. A precious water against many sicknesses. Take Nutmeg, Cloves, Cresses-seed, Cubeb Maces: Grains, Ginger and Cinnamon, of each alike much, and beat thm to powder, and put them in white wine a Limbeck, and distill them with a soft fire. This water drunk fasting
helpeth all cold sicknesses, putteth away all diseases in the eyes and redness and watering: It helpeth the Spleen, the Liver, the Fistua in the body, the Palsie, the cold Gou, the Palsie, with many other diseases, and much comforteth the stomack. For the falling Sickness Take a good handful of single Piony, stamp them in a pottle of white wine, having in it some Saffron within a cloth; then give three spoonful of this three dayes before the change of the Moon and three dayes after the change, the day of the change being not reckoned for one. Take three spoonfuls of this three mor¦ings, and three nights, press well the juice ou of the roots. Hang a Piony root as neer the heart as you can. Another. Take the weight of half a crown in silver, or half an ounce of red Fox Gloves, and the like weight of Southernwood, let them lie twelve hours a steep in a pint of Ale, then strain it, and give it blood warm fist and last, do so for three daes together about the time of the Moon your fit comth. If it be for a chide,  pint may be given at four daughts, it maketh the party sick but it cureth. For the Falling sickness or disease neer unto it. Take one once of Piony root dryed and finely beaten, and put it in a pint of Ale r
Beer or both, boil it and drink it morn and evening, an it will help you. It is proved. For the Falling sickness. Take three nails made in the Vigil of Saint Iohn Baptist, commonly called Midsummer eve, drive them in the ground so deep, that they be not seen in the place where the sick party fell, naming the parties name whiles it is in do∣ing. It will drive away the disease which Mi∣saldus credibly reported. A powder against the Falling sickness. Take of Christal prepared one dram. Of red Coral prepared two scruple. Of Pearl prepared one scruple. Of Oiental Smaragd prepared half a dram. The half part of which is one dose in the water of our Ladies thistle. Caear accounted this for a great secre, and with which men that were somewhat aged, as also those which have been long subject to this disease after purgation, were cured. Zacutus Lufitanus winesseth and reporteth, de Prax. Med. adm lib. observat. 20. that he hath seen many, and also of great age, having this disease of the Falling sickness, having try∣ed many remedies, as well of an hidden as manifest quality, which nothing profited or availed them, onely with the syrup made of the green leaves of Tobacco and hony, to have been cured, taking of the same three ounces three hours after supper for fourty dayes; if gree Tobacc  wanting, dry of good note,
or the best, may be used instead thereof. Another excellent Remedy for the salling evil. Take a good handfu of Piony roots, and a handful of Misselto that groweth upon a black∣horn, and a handful of Polypodium, otherwise called in English Oakefearn, and two good andful of Selendine, if it be possible it may e had, and stamp them very well, and then et them to steep either in Ale or Beer for the pace of two hours or more, and then put it in∣o your earthen pot, where it maybe kept close rom any air, and let the party grieved drink a ood draught thereof every morning fasting, nd last in the evening, and let him use it for he space of fourteen or fifteen dayes, and by Gods help it will cure him in short space. Against the Epilepsie of Children. Take Coriander prepared, Mstard-seed, Nutmegs of each half a dram, Piony-seed seven rams, Diptamni two drams, make thereof a owder, and let it be given in the morn with ot wine. Another expert against the Epiepsie. Take red Coal, the forepart of the skull of a man, of grains of Piony, of each one ram, mix it and make a powder thereof, of which powder must be given at three times, at morn, noon, and night with some broth or ome water appropriated, and if it help not at once, then renew it in the same manner and ose as before.
It is found that many things have a natural vertue against the falig evi, not of any qua∣lity elemental, but by a sigular property, or rather an influence from heaven, which al∣mighty God hath given unto things here on earth, as by these and other Saphies, Smargdes, red Coal, Piony, Misseltoe of the Oak aken in the Moneth o March and the Moon dcrasing▪ Time, Savin, Dill and the stone found in te belly of  young Swallow and others; these or one o them hangd about the neck of the child, sa∣veth and prserveth it from the said sickness. Take he root of Piony, and make it ino powder, and ive it the child to lick in a little pap and Sugar. They that are of age may eat of it a good quantity at once, and likewise of the black seeds of the same Piony. Item the purple Violets that creepeth o the ground in gardens with a long stalk, and i called in English Hearsase, drunk in water o in water and hony, helpeth this disase in  young childe: moreover the muskle of the Oak rased and given in milk, and water and hony is good. Also ye may still a water of the flowers of Linde, it is a tree call in Latine Tilia, take the same flowers, and distill a water, and let the patient drink thereof now and then a spoon∣ful, it is a good remedy. Item, the root of the Sea-thistle called Erigum in Latin, eaten in broth or drunken,  exceeding good. Some wite that Cichory is a singular remed for the same disease, it is meant by wilde Cicho∣ry growing in corns.
The flowers of Roseary ade a Conserve hath the same effect in curing this disase. I could declare many other rmdies com∣mended of Authors, but these are sufficiet. For the Falling sickness. Take the skul of a dead man, which is clean∣ly takn out of the grave pulverizate very sall, add also hereunto five or six Piony ker∣nels well pounded, take hereof in the morn one dam with wine, and it is for this disease one of the best remedies. An excellent Medicine sor the Apopexia and Falling sickness. Take Aqua vitae perfectly rectified without flegm, one pint, oyl of Vitriol one spoonful, mix thm and let the patient drink thereof e∣very morn one spoonul, and he shall be holp∣en, although he have had it ten years and ll every hour. And for Apoplexia, ye shall give it in the said ordr, but if he cannot drink it so, ye shall give it as you think good, so that he have it in his body, and prsently he shall amend, although he have had i a long while and were lame over all his body, &c. For the Falling Evil. Take the secundum of a boy child, dryed to powder in an Oven, and the forepart of a dead mans skul wash' in water of Betony, and the seed or root of Piony dryed into powder, and of Galingale, all into several portions, to the
quantity of a spoonful of each, moe or less, in the distilled water of Cowslipe flowers accor∣ding to the strength of the patient, and give to drink, drink three dayes together, and then rest three dayes, and then drink it three dayes together again, then rest three dayes, and so till he have took it nine dayes. The Eyes, The Remedies for its distempers. A Medicine to take all gummy matter or filth out o the Eyes. TAke Housleek, otherwise called Sin∣greeen, and stamp it well, and strain it through a fine linnen cloth, and with the juice thereof wash the eyes often, and it will both clear the sight and purge the eyes from all manner of filth and matter. A powder for weeping and running eyes. Take red Coral one dram, Tutia half an ounce, and burn them in a vessel of earth, then put into it fine Pearl half a dram, and beat it small into fine powder in a stone morter, and search it through silk, and put of it into the eye morning and evening, and close up the eye till tis dry. This is a great secret, and is excel∣lent for a pearl and dimness of sight.
For the Sight. marvellous good water to recover the Eye sight he same being  by any cause whatsoever▪ Take three drams of Tutia made into hall powder, an like quantity of Aloes paticum, and three drams of fine Sugar,  ounces of Rosewater, and as much white ine, mingle all these together and put them to a glass, and stop it close, and set it to and in the Sun by the space of a moneth rring it together once every day. Then ke the quantity of six drops at a time of the me water, and drop it into your eyes both orn and even, and so continue for a short ace, and it will cause your sight to come a∣in, and be as clear and as perfect as ever it as before. This hath been proved by one hat recovered his sight, having lost it a mo∣th before it was ministred unto himself. most singular good Medicine to keep the Eyes clear, cool, and from redness, and to kill the Itching of them. Take a good handful of Housleck, and two andfuls of Plantaine, and stampe them well gether, and strain them, then let the juice and and settle for a little space, and when it well settled, power out the clearest from the sidue; and put thereto half as much red ose water as is of the juice, and half a quarter  white Sugar candy beaten to fine powder,
and then take a piece as big as a Walnut, or somewhat more of Lapis Calaminaris, and let it slake ten or twelve times in the same water and let the patient take four or five drops a he lyeth upright in his bed thereof, and put i into his eyes and it will help him. This hat been proved. For running eyes of a cold. Take Tutiae ten drams, Coralli rubri, mirabola citrini, succo▪ aloes alike two drams, piperis ha a dram fiat pulv, and put often into the eye. Here is a precious water for the sight, and for th that be fair clear blind. Take Smallach, red Fennel, Rue, Vervin Betony, Cinqfoile, Pimpernel, Eurace, Sag Selendine, of each a quarern of a pound, an wash them clean, and stampe them and d them in a clean brazen pan, and take fie Pepper corns and bruise them all to powde and cast them to the Hebs, and a pint of goo white wine, and three spoonful of life hony and five spoonfuls of a man-childs urine that  innocent, and boil them altogether on th fire a little, and strain them. A Medicine for them that may not well see and if the eyes be red. Take the white Ginger, and rub it on  Whetstone in a clean basin, and take there as much Salt as thou hadst of the powder, an temper them with white wine, and let it stan
n the bason all a day and a night, then do that clear that standeth above into a clean glass, nd anoint thine eyes a litle therewith when hou goest to bed with a soft feather and do so often, and forsooth he shall be hole on warran∣ise. For them that the Eye-lids be over-turned beneath. Take Arnement and hony, and the white of ggs, of all alike much, and temper them to∣gether, then take hurden of Flax, and wet hem in water, and wring out the water clean, nd lay these three things on the Hurds plaist∣erwise; And if evil blood be within thy eyes, t shall drive it out and heal them. De ophthamia. There happeneth sometime debility and ulness of sight which must be holpen accor∣ing to the divers causes thereof as followeth. Take Fennil, Vervine, Celidone, Rue, Eye-right, and Roses, of every one of them alike much, ad distil them as ye would distil Rose∣water, and use theeof a little in your eyes, oth in the morn, and when ye go to bed. A water proved to clarifie the dimness of sight: Take the juice of Fennil, of Celidony, Rue, nd Eye-bright, of each two ounces, hony an unce and hal, Aloes, Tutiae, and Sarcoclle, of ach half an ounce, the gall of a Capon, Chick∣n or Cock, two drams, Nutmegs, Cloves and
Saffron, of each a dram, Sugar candy six drams, put all into a Limbeck of glass and distil it, and of this water put in your eyes once in a day. For the same. Ye must use every day to eat Nutmegs, and to take once in a week a Myrabolane condite. Take green Walnuts, liuks and all from the tree, with a few Wallnut leaves, and distill therof a water to drop into our eyes. Pills good for the sight. The pills sine quibus, asswaged with Trochisk of Agarick and Piulae Lucis are excellent good to purge the brain, and comfort the sight. For swelling of the Eyes. Take a Quince and seethe it in water till it b soft, then pare it and bruise it, and mix i with the yelk of an egg, and the crus o wheat or white bread steeped in the said water and put thereto a little womans milk, and tw penny weight of Saffron, bray them altogethe and ly it over the forehead and the eyes. To resolve gummy matter in the eyes y shall use to wash your eyes oftentimes wit th juice of Houleek, otherwise called Sen∣green. For great pain of the eyes. Take an ounce and an half of oyl of Roses the yelk of an egg, and a quarter of an ounce o Barly flower, and a little Saffron, mix all toge∣her
and put it between two linnen cloths, nd lay it to the pain. Another. Take crums of wheaten bread or white an unce, and seethe it in Nightshade or Morrel-ater, then mix with the said bread two yelks f eggs, oyl of Roses and Camomile, of each n ounce and a half, Mucilage of Lineseed an unce, and use it as aforesaid. Another. Take six leaves of Henbane and rost them, hen beat them very well in a Morter and lay hem to the pain. For redness of the Eyes. In the beginning of the redness, lay upon he eye Tow dipped in the white of eggs, but et the whites be well beaten first with Rose∣ater, or with Plantaine-water. Another. Take red Roses and seethe them, and let hem be set warm to your eye. This taketh way spots of blood that sometime chanceth n the eyes: also it is good for all diseases of he eyes, and it is good for redness of the yes that cometh by striking or any such vio∣ence. If at any time there happen a spot or lemish in the eye by a stroke, ye must by and y lay to it Tow wet in Rosewater and in
whites of eggs, and after the pain is mitigated; ye must lay to it a Plaister upon the eye made of a raw egge, Barly flower, and the juice or Mucilage of Mallows, and then if the eye be not holpen of the said blood, ye must lay to it a plaister both dissolutive, defensive, and partly appeasing the pain, which must be made of Wheat flower, the juice of Mallows, Mint and smallage, and the yelk of an egge. Of hardness that hath been long in the eye. Take a scruple of Aloes succotrine and mel it in water of Selendine at the fire, then re∣ceive the fume of it, and afterward, wash the eye with Fennel-water. Another. Take the powder of Cummin mixt wit wax like a plaistr, and lay it upon the eye. Another. Take Roses, Sage, Rue, Celidony, of eac alike much, with a little Salt, and distill  water, and put thereof a drop or two in you eye morning and evening, instead of that w∣ter it is good to take juice of Vervine, Rue and a little Rosewater. For all redness of the eyes▪ Take the bigness of a Nut of white Coppris, and a scruple of Ireos and powder it and mix it with a glassful of well water, then put two o three drops in your eyes.
For the same. Water of strawberries made and put in the ye is good. A singular powder that dryeth and takeh away the redness of the eyes. Take Tutiae preparatae an ounce, and Timonie alf an ounce, pearles two drams, red oral a dram, and an half, powder all these hings very fine and keep it in a box o Tin nd use it. For to stop watering of the eyes. Take a plaister of powder of Mastick, fine Frankincense, Bole-armoniack, and Gum ragagant with white of egg mixt together, nd lay to the forehead and Temples. Also it s good to lay ventoses on the Nape of the eck. Also t is good to make a Collyrie to put nto the eyes as olloweth. Take Tutiae preparat. and the stone called Lapis Hematites of each a dram, Aloes half a dram, Pearls and Camphire of each a scruple, powder them all very fine, and mix them in hree ounces of water distilled of the knops of Roses and thereof make a Collyrie. Also for to stop all humours descending to the eyes, these things aforesaid are good mixed wh rain water, wherein Olibanum or Fran∣kincense hath been odden.
For webbes of the eye. It may easie be holpen in young folk, but  aged pesons it is very hard; And in the be∣ginning ye must mollific them with a decoct on of the flwers of Camomile, Mellilote,  cool Leaves, receiving the fume of the  decoction within the eyes, and thn put there in a little powder made with Sugar candy Sagemme, and egge shells brent, and afte distill into them womans milk, with the de∣coction of Fenugreeke. Another singular receipt for webbes in the eyes. Take snayles with the shells on, and  them eight times, and distill them in a co¦mon Stillatory, then take Hares galls,  Corall and Sugar-candy with the said wate distill them again, and put every morning a evening a drop into your eyes. Another. This water is made of white Copperis, S∣gar candy, and Rosewater, with whites of egg sodden hard, and strained through a Lin Cloth, and put into your eye after dinn and at night to bdward. To stay the humours that fall in the eyes. Take Mastick, Sanguis draconis, the whi of an egge, and Rosewater, of every one a sm
uantity mixt them altogether, and make a laster thereof, and spread it on a piece of elvet and lay it to the temple vain, and let it ick here till it fall of it self. To clear the eyes that be dim of sigh. Take the Juice of Caprifolium, or wood∣inde, and dry it in the sun till it come to a e powder, after it is pounded, strained, and rought to fine powdr, blow some of it to the eyes and it will help God willing. The Juice of Caprifolium, is called at the pothecaries Lycium, you ought not to wash he woodbinde before the straining, especially hen you make Lycium for the eyes. To destroy Rheum that it fall not into the eyes. Take raw beef a fair slice, as broad as your and and lay it in a pewter platter, and put to asmuch aqua vitae as will cover the beef, and t it on a chaffing dish of coles, let it boil in qua vitae until it be ready, as though it should e eaten, then take it out of the Aqua vitae, nd lay it to the neck of the grieved partie, nd there let it remain and use it, and it will ive the Rheum that doth offend the eyes. roved. Master Davies water, for the clearing of the eye sight being much decayed. Take two great handfuls of eye bright when is well sprunge up, and in full flowring, and e handful of Balm, and still them together, nd scum the water nine dayes, then use every
morning to wash your eyes, and eye-browes therewith and use so quarterly nine dayes to∣ther, and it will cause you in short space to read without spectacles, if you have used spe∣ctacles before time.Probat. To draw a mote out of the eye. Take white sope, and scrape a little of it into a Sawcer, and dry it by the fire, very dry, and then put it into a little fair water, but make it not too thin, put it into the sore eye with a feather and its good for man or beast, Probat. A cure for the sight decayed. Take 3. pintes of barly flower finely boulted, make paste thereof with fair water, or with distilled water of Tormentil, and make your paste stiff and roul it like venison pastie, and fill it full of the leaves, flowers, and Wyers of Tormentil, and put thereto one peny of life∣hony, and close it and bake it with Cakes, and when its baked, break it in small pieces, and put it in a steane pot of ale of three gallons and drink no other drink neither at meat, nor any other times, for the space of two moneths, and this shall restore the sight if possible. Pro∣at. A powder to clear he sight much decayed and near gone. Take of the powder of eye-bright made of the leaves and Flowers stripped together and
o fine powder four ounces, of Mace one ince, mingle them and take thereof, the ight of three pence before meat. water to preserve the eye-sight which hath been commended to be the best in the world. Take Hepatis hircini sani & recentis 4. ounces, lmi Aromatici melli, one half ounce, succi a one scrple, Aquae Celidoniae, six drams, ue feniculi, aquae Verbenae, aquae Euphragiae of ch 4. drams, Pieris longi, Nucis Moschat, iGario∣orum of each grains fifteen, Croci, grains two, is Rerismarini aliquantulum, contusi Pugillum is, Sarcocolle, Aloes Hepatice one scruple, of e gall of a Hen, and of a Capon of each ee drams, hony of roses one dram, mingle em, and distill them in a glass, still first brui∣g them and putting to them one quarter of ounce of the best refined Sugar. Some three four drops in each eye at a time is thought ficient, its also a fine smelling water with a tle smell, not very easily perceived, nor elling far off. Its not much matter, whether  Liver of the Kid be of a he Kid, or a e Kid, but of the two, the he Kid is ought to be the better. A preservative for the eye sight. Make comfits of Turnepseeds, and eat a re of them after dinner, and supper, as ny immediately after the said meats It was ected that nine or ten of the said Comfits ould be eaten, after meales, they are to be led in Sugar.
To purge the head and preserve the sight. Drink beer every morning a good draugh asting, wherein the roots of dog fennell o Motherwood is steeped, the roots somwhat bruisd, and it will presently work in your eye and head, Probat. For all Infirmities in the eyes. Take ground Jvy called Cill gee by the ground alias Ale-hoof, Celendine and Daysies the Flowers, leaves and roots of each one o these herbs, and a like quantity of the stamped and strained, and a little Sugar, an red rose water put thereto, and dropped wit a feather into the eyes, it taketh away all ∣flamation and spots, scabs, scales, Itch, sma∣ing, or any grief whatsoever in the eyes, y although the sight were almost gone. A god water for sore eyes. Take a pint of running water, half an ha∣ful of Singrene Leaves and a little of unico horn, and boil it all together and pour out  water and wash the eyes therewith. Proved. A precious Medicine for the eyes, then which no better be, for though a man had been ten years, within eleven dyes he shall be stored to his sight again of very truth. Take smallach, brown fennile, vervi  etonie, avence, pimpernel, strawbe wis, Filago, Eufrace, Clendine, Sage, of e
alike much and lay them all a night to sleep in a childs urine that is a virgin, and after put t into a morter and put seven corns of peper and stamp it small and temper it with the sme rine aforesaid, and then strain it and keep it in boxes and anoint the eyes in the morning and Evening. For sight of the eyes lost, how to restore the same, and to clear the eyes and to help the dimnss of tem. Take Eye-bright water made of all the whole Eye-bright and anoint the eyes ofte▪ and eat often the powder thereof and drink the water, use it long, sanat. To cleanse the eyes and do away the pearl. Take the red Roses and Maiden-air, and Rue, Vervine, Eusrace, Endive, and Singen, Hill-worte, red Fennel, f each alike three ounces and wash them clan, and lay hem in white wine all day, and all night, and ar distil them. And the first will be like gold, and the second like silver, and the third like Eawm, this is for the eyes, a worthy water and a good, &c. To restore their eyes that are as though they did see and yet see not. The decoction of Tormentil daily drunk three Moneths, and no other dink, and the same Tormentil every night laid plaster wise on the eyes, doth it pro certo.
To kill the pin or webbe in the eye. Take leaves of Celendine and stamp the well and strain them, and with a feather  one drop of the same Juice into the eye of the patient and it will presently help. A very good Medicine to kill a pearl or webe the eye. Take a good quantity of three leaved gra that beareth the honey suckles▪ and bruise well in a Mortar, or else in a wooden dish, and then strain it, & let the party grieved put some of the same Juice into his eye, and by using this twice or thrice a day, for the space of si, or seven dayes together it will help him. A good Medicine for eyes that be blood-shot and red. Take Housleek and stamp it well, then take a new laid egg, and make a hole in the one end of it, and draw out all the meat of it, and put the Juice of Housleek into it, and set i on the Embers, and so distill it, and scum it clean with a feather, and at night when you go o bed, Let a drop thereof fall into your eye, with the feather, lying upon your back, and this will presently help you. For eyes that runn. Take Occulus Christi and Celendine, red fen∣nil, and daysies, and stamp them together i
a Mortar and take the Juice and put it into the eye. For the apple of the eye. Take the juice of Terfylle, the yelk of an egg a prettie portion of hony, and the milk of a woman, flour of wheat, and make a plaister, and ly thereto till it be whole. The Ears: Remedies for all dis∣eases in the ears. For noise and sounding of the Ears. TAke Pilulae Cochiae, or fetidae because the sound is of ventosity or Phlegm, and be∣fore ye take the said pills, It is good to drink three ounces of Fennel water, two hours be∣fore meat, four or five dayes: After the o∣peration of the said pills ye must dip a tent in oil of Rue, Castor or of salt with the juice of Leek, and often in the morning fasting to hold his ear over the decoction of Marjerom, Rue, Wormwood, Camomil and Melilote. For pain in the Ears. Goose-grease with a little hony swageth the pains of the Ears. Item, oyl of Almonds especially of the bitter Almonds hot. em, If there be water in the Ears, it shall
be had out with a little Goose-grease, and the juice of Onions; sometimes there chance deafness by winde which is in the Ear, the which causeth inckling in the Ear, and then one must put a little Aloes in hot water, or in white wine and distil into the Ear, then put a little Euphorbium in powder into his Nose for to make him to neese, and avoid asmuch hu∣mors as ye can. Sometime deafness cometh  Phlegm which when it is old, it is uncurable▪ but when it beginneth it must be purged a hah been said in the remedy of the sound o the Ears; then take powder of Bay berries, and sethe it in oyl of Lilies, and put it warm into our Ear, and a little black wool to stop the Ear with, that no air nter. An approved Medicine for Deasnss. Take sweet Sallet oyl half a pound, add to it Wormwood, Sorrel, Aniseed, Perwinckle, of each one dram, dry all to powder, the pow∣der of old Roses one ounce, as much of Colo∣quintida boiled in the said oyl, strain and use it three drops into the Ear at a time warm. To recover the lost hearing or deasness in the Ear. Take Civet a grain, Musk one grain, and good Tar one scruple, mix all these together▪ and put it into a fine linnen cloth or peice of silk, and binde it fast with a thread, and put it into the Ear cloth and all, and binde the thread about the top of the Ear, and so wear it in the ear, and thou mayest take it forth, when thou wilt, it doth then help the had, and recover the hearing.
A soveaign Medicine for the pain and buzzing in the head which hindreth the haring. Take a Clove of Garlick, and pill it clean nd make three or four holes in the midst of it nd dip in it a little English hony, and put it nto your Ear, and put a little black wooll in str it, & for that night let the patient lye up∣n the contrary side, and let the ea that is topt be upright, and the next night following et him use the other ear in like sort, and lie n the other side as before; and so let him al∣r it every other night, and use it for the ace of eight or nine dayes together; and this ill expulse all ill humors out at his nose▪ eale he pain and restore the hearing. An experienced medicine for deafnes in the head. Take Bay leaves, Bay berries, Betony and ticades, of each of them one handful, and eethe them in white wine, till one hal be onsumed, but if it be an aged person use Mal∣esy instead of white wine, and then put it to a vessel that hath a narrow mouth and let he patient hold his ear upon it, it being un∣opped, so that he may suffr the same, eing neither too hot nor too cold; then take yl of bitter Almonds, and put three or four ops into his ears, and then stop it close with  lock of sheeps wooll that groweth between he Sheeps Legs, and if he put a little Musk,  Civet, it will be the better. This was prved.
A present Remedy for one that cannot hear. Take an Hedghog, and flea him, and ro him, and let the patient put some of the grea into his ear, and he shall recover his hearing in short space: This hath holpen those that could not hear almost any thing at all, and hath bee roubled with this impediment for the space of twenty years and yet were holpen with this. Medicine. An excellent good Medicine for deafness in the head. Take a quart of Malmesy, and a quarter  pint of clear running water, a pennyworth of Cummin, and eight or nine leaves of Beton▪ and boil them altogether until half the liquor be consumed, then take the pot wherein the Medicine is boiled and cover it close with  Tunnel, binde it close about the verge o brim whereby the heat may not issue forth then put a quill into the other end of the Tun∣nel, and let the patient hold his ear close that the heat may ascend up into his head, and when he is weary of holding the one ear, let him turn the other to the same place; and wilst the heat is ascending up into one of his ears, let the other be well stopped with black wool, and let him also apply hot cloths to keep in the heat on the other side of his head wilst the Medicine worketh, and let both
sides be used alike, and let the patient use this three times a day, that is to say, at morn, noon and night, and so continue it for the spae of eight or nine dayes together; and during all which space he must abstain from any open aire, and doubtless this will help him, for by experience it is known, that it hath cured both men and women that were above fifty years of age. For deafness or noise in the head, an excellent remedy. Take of the juice of a Radish root a pretty quantity, of the oyl of bitter or sweet Al∣monds, with a pretty deal of Colocynthis, and warm all these together in a little white wine, and when it is well mingled and bloodwarm, then pour a drop of it warm into thine ear; and this using the patient shall be remedied. Good for the earing. The juice of Betony cast into the ear luke∣warm, is very profitable against the pains of deafness or other impediments of the ears. Item, The fat of a Fox doth greatly cure the pain of the ears: also the juice of Hyssope mix with oyle and bloodwarm put into the ears, taketh away the painful aches of the ears. For to make a man hear. Take a red Onion and pick out the top, and fill it full of fair hot Hens grease▪ and lay the top on again, and rost it in the Embers till it
be tender, and then quish out the oyl into the ears of the sick man or woman, and then stop the ears with black wooll. An approved Medicine for deafness. Take sweet Sallet oyl half a pound, add to it Wormwood, Sorrel, Anniseeds, Perwinkle, of each alike one dram, dry all to powder, the powder of the old Rses one ounce, as much of Coloquintida boiled well in the said oyl, strain it and use it three drops at a time in the ear warm. Another approved. Take oyl of Castory, and of bitter Almonds and of Roses, let them be boiled in Aqua vit till the Aqua vitae be wasted or consumed, and so distil a drop at a time into the ear. For deafness, and for an Impostume of the ear, to break it, a rare secre. Take the juice of young Elder buds, and the inner rinde thereof, either of them and use, it helpeth. For a man that may not well hear. Take the block of an Ash, and lay it to the fire, and gather the water that cometh out o both ends of the block, and the juice of Ju∣barbe and white wine, the grease of Eel, of all these alike much, and seethe them well to∣gether, and put it into his ears till he be whole, &c.
The Teeth, Remedies for all their diseases. Remedy for the Toothach. PAain of the Teeth (as Galen saith) among other pains that are not mortal, is the most ruel and grievous of them all. It may come divers wayes, of a cold or hot cause; If it come of a hot cause, the Gums are red and very hot, wherefore it is very good to hold in his mouth water of Camphire, or to seethe a little Cam∣phire in Vinegar, and hold in his mouth; al∣so take Henbane roots, and seethe them in Vinegar and Rosewater, and hold in his mouth. If it come of cold causes, since in such cass oft times there distilleth abundance of water into the mouth, purge it with Piulae co∣chiae, afterwards keep in your mouth warm wine wherein hath been sodden Pellitory, Mintes, and Rew. Another. Take the middle barke of Elder, Salt and Pepper, of each alike much, and stampe them together, and lay it to the sore teeth. Item, Gum of Ivy with a little Lint dipped n Vinegar or Aqua vitae, applyed is very good.
For rotten and stinking Teeth▪ Stampe a quantity of Sage, with as mu Salt, and make thereof pretty pasties, b them in an Oven until hey wax black, a with the pouder thereof wash well your tee both mornings and evenings. Take the inner ride of Elder, and the inn rinde of the Withwinde, and the inner rin of Woodbinde, then shred it small, and pou it small, then pound into it pouder of Pep and a little salt, and pound it again, then put i into a linnen cloth and binde it fast a piece  bigge as a Damson, & hold it between the for teeth, let the moisture run out, when it do stint running, then take another ball so made▪ and hold it between your teeth doing the lik and at the third or fourth ball it will help if  come of rheum, but if it come of blood, yo must let them bleed. The decoction of Colocynth with srong Vinegar taketh away the pain of the teeth. To draw Teeth, take the brains of an Hare▪ and seethe them in red wine, and therewith a∣noint the Teeth, that you would have ou, and they will fall out without pain. Iem, The Gum of Ivy tempered with wax, and put to a pained tooth, will draw it out without pain. To draw a tooth without pain, rub it and none other with powder of the Gum of Ivy. A water to keep the teeth from stinking. Take long Pepper▪ Mintes▪ Purslane, Aristo∣logy rounda, salve green, seethe all together in wine, and use to wash thy teeth, and it will eep them both white and sweet.
For the Toothach. Take a spoonful of Aqua vitae, and a spoon∣ul of Triackle, half a spoonful of Pepper in fine powder, boil all these together upon a Chaffing-dish of coles, and then put it into a box, and put it into the Tooth where the pain is. Fill the hollow Tooth with the gum of Ivy, it will take away the Tooth-ach. Touch the Tooth that aketh with the root of water Crowfoot' incontinent it taketh ∣way the pain and breaketh the tooth. In  vehement ach, put a little of the juice of ground Ivy in thine ear, on that side as thy ach is, it will a little grieve thee, but incon∣tnent thy Teeth shall cease aching. Put the powder of red Coral in the hole of thy Tooth, and it will fall out by the root. Put Henbane seed upon coles, and receive the smoak thereof into thy teeth by holding ty mouth over it. It killeth the worms and aswageth the pain; this hath ben proved. That thy Teeth never ake, take the powder that cometh of filing of an Harts horn, and let it seethe in water in a new earthen pot, and so put it into thy mouth where thy grief is. A medicine that the Toohach shall never vex you mor. Take twenty leaves of Ivy, a little long Peppe, and boil them with a handful of Salt in old wine, and then put the liquor when it is well boiled into your mouth on that side that
is vexed with the ach, and you shall prove that the ach shall be destroyed in sempiternum. A most expert and true Medicine for the pain of the Teeth and presently easeth the pain. Take Lupines dryed, let it be a little rubbed in your hands, after put it into strong Vine∣gr, and boiled a little, then strain it, and press it out, of which wash the mouth and gums, for it is wonderful. For a Tooth that is loose. Take Gum of Ivy, and red Vinegard, and boil them together in a Pewter Sawcer, till they be molten together, wet therein a clou, and put down the Tooth therewith, &c. To help the Toohach of any sort. Ivy berries sodden in white wine or in Vine∣gar, this water being strained. To fasten Teeth, and to purge the head. The roots of Pellitory of Spain chewed in the mouth, & fiet pro certo▪ To make a Tooth eave aking, or to fall out. Stampe Neppe, and put it into a cloth, and lay it on the Tooth, and it wil either leave king or fall out.
The Nose, The Remedies for its diseases. Remedies for stinking of the Nose. TAke Cloves, Ginger, and Calaminte of each a like, and seethe them in white , and therewith wash thy Nose, after put  powder of Piretrum to provoke you to ▪ and if there be repletion of Phlegm in e head, first ye must purge it with pills of ochiae, or of Hiea Picra, also if the stinking ome fom the stomack, fist help the stom∣k, as shall be said hereafter in the remedies f the stomack. The Mouth, Remedies for its diseases. To destroy a stinking breath. TAke three handfuls of Cummi beat them in a mortar to powder, then take a pottle  wine, and put the powder into it, and let it ethe till it come to a quart, then drink first nd last of this wine by the space of fifteen ayes, as you may suffer it▪ Probatum est▪
To make a sweet breath. Take the juice of Mintes▪ or the wate Rue, Cummin, Coliander, Liquorice, Cin∣mon, alike four ounces, seethe all these  wine, and give them to drnk that hath  stinking breath, and surely it shall be seet. Another for the same. Take the powder of Sage one ounce,  mary blossoms three ounces, Cloves and Gil flowers five drams, Cinnamon one dram and half, Nutmegs one dram and a half, Mus little quantity, then take as much as is su∣cient to make the said Compositions into Corporation like unto Marmelade, and ea this fasting, and at night a little quantity a time, so shall your breath be sweet, And you go into any suspicious place of the pe∣lence or any other corrupt air, if you take  this next your heart, it shall defend you fro the jeopardy thereof. For stench in the mouth. Take Pulial Mountain, make powder there∣of, and eat it fasting. Another. Take Costmary, drink it every day fastin wash thy teeth every night when thou go to bed with Vinegar.
Another. Take the juice of Gladin with old wine, and wash thy mouth every morning and evening. Another. Take Mastick and Incense, and seethe it in sweet wine and drink thereof early and late▪ Another for the stench in the Nose. Take the juice of Mintes, and put it into hy Nose. Another. Drink the juice of Rue, and five leaved Grass. Another. Take the juice of Ivy, mingled with wine nd oyle Olive▪ Probat. To take away stinking of the mouth. Ye must wash his mouth with water and Vi∣egar, and chew Mastick a good while, and then ash thy mouth with the decoction of Anni∣eeds, Mintes and Cloves sodden in wine. Ye must wash your mouth before and after meat ith warm water, for to cleanse the mouth, nd to purge the humours from the Gums hich descend out of the head, it is good evry morning fasting to wash your mouth, and to ub the Teeth with a Sage leave, pills of Ci∣ron, or with powder made of Cloves and Nutmegs, forbear Lettice, Raw fruit, all tart meats, and the chewing of hard things. Also ll meats of evil digestion and vomiting.
The Breast, Remedies for distem∣pers thereof. Remedies for diseases of the breast. And first for harsness of the voice ye  avoid all eagr, salt, and sarp things, an sleeping by day, too much watching, grea cold, much speaking, and too lud crying:  sweet things are good as apples sodden wi Sugar, great raisins, Figgs, Almond milk, whi pills, Sugar candy, and the juice of Liqueri For a hoarse voice. Take the broth of red Coleworte a mingle it with sven or eight Penidies, and a ounce of Syrup of Maiden-hair and give un the patient whn he goeth to bed. Another. Take Diairis simple and eat a Lozenge o the same at morning and at night. For hoarsness of long continuance. Take Raisins, Figgs, Sugar, Cinnamon, an Cloves of every one a little, seethe them i good wine, of the which ye shall give to drin morning and evening, two ounces at a ti
xcept he have a fever; It is good to take orning, and evening a fpoonful of the Syrup of Juubes mixt with a root of Liquerice in anner of a Lohoch. A Syrup for Cough, rheums, Catarres, and other like diseases. Take Althaea leaves seven handfuls, stamp them in a mortar, then take a pot that will hold seven pints, boil in it these hings follow∣ng▪ Liquerice two ounces, Sage, Rosemary, Cardus benedictus, figgs, raisins, barly flower, of each a handful succory leaves and roots, a handful; let all these boil one hour and a half, then let it cool so that you may strain it, then take the water, and put in two or three pounds of French Mallowes setting it to boil on the fire again three hours or more, then strain it as you did before, then take the decoction and set it on the fire with asmuch hony or little less, taking off the scum when it hath boiled a good space, ad to it one ounce, or as much as you wil of Cinnamon; Then take it immediately from the fire putting it forth and covering it close. This secret is so excellent that if a man use it in winter, warming it when he taketh it, it is not possible for him to be vexed with Cugh, rhum, Catarrhes, and like diseases. A Medicine for the Cough. Take the yelk of an Egg▪ and put it into an emptie Egg shell, and put to it five grains weight of the powder o Saffron▪ and roste the
same very rear, and to bedward sup it off warm, being well stirred together, it cureth the Cough or giveth much ease. Against the Cough. Take Anniseeds Licquerice of each an ounce Hysop one handful, sugar candy, four ounces, strong beer three pints, boil altogether till half be consued, then strain forth the simples and give the patient every night, when he go∣eth to bed four ounces warm. For an old Cough. Take Elicampane roots and boil them ten∣der, then pound it in a wooden mortar, then rub it in through an hair sieve, then take clari∣fd hony, and lay a course in the bottom of a stean then a course of sliced wardens, then a course of the Elicampane and so again as long as you please; And then put the stean into a oven and bake them two or three hours, then take it two or three times a day, a spoonful at a time▪ Another for a Cough with a rheum. Take Brown sugar candy and put it pound∣ed into a calves bladder, and lay it in spring water 24 hours, then cut the bladder and eat t with a Liquerish stick as the Cough doth trouble you.
preerve Wallnuts for a cough or Consumption. ake a pound of Walnuts before they be , and pae them very thin, then steep  in water a night, then boil them in run∣ or standing water, until they be so tender ou may put an hard rush through them;  stick in each end of every Walnut a ; Then lay them hot togethr in a ney Bason, then take a pound and a half ugar and strew upon them hot, and cover , and let them lie covered all night with∣he warmth of the fire; And the next day  them up, and put them into a pot. A good Syrup for an old Cough, and it mundi∣eth the breast and the Lungs and for pain under he side coming of cold. ake Liquerice scraped and bruised two ce, Maiden hair one ounce, of Hysop dried  an ounce, put all this into four pint of ing water, and let them stand in that wa∣  one day and one night, and then seethe  till half the Liquor be consumed, then  the Liquor from the herbs, and put in- Liquor pure English honey, white  and Penidies each of these eight ounces water five drams, boil all this with an easie  till it come to the thickness of a Syrup  alwayes as the scum ariseth gather it off,  keep it to your use.
For wheesing in the Chest. Take a Toste of bakers bread and pour  let oil on it, upon either side as you wo butter a toste, & strew heaten Sugar on eit side and use it first and last till you find ea For delivering from Phlegm. Take Hyssop and parsely and stamp the temper them with wine, or Ale, and drink  night and morning. Another for wheesing of the Chest. Take spring water one quart, put to it  ounce of white Sugar candy, and two ounc of Liquerice pared and cut small in shive and half an ounce of pure Cinnamon a litt bruised, let them steep in the water all nigh drink of it first and last, until it be pent. P∣bat. Remedies for the Cough. Take Hyssop, great raiins, and figgs of ex a handful, Liquerice an ounce, boil them  water till the third part be wasted, then gi it him to drink twice a day in the morni two hours before meat, and at night one ho before supper, & immediately after it is goo to eat a Lozenge of Diairis, or Diapenidion.
Another remedie. Take Sugar candy, white pills of Diairis, and iagragant of every one, an ounce, Liquerice wo drams, make a powder and let him eat a oonful thereof morning, and evening, and rink after it three ounces of water of Hyssop r of scabious with Sugar and without Sugar. In stead of these waters ye may take the roth of red cole worts without salt. Another remedy. Take Syrup of Liquerice, and of Hyssop, nd drink it evening and morning with a tisan, or of one of the same Syrups with a oonful of Ptisan is good. Another. Take powder of Diairis simple and Lique∣ce, of each a dram weight, and with four unces of Sugar make an Electuary to be aten first, and last after meat. It is good to take Lohoc sanum with a stick f Liquerice at the coughing, and after eat. And there is another Loch called och de pino as good at all times as the ther is. And it is good to anoint the brest orning and evening with oil of Lilies, sweet lmonds, and May butter without salt. Remedie against the cough coming of a hot cause. Take Syrup of violets, and of Jubes and
drink thereof morning and evening with a lit∣le Ptisan sodden. For the same. It is good to take first and last a Lozenge of Ditragagant and afterward to drink draught of good Ptisan. A good receit against the Cough. Take the root of Elicampane, Horehound, Hollihock of each alike much, seethe the altogether in white wine, with a dozen of sat Figgs and a little Liqurice, drink of it a draught every day twice. For the Cough and Murre. Take Aqua vitae a sufficient quantitie, temper it with Sugar candy. A Medicine for hoarsness in the throat. Take three or four figgs and cleave them in two every one, and then put into them  prettie quantity of Ginger finely beaten into powder, and then roste them upon a clean hearth or tile stone, and then let the partie eat them as hot as possible he can; This har holpen some that have been troubled with hoarsness four or five years together before. To heal the Srfa or disease called the King evl Take barly lowre, liquid pitch, wax and o
live in equal quantitie boil it altogether with childs Urine and brought to a plaister and applyed. Fiet. To cure the Kings evil. Mistris Athinson, the wife of the man else∣here mentioned, at the same time as her Hus∣and was cured of a broken vein, affirmed that her certain knowledge, the roots of Hounds∣ngue cut in the shape of dice and put into a nen bagg of about two inches square un∣l it be almost full, and hang it about the neck f the partie grieved to lie upon the pit of e stomack, and let it be renewed once in two  three dayes, as the vertue decaies, It will reak the disease, if not broken; if broken it ll cure it, especially if it run brown water, white then with more difficultie. Against shortness of winde. Shortness of winde proceedeth oft-times of hlegm that is tough and clammish, hanging on the lungs, or stopping the conduits of the me, being in the hollowness of the brest, or  catarrhous humors that drop down into the ungs, and thereby cometh straitness of draw∣g of breath, which is called of Physicians yspnoea, or Asthma. And when the patient can∣ot bend his neck down for fear of suffocation, s called Orthopnoea, for every one of these di∣ases there be very wholsom Medicines de∣ared before.
The receipt for Asthma. Take an ounce of great raisins picked from the kernels, two figgs, the meat of a Date, dry Hyssop, maiden-hair, Liquerice and the lungs  a Fox washed in wine water, of scabios of every one a dram, Penidies two ounces with Syrup of Liquerice; Let all be incor∣porated and make a Loch to eat a good whil after meat, with a stick of Liquerice. To cure Asthmatick persons. Take Lowes aas in Latine Porcelliones and burn them to white powder upon a little stone and make them into an Electuary with life honey is excellent against the disease called Asthma. An oyntment for shortness of breath. Take two ounces of oil of sweet Almonds one of May butter unsalted, a little Saffron and of new wax and make an oyntment, where∣with ye shall anoint the brest morning and evening. To break a sore brest. Take a Lily root, and a piece of leave sethe it in milk until the lilly be very  ad plaister like, and so as warm as the par can suffer it lay it morning and evening.
o keep the brest from breaking, if it be not too far gone. Take clay that is without stones, and knead  with sharp vinegar, the ylks of two eggs a ittle English Saffron, and work it into the clay nd so take asmuch as will cover the redne of t, you must use it cold, some brsts will have o colour and such are not lightly saved from reaking. To heal the breast. Take as many Mallowes as will into a charger, nd chop them, and seethe them in ruig ater till they be tender, pour the waer from hem and put them into a pottle of good Ale-drggs, and a peny loaf of leaven brd gated with a quart of white wine, let thse eethe together till you think it be thick nough, then put thereto half a quarter of a ound of Deares suet, and lay it to the sore as ot as the party can suffer it, morning and vening, and after that the heat be such as it ryeth, this will help any sore in the breast or ny other places. You must wash the place be∣ng broken with white wine at every dres∣sing. To heal any kinde of ach or sore brest. Pare off a cap of the root of white Bryonie nd make a hole in the root as hollow as you an, and cover the root close with the cap you ut off, or with a piece of a tile-stone and cover ll again with earth, letting it still grow, and
three dayes after open the said root, and the hole will be full of water, then take that wa∣ter and put it in a glass and anoint the place where the grief is, and use it. A plaister for a sore brest. Take wheat meal, and pure life honey and claified bores grease, of each like portions boil them a little and make a plaister and lay thereto. Probat. A medicine to skin a womans sore bret which is aw. Take a pint of sweet thick cream, and put it into a pan with three spoonfuls of the juice of brown fennel, boil it to an oil, and there∣with anoint the sore brests morning and evening till it be whole, Probat. To help the hardness in women brests. Wheat flower, honey oil olive and the juice abundantly of yellow Gilly flower, together with the juice of rue. Sanat. For the aking of a womans brest. Take Cinquefoil or five leaved grass, and stamp them with swines grease, and make thereof a plaister, and lay it to well brayed together and it will take away the aking. Another for the same. Take and boil Rue and put there to flower
f wheat and make thereof a Plaister and lay hereto. r womens brests, or swelling that cometh by cold in child birth. Take and lay Chickweed upon a Tyle∣one, and rose leaves upon, Chick∣eed upon the rose leaves again, so that hre be of them two or three leaves, then rinkle it with vineger, and boil all these pon the tyle-stone; And when its well boil∣d, take another Tyle and lay upon tha, and ut it asunder and lay to the swelling and it ill take away the pain. n approved Medicine for them that hae cold in their brests. Take oil of Camomil and Aqua composi, ingle them together against the fire; chafe e breast well withall that it may enter into e Stomack and veines: This hath holpe any. pproved Medicine for a sore brest that is broken. Take Malowes and boil them with sheeps llow till they be very tender, then strain it d keep it in boxes and, if the brest have eed to be tented, take a piece of the stalk of e Mallowes that are dden, and tent it with∣l, this is proved.
For bolning of a womans brest. Take apples of the oak and stamp them with oil and lay it to the bolning. For a very sore brest. Take Hartshorn or a Buls horn for need, and grate it into a pint of good white wine, and give the woman to drink thereof, and le her sleep upon the same Medicine and it shall cease. For coagulation of milk in a womans brest. Take Egmiony, Vervine, Fennel, and bray it altogether and lay it thereon, and be whole, &c. A Soveraign Medicine for a sore brest. Take a pottle of smiths water, the elder it is the better, if it smell a little, so much the bet∣ter, also you must take a quarter of a pound of old alume, and white salt asmuch as ye can hold on the two fingers from the second joynt forth, two handfuls of Sage, two Heads of housleek put all these into the water and seethe it till it come to a quart, then let it stand with the Herbs in it, and wash the sor breast well with the Herbs, and the wate twice a day, and at every time ye wash it lay upon the sore, or sores, green Sage leaves till it be whole, this hath been proved and haled a breast so sore as it was thought uncu∣rable.
Ye must warm the water and Herb every ime ye dress the brest. A medicine for the woman brests if the sore  of Mil. Take Mallows as ye get to be holden in a harger, and cut them small, and seethe them n a Gallon of running water, and when they esodden soft, put thereto a potile of the ronds f Ale, and a quart of white wine, nd two penny white loaves, cutting off the rusts leavened, make it thick, and put into it eers Sue, or Sheeps Sue, and lay it upon a lew cloth or linen cloth, and lay it warm to he sore brest every day as long as its sore, nd it shall be healed by the grace of God. A plaister for a postume on womens Teats. Take Linseed, and seethe it well and long  fair running water, then take fresh Shees allow, and fry the Linseed therein, and e∣n as hot as ye may suffer it, lay it thereon. Remedies for the Pthisick. Pthisis is an ulceration of the lungs, by hich all the body falleth into Consumption,  such cas, that it wasteth all save the slin, y ay know him that hath a Pthisick, for rom  to day he waxeh ever leaner and dryer, nd his hair falleth, and hath ever coug, and itteth sometimes matter and bloody strings ithall. And if that which he spitteth be ut
into a bason of water, it falleth into the bot∣tom, for it is so heavy. A remedy. Take two onces of Pimpernel in powder, and thereof make an Electuary with Sugar, and use it every morning two drams with Pimpernel water three ounces. Water of Snails distilled, is proved good to them that be Pthsicke, every morning in drink, and for all them that are dry and lean. Another. First take a quantity of running water, and boil it half away. The ingredients that you are to put into the composition, are two ounces of Anniseeds, one ounce of Coliander seeds, one ounce of Lique∣rice sliced, one ounce of Sugar candy, one handful of Coltsfoot, half a pound of Rai∣sins of the Sun, one quarter of a pound of iggs, and one handful of Liverwort, a hand∣ful of Maidenhair, a quantity of Hartstongue, and two penniworth of Dates. The composi∣tion made and put into the water, boiled hal a way, take it and strain it, and scum it, sweet∣en it and drink it. For the cough and consumpton of the lungs. Take Fox Lungs fresh killed, pull them from the Windepipes and the straines which hange by the same; then wash the lungs in Sack or white wine lewarm three or four
times until they be clean from the blood, thn dry them in a pot in an Oven after the bac drawn forth, so well dried, beat them to pow∣der. Take Anniseeds, Fennel seeds, Maiden hair of each like quantity of weight to your Fox lungs, beat all these together to fine powder, and see the sme well mingled; take also a like weight of Liquorice, as the Fox lungs or som deal more, and lay it in water fourteen hour, first clean scraped and a little bruised, then seethe your Liquorice in the same water until half be consumed, and so strain the Liquor from the Liquorice, and with the liquor seeth as much fine Sugar beaten sall as he weight of the receit amounteth unto, till it thick like a Syrup, then put to this Syrup as it cooleth, all your powder, well stiring and incorporating the same altogether, and so keep it for your use. Pohatum est. Take the lungs of a Fox dryed, the juice of Liquerice, Maidenhair, Fennel-seed, of ach  like four ounces, make it in Sugar sodden in water as much as will suffice, some make it with the juice of Myrts, and then it is com∣fortable for the stomack, this is a present re∣medy for a Consumption. For the Phlegm and Cough. Take an handful of Coltfoot, of Liquerice shaved and bruised two ounces, an handful of Maidenhair, of Anniseed three ounces Lt it be boiled in three pound of foutain r Spring water till half be consumed, strain it
and then put into it three ounces of white Su∣gar. Give thereof five spoonfuls for the space of eight dayes warmed. For a Consumption. Take Syrup of Limons half dram. Syrup of Coltsfoot Syrup of Hyssop, alike one ounce. Syrup of Liquerice one ounce. Floris Sulphuris half a scruple. Spirit of the seed of Fennel, four drops, and mix it all together. For the Consumption. Take a handful of Rosemary tops, a handful of red Sage, a handful of Horehound, a hand∣ful of Plantaine leaves, a handful of Hyssope, a handful of winter Savory, a pint of English hony, a pint of runing water, half a pound of blew Figs, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun, a stick of Liquerice, boil all these in a new pipkin, with a cover to it, cut them small, and put them into the pipkin, and let it boil softly unil it be half consumed, then take and strain it through a cloth very well, then give the party four spoonfuls morning and evening. Another excellent for the same. Take a quarter of pure red Rosewater, put it in a pewter platter or bason, set it over a Chas∣fing dish of coales, take clean Anniseeds, and bruise them a little in a Mortar, put thereof into your Rosewater a good handful, and put
also of sliced Liquerice, bruised and tore in  three or four stick, and as much of Par∣ roots, the pith taken out, bruised, and sliced  put therein, then last put in a good spoon∣ of the tender crops of Hysope, so let them  from a quart to a pint, still bruising them  a spoon as they boil, and when it is fficient boiled, strain it into a glass, and take ereof warm in the evening a pretty draught,  two hours after, and before meat fast two , use this, it hath done wonders. &c. he Sides, Remedies for their distempers. euisie, A thing most certain to remedy the great∣est pleurisie possible. TAke the delicatest Apple, that may be had, make an hole therein, pull out the , if it may be, not breaking the Apple,  which hole put in Olibanū of the best the antity of three or four grains, and cover the  of the Apple, then put the Apple into  embers, there to soken till it be tender but it must not burn,) then break the apple,  the Olibanum into four or five pieces, and give it, the patient to eat, and forthwith  Impostume of the pleurisie breaketh, and  patient recovereth Pro certo oyl of scor∣ons anoynted often to the griefs vatet wrod. See that you apply withal thin Cakes
made with the said oyl, and the fleying  dryest hot, one after another, one at once and anointing the grief, before any cake  laid on with the said oyl hot, and thus the  cakes oyl and hot ashes breaketh the Impo∣stume of the Pleurisie. For to cure an Ipostume, which groweth in the  side of the ribes of the side, when no other Meic will cure the same. Take Pipins, and bruse them, and stray the juice thereof, to the quantity of a prett draught, and put thereto a dram of the juice  the herb called bearfoot, and give it to th grieved to drink, and it shall presently hel him. Another good Medicine. Take Aqua vitae and Capons grease, of eac of them a prety quantity and boil them to∣gether: then take a little black wool, and  it therein and lay it hot as may be suffered to the stomack of the party grieved and it will ease him very spedily. To destroy an Impostume and an swelling. Take the roots of Hollihock, sod till they be very soft and the water halfe consumed and more, then put into the same water the flower of Linseed, fenugreck, a like much, seethe it until the water doe rope, then put the said ollihock roots to it being well pounded, and add a handfull of barly meal, and fry them all
ith boars grease, and if you will, you may dd sheepes suet, apply it hot, Probatum est. A Catplasme. Take the flowers of Camomil, Melilote of ach one handful, of the leaves of Rue, Mar∣row, Nepthe, of each one pugil, of the seeds  Annise two drams, of the Laurel berries hree ounces, boil it moderately, pound it,  asmuch hoy as is sufficient and apply it. Another. Stamp, Mallowes roots well sodden, then  butter, hony, and pigeons dung very well ixt, et fiet. For the stitch. Anoint the place with oil of Melilot, and ap∣ly Melilot plaister to the place, upon a piece of Leather, and change it once a week. An experienced good Medicine for a pleurisie. Take Brooklime, sheeps suet and a little fair unning water, and fry them together in a fry∣ng pan, and make a plaister thereof and lay it he side of the patient▪ and it will draw forth ll the corruption; This hath been proved.
The Heart, Remedies for its Distempers. Remedies for weakness and feebleness of the heart. GIve him that hath a feeble heart and ready to saint, either for fever or extream hea the wight of a French crown of Trochisk of Camhire, with wine of Pomegranates and lay upon his left side Limon dipped in water of roses and vineger; In stead of these Trhisks, ye may use a Electuary called Dia∣margariton frigidum, every morning a lozenge. And it is good to give him for the same feeble∣nes conserve of Roses, violets, water lilies ming∣led together, and after to drink water of Sorrel, and to smell Roses, water lilies, rose-water and vineger. Other whiles and most of∣ten debility of heart chanceth of a cold and drie cause, and is without fever with great fear and heaviness, the remedy whereof is this. Take an Electuary called Diamoschum and use every morning a Lozeng▪ and drink after it a litle good wine or Bugloss water, and anoint the brest with oil of Spikenard, Moreover use once in a week before meat the weight of half a crown of good triackle, or Mithridate so it be well tempered with a little white wine and with a few maces.
For beating or trembling of the heart. If it be without offence; Take two drams  the third part of Elect. de gemmis, then  two or three ounces of Bugloss and awme mixed together▪ For the same. It is good to drink every morning three nces of water of Bugloss, wherein hath een sodden cloves. And it is good to drink in a Morning four unces of Julep made of half a pound of awm water and three ounces of Sugar. For the same. It it good to drink every morning 3. ounces  water of Bugloss wherein hath been sodden oves; And it is good to drink in a morning  ounces of Juep made of half a pound of arm water, and three ounces of Sugar. The onfection of Diajacinthy is singular and ex∣llent for trembling of the heart, but it is for oble men, not for poor folk. or ach at the heart which are commonly a knot of worms. Take unset leeks one handful chopped small d frie it with butter and bay salt, and lay it  the stomack upon a napkin. Take a pinte of white wine, English liquerice  sugar, boil it together in a pot close stop∣ed take it fasting
To help a mad body. Take the Flowers of Rose-mary, of Burrag and of the roots of Buglosse of each a pound Saron two drams, of Quinces four ounces,  the best white wine a quart, mix them toge∣ther, let them stand a day, put them over th head fifteen days in an Horsmixon the mou of the glass not covered quite, then distil it Then take of it first and last a dram at a tim It is a precious secret, it helpeth the tre∣bling of the heart. For them that swound or are faint-hearted. Take Rosemary, Sage, Betony, and Marje∣rom of each an handful, seethe them in a gallo of fair water till a quart be consumed, the take away the herbs, and put to the said wate a pinte of good hony, then scum it well, the put in an ounce of Staechades tied in a fair linnen cloth, Let it seethe a little, then tak out the Staechades, and add an ounce of Cinna∣mon, three quarters of an ounce of Nut∣meggs, and asmuch in Ginger in powder, drink it warm thrice every day six or seven dayes, ∣fiet: A potion for sainting. Take of the confection of Alchermes two drams, of garden blew violet water and ex∣cellent red rose water of each two ounces, and Syrup of violets two ounces and an half, and Syrup of Lymons one ounce▪ mingle them well together and take hereof four or five spoon∣fuls at a time when you see eause or when you please.
The Stomack, Remedies for all pains of the stomack. For weakness of the Stomack. TAke Pilulae Stomachiae two or three hours before meat, more or lesse according to  quantitie of the fulness of the stomack,  after give him every morning, two hours ore meat, and one hour after supper, at every me a Lozenge of an Electuary called Diaga∣ga, or another called Diacinimum which  consume ventosities and with their com∣table heat, drive away the cold and windy mplexion of the stomack. For windiness of the stomack. Take in a morning two hours before meat a zenge of Aromaticum rosat. and if ye have  aching stomack, and cold, take every morn∣ a Lozenge of Dianis, or Diacinimum, and drink after it a spoonful of wine. A present remedy for pain and ach in the stomack. Maiden-hair, bruised, plaistered and laid to  stomack sanat. To help the pains of the stomack a rare secret. Take every night last three drams of .
For a windie and cold stomack. Take Aromaticum Garyophillat. one ounce. Electuar de aromatibus, one ounce Et Diattrion piperion, one ounce. Mix it together and take it first and last  the quantity of three Nut krnels. For pain of the stomack. Take two drams of Diacinnaon of Dianist,  Diagalanga, and drink it with a little goo wine an hour or two before meat, drink a lit∣tle Castor with good wine. Another. Drink two hours before meat three or  ounces of the decoction of Mintes, Anni seeds, cummin and fine frankincense. Also drink an Electuary caled Arcuaticum whereof receive one Lozenge every mrnin fasting. To comfort the stomack after vomiting. It is good to give unto the patient ever morning an ounce of Syrup of wormwood,  Mintes; instead of which it is convenient  take a Lozenge as Azromaticum rosatum, or Di∣galanga. For the same. Take evening and morning three hours be∣fore meat two Cloves in powder with a spoon∣l
of the Juice of mintes, or half a spoonful  Rue dried with a little wine Also it is good to take powder of Cloves, d lignum aloes to the weight of a crown with ine, two hours before meat. n excellent purgation to avoid choler for men of all ages. Take half an ounce of Cassia newly drawn▪ dram of good Rubarb infused a night in wa∣ of Endive with a little spikenard an an unce of Syrup of violets, mix all these things ith three ounces of Ptisan, or whay and rink it warm. A Medicine for winde in the stomack. Take a spoonful of hony, and two spoon∣ls of rosewater, and set them upon a Chaffing∣sh of coales, and as the scum ariseth take it ith a feather till be clear. Then take it off e fire, then take a groas weight of long epper, asmuch of white, asmuch of black d asmuch of cummin seed, asmuch of ginger d beat all together in a Mortar not very all and put them into a box; Then put in ony and rosewater unto them, and mix them ogether with a knife, and eat them after din∣er, asmuch as a pease, and you may keep it as ng as you will, and ever as it dryeth, put hereto more hony clarified with rose water. To clear the stomack▪ Take stale Ale and boil it, and put it two
branches of Hyssop to boil with it, and drin first and last. A notable sauce to procure an appetite in them whic be brought low to get them a stomack. Take Vine leaves and stamp them, a strain them and put in Sugar to the juice, a Cinnamon powder with Sippets of manche boil them as sorrel sops, eat them with chicken or what you will. It is excellent  a fever or other sicknesses. To make Pulvis ducis out of Master Cogans Caj of the wekness of the stomack. pag. 194. Pulvis Ducis as he saith is usually de of on ounce of Sugar, and one ounce of Cinnamo finely powdred both, and then mixed toge∣gether; And this Pulvis Ducis being mingled the quantitie of one dram with half a pint o Aqua vitae, well tempered together, and thr pints of rosewater, and so let run twice o thrice through an Hyppocrates bagg, an thereof take oft-times in the week one spoon∣ful in the morning fasting especially in winte time is excellent good for a bad stomack of cold cause. A drink for a bad stomack. Brew Beer or Ale, and when you tunne i before it work take a pound of wormwood and asmuch of the roots of red docks, the pi taken out and washed, and put them in a bag with a stone to make it sink, and hang
the drink and drink it in the morning fast∣g and at four of the clock in the after∣on. Probatum. Another for the stomack▪ ke cakes like apple cakes, or Pasties in  or May, and fill them full of wormwood,  bake them hard; the paste must be of eat meal undrest, and brew a stand of strong  beer, And when it's turned and given e urging, ak he akes when they be d, and cut them into quarters, and put em into the barrel, and stop it up close, and hen it's settled and clear, drink a bowl full draught in the morning fasting, and so use heat in the stomack which maketh the throa sore. ke an handful of Columbine Leaves, and a ndfull of Cuarrnts, boyl them in a pine of w milk, then take out the Currants and the eaves, and shred them together, And eat e Currants and the leaves, and then sup the ilk as hot as you can.
The Liver, Remedies for its dis∣empers. Against stopping of the Liver, called opilai DRink every morning the Syrup of Oxy sqyllitick, wi half a daugh o mo of the decoction of the roots of Small Fennel and Parsely. Another for stopping of the Liver. Take Venice Turpentine to the quantity a bean, and put it into a spoon until it doe m and then put there to a lile white sugar,  let them eat of it every day fasting. Take a good hadful of iver wort t groweth upon stones, and another of fumito with as much hearts tongue, and drink the every day twice. The liver of an hare dryed good for all diseases of the Liver, also for t heat of the Liver seethe Barberries in whe and drink them. Remedy. If it come of gross blood, give the patie Medicins that do pierce and are sutil, as is wi of Pome-granates, Srup of Endive, with t decoction of Cicers; Then let him blood  the Liver vein, and everymorning eat a Lzeng of Triasanali.
Sometime the said opilation cometh of bundance of som humour viscou, cod and  egmatick stopping the veins of the iver, d then the Urine as clear as water, and then e patient must use the Syrup above written viz.) Oxymel scylliticum. A Iulep for heat of the Liver. Take half a pound of rose water, one quar∣r of waer of Endive, and five ounces of gar, make a Julep, of which you shall drink sting a good draught, And if he will needs rink between meals, Let it be mingled with o parts of the waer of the wll, and if ye ill have it more cooling ad unto it two unces of vinger, or the juice of Pomegra∣ate. In stead of the said medicine, too cost∣ for poor folk, you may make bles of half n ounce of Cassia, and three drams of the lectuary de succo rosarum and eat it three ours after midnight, and steep it, and so drink , mix the said boles with whay, or Edive ater and drink it at five in the morning, but eep not after it. A drink to cool the Liver. Take an ounce of Sena Alexandrina, a far∣hing worth of Anniseeds, and a sarthing worth f Liquerice, and a dram of Rubarbe de Spain, nd make a powder of the sme, with half an unce of Polypodie of the oak, when the owder is fine, boil it in three pints of white ine, before you do put it in, make ready hree roots, thats a Fennel root, a parsly root, a
Mallow root washed fair and clean, bruise these three roots and boil them in white wine, from three pintes to a pinte upon a still fire, and be sre to stir it about, and let not the flame nor smoak come to it. This purgeth the Liver, and spleen, then strain it through a clean cloth and drink in the morning fasting, in the second day of M or the first day of Sagittaris, And when ye drink it, take a brown toste and wet it in vineger and smll to it, & fiet. A good rcipt for the dopsie. Take the salt of Wormwood three daies i a moneth, a spoonful at a time, and you shall feel the dropsie water fall into your leggs, every time you may take it away by setting your leggs up to the knees in hot water. To purge dropsie water abudantly, for the shedding o nature called Gonorrhaaea, verbatim, out of Master Cogan, Pag. 5. in Flower deluce. Take a new laid Egg, pouring out the white, put into the yelk so much of the root of Flower deluce, as was of the white after, set the same Egg into the Embers, which being sufficiently warmed sup off fasting in the morn∣ing; And the patient shall after send forth audance of water, and so be eased of the dropsie. Or else you may take a dram or two o the dry root made into powder and drunk in way clarified, or its good also to pre the dropsie water; And if you put a little Cinna∣on to the juice of Flowe-deluce in the
g yelk its a very good medicine for the dding of nature as hath been often proved. For the Dropsie or Tympany. Take the flower of Dane wort and of the ves, and distill them in a stillatory, and nk four or five spoonful at a time with the er of Herb grace; in six or seven spoonfuls  white wine, one spoonful of the water of b grace will serve; This is the excellentest dicine one can give, for this will void the er out of the belly by usage. Probt. by er for which propertie of daneworte Gerards Herball. The Gall. Against diseases of the Gall. He gall is placed in the hollowness of the Liver to receive the superfluity of cho∣ and to send it to the bowels to be avoid∣ ith the grosse excrements to the intent to se the blood of the said choler; To the ch cometh opilations in the parties about he liver, or beneath it, in it self nxt the els, causing great pain, by reason whereof  choler turneth again into the liver, and e is mingled with the blood, and spread ad into the veines of all the body, and deth a disease named Iaundise, Ictiritia.
If the Jaundise happen in an Ague befo the seventh day. It is great danger of his lie but if it appar on the sixth day, being a da judicial or critick of the gu., o after, it is very good sign. And thn ye must succo Nature with refreshing and disting the chler with Syrup of violets given in the moring, Syrup of Endive with watr of Cicho Aftr this purge choler, and then give hi a Lozenge of Triasandl with Ruarbe ev morning, two hours before meat, and d a little water of Endive, and Cichory afore  said Lozenge. Moreover it is good to hath the Liver,  wash the patients eyes with vineger, and  mans milk, an drink a Ptisan made of b I querice, prunes and roots of Fennel.  if when the fever is past the Jaudize ta  still, the patient must drink water of  rll and fennel, with the Syrup of oxysah composit. Jaundise sometimes cometh witho a fever, and may be healed thus, drink ev morning four ounces of the decoction of Ho  hound made in white wine; Ye may let  drink seven, or eight dayes together in  morning a good draght of the decoction Politrichon or maidnhair. The decoction of woodbine, or the water of it distilled a common still is a soveraign medicine r said disease. Another singuar Remedie. Take cowes milk, and white wine of  a pinte, and distill them in a still, keep  water a moneth, and then give it the
hree ounces in the morning two hours before at, and likewise after supper when he go∣th to bed. A medy for the Iaundise and strangury and dys∣sury and straitness of breath, and to break the stone in the bladder. Aianhes otherwise called Gallitricum in Engish Maidenhair, or maidenweed (the leavs re ie Coliander) sodden in pure water, or in ine, and therewith make a Syrup with Sugar nd when ye seethe it, put in the root f Fennel, march the branches and leaves of  me or Borwot and give it with wie, nd thou shalt see the marvellous cures in hese disass. A perfect help of the black Iaundise. The powder of shell snayles eaten, and runken killeth the black Jaundise pro certo. For the yellow Iaundise. Take one handful of Chickweed, and stamp  and strain it into a draught of Ale and use  three dayes fasting, and last. Probat.
The Spleen. For dis eses of the Spleen. IN oppilations caused of a hot humour must give the patit four or five mrnin fasting Syrup of Endive water, and Heart tongue, then a purgation made thus. A urgation to avoid Melanchoy. Take an ounce of Succo Rosarum, and thr ounces of the decoction of the roots of Cparus and Harstongue and ake a dink, t which ye may minister in a good day to tak purgations for Melancholy. Drink Syup of Staechados or Heartstongue or oxyml diureticum wth water of the d∣coction of Hstongue, Eithyme, sallag roots, parcely root, Tamariscus and mintes r else only with the decoction of hears tonge, and roots, of Capers▪ And the after purge from such Melancholy hum with an ounce of Diacaholicon, and tw drams of Diaena▪ dissolved in three ounce of the said decoction or water of wormwood or Heartstongue; And aftr this ye must anoin the side of the spleen with oil of lies, o of Dill, or anoint the said side with Dialthe. An expet medicine for all diseases of the spleen. Take the leaves and cods f Sena, the bark of an Ash tree, scraped and cut, Maidenhair Hartstongue and Liquerice, seethe them all i
clear whay, and after they be strained drink of it twice or thrice till he be amended. For the spleen that is great and aking. Take the barke of the clefts of he ash, ad cleanse them▪ and bruise them well in a mora and seethe them well in white wine from a pottle to a quart, and of that liquo milk warm; dink at morning and at evening the quantty of seven spoonfuls and thou shalt be whole. For diseases o the Spleen. Ye must give Syrups and purgations, a is forsaid, and to be let blood of the vein Sal∣arlla, and after dives times to apply Ven∣oses upon the spleen without scayng▪ A∣rward ye must lay n it a lift wt in good ineger▪ an keep it there so long as het re∣aineth in the said lift, and warm it three or our times, Afterward anoint the splen with Dialhea and so continue four or five dayes, and other four or five dayes lay upon the plaister made of two unces of gum Armo∣iack disslved in vineger and spead upon Leather; And if by the aforesaid tings the patient be not eased, the Doctors of Physick a that he must receive the Medicines again t the least once every moneth for half a yar ogether. An approved Medicine for the Spleen. Eat Capers and drink after them the water n a smiths cole trough, sanat pro certo.
An approved Medicine to take away an ag though a Quartain. Take of Bay-salt a spoonfull, of the blackest sope asmuch; pepper finely beaten, nnge those in the yelk of an new laid Egg, adding thereto of Aqua vitae with some raisins of the sun stoned, with a spoonfull of red Sage chopped small, apply it plasterwise to the wrests before the fit. For the Spleen. Doctor Butler of Cambridge did use to pre∣scribe ten raisins o the fun, torrified o parched upon a clean Tyle stone by the fire, until they did swell and then to be eaten fast∣ing. A diet drink for the Liver and Spleen. Take a handfull of red Dock roots, and make them clean, and a handfull of Tamarisk, boil them together in a quart of clear posset Ale, and drink it morning fasting, and after walk or use some other exercise for one hour or more. Doctor Simons Medicine proved both for the Ag and Quartane. Take Southernwood and minse it small, and put sallet oil into a sawcer and put the herb to it and let it be an hour or two in it, then let them simper a little upon the fire, then take it
and anoint the wrests and soles of the feet and the nape of the neck and down between the shouldrs, and this must be done before the it comes, in three times doing they shall be hole. For the Fever. Take a pinte of stale ale o Malmesey and oil in it powder of Sage and powder of inger, and drink it a little before the shak∣ng. For the Quartan proved by Doctor Simons. ae a red dck root and slice it and lay it i almesy four and twenty houres and drink it very day fasting. For the Ague. Take a posset made of milk and clarified ith a good deal of Camomil that the strenth ay be in the posset ale, and then let the sick rik of it. An approved Medicine for the Ague. ake three spoonfuls of Aqua composita, and six oonfuls of Malmesey and put ther to a quan∣t of long pepper beaten and asmuch gaines,  it as you would des a cup of ale with nger ad Numeg, and when the co is upon▪ e sick, give him a good draught to drink▪.
For a fever quartan. Take a handfull of Maydenhair, and choice Mirrhe one ounce, drink with water, and in the same water mix a little Triacle, and give to the patient with a fasting stomack, and so continue, and he shall be certainly cured. For the Ague. Take a handfull of Rue, a ed onion: be them small together with the glare of an Egge, and lay it to the wrist. An approved medicine to take away an Agu▪ Take of bay-salt a spoonful, of the blackest sope asmuch, pepper finely beaten, mingle these in the yelk of a new laid egge, ad∣ding thereto of Aqua vitae with some raisin of the sun stoned, with a spoonfull of red  chopped small; Apply it plasterwise two houres before the fit. For a burning fever, a medicine approved ue. Take six spoonfulls of fair running water and put it into a fair glass or other vessel, an put thereto one spoonful of bay salt  picked from filth, and let the salt melt  the said water, then put to it a pretty quanti∣ty of Saffron finely beaten, and let the pati∣ent drink thereof in the beginning of his hear and it will lay the heat, and in short spac drive away the fever, and the sooner if th
siek be made soluble or loose bellyed; and thi approved to be true. Another for a burning fever. Take a handful of Cllendine, a handful of bay salt, an hard gge, and a raw egge, a rsted onion, and a raw onin stamped alto∣gether, and make two plasters, and binde them to the soles of your feet, and with two plasters you shall have remedy. A medicine to precure sleep in a fever. Take of the seeds of white pppie two spoon∣fuls, of the white seeds of Lttice being te best one spoonful, make them into powder and drink it going to bed in a draught of clarified Mce ale warm, and it will cause quiet sleep; the ordinary use is two small spoonfuls to bed∣ward. Probat. For the fever in Angine, and for bloody matter. Seeth parsly in white milk, and pt the ot milk to cold butter, and it will be a posset, you must use that posset ale first and last a week together, It cueth also such as ake bloody water. To make a breath to cool one in a fever. Tae fair water, and put threto French barly, boyl until the watr be red, thn pour the red water from it, and put into barly the hot water, some Liquorice, some cooling herb,
as Violet leaves, and strawbery leaves, and put in some Lettice seeds, and let it boil until the barly be very sot, then strayn the barly from it, and let it cool, and when it's cold, put in some vinegar and sugar, and so drink it: you must put in your vinegar and Sugar as you drink it. For an Ague of long continuance. Take of Sea two ounces, of Polypody o the oak half an ounce, Bay-berries half an ouce, of Fenel seeds half an ounce, of Ani∣seeds half an ounce, of Liquerice half an ounce, one red Dock root the pith taken ou, of scurvy grass one handful, and a half, bruise all this together in a mortar, then put them in a Linnen bag and hang them in a gallon of nw ale three dayes, then drink thereof near a pint at eight in the morning fasting, and at four in the afternoon till all be out. A remedy to cure the new Ague and to cleanse the stomack by vomit. Take a dram of pure Tobaco and open the the Lea, if it be in roul, and step the leaves of the said dram all night in half a pinte o white wine, then strayn it and drink it next your heart, and ast two hours after, and you shal have you stomack well purged and clean∣sed of Phlegm and choler. This will our En∣gsh garden Tobacco do. Probatum also either steeped green but especially the dry Leaves of it, as with esseth Mr. Parkinsons Herbal.
For an Ague if it be given before the first fit. Take Dandelion, stamp and strayn it, and ou Triacle or Mithridate to the juice, and drink it on your good dayes two or three dayes as your good dayes do fall out, and it will hlp, for it hath been proved many imes. An excellent plaster to put away the Ague fit, ei∣ther Quotidian or tertian. Take a good spoonful of Bay salt▪ asmuch rankincense bruised both so small as you can and put to them the bignes of an gge of the root of white Briony, and half an handful of Smalledge, let the Briony and Smalledge be both pounded together, and put with them your bay salt and Frankincense, and lay it to both your wrest of your arms a hand breadth, so cold as may be two hours before the course of your fit▪ being spread a good thickne on two fai clothes. Let it be unre∣moved twentie four hours, then renew it; This helped a dozen at one time in my Lord Harringtous house. A plaster to put away the new Ague. Take the middle bark of a walnut tree well steepd in rose vingar, thn stamp it with a sponful of bay salt, and one spoonful of Oli∣banum, and lay it on a cloth, spread well and thick to the left hand wrest lein it ly there four and twenty hours. Probatum.
What to give one in the fever or Ague▪ Give them one dram of Theriaca Andromac mix it with one ounce of Conserves of Red ro∣ses, and with dragon water, or water of Cardu Benedictus two ounces, with one ounce of Sy∣rup of Limons, and take of this mixture one spoonful in your extremity at a time. Le blod, if need require, the sixth day of you sickness, in the Hepatica vein six or seve ounces. For a tertian Ague, a soveraign drink proved. Take vervine, and Mouseare, and Camomil one handful, boyl them in a quart of Ale to a pint, and strayn it into a pot, and when your cold fit is upon your, drink a good draught of it, and in two drinkings it will help. Pre∣batum. For an ague. Juice of Wormwood and sugar, doth help the ague in short time. A special medicine for the Ague. Drink at the coming of the cold fit the distilled watr of Germander and it helpeth surely. To cure a fever. Take spring water, and boyl it either in sil∣ver
or other clean skillet, or in a pewter pot set in hot water, and let it onely boil and no more, and then cool it, And let the patient make it his drink untill the fever be gone, and if the party have a choice palate, put in a little white sugarcandy to take away the taste of the water. A diet drink for the Scorbutum or scurvy, and to put away the malum habitum corporis. Pr∣batum. Take seven gallons of good middle ale wort and put it into a pan, with seven handfus of Scurvy grass, or for want thereof take three handfuls of pepper, three handfuls of water Cresses, and three handfulls of Brooklime, boyl these, being fair washed and pulled in pie∣ces, in the water until six gallons remain, then order it as you would order beer, and tunne it up in a barrel having ready a fine linnen bag, wherein put a stone or plum with three ounces of Sena and one ounce of fine Rubarbe cut in small slices, with the powder of grains, long pepper, anniseeds, fennel seeds, and Liquorice scraped and bruised flat, one half ounce of spicknard and galingal vera beaten small, one two ounces of the wood and rinde of pure sas∣safras, half an ounce or one ounce, if the wood be not vry good, cut in smal pieces, then sow them all in the bag, and fasten a long double strong thread to the bagge, and hang it so in the barrel near the tunning hole, see that it touch not the bottom by two inches, fasten the thread to the top of the barrel, then put barme to your said ale, and after purging, stop it up close, and after three dayes stling drink
continually of this drink, and no other so long as it lasteth, and at to your breakfast and supper pottage made of water Cresses and brooklime made with veal or mutton, and eat what good meat you best like, see it be rabbe, Capon, Mutton, or Vel dy rosted, continue this diet twenty dayes or so long as your drink lasteth good, and this by God grace will reco∣ver your health and abate the swelling of the peen, and cure perfectly the scorbutum or Lassitudo in man or woman. The signs of this disease which comes of Melancholy, are certain seckles appearing on the hand the armes and legs, which will go a∣way suddenly and come again, the teeth are as it were eaten with cankers about the gums, apt to bleed and impstume, & they wax loose, a weariness of the whole body and werinss of the Leggs, with a swelling in them towards night, and the stomack decreaseth by little and little, and the patient, if he have not help in time, falleth into a dropsie or con∣sumption. A good drink to cleanse the blood. Take water Cresses four hands Is, Brook∣lime two handfuls scurvy gass, half a peck, sena two ounces. Rubarb an ounce and a hal, Liquerice an ounce, sweet fennel seeds two ounces, he midle bak or  barbry tee an ounce, new wort three galos, Bruis all that is to be bruised, Cut the Bubarb in thin slices and cut the Herbs small, and put all together into a bag made o bouel Clath, and let it hang in the dink five dayes before you give it
to the party, and then cause him to take it e∣very morning fasting, and about the clock n the afternoon. This drink is good against the scurvy, whosoever takes this drink spring and fall▪ needs no other Medicine. A very good drink against the scurvy, Take yellow Dock roots finely sliced, Hors∣radish roots bruised small, of each a pound and a half, Succory roots their piths taken ut four ounces, Egrimony and funitory of each four handfuls, water cresses six handfuls, Scurvy grass a peck, ginger bruised one ounce▪ Nutmegs one ounce and half, Anniseeds and assafras rots of each one ounce, wash and pick and dry the herbs with a clothe, stamp them altogether in a stone Mortar, and wring ut the juice and put the Herbs after they are trayned with the rst of the simples into a ag made of bowtel clothe, and hang them in  Vessel of five gallons of new ale, and put in the juce that was strained out of the Herbs, nd let it stand four or five dayes, and then drink every morning fasting and every even∣ng half a pinte at a time, and if the party please let him make new drink thereof some ime in the day. To make a laxative beer of scurvy grass taught by Mr. Doctor Butler unto the Lady Finch, which takes away the swelling of the egs and stomack, ad makes to sleep well. Take Fennel and Partly roots wash it, scrape t and slice it, and the piths taken out, alike
four ounces, green asparagus roots, whole fo ounces, steep all this twenty four hours in quart of White wine and mix them with half  pound of scurvy leaves, clean picked wate Cresses, brooklime, Egrimony each  drams, wrap all these leaves and roots in  cloath, and lay them in a pye of thick rye past made without butter, and bake them tw hours in an oven, after cut open the pye and le the Herbs and roots cool, bruise the roots and Herbs with the inside of the rye pye in a mor∣tar, take Sasaparilla sliced in the midst, c short and bruised, Polypodium, Sena Alex. bruis∣ed a little three ounces, of Rubarb thin slice one half ounce, of sweet fēnel & Carroway seed of each one ounce, white fennel seeds bruise one half ounce▪ Liquerice scraped and thin sli∣ced one ounce mix all these ingredients toge∣ther, and put them into a bag, run them  in two gallons and a half of beer, let the work together for the first day, and as they work, let one squeeze the juce out of the ba twice, and tice the second day, let the ba hang continually in the drink by a thread to the bung, then stop the vessel close. When  dayes old, drink three quarters of a pint  once two hours before dinner, and two hours before supper, use to eat the sprigs of Asparagus in a sallet often times or the roots boyled  aforesaid in white wine and water. A Medicine for a surfet. Take a handful of Wormwood, an handful of Sage, an handful of Centory, a handful o Mintes and seethe them in a quart of Ale, or
beer, and drink it blood warm in the morning fasting. The Bowels. Diseases of the Bowel. THe Colick and Iliaca passin come often∣times both from one cause, thats to say of the opilation of the bowels, and are diseases very eager and sharp, and almost importable of pain, whereof many times followeth defection of the strength with variety of medicines, ye ought incontinent to help them First when the said pains come by stopping of the belly, you must give him a mollificative Clster made of the decoction of Mallowes, Violets, beers, anniseed and Fenugreek, with Cassia and com∣mon hony and oil olive, and afterward the Herbs of the said Clyster bruised▪ and fryed ayed hot betwixt two linnen Clothes, and applyed to the belly, but if the pain cease not give him a suppository long enough made of hony and Sal gem. For the winde Coick. If it come through windiness, and then the pain is changeable and moving from place to place, and is known also by the rumbling which is a noise in the bowels, with griping nd great pain.
A suppository for the winde Colick. Take a dram of Rue in fine powder, and half a dam of cun min dried and powdred, and with hony scummed make a suppository. A plaster. Take two handfuls of rue in fine powder, mirthe and Cummin powdred of each half  ounce; four yelks of Eggs and make two plasters with honey, and lay the one at night and the other in the morning upon the belly. Water of Camomil or a decoction of the ame drunken is good. Also a dried Acorn i powder and given to drink in white wine is very good. To cure a rupture in the belly. Take the root of male comphry ground in∣to powder, one dam of Polypodium of the oak asmuch of the root thereof, of white daysie mors asmuch; And asmuch of the root o Osmund which goweth in brooks all beaten into fine powder, mingle them together, and give the same to the patient to drink the space of nine dayes every morning, together with four spoonfuls of Malmesey, all this while let the patient wear the iron hoop with the russe and leave off the trusse until three weeks a∣ter he is perfectly whole. For the Fundament coming out. Take Aloes, Mirrbe ana. one ounce, terend terantur subtiliter and cribrentur, And anoit the
Fundament with the oil of Almonds, and lay of tis powder thrpn, and wit a skarlet ot hot put up the funament: this used will hlp with Gods gace. o a mans Fundament when it comes out  true Medicine. Take red nettles and stamp them well, and put them into an earhen pt and pu to them a portion of wine and seethe it well and give it the patient to dink. A special good Medicine proved to heal a rupture or broken man, Probat. First puge him with easie purgtions and let him keep good and straight diet ll he matter be up within his body. Then take the juice of Polypodie of the oak, of daysies, compry, Avens and Beony, in the winter, take the juice of the root and all of each one handful, stamp them, and strain them without other Liqur: And put the same juice into a quart of stale Ale, and drink a quantitie thereof evening and morning blood warm for nine dayes, keeping good diet, and sure trus∣sing; you may put Sugar candy to it if you will, Probat. Against ruptures or burstings. Take the Herb and root of Cranesbill dry it, make it into very fine powdr, and give one spoonful every morning fasting, & every night when he goeth to bed in red wine, or claret
wine, for xxi. dayes together. It cureth mira∣culously, but in aged persons to mix with it the powder of red sails, those that that are without shells dried in an oven, This medi∣cine never faileth although the rupture be great and of continuance. It likewise profiteth much those that are wounded in their bodies, The decoction of the herbs made with wine, prevaileth migh∣tily in healing inward wounds; All this hath been well proved. If ye know the pain of the belly cometh through winde, apply upon it a great ventose, without incision, for by that means the pain will surely go away or diminish: If not it shew∣eth that it is caused of some other humor as Phlegm or choler. A purgation for Colck coming of Phlegm. Take five drams of Diaphaenicon, three ounces of Wormwood water, and make a drink, the which received fasting four or five hours be∣fore meat is very profitable. For pain of the Colick coming of Choler. If the said pain come of choler which is known by the application of hot things, the pain increaseth, ye must make a Clyster of violets, or give him half an ounce of succo rosarum with Ptisan, Endive water, or wine. And the next morning let him drink a Ptisan of the decoction of prunes and violet Flowers, and anoint the belly with oil of violets, or wet a linnen cloth in cold water, and lay it thereupon, and if the pain
me of cold ye must anoint his belly with of bayes and goose grease. For the winde Colick. t is good to drink the Syrup of Elecam∣, & to wear a plaister upon the belly made ony, Wormwood and Aloes, Pilulae Co∣ are very good for the said disease, especi∣ when the Clster doth not suffice to ge the cause of the same. Also Diamuscum  Diacinnamum, are very good Electuaries, if ake one of them a Lozenge fasting 2 hours ore meat; Likewise it is good to take hridate with a little white wine, or with decoction of Camomile four or five hours  dinner, if his belly be naturally lax, or  by some suppository or Clyster. Back and Reins, The Reme∣dies of their distempers. A purgation for Choler coming of Phlegm. ke five drams of Diaphaenicon, three ounces Wormwood water, and make a drink, the ch received fasting four or five hours afore t is very profitable. scour, ceanse and cool the reins of the Back▪ ake half a pound of brown Sugar candy,
and one pint of Endive water, and anothe pint of red rose water, boil all thse togethe from a quart to a pint, and until it come to thick Syrup, which then put into a fair gas and keep it to thy use. This Syrup cleanseth the Reins and cook the heat threof, It must be taken fasti chiefly and last towads bed, yet it may be use as occasion srveth. For a pain in the back. Take a quart of wite wine, and a quar of running water, Then take of the crp,  Rsemary asmuch as both the hads can cla seethe them till half be consued, ten tak Sugar gains, as ye think good, and drink  first and last. For ache in the back. Take a good onion or two and rost the in the Embers, then stamp them and stra out the juice, and mix it with asmuch Malme as juice, and drink threof blood warm fir and last, Probat. Another. Take Egrimony, and Mugwort both leav and roots, and stamp them small, then ming them with good Dears sut, then smear  anoint the place therewith very warm, and ∣ter binde it up.
A good ointment for the back and restorative for the same. Take the mosel of a Hart or Stagge, and make powder of it, and boil it in white wine with Bursa Pastoris, knot grasse, plantain and Comphry, and when its well boiled, strain it and let it cool, and it will be a Jelly, And if you will eat of it, put to it Sugar, Cinnamon and Saffron, for its a great restorative so eaten, also with the Jelly aforesaid, anoint a weak back on either side the back bone, and chafe it well in, but do not anoint the back bone with the hand, use it thrice a week to bed∣ward till you be well, Probat. For the weakness of the small of the back. Take one handful of Baulme, one handful of Clarie, wash them not, they must be ga∣thered in the heat of the day, dry them in an oven and make them into power, the powder will be green, if it be done right, then lay a new layed egg into the fire, Let it be not half rosted, then put into it asmuch of the powder as will lie upon the point of a broad knife, and so eat it. A powder to knit and restore nature well proved. Take the roots of Tormentil, the best of them are red when they are broken, take of the pow∣der of these roots two parts and the third par of fine Galingale in powder, and of the powder of red mintes asmuch as of the Galingale, and
mingle them, and use of this powder in your broths, and meats, and Sawces. Pro Gonorrhaea. Take Aqu. Calendulae extractae ex foljis florum, et bibe singulis diebus Cochlearia tria & sanus evades. To restore a man that wasteth, and for soreness of the reins. Take sperma caeti and powder of mints and use to drink this with a spoonful of red rose water and make it luke warm, the sperma caeti, will relent anon, for this is a soveraign Medi∣cne. For heat in the back. Take the white of an Egg, a little red rose water, and a little Nutmeg, beat it well to∣gether and drink it mornings. Its an admi∣rable thing to cool it. For feeble reins. Take Burre roots and stamp them, and boil thm in stale Ale, and drink thereof at even∣ing hot, and at morning cold. To preserve nature from wasting. Take acorns and steep them three dayes in wie vinger, and dry them, and let him drink the powder; the cup is as good, if not better
then the Acorn its self, so they may be both together. For the running of the reins. Take an handful of Cumphry, a handful of Clary, and so much of Mousear, boil them in a quart of red wine, with powder of Cinna∣on, Saundrs and Sugar, and drink a good raught of thi fasting. For the running of the Reins. Take white wine, rosewater, Plantain ater of each alike much in Quantitie one arter of a pint, two Nutmegs grated, two enny worth of Cinnamon pounded, and as∣uch of Bolearmony as a Nut beaten inal, the hite of an Egg beaten to oil and put toge∣er, and for three dayes use it not, but every  shake it together in a glass, and then take  morning and evening, provided that you  a Syring now and then, either with white ne or else rose water, together or several, nd this is a special remedy for the running of  reins often times proved. To knit a broken Vein. One Master Atkinson having a broken vein his back could not be cured by any Doctor,  home to die; having a continued issue of  The Person of the parish advised him take a spoonful of the juice of Platain ing, which he did three or four times and
was cured and is well, and verifies this in J∣ly, 1652. For the help of the disease called the French pox. Take two peny worth of white wine and  peny worth of honey, one peny worth o Roh alame, these three sorts to be boiled to∣ther, and the same to be placed where  grif doth lie or most offend. A Diet drink o cure Lues venerea or any desper disease in mans bodie. Take seven gallons of spring water in rom pt, and put into it Saraparilla flic and bruised three ounce, set it on the  and let it infuse or boil very gently two hou thn pt into it fur ounces of chosen  leaves and cods, and half an ounce of  beaten to powder and half an ounce Stychads, and asmuch of Epithymum, of cho∣ liqurice scraped, sliced and bruised flat t ouces, of Camomile flowers one once,  them into a pot and let them boil all together one hour or more, then take it from the  d strain it into an earthen pot, and  and till it be cold then pure it and  bottles and drink thereof morning and e∣ing, a reasonable good draught. A morbum Gallihidropicum & cetera. Acci, e vini albi pounds 96 alias gallons▪ , lib. ss gyyrrhiz. iib. 2. Sea , ib. . Certci guiaci lib. 2. Colo
one ounce, coque in balneo Mariae per 24. horas, i non aporet, & exprime, Colaturae ad Mitri∣datum optimum, one ounce, per dus dies, bibat antum potest & nihil comedat per quatur , postea comedat semel in die & postea comedat  in die. Perficitur cura in duodecem diebus. Pain of the reins is called Nephretica passio. And cometh of some stone or gravel, and it is most like unto the Colick in cue, but in ourses they be clean contrary, or the Colick beginneth of the lower pats on the right sde and goeth up to the higher parts on the  side o the belly, and it lieth rather more r∣ward then backward, but Nehetica Passio be∣ginneth contrariwise above descending down∣ward, and ever lieth more toward the back; Aso Nephretica is painuller a sore meat, and the Colick is more grievous after. And ofte the Colick chanceth suddenly but Nephtica contrary, for commonly it cometh by little and little, and evermore before one shall fel pain of the back with difficultie of urine, Item there is more difference, for the Colick sheweth dry∣ess as it were coloured, but Nephretica is clear and white like water, afterward waxeth thick and then appeareth in the bottom of the vssel, like red sand or gravel. Remedy or pain of the reins. You must use things aperitive to cause you to make water, but afore ye ought to loose the belly in taking an ounce of Cassia, an hour before meat: but if your belly be hard or boud you must take a Clyster before you take the
said Cassia. In stead thereof you may take Cowes milk, with two yelks of Eggs in man¦ner of a Clyster, the Clyster must be great in quantitie. Drink water of Pellitory, of Cresses or of roots aperitive, the which waters are good to purge the gravel and stone. Likewise a very good Electuary, for the me Philantropos, or Lithontripon, if one take  dram or two after operation of a Clyster of Casia, or a pill of ante Cibum and after to drink one of the sid waters or else a little white wine warmed. If ye will make a Julep, take water o intes and of Bam of each half a pound, Sugar a quartern and make a Julep of the which one may drink evening and morning after mea a draght. Every morning is good to take a Lozenge of the Elect. that follow∣eth. A nobe Eectuary for the fluxe. Take powder of Diagalanga a dram and a half, of red corall and Masticke, of each a scruple, Trchiskes of Terra sgillata half a dam the barkes of Citrons confite and quin∣ces, of each one three drames, sugar dissol∣ved in water of Mintes four ounces, make an Electuary. Ols of Wormewood, Mint and of Narde and Masticke are very holsom to anoynt with∣all the belly and the stomack for the said flux, And the things declared of the flux Liente∣ria be very good in this case taking ever after meat a morsel of Marmalade. Red wine is very
good in this flux to drink at meat with the wa∣ter of a smith, and likewise all spices are good in this case. Medicines to restrain the flux of what cause sever it be. Take the Peisel of an hart and dry it into powder, and drink it, the water of Oakbuds, or the very acorns dryed and made in powder, and drunk in ed wine, is very good▪ Remedie fr the flux humoral, called Diarhaea. The said flux ought not to be restrained a sore the fourteenth day, i nature be not vry much infeled, And sometime it cometh of hot causes, as of color, and then the patient must drink beore his meat Syrup of Ribes, Syrup of roses or syrup of Quinces, and very smithes water. After ye have purged the principal matter o the disease the second Intention shall be by and by to stop the said Issue. To stop the said flux. Take trochiskes of white Amber and make them in powder, and give a dram every morn∣ing, and anon after drink an ounce or two o plantain water. Instead of those Trochikes he may make a powder of Sanguis draconis, Bole armony, white amber, and red coral, drinking one dram with plantain water, as is aforesaid.
Another Medicine to stanch the said flux. Take two ounces of old conserve of Roses, of the seed of plantain two drams, Sanguis draconis, Bole armony, of every one a dram and a half, white Cortal and red one dram, make a confection with Syrup of Mirtles and give it to drink morning and evening two houres afore meat at every time he quantity  a mean chesnut. An Irish Medicine to stay any flux. Take a handful of Sage, chop it small and put thereto the yelks of eggs, and fry them with as little butter as may be, and eat them as hot as you can, and drink not of 4 hours, and in four dayes after it helpeth. For the boody flux. Take owder of Comphry, and make tosts of wheat bread, and put them in red wine, ad powder of Cinnamon therewith, and also eat it alone. To cure the bloody flux. Take of Rubard grated one ounce, harts∣horn burnt and made into powder half a dram, mix them with Conserves of red Roses, of the last year and make thereof two or three boles, and let him take it at once, this scoureth away the cause of the flux and bindeth him pre∣sently after.
To cue any dangerous flux which is f orce to bring a man in danger of a consumption. Take fine wheat flour boulted finely, and tye it in a linnen cloath of the bigness of two eggs; and boyl it in a pottle of running water, with a handful of mother of time, whn it is half boyled away, then take up the flour whhich will be hard, and in looking upon the flour you must take of a skim which will be on it, then take some of the said flour and thicken a quantity of new milk, boyled as a thin flour meat, and drink it as ye see cause until you have recovered strength. This will recover a man of the bloody flux, even when he is tought past help, and also to rost an egge stone hard, and lit it and lay it hot to the fundament, stayeth any monstrous flux, and to wear napkins hot, and to keep them as hot as one can well en∣dure to the navel and fundament, shiting them as they grow cold, is excellent in ths case. For the bloody flux. Womans milk drunk nine dayes togethe sting, cureth the bloody flux in any: Another for the same. Note that the powder of Misselden of the oak given in red wine, helpeth that Flux, hatum.
A sure experiment to cure the bloody flux, when a man avoideth as it were black gobbets of flesh. Take Cumphry, Knotgrass, sheppards purse, Cinqufoil, Plantain, Ribwort, strawberry leaves, one handful, the middle rinde of a black thorn, & of cinramon one half ounce broken in small pieces, boyl all these in a pot of spring water, with a wheat bread crust unto a quart, and clarifie it, and put nine spoonfuls of wine vi∣negar unto it with sugar, and make a Iulep, drink thereof morning and evening, not drink∣ing after of two hours. Probatum. The Bladder, Remedies, for its Distempers. A medicine for the stone. Take grommel seed, pasley seed, red nettle Seed and saxirage all these made in pow∣der by even portions, or else take the Juice of al these Herbes, and of Lettuce and endive of all juices alike much and strain it through a Cloath and set it in a vessel on the fire, And take halfe so much of honey, as of the Juices and cast them all together and seeth them till they be thick, and keep it safe as Treasure, for this is a gracious Electuary for the stone,
Of the cure of the stone in the Reines and bladder. To break the stone, Take the kernells that are within sloes and drie them on a tilestone, then make of them a powder by it selfe, After that take the roots of Alisander, parsly, parietary and Hollihocke, of every one alike much and seethe them all in white wine or in the broth of Chickens, then strain them out into a clean vessel, and when ye drink of it adde asmuch of the said powder, as ye think convenient, half a silver spoonful or more, for without doubt it hath great effect in bringing out the gravel. Another expert medicine. There groweth in the galls of some open a certain yellow stone, sometimes, in bignes of a Wallnut somewhat long and brittle, if ye take that stone and make of it a powder, and eat it in your potage, the weight of one scru∣ple, or more according to your strength, It is a singular Medicine for them that cannot pis for stopping of the conduites; Another singuar Medicine. Take the seed of Smalledge, parsly, Lovage vage, and Saxifrage, the roots of Philipen∣dula, cherry stones, gromel seed and broom seed, of every one alike much, make them in fine powder, and when ye be diseased of the stone, eat of this powder a spoonful at once in pottage or broth of Chickins, and
eat nothing after in two or three hours. A goodly syrup to mundifie the reins. Take the broth of a young chicken sodden till the bones fall assunder three pound, Me∣lon seed a little bruised an ounce, parcely roots and Alisander roots three ounces, Damask prunes, Sebesten of each six in number, great raisins half an ounce, clean Liquerice o drams, water of Borage, endive and hops of each three drams, and with sufficient white sugar boyl them all unto the consumption of half and mor and afterward strain them and make a goodly syrup. This is a thing of excellent operation and an high secret in mundifying the reins, and keep right diet, the dose of it is one Cyath or a little cupfull in the morning early and sleep after it a little, if yee would have the foresaid Syrup to purge more choler then put in a dram of fine Rubarb with a liter cassia. A powder for the stone and Colick or either of them. Imprimis Carawayseeds two ounces. Gromel seeds two ounces. Anniseeds two ounces. Rubarb two ounces. Liquerice four ounces. Parsl seeds two ounces. Fennl seeds two ounces, dryed in an oven, Elecampana roots dryed as the Rubarb, else neither of them will beat to powder, bruise all these very small and Put to them asmuch
sugar as the quantity of them all and searce them through a sieve, then every morning take an heaped spoonful and put in your broth or what you like best. If you cannot away with the Gromel, put the more into of the other seeds, for that doth more prevail either against the stone or Co∣lick. This receipt hath often been proved to be good either for the stone or Colick. Another for the stone and to break it. Take ripe elder berries and distil then, and drink the water with sugar and it shall break and come out in one night, Probatum. Some four ounces of the water will serve at a time. For the stone which letteth a man to make water, Take Southernwood stamp it small and tem∣per it with small Ale and use to drink it every morning fasting and it shall break the stone. When you have used this drink eight or nine times together, then put a little Galbanum into the end of your yard and that will draw out the stone. An oyntment for the back if the stone come painful∣ly from you. Take red dock roots and May butter and beat them together in a morter very well and fry a little in a fryingpan and then strayn them and anoynt the back.
A Pultis to cause the stone to slip when its broken. Make a Pultis of oatmeal, and white wine vinegar, and after its made put to it a conve∣nient quantity of Aqua composita, and apply it to the place where you feel the stone to lie, and it will cause the stone to slip forward or downward. A medicine to avoid the stone in the bladder. Take a pinte of white wine, and put it in a pan and boil it, and put thereto asmuch powdr of Nutmegs, and drink it with Ale evening and morning, and you shall be whole, Probat. For the stone. Take Coliander seed, Parsley seed, Broom seed, Allexander seed, the seed of Asnen keyes, Hasel nut keyes, red bramble berries, Ivy berries, of each of them alike quantitie, and dry them, & beat them to fine powder altogether and searce them fine, Let the partie make a posser of white wine as clear as may be, and put in asmuch of this powder as will go into an hasel nutshel and take it three or four mornings together fasting, and if you please you may seethe your powder in your posset drink and so take it, probat. Also the Syrup of Althea commonly cal∣led the Syrup of Mallowes, and put in posset drink, and drink it and it will cause water pre∣sently, Probat.
A Soveraign Medicine for them that cannot pisse, well proved by the Lady of Northumberland. Take Alexander seeds and Parsly seed of each alike much, and beat them tgether in a Mortar, and seethe it in Malmesey, and seethe withall unset time, and parsly Leaves and seethe it from a pottle to a quart, and strain it, drink it warm. To make one make water presently. Take the inner skin, or pill o the Gizem f a Dove, dry it to powder, and give it to drink with white wine, I think the skin of one Gizern is scarce enough. To procure a man to pisse well. Take the kernels of Ash keyes dryed and made into fine powder, and drink a scruple of the powder fasting in seven spoonfuls of white wine warm. To procure urine that is stopped. Take Borrage roos mundified and sliced, and boil them in clarified posset Ale, made with Ale and white wine, and drink a good draught thereof with a little Sugar at any time in your infirmity. Probat. A special receipt to help sharpness of urine. Make Posset drink of a pint of milk, and a pint of Ale, then take three roots of Housleek,
and pick the leaves, stamp and strain them, and put the juice into the posset drink, Let it boil a walm or two, then drink it warm at any time of the day morning and evening, but not at meales, and as oft as you think good. An Injection for burning of urine. Take of fountain water four pound. Passul▪ exacinat. five ounces, foliorum Plan-taginis five handful: foliorum fragariae, Poligoni, rosarum one pulgil, quatuor seminum frigid. majorum munda∣torum one ounce, Aluminis three ounces, boil them and add two pound of the decoction Mellis rosati colati, six ounces, I doubt the Allume is of the most for smarting, which if it be, somewhat lese may be put in next the Mel rosarum. I think the lesse to be with the most, but that is a good wholsome, cleansing, healing and mitigating thing, so that there can be no hurt with it, but the waste of it. A powder for the heat of urine. Take Seminis Portulac one ounce, Endivi Seminis, Lactucae, Scariolae, acetosae, one half dram, Seminum communium frigidor▪ majorum one ounce, Papaveris albi, half one ounce, Sac∣chari ad duplum, fat traea; And a little be∣fore dinner and supper eat a spoonful of this powder for this purpose, but if the patient have a shaking ague withall then the cold∣ness of the powder is apt to draw on the  and to make his fits come often as hath been proved.
Fr them which make very foul or red water. Take the juice of Ribwort, and drink it warm with Ale once or twice a day, also for man that pisseth blood seethe garlick in wa∣ter till two parts be wasted, and let him drink f that water and he shall be whole. To provoke urine and a asswage the belly. Dry Pellitory into powder, and drink a oonful of the powder in white wine first and ast, and it shall asswage you, you may take esl sometimes, as now and then half a spoon∣ful with a Messe of pottage or broth. A receipt for the stone. Drink the distilled water of bean fowers at l times when you feel heat in your back, hich will bring away all gravell and loose ones, its not good to use it too often, lest  should break the stones too fast. good Medicine for one that cannot pisse by reason of the stone. Take Snayls that carry shells, a good hand∣, lay them in the fire, and they will creep ur of their shells, then take the shels and beat hem to powder and let the party drink the owder in some posset ale, or such like drink.
For the stone. Take white Saxifrage roots, Parsly, Pierstone, the Kernels of Ashen keyes, of each an hand∣ful, of Ringus roots two handful, bruise them well in a Mortar, and then boil them with si gallons of Ale or beerwort so long as wort is usually boiled, then put all into a vssel, and when it shall be stale enough drink every morning next your heart half an ale pint. This being very often or every day taken, you shal never be troubled with the stone, though you had been much troubled with it before. A receipt for the stone used by Sir Trever Williams. Take the quantity of a Walnut of the best Leaven and half so much of bay salt, put them together in a pinte of milk and stir them with a spoon until they dissolve; Then let them stand covered all night, then strain it, and drink it in the morning, fast one hour after and for that space keep your self walking. To prevent the stone. Take a peny pot worth of white wine, and put into it the quantity of a small nut of the finest castle sope scraped very small, and then warm it a little by the fire, and then drink it, and walk after it one hour, take this two dayes in a week, or in a moneth as you finde your self by your water.
To make a water for the stone. In the Moneth of May, or in the beginning of June, when oxen go to grasse, you shall take of their dung not too frsh, nor too dry, which you shall distill fair and softly, that it may not smell of th smoke, into some vessel▪ of glass. Then take two or three Radish roots cut into small pieces, and put the radishes so cut into a vial and fill it with greek or good white wine, or good strong Malmesey, letting it stand in the sun close stopt all one day, and one might; And then take one part of that wine, and two parts of the water of ox dung, half a pinte of Strawberry water, three or four drops of Lymons juice or Citrous juice, and let there be of all half a glassful or somewhat more, into the which you shall put a piece of Sugar to taste it withall, which Medicine must be given in the morning and the patient must walk after it, you must also incorporate inhs water this powder following, or else this Medicine is of small effect. The powder for the stone: Take the seeds of blew violets or march vio∣lets, and the seeds of common Burrs with their ittle seed and all, or ripe burrs, put them to dry in a oven, for else it will be hard to stamp them o powder, then stamp them with their seed. his done take a quick hare and strangle her hat no drop of blood be lost, with a strong ord, put him so whole or in pieces into an arthen pot close stopped, the feet, head,
guts, skin and all, and so let the pot in a  that the Hare may be burned to powder, and then stamp your Hare with your other two powders of Burre and violets, and dry oaken leaves well beaten to powder four ounces, of dry Saxifrage or of Sampier one pound beaten to powder, bay-berries five ounces Let all these things be well beaten to powder, sisted and well mingled together. Give unto the patient so much as will lie upon a groat, making him to drink it to his breakfast in the morning fasting, in white wine. And let him do this ot-times, Its the most exquistest thing in the world: And although both new as ell as old Physicians have very well tra∣velled for this disease of the stone and Stran∣gury, yet this is the best and soveraignest thing that can be given to a Christian man. Both the water going before, and this powder must be applyed as one medicine, so it seem∣eth that this powder may be taken either in white wine, or in the aforesaid water, or in white wine mingled with the said water, or in the said water without any white wine, which is thought to be the best, the said water be∣ing accounted so precious for this purpose, and of purpose distilled for this use as appear∣eth in the end of the receipt of the said water. Note Mr. Louth saith, that the very blood  the Hare dried to powder & drunk with white wine is excellent for the stone, and in red wine for womens diseases for the superflui of the flowers, Probat.
For the stone in the back, bladder, Kidnies and stomack. Take the roots of Philipendula, thats to say the round knots thereof, gather them after Lamma and grate them and take it in Ale, or white wine. The cold diureticks are the best for the stone, when diureticks are to be used for it or fr any other obstructions of the Kidnies which are the four cold seeds, the greater, Semen Al∣kakengi, radix graminis & acetosae. And there∣fore is cited Valeseus who saith that nothing is more excellent for the stone then Vinum Al∣kakengi or the distilled water thereof, and to use the wine in winter, and the water in sum∣mer, the branches and fruit of Alkakengi be∣ing in equal portions mixed and then bruised and then put into the wine, which must be used when the effect cometh from a cold cause, And the reason is that the hot diureticks, which are wont to be used against the stone do increase the hot distemperature engendring the stone; And therefore what good the said hot diureticks do one day, they do hurt ano∣ther. And the cold diureticks are not onely good for the present evil but do also resist the efficient cause and do stay the generation of the said stone. Thus much out of Valeseus as aforesaid, Whereby I gather that in a hot cause the water of the said Alkakengi is best and fittest and to use the wine and ale, for he prescribeth the win when the effect proceedeth from  cold cause, and also the wine in winter, and the water in summer, which observe, whether th stone may proceed of a cold cause, obstructi∣ons
of slyme may, threfore for the stone the water is likely to do best, the wine in winter may be good as he saih, and for sime the wine may be good or better, if cold slime wihout biting heat, but it seemeth the coldness which he Commendth i the coldness of the diuer∣ticks; and if the ffect do prced fom a cold, then the wine may do well r bst wih it. Als Mr. ogan in his chape of the peser∣vati  cu of the stone in the kidneys, and bladder, th that the water of glamen or Cuchgras with a little pure thin wine is a sigula. Mdicine for that purpose, also he saith that win of Alkakengi, is a good preservative, or the fruit condited with sugar. Thus much for the stone. The Womb, its remedies. For the flux of the wmb. In all fluxes of the belly, cause the excre∣ments to be duly searched, for if the disease be such, that the meat cometh forth, as it was received, or not half digested, the said Flux is called Lienteria, if great abundance of watery humours have their Ie below, the said Flux is named Diarhaea, which is as much to say as Flux humoral, and if blood or matter appear with the excrements in the sickness, then they call it dysenteria, which is a great dis∣ease and dangerous fo to cure. Take the rindes of Mirabolane cirtin bae
e dram, Rubarb a little dryed, half a dram, rup of quinces one ounce, water of plantain three ounces, mingl altogether & let the pati∣t drink thm, our hours before meat, and hen give him a Clyster Retentive made thus, ake oyl of roses or quinces, of mastick of ach e three ounces, ole amoniack in powder a ains, meddle alltogether & give it as a Clyst∣, here is to be noted that the Clyster: that e given to stop a Flux must be very little in uantity. Ye may heal the Flux dysenteria as the flux umral, and take afore your reast two dams f conserves of quinces, and he ought to drink ter wherein hath been quenched gads of eel, ye must avoyd diversitie of meats. A purgation for the flux humora. Take two drams of Mirabolanes dryed on tile, half a scruple f Agarick in trochisk, half  ounce of Syrup, of Mintes, or two ounces of ater of bawm, and make a potion to be re∣ived three or four hours afore meat. For the suffocation of the matrice. The matrice in a woman oftentimes mounteth wads the midffe and the stomack with in∣lerable pain & is called suffocation, because  it is choaked, ovrcharged with some evil  superfluous matter, as by stopping of due gtions or too much abstenence of Venus, hereby often chanceth shortness of breath, in of the head, swooning, trembling of the art, contraction of members, and otherwhiles th without remedy.
A drink for pain of the mother. Take one dram of Mithridate and dissolve in an ounce and a half of water of wormwoo and give it her to drink afore she go to me four hours. Another to provoke the flux of the Matrice. See the Marigolds, nept and savine in good al and drink it with a good quantity of Saffr and a little honey and sugar. Item fifteen bla seeds of Piony drunken in wine with safir purgeth the Matrice of humors, and other fteen of the red seeds stancheth it again or a∣other Flux of he mother. These Hebs a good to purge the Matrice, Rue, Piony, Savin Betony, nept, Valerian, Maydenhair, Hor hound, Savary, Parsley, Gromel, Alisa¦der, Marigolds, Smalledge and Time. The Terms or flowers, their Rmedies. Fr suppression or retaining of the flowers or Mstruus. If the blood be too gross and thick you mu every month give her the syrup of sumito with the decoction of borage and bugloss a
ther bath her self with fresh water hot. And hen she goeth out of the bath into the bed e must receive the aforsaid Syrup and de∣tion of the Herb called Rubea tinctorum or adder, sdden in clear water. In stead of Sy∣ps ye may take the very juice or decoction the Herbs. And if the womans blood be slimie, cold, nd Phlegmatick, then she must drink Syrup of echados and of oxymel diuretick and after∣rds take the pills called Faetidae and of Aquae rick, and every morning after she must ke a dram of Trochiskes of Mrrhe with two nces of the decoction of Iuniper berries d thereupon drink two ounces of water of gwort. Moreover it is a proved & expert Medicine,  give the first day of the new Moon a im of powder made of Borax, which theldsmiths do occupie, with asmuch Cinnamon d a little water of smallage. It is good to help and provoke the said pur∣tion by such things as open, which must be en at such time of the Moon as the said wo∣n were wont to have the same. the overflowing of the menstruus and for the retaining of the same. To provoke the termes a most expert dicine, and secret. A certain herb called rin, not that with cos and stones in the t, but that which hath a root like the hand  man with fingers, and the root of one  drieth and groweth in the end of the r, the other a green root; Take three
leaves, otherwise one or two, otherwise thre green roots of that Herb dayly and give it fo nine dayes in broth, or rosted or fryed with∣out broth as you will and it shall effct, an give of the dry roots in the same and the shall cease, &c. A most approved Experiment to provoke the Men∣struiss. Take of tryphera magna the quantity of great Nut, and put to it the Sal gem the quan∣tity of a filbird nut, let them be mixed an tempered with white wine, or eat it with Rue For the dropsie and to provoke the flowers a urine. Cantharides (the head and other things t¦ken away,) burnt and brought to a powde the dose is a dram with white Wine in th evening, Probatum est. Item, a gum called Serapine, mixed with t juice of Savine or Centory, and it causeth a dea childe to issue forth. To bring down womens termes. Bruise the roots of Celendine and wear the in your socks, next to your bare feet, and will cause them to break and come down wit in four dayes or lesse in plentiful manner which then presently take away. A medicine for the green sickness and to cause flowers. Take Nep, unset Hyssop, Lavender Cotte
ngelica leaves, mother of time, French Mal∣wes, Germander, Fetherfew, of each a good ndful, boil them in two gallons of spring ater to one gallon, then strain it, then put to two good sticks of Liquerice scraped and uised flat, and one pint of pure clarified y, then boil it again four or five walmes d drink thereof fasting and one hour before pper, and use exercise. A medicine to stop over much abundance of Flowers. Take Shepherds purse, knotgrass, and red changel, a little quantity, pound them a∣der and not all together, then take the juice each of them, and put one spoonful of e juice of every one of them into six spoon∣ of stale Ale, for Ale is better then Beer this case, and drink it of, and use this drink orning and evening. To make this Electuary, take red Coral in e powder two ounces & a half, white Coral fine powder two ounces, Sanguis Draconis fine powder three ounces, put to it two nces of conserve of red roses and mingle em well together; of this Electuary, first take e quantity of three beanes morning and ening to bedward, and within one quarter of hour after take of the drink aforesaid cold, warm will hinder the force of it, this is a ble Electuary and drink in that case. For the red Flux in women. Take a dram of Persicum Philonium in a suf∣ficient
quantity of plantain water to carry down as a Vehiculum, which is the Physician word to carry things down, drink this fasting and anoint the Navel and the belly about the Navel and all the back over with Vnguentum Comitssae, & make two plasters the one for th belly about the Navel, and the other, for th other for the whole back parts and appl them thereto and wear them nights and day for a good while, you must take the Phy oniu Persicum divers dayes together in manne aforesaid for four or five dayes together and stay to see what good you finde, if you hav not found it stay before, and if it be n stopped, then you must take it again and  the ointment and plaster still until it sto and if this will not help it and stop it, n∣thing will do it, as one Master Berington  confidently assure out of his own practise. For the whites proved. Take a pint of spring water and stone the in half a pound of prunes and put ther with them two spoonfuls of sugar, and  mornings together drink three or four spo∣fuls of the water, and fast an hour after. For rising of the Mther. Take some knops of Amber otherwise led Succinum, and cast them upon a chaf dish of coal until they make a great smot and then hold your mouth open over chaffing dish and receive the fume  as you can, and cast a good, linnen cloth ab
your head and face to keep in the fume that as little go by as may be. A specia mediine for the mother or winde or spleen which riseth about the heart. Take Fenugreek, Liquerice, Fennel seeds, Anniseeds, Alisander seeds, coander seeds pre∣pared, Parcly seed one ounce, and beat them together; then take Cinnamon half an ounce and saffron one scruple and beat them to pow∣der altogether, and temper with clarified hony or sugar making thereof an Electuary and eat of it morning and evening. Probat. A medicine for the whites and weakness of nature. Take the whites of four Eggs dryed and made into powder, two Nutmegs, he weight of six pence in Cinnamon, the weight of two pence in Mace, the weight of ten pence in ed Saunders make all these into fine powder and take of this powder asmuch as will lie on a six pence in a rear egg or with Muscadine or mace ale, and sometimes broath every morn∣ng for a monehs space together; for your dit forbar milk, butter, roots, and Herbs, claret and wite wine, and especially pigeons flesh. To cure the Mother. Take Gr.ii. of Musk in conserve of Gilliflowers nd it must be taken inward, It will melt in our mouth.
A good Medicine for one that feareth to misca with childe. Take yarrow and stamp it and strain th juice and three spoonfuls of new milk war from the cow, mingle them together an sweeten with sugar. To make a caudle to strengthen one that is with childe and is weak. Make a caudle with whites of Eggs and  ylks, and boil in it a stick of Cinnamon, whic rose leaves, and white Archangel flowers, an harshorn; boil all these together and so drin it. To make a woman have a quick delivery and sma pain. Take leaves of Betony, stamp them an strain them, or else make powder of them an give the woman to drink in a little water. To cleanse the matrix after the Childbirth. Take a quart of Claret. Wine and burn i and set it on the fire again, and as it boileth p into it 2. or 3. spoonful of Embers, then stra it from the ashes this do two or three time then powder it with powder of Sugar and suc Syrups as are fit for the womans body, if s be hot and costive, Syrup of Violets, but if s be Laxative not that but Syrup of cowslips,  good to give her in broth oyl of sweet A∣monds.
To drive away the after pain of a woman. Take mother time, picked clean from the stalke and shred small, the quantity of a spoonful, and put to it asmuch salt as the quan∣ity of a hasell Nut, and put it in a draught of broth or caudle and give it the Woman to drink immediately after shee's delivered, the sooner the better, the Herbs must be raw. A medicine to fetch away a dead childs after burden. Take a handful or two of Mugwort stampt  chopt which you please, then take a quan∣tity of barly meal and mingle it with a little fair water set over the fire, and boil till it be o thick to spread on a cloth, then put into it some barrowes grease asmuch as an Egg, and so  and spread it on a cloth and lay it beneath the Navel of the woman and not above in any e, and assoon as it hath brought away an∣hing, take it away, for it maketh that way as ng as its on, and will bring away that which  should not bring, if it lie on after thats gone which you would have away. A present remedy for a woman that travaileth with childe. Take Hyssop, Vervine and Betony of each e handful, stamp them well and temper hem with stale Ale, then strain it, and wring ut the juice and give a good draught thereof  her to drink, and she shall be delivered with
speed, and the childe saved and she both, fots proved. To deliver a woman of a dead childe. Take Camomil and give it in clear posse drink, is good to ease te pain, colick or grip∣ing pain of the body, stamp it and strain it in to white Wine, and give it a woman that hath a dead childe within her and it will cause he presently to be delivered. The Gout. Remedies for the Gout. THe pain in the joynts of a mans body as in the hands and feet is generally calle Arthritis or gout, which proceedeth some∣time of debiliy of the sinewes being last and unable to consume the humours that con∣tinually Flow unto them. And for the most part they are derive from the member Mandant, that is to say th brain, for he is very grosse and engendret every humour in himself, by reason whereo much of the said humours are derived int the Nuke and muscles of the back, and from thence they descend into the feet or to th Hucklebone or else into the hands.
Remedy. And since all the said kindes come or are caused of one beginning, and for the better expedition in that, we will be brief, ye shall first take away the superfluous moisture of the brain, which is the root and fountain of all the said diseases, and that ye may do four manner of wayes. The first observance is of diet inclining to dryness and to avoid all ful∣ness of meat and drink, and not to sleep in any wise after meat. And ye must beware that ye eat no vaporous meats nor thin Wine, nor dink much after supper; And if per∣chance the pain be very sharp it shall be whol∣some to abstain from all kinds of wine, and o use himself to small drink which thing if he cannot do, let him drink Claret wine mixed with a good quantity of water. The second is to purge the brain once a moneth with the one half of Pills of Cochia nd another half of Pills of Assajareth and in ime of harvest and of summer with Pills  quibus and Pil. imperial. Whereof ye shall give one dram the night before the full Moon, nd the day following ye may give him to eat little broth of Cicers, with a little quantity of raisins of the sun. The third is to repress he sumes that ascend into the brain after eat, which thing may be done by eating a ttle dredge made of Aniseed and Coriander. The fourth is to perfume the brain with cer∣ain things comfortative as for example thus. Take fine fankincense, Sandrach and Mastick, f every one an ounce, of Lignum Aloes a dm,
make them all in grosse powder and perfum therewith stupes made of Flax or o Cotten and lay upon the head; And when ye have by this meanes well and duly comforted the brain and defended the original cause o the said disease, ye shall proceed to take away the matter conjoynt that is descended into the sinevves and ye shall begin thus. First ye must preserve the body from in  gendring of humours, in taking every morning next your heart a conserve made of Alcherine and of Flowers of Rosemary mingled with  little Nutmeg and Mastick, and if ye be  povver, ye may drink a good draught o Ipocras or other spiced drink after meat,  dinner and at supper. Secondly ye shall un∣derstand that whosoever doth intend to be holpen of the Gout, he must every year  purged two times, prepaing fist the matte to digestion with Syrup of Staecados and duobus radicibus with the one half of vvaters of Sage primeroses and Marjerom in manner of spiced ulep with Cinnamon, taken five continua mornings, tvvo hours after ye eat any othe meat, And after that ye must receive a dra of pills called Artheticae or Hormodactyl, or o both together equal portions, or take half  ounce, of Diacarthami tvvo hours after night and of Diaturbith, of every tvvo drams vvit a little Syrup of Hyssop. The rest of the said curation, shall be ac∣complished with the applying of divers loca remedies, whereof there be sundry sorts her declared, ye ought to rub the place that is sor with oyl of roses and a little vinegar, and af∣ter sprinkle upon the same, fine powder o
Myrtles. Another plaster also as hereafter fol∣loweth, A plaster for the gout. Take the Emplaster called Melilot, two ounces, of Populeon, an ounce and an half, red roses, myrtles and Flowers of Camomile, of every one a dram, make a plaster and lay up∣on the gouty ioynt. Another. Take oyl of roses, crums of bread, yelks of Eggs, and cowes milk with a little Saffron, seethe them a little together, afterward spread them upon clouts, and lay upon the sore. Another. Make Lye of the Ashes of Rosemary or of oak or of bean-stalks, and boyl it in sage, molin, prime rose, Camomile and Melilor, and receive the fume upon the sore place, or wet clouts in the said decoction, and lay them upon the pain. All the said Remedies are very good, to as∣swage the pain of the gout, after the which done, it is good to goe about the comforting of the joynts and sinews, and to that intent apply oyl of Camomile, and of Althea or Ho∣lihock, oyl of a Fox, oyl of earth wormes, oyl of primerose, turpentine, wherewithal or with one or two of them, ye may anoynt the sore place, and comfort both the joynts and sinewes marvellously: also this oyntment that
followeth, is singular good for the same pur∣pose. Tke five or six handfuls of Walwort, and seethe them wel in wine, then strayn them and with a little wax, oil of spick, and Aqua vit make an oyntment, wherewith ye must a∣noynt the place morning and evening every day. Medicines for the gout appropriate in all cases. Take Cowes dung and seethe it in sweet milk, and lay a plaster to the gout hot, aso the yelks of eggs, womans milk, linsed and Saffron, alto∣gether in a plaster swageth the diseases of the gout And if ye be disposed to break the skin, and so let the humors issue, as by such many one is easd ye shall make a plaster of back sope and Aqua vitae, which will blister it withut any great pain. Also very old hard cheese cut and sodden in the broth, of a gamon of bacon, and afterward stamped with a little of the brth and made in manner of a plaster, is a singular remedy for diseases of the gout, and was first practised by Galen the prince of all Physicians. A Medicine to ease the gout and to bring down any swelling in feet, leg, r arm. Take a quart of milk fom the Cow and crum into it a peny white Loaf and put into  asmuch Dears suet as a pullets egge, and boyl t to the thickness of a pultis, and spread it wll and thick on a cloath, so broad as will cover the gie and renew it once in twenty four hours, and if your pan cease not use it so as long again, and it will cure the grief and
draw out streaks o blood. This medicine cured one in such extremity and pain of the gout, when he continually crved, and could neither go nor ride; and never grieved since so perfectly was he cured. For lgs swollen of any manner of disease. Take pellory and seethe it well in white Wine and wash the leg in the water, and lay the Herbs about the Lgs plasterws and it will asswage within five hours. Pobatum est. For the gout. Take half a peck of snails, a quart of bay salt, and put them in a bowl and bruise them together, then take them and put them in a bag, and let them drop in any thing so you preserve the oyl. To cure and ease the gout. Apply to the gouty place, a pultiss made of barly and brooklemp hot in the time of extre∣mity and let it lye twenty four hours. A pultis of barly to asswage swelling in the legs to molifie the hardness, Boil in a gallon of water, one quart of hulled barly very tender, and put therein a good Al∣lume stone, and being tender, drain the water from it, and to bedward lay it on a cloth a good thickness and lay it over the swelling reasonable warm, leeting it lie twenty four
hours, and ue it three or four daye togethe Probat. For the Gout: Take Caro Costinum an ounce and dissolve  in white wine, and drink it about half a pint and use the partie as after a purge, and th effect is wrought by purging, approved by ma∣ny Gent. A medicine for the Sciatica. For a man take the urine of a man child and let it stand in some vessel for nine daye and then separate the clear urine from th thick, and put it into a vessel, and put to th clear urine a good quantity of the juice  Cullerage, male Culrage, which hath spotte leaves of a black colour, and boil it togethe till half be consumed, and it will be an oynt∣ment, with which anoint the patient by th fire, and he shall be cured, which hath been often tryed. And for a woman take the urine of a femal childe, and of the uice of Culrage withou spots and do as for the man. An experienced medicine for the Sciatica. Take Jvy, Mugwort, Wallwort and the Inner rinde of an Elder tree, and seethe them in fair water with a good quantity of salt, and bath the sore place well therewith three or four times a day for the space of nine dayes ogether, and doubtless this will cure it▪
An excellent oil for an ache onely to be made in the moneth of May, oil of Rosemary Flowers. Take a thin glass of a pottle, and fill the glass ull of Rosemary Flowers very finely and purely picked, put no liquor at all thereto but the pure Flowers onely, and stop the glass very close that no air get therein, then set the said glas in the sun against a wall out of the winde, and there let it stand all the said moneth of May▪ In the end of May you shall ind the said Flowers dissolved into a very seet oil, which oil clarifie it into another glas rom the grounds; And this said oil stop close and keep it diligently, for its an excel∣lent and proved remedy, against any manner of ache in the Joynts or otherwise. A powder for the Sciatica. Take Betony Cetaury one two ounces, Dit∣anie, rue, one 6▪ ounce make all these into fine powder searced and kept in a box, the dose to be given is one dram in a draught of white Wine bedward to sleep, Probatum. A plaster fr all aches and pains in any part of the body. Take a quarter of a pound of pure Rosen, and unwrought wax, Dears suet, or sheepes suet of equal quantity, melt them altogether, three or four spoonfuls of Sallet oyl, black sope of the bigness of a Wallnut, stir all toge∣ther, take it from the fire, put in your Linnen
first made fi for the place grieved, then hang them on a string till it be cold. It will take away the pain and disease, use it to any par of the body where th pain is, whether in the joints, swellings, Sciatica, often proved upon my self▪ I will not leave the use of it fr gold. Childrens Diseases. The Head, Remedie or the Dis∣tempers of their Heads. For the apostume of the brain and swelling. IN which cases the childe cannot rest and is ever loath to have his head touched cry∣eth and vexeth it self as it were in a Phrensie. Remedy. Make a bath of Mallowes, Camomil and Lillies sodden with a sheepes head till the bones fall, and with a spunge or soft clouts all to bath the head of the childe, in a cold apostume with the broth hot as may be suf∣fered, but in a hot matter, with the broth luke warm, or in the cooling and after the bath set on a plaster thus.
Take Fenugreek, Camomil, wormwood, of every one a handful, seethe them in a close ves∣sel till the third part be consumed, then stamp them in a mortar and stir them, to the which ye shall put of the same broth again enough to make a plaster wih a little bean flower, yelks of Eggs and Saffron, adding to them fresh butter or ducks grease, sufficient, and ap∣ply it; in a cold matter let it lie a day but in a hot cause ye must remove it every six hours. For swelling of the head, Which cometh of a windie matter, which is manifst to the sight by the swelling or puffing up, and pressed with the fingr there remaineth a print, which is a sign of winde and viscous humours, ye shall heal it thus; Take an handul o fnnel, Smallach and dil, and seethe them in water in a close vessel, afterward stamp them, and wih a little Cum∣min and oil of bitter Almonds make it up and lay it often to the child warm; In default of oil of Almonds take goose grease adding a little vineger. And it is good to bathe the place with a sft cloth or a spunge in the broth of these Herbs. Rue, Time, Marioram Hyssop, Fennel, Dill, Cummin, Salintra, Mints, Radish roots, rocket, or some of them, ever taking heed that there drop not the Medicines in the babes eys, mouth or ears.
For scales and ulcers in the Head▪ If ye see the scales like shells of oisters, blac and dry cleaving upon the kin one withi another, ye may make a fomentation of ho and moist herbs, as Fenugreck, Holihock, Bear breech, Linseed and such other sodden, all  some of them, in the broth of neats feet, an so to bathe the scres, And after that apply  soft plaster of the same Herbs with goose grease or butter, using this still till ye see th scab removed: and then wash it with the juic of Horehound, Smallach and Betony sodot together in wine, and after the washing pu upon it powder of Mirrhe, Aloes, and Frankin∣cense, or hold his head over a chaffing dish  coals wherein ye shall put frankincense an Saunders in powder. But if ye see the scab very sore and matterie with great pain an burning of the had ye shall make an ointmen to cool the matter thus. Take whie Lead and Litarge of each fiv drams, lie made of the ashes of a vine thre drams, oil of roses an ounce, wax an ounce melt the wax first then put to the oil, and li with the rest, and in the end two yelkes o Eggs, make an ointment and lay it to the head. This is the composition of Rasis. Another. Take Betony, groundsel, plantain, Fumi∣tory and daysies, of every one like much stamp them, and mingle them with a pound of fresh swines grease, and let them stand
closed in a moist place eight dayes to putrifie, then fry them in a pa, and sain them in a clean vessel and ye shall have a green oint∣ment of singular operation for the sad disease and to qunch all unkinde heats of the body, also ye must use to shave the head, whatsoever things ye do lay unto it. If there do lack cleansing of the sores and the childe wounded, ye shall do well to make ointment of a little Turpntine, buls gall and hony and lay upon the sores. The juice of morrel, daysie leaves and groundsell fryed with grease and made in an ointment, cooleth all unkinde heats and pstules of the head. Moreover the childs head may not be kept hot for that is sometimes the cause of this disease. Sometimes there breedeth in childrens heads as it were little warts or Knobbes some∣what hard and cannot be resolved by the said Medicines. An excellent remedy for warts or Knobbes of the head. Take Litarge and white lead of each a like quantity, of brimstone and quick silver quench∣ed with spittle▪ of each a less quantity, twice asmuch oil of Roses and a spoonful or two of vineger, mix them all together on a Marble till they be an oyntment and lay it on the head, and when it hath been dry an hour or two, wash it off with water wherein was sodden Marjerone Savory and Mintes, use it thus twice
a day morning and evening till ye see it whole▪ This thing is also good in the other kinde o scales. Rhasis description. Anoint the forehead and temples of th childe, with oil of vilts and vineger, put∣ting a drop or two into the Nostrils, and if y can get any Syrup of Poppie give to the child to lick, and then mak a plaster of oil o Saffron, lettuce and the juice of poppie, o we cloutes in it and lay it overthwart th temples Also the seed ad the heads of Poppie ca∣led Chesuls stamped with Rsewaer, an mixt with with womans milk, and the whit of an Eg beaten altogether and made into  plaster causeth the childe to receive his natu∣ral sleep. Also an ointment made of the seed of pop∣pie and the heads one ounce, oil of Lettuc and of Poppie of each two ounces, make a ointment and use it. They that cannot get these oils may tak the Herbs or juice of Lettuce, purslane, hous leck and poppie and with womans milk, make a plaster and lay it to the forehead. Oil of Violets, of roses, of Nenuphar ar good, and oil of Populeon, the broth of Mal∣lowes sodden and the juice of water plan∣tain. The cure of a palsie in a childe is not like to that in elder age, for the Sinnewes be very nesh and tender and they ought to have a much weaker medicine, evermore regarding
the power of the sickness, and the vertue or ebilitie of the grieved patient. shal be good for the nurse to eat a Electuary made after this sort. Take mintes, Cinnamon, Cummin, rose leaves▪ dried Mastick, fengrck, valerian Ameo, dor∣ici zedarii, clove, Saders and lignum aloes, of evry one a da▪ Muk half a dram, make an Electuary with clarified hony and let her eat it, and give the child asmuch as half a nut every day to swallow. A paster. Take an ounce of wax and a dram of Euphbium at the Apothecaries, and temper it with oil olive on the fire, & make a cerecloth to comfort the back bone and siewes Take lie of ashes and seethe therein bay∣berries and asmuch piony seeds in a close ves∣sel to the third part, and wash the childe often with the sa. Iem, a bath of savory, Marjo∣ram, time, Sage, Nepte, Smallage, and mintes or some of them is very good and wholsome, Also to rub the back of the childe and limbs with oil of Roses and spike mixt together warm and in stead of it ye may take oil of bayes. Of the Cramp or Spasmus. This disease is often seen among children and cometh very lightly, as of debility of the Nerves and cords, or else of grosse humours,
that suffocate the same, the cure of which i delared by Authors to be done by frictions and ointments that comfort the sinewes, and disslve te matter, as oil of Flower de luce and the roots of Piony▪ tem. oil of Camomil, Fenugreck and Melilote, or the herbs sodden, Betony, wormwood, Vervine and time are ex∣ceding god to wash the childe in, Iem, the plaste of Euphorbium written in the Cure of the Palsie. Of Starkness and stiffness of the Limbes. When a young child is so taken with a cold I esteem it best to bath the body in luke warm water wherein hath been sodden Marj∣ram and time, Hyssop, Sage, Mintes an such other good and comfortable herb, then to relieve it with meats of good nourishment ac∣cording to the age and necessity, and if need be when ye see the limbs yet stark make an oint∣ment after this form. Take a good handful of nettles and stamp them, then seethe them in oil to the third part in a double vessel, keep that ointment in a dry place, for it will last a great while and it is a singular remedy or the stiffness that cometh o cold, and whoso anointeth his hands and fet with it in the morning shall not be grieved with cold all the day after. The seeds of nettles gathered in Harvest and kept for the same intent, is exceeding good sodden in oil, or fryed with swines grease, which thing is also very good to heal the kibes of heel, called in Latine Perniones. When the cause cometh not by extream cold but of
ome other affection of the sinewes and cords, i best to make a bath or a fomentation of erbs that resolve and comfort the sinewes ith relaxation of grosse humours. The Eyes, Remedies for their Distempers in Children. mours, and to open the pores, as by exampl thus. Take Mallowes, Hollihock and dill of each a ndful or two, seethe them in the water of eatfeet, or in the broth of flesh without , with a handful of bran and Cummin, in hich ye shall bath the childe as warm as he ay suffer, and if ye see necessity▪ make a aster of the same Herbs and lay it to the  with a little goose grease, or ducks grease, it may be got, oil of Camomil, of Lilies and  dill, clothes wet in the said decoction and  about the members helpeth. Of blood otten eyes and other infirmities. The cause is often too much crying, for the hich drop into the eye a little of the juice Morrel, otherwise called Morel, and to noint the forehead with the same, and if  eye swell, to wet a cloth in the juice and  white of Eggs, and lay it to the grief.  the humour be clammish and tough and
cleaveth to the corners of the eye, so that the childe cannot open them, afer his sleep it shall be removed with the juice o Housleek dopped on the eye with a feather▪ When the eye is bloodshot it is a singular re∣medy to put in the blood of a young pgon, or a dove, or a parige, ther hot from the bird or else dried and made in powder as subti  may be possible▪ A plaster for swelling and pain of the eyes. Take Quices ad crums of white bread and seehe it in watr till they be soft, the stamp them, and with a little  and  yelks of two Eggs, make a plaster to th childes eyes and oehead; ye may let him re∣ceive the fume o that decoction. It is als good in the Meg im. For watring eyes. Hartshorn brent in powder and washe twice, Guiacum otherwise called Lignum Sanc Corticum thuris▪ Antimony, of each one part, mus the third part of one part make a fine powde and use it with the juice or water of Fennel. The Ears, Remedies for Distem∣pers of the Ears of Childrn. For pain in the Ears, IT is good to drop into the Ears the juice  organy and milk.
For swelling in the Ears. Painters oil, which is oyl of Linseed is ex∣ceeding good for the swelling of the ear, and for pain in the ears of all causes. If ye see the Apostume break and run, ye may cleanse it with the juice of smallach, the white of an Egg, barley flower and honey, which is a com∣mon plaster to mundifie a sore. When the ars have received water or any oter lquor, It is good to take and stamp an onyon, and ring out the juice with a little goose grease, nd drop it hot into the ears as may be suffered and lay him down on the contrary side an our, after that cause him to neese if his age ill suffer with a little pellitory of Spain, or eesing powder, and then incline his ear downward that the matter may issue▪ For worms in the Ears. Take Myrrhe aloes and the seed of Colocynthis lled Colloquintida at the Apothecaries, a uantity of each, seethe them in oil of roses, nd put a little in the Ear. Myrrhe hath a great ertue to remove the stench that is caused in he ears by any putrifaction, and the better  oil of bitter Almonds, or ye may take the  of wormwood with hony and salt . For winde in the Ears and tinckling. Take Mirrhe, and Spicknard, Cummin, Dill  oil of Camomile and put a drop into the  Eas. They that have not all these may
take some of them, and apply it according to discretion. To amend deafness ye shal make an ointment of a Hares gall, and the grease or dropping of an Eel, which is a soveraign thing to recover hearing. For neesing out of measure. Anoint the head with the Juice of Purce∣laine, Sorrel and nightshade, or some of them and make a plaster of the white of an Egg and the juice, with a little oil of roses, and em∣plaster the forehead and temples with the milk of a woman, oil of roses and vineger a little. The Teeth. To help the breeding of them. IF it come of cold Rheum, make a plaster o Mastick, Frankincense, Mirrhe, wine, an apply it to the former part of the head. fume of the same received in flax and laid up¦on the childs head is wholsom. To procure easie breeding of Teeth. Anoint the gums with the brains of an har mixt with asmuch capons grease and hone or any of these things alone is exceeding goo to supple the gums and the sinewes And when the pain is intolerable wi Apstume or Inflmmation of the gums, mk an ointment with oil of Roses with the ju
of Morrel otherwise called nightshade, and in lack of it anoint the jawes within with a lttle fresh butter and hony. For lack of th hars brain ye may take the conni, for they be also of the kinde of hares, whse Mawes are of the same effect in Medicine as the Mawes of Haes. If the gums apostume or swell with sot flesh full of matter and painful, the best shall be to anoint the sore place with the brain of an ha and Cpons grease, equally mixed to∣gether, and after that ye have used this once or twice, anoint the gums and apostumations with hony. If this help not tke turpentine mixt with a little hony in equal portion. And make a bath for the head of a childe in this manner following. Take the flowers of Camomil & dill of each an handful, and seethe them in a quart of pure running water until they be tender, and wash the head afore any meat every morning, for it purgeth the superfluity of the brain, the seames of the skull, and withdraweth humours from the sore place, finally comforteth the brain and all the vertues animal of the childe. The mouth, The Remedies of its Distempers in Chidren. To cause easie breeding of Teeth. TAke red Coral hanged about the neck, where upon the childe should often labor
his gums, It helpeth children of the falling evil, and is very good to be made in powder and drunken against all manner of bleeding of the nose or Fundament. Remedies for the canker in the mouth of Children. Take drie red roses and Violets, of each a like quntity, make them in powder and mix them with a little hony, this medicine is very good in a young sucking childe, and many times healeth without any other thing at all. But if there be great pain and heat in the sore, ye shall make a juice of purcelaine, lettuce and nightshade and wash the sore with a fine piece of silk, this will abate the brenning, as∣swage the pain, and kill the venome of the ul∣cer, but if ye see the Cankr yet encrease with great corruption, and matter ye shall make an ointment after this manner. Take Mirrhe, galias, or in default of them open apples, dried Frankincense, of each a like much, of the black berries growing on the bramble, taken from the bush while they be green, the third part of all the rest, make them all in powder and mix them with asmuch hony and safron as is sufficient and use it. Another stronger Medicine for the Canker in the mouth of Children. Take the root of Celidonie dried, the rinde of Pomegranate dried, red Coral in powder, and the powder of an hrshorn, of each alike, och alon a litle, fist wash the place with wine, or warm water ad hony, and after∣ward
put on the aforesaid powder, very fine and subtile. The Neck, the throat and breast, Remedies for their Distempers in Children. Another singular medicine for the Canker in the mouth of all ages. TAke Hyssop, Sage, rue, of each one good handful, seethe them in wine and water to the third part, then strain them out and put in it a little white Copper as according to the necessity: that is to say when the sore is great put in the more, when it is small ye make take the lesse, then add to it a quantity of hony clarified and a spoonful or two of good Aqua vitae, wash the place with it, for it is a singular remedy to remove the malice in a short while, which done ve shall make a water incarnative and healing thus. Take Ribwort, Betony and daisies of each a handful, seethe them in wine and water, and wash his mouth two or three times a day with the same juice. Of Quinsie and swelling of the Thrat. The Quinsie is a dangerous sickness both in young and old, It is an inflamation of the neck swelling and great pain, sometime it
lyeth in the very threat upon the Weasand pipe, and then it is exceeding perillous, for it stoppeth the breath and strangleth the patient ann, otherwhiles it breaketh out like a bouch on the one side of the neck, and then also with very great difficulty of breathing, but it choketh not so soon as the first doth, and it is more obedient to receive Curation. The signes are apparent to sight, that the Childe cannot cry, neither swallow down his meat and drink without pain. Remedy. It is good to anoint the grief, with oil of Dill or oil of Camoil and lilies, and to lay upon the head hot clouts dipped in the wa∣ters of rosemary, Lavender, and Savory, the chiefest remedy commended of Authors in this utragious sicknss, is the powder of a swallow brent with feathers and all, and mixt with hony, whreof the patient might swallow down a little and the rest anointed upon the pain. Iem, another experiment for the quinsie, and swelling under the ears. Take the Mushrom that groweth upon an Elder Tree, called in English Jews ears, heat it against the fire and put it hot in any drink, the same drink s good and wholsom for the Quinsie. Some hold opinion that who so useth to drink with it shall never be troubled with this disease, and therefore carry it about with them in journies.
Of the Cough. Stamp blaunched Almonds and wring them out with the juice of Fennel, or water of Fen∣nel and give it the childe to feed with a little sugar. First anoint his head over with hony and press his tongue with your finger, holding down his head that the same may issue. Against the great Cough and heat in the body. Take heads of white poppie and gum Da∣gagan, of each alike much, long Cucumer seeds asmuch as all, seethe them in whey with raisins and Sugar, and let the childe drink of it twice or thrice a day luke warm or cold. The Stomack, Its Remedies in Children. For straitness of winde. AGainst the straitness of winde which is no quinsie, the consent of Authors do attribute a great effect to Linseed made in powder, and tempered with hony, for the Childe to swallow a little at once. For vomiting. It is very good to wash the stomack with
warm water of roses, wherein a little Musk hath been dissolved▪ for that by the odour and natural heat giveth a comfort to all the spi∣ritual Members; And then it is good to rst a Quince tender, and with a little powder of Coves and Sugar, and give it to the Childe. To eat Conserve of Quinces wih a little Cin∣namon and Cloves, is singular good for the same intent, also ye may make a juice of Quin∣ces, and give the Childe to drink with a little Sugar. An ointment for the stomack. Take Gallia Moschata at the Apothecaries xx. gain weight, mirrhe a very little, make it up in ointment form with oil of Mastick and wa∣ter of roses sufficient. To recover an appetite lost. Take a good quantitie of rank and lustie Rue and seethe it in a pint of vineger to the third part or lesse and make it very strong, whereof if it be a childe, ye may take a tost of brown bread and stamp it with the same vineger, and lay it plaisterwise to the stomack, and for a stronger age, besides the plaster, let him sup morning and evening of the same vineger. This is also good to recover a stomack lost by coming to a fire after a long journey, and hath a singular vertue to restore a man that swoon∣eth.
For a yeaxing or hicket. Make him vomit with a feather or by some other light means, that done, bring it asleep and use to anoint the stomack with oil of Castor, Spike, Camomil and Dill, or two or three of them joyned together warm. For Colick and rumbling in the guts. Wash the childs belly with hot water where∣in hath been sodden Cummin, Dill and Fen∣nil, after that ake a plaster of oil and wax and clap it hot upon a cloth to the belly. Remedy for the flux in a childe. First make a bath of Herbs that do restrain, as of plantain, St. Iohns weed called Hypericon, Knot-grasse, Bursa pastoris, and other such or some of them, and use to bath him in it as hot as ye may well suffer them, then wrap him in with clothes and lay him down to sleep. And if in twice or thrice using the belly be o stopped, ye may take an eggs yelk hard rosted & grinde it with a little Sffon, Mirrhe and wine, made a plaster and lay to the ail hot, if this succeed not, Take powder of Knotgrass, or the juice there of in a posset drink, or a plaster of the same herb and of shepherds purse, Boleamony and the juice of plantain with a little vineger, and wheat slower is exceeding good in this case.
Another. Take Sorrel seed and the kernels of great Raisins, dried Acon cups, and the seeds of white poppie of each two drams, safron a good quantity, make them in powder and temper them with the juice of quinces or Syrup of red Roses, this is a soveraign Medicine in all fluxes of the womb. The pizzle of an hart or stagg dried in pow∣der and drunk, is of great effect in this case, which is also approved▪ in the Liver of a beast called in English an otter, The stones of him drunk in powder a little at once, thirty dayes together, hath healed men for ever, of the falling evil. For stopping and hardness of the belly. In this case ye must alway put a little hony in the childs meat, and let the nurse give him hon to suk upon his fingr, and if this will not help, then the next is to mixt a little fine and clear Turpentine with hony, and so to rsolv it in a sawcer, and let the childe sup of it a little. The gall of an ox or cow laid upon a clout on the avil causeth a childe to be loose bellied, likewise an emplaster of a rostd onyon, the gll of an ox and butter laid upon the belly as hot as he may suffr it. If these will not help ye shal take a lil Cotto and dip∣ped in the said gall put it in the Fundament. And t s to be noted, that a natual flux is nevr to be feared aoe the seventh day, and
except there issue blood it ought not to be stopped afore that time. Remedies for worms in Chidren. The herb that is found growing upon oysters by the sea side is a singular remedy to dstroy worms, and is called herefore of the greeks Scolitabotani, that is to say the herb that killeth worms. It must be made in powder, and given with sweet milk to the childe to drink. The Physicians call the same herb Corallin. To kill worms in Children. Take red currants and lay them in vinger of white wine, and let them remain one night steeped in the vinger, and take sugar and make it sweet and take two or three spoonfuls and give the patient to eat and this will make them come away. For worms in the belly or Stomack a most excellnt approved Medicine. Take the green buds of Elme, and fry them with fresh butter and lay it hot to the belly or stomack and it presently curth the grieved and will cause the worms to avoid. For worms. Take powder of Centory, Carduus Beneictus, and Lavender coton, one ounce, and towards the full of the Mon, give one suple, with wort or pure Triacle to bedward and it help∣eth,
also you may spread thereof on the rough side of Leather cut round like a trench∣er for fruit, and lay it on the childs navil and warm clothes aloft. To kill and avoid chest worms. Take great raisins, pick out the stones and fill them with powder of Mirrhe, and give the childe fasting and he shall finde ease pre∣sently. A singular receip to kill worms. If the childe be of age, or of strong con∣stitution, ye may make a few pills of Aloes, and the powder of wormseed, then winde them in a piece of a singing loaf, and anoint them over with a little butter, and let them be swallowed down whole without chewing. The Nvil, It Remedies. For swelling of the Navil. TAke Spike, or Lavender, half an ounce, make it in powder, and with three ounces of fine and clear Turpentine temper it in an ointment, adding a portion of oil of sweet Almonds. But if it come of crying take a little bean flower, and the ashes of fine lin∣en clouts bunt, and temper with red wine and honey and lay to the sore.
A Plaster for swelling of the Navil. Take Cowes dung and dry it in powder, barly flower and bean flower of each a por∣tion, the juice of knot grasse a good quantity, Cummin a little, make a plaster of all and set it to the Navil. Take Cowes dung and seethe it in the milk of the same Cow and lay it the grief. This is al∣so marvellous effectual to help a suddain ache or swelling in the Leggs. For the stone in Children. Though it be very hard to be cured, yet in the beginning it is healed thus. First let the nurse be well dieted, or the childe if it be of age, abstaining from all grosse meat, and hard of digestion, as is Beef and Bacon, salt meats and cheese, then make a powder of the root of Piony dried and minister it with asmuch hony as shal be sufficient, or if the childe ahor hony make it up with sugar molten a little upon the coles, and give unto the childe more or lesse according to the strength twice a day till ye see the urine passe easily, ye may also give it in a rear Egg▪ for without doubt it is a singu∣lar remedy in Children.
Reins and Bladder, Their Reme∣dies in Children. An ointment for the same. OIl of Scorpions, if it may be gotten, is exceeding good to anoint wihall, the Mmbes and the neither part of the belly, right against the Bladder. A singular bath for the same intent. Take Mallowes, holihock, Lilly roots, Lin∣seed and Parietary of the wall, seethe them all in the broth of a sheepes head, and therein use to bath the childe oft times, for it shal open the strainess of the Conduits that the stone may issue, swage the pain and bring out the gravel with the urine, but in more effect when a plaster is made and laid upon the reins and belly, immediatly after the bathing. A plaster for the stone. Take Parietary of the wall one portion and stamp it, Doves dung another portion and grinde it, then fry them both in a pan with a good quantity of fresh butter, and as hot as may be suffered, lay it to the belly and back, and from four hours to four let it be renewed, this is a soveraign medicine in all manner of ages.
Item, another powder which is made thus, Take the kernels or stones that are found in the fruit called Mespiles or of some Md∣lers, make them in fie powder, which is wonderful good to break the stone without danger, both in old and young. The Chestworms dried and made in fine powder, taken in the broth of Chickens or a little sugar, helpeth them that cannot make their urine. Of pissing in the bed, A powder. Take the weasand of a cock, and pluck it, then brenne it to powder, use it twice or thrice a day, the stones of an hdghg is of the same vertue powdred, Item▪ the clawes of a goat made in powder drunken or eaten in pottage. Ruptures. Of bursling. IF it be not utterly incurable it may be heal∣ed after this sort. First lay the patient so on his back that his head be higher then his heels, then take and reduce his bowels with your hand into due place, afterward ye shall make a plaster to be laid upon the Cods and bound with a Lace round about the back, after this form. Take Rosin, Frankinense, Mastick, cum∣min, Linfeed and Aniseed of every one alike, powder of Osmund roots, that is to say, of the road fearn the fourth part of all, make a
plaster with sufficient oil olive and fresh swines grease, and spread it on a Leather, and let it continue except a great necessitie, two or three weekes, after that apply another like till ye see amendment, In this case it is very good to make a powder of the ears of an hare and to temper it with sugar, or conserve of roses and give it to the childe every day. If it be about the age of seven years ye make make a singu∣lar receipt in drink to be taken every day twice thus. Take Matfellon, Daisies, Comfery and Os∣munds of every one alike, feethe in the water of a smiths forge to the third part in a vessel covered on a soft fire, then strain it and give to drink of it a good draught at once morning and evening. The Fundament, or right Gut, the falling of the Fundament. If the gut called Rectum Intestinum hath been long out or swollen, that it cannot be reposed, or by coldnes of the air hath bin so congealed, the best counsel is to set the childe on a hot bath made of the decoction of Mallowes, Hohock Liseed and the roots of Lilies, where∣in ye shall bath the Fundament with a soft clout or spunge, and when the place is sup∣pled thrust it in again, which done then make a powder thus. A powder for falling of the Fundament. Take the powder of an hartshorn brent, the cups of Acorns dried, rose Leaves dried, goats
clawes brent, the rinde of a Pomegranate and of galls, of every one a portion, make them in powder and strow on the Fundament. It shall be the better if ye put a little on the gut, afore it be reposed in his place, and after it be setled to put more of it upon the Funda∣ment, then binde it with hot Linnen clothes, and give the childe quinces or a rosted warden to eat with Cinnamon and Suggar. Another good powder for the same. Take galls, Mirrhe, Frankincense, Mastick, and Aloes of every one a little make them in pow∣der and strow on the place. Another good Remedy. Take the Wool from between the Leggs or the neck of the sheep which is full of sweat and at, then make a juice of unset Leeks, and dip the wooll in it, and lay it to the place as hot as may be suffered, and when it waxeth cold remove it, and apply another hot, this is a very good remedy for the falling of the Fundament. If the childe provoke many times to siege and can expel nothing, that disease is called of the greeks Tenesmos for the which it shall be very good to apply a plaster made of garden Cresses, and of Cummin in like quantity, fry them in butter, and lay it on the belly as hot as he may suffer it.
Small Pox and Measils in Chil∣dren and their cure. To avoid ill humours in a childe of tender years. TAke a quantity of Liquerice, Anniseeds, and small raisins, with a handful of Hyssop boiled in white wine and strained, also Lin∣seeds beaten into small powder and rolled up in hony in pills, divers of them, and cause the childe to swallow down two or three o them in a day. For children that breed the Pox and Measils. Take a piece of fair fat pork that is young and seethe it in fair water, and no salt thereto Let it seethe until it be tender then take i out and keep the broth, and wash the child therewith and it will make the Pox an Measils come fair out and keep the sores fro pockers and blemishes. A medicine for the small Pox. Take oil olive and a good handful of the re berries of the white Brioni, and two handful of the Leaves of yarrow chopped small an bruised with the berries, boil them lea surely in the oil till it be greenish, then strai it into a glasse, and being cold cover it clo and with a feather anoint the face and eye therewith, and any part of the body you wil
f you have no oil, for need you may take ream and stamp and strain the berries and rrow, and blood warm anoint the place ith a feather, but let the pox be come out st five dayes, least they stick in again. medicine for the small Pox in the throat, or any ill or soreness in the throat. Take and rost an apple that is cored, and fill  the hole thereof with fine Sugar candy ten, and so eat the butter and pulpe of it rm and it giveth you present help. To keep the small pox out of the throat. Take Diaprunis the quantity of a good Nut∣gg, and dissolve it in broth, and give it o the partie grieved in the morning fasting. For chafing of the skin. In the beginning ye shall anoint the places th fresh Capons grease, then if it will not al make an ointment and lay to the place. An ointment. Take the root of Flower-deluce dried, of  roses dried, Galingale, and Mastick, of each ke quantity, beat them into most subtil wder, then with oil of Roses or of Lin∣d make a soft ointment. Item, bean flower, barly flower, and the wer of fitches tempered with a little oil of es maketh a soveraign ointment for the me intent.
Of small Pox and Measils. The best and most help in this case is not  meddle with any kinde of Medicines, but  nature ork her operation, notwithstandin if they be too slow in coming out, it shall b good for you to give the childe to drink sden milk and saffron, and so keep him close an warm, but in no case to administer any thin that might represse the swelling of the skin,  to cool the heat that is within the Members. If the wheales be outragious and great,  decoction of water Betony is approved go in the said disease, Likewise the ointment made mention of in the cure of scabs is ceeding wholsome after the sores are rip moreover it is good to drop into the patien eye, five or six times a day a little rose Fennel water, to comfort the sight, left it hurt by continual running of the matter; T water must be ministred in the Summer co and in the winter luke warm. The same rowater is good to gargle in the mouth if t childe be then pained in the throat; And l the conduits of the nose should be stopped is expedient to let him smell often to a spun wet in the juice of savory, strong vineger an little rose-water.
Fevers in Children, their cure. To take away the spots and scars of the small poxes and measils. THe blood of a Bull, or of a hare is much commended of Authors to be anointed ot upon the scars, and also the liquour that eth out of sheepes clawes, or goats clawes o in the fire. Fevers. If the Fever use to take the childe with a at shaking and after hot, whether it be tidian or Tertian; it shall be singular good o give it in drink the black seeds of Piony de in fine powder, searced and mingled with  little sugar. Also take plaintain, fetherfew  Vervine and bath the childe in it once or ice a day, binding to the pulses of the hand d seet a plaster of the same Herbs stamped, d provoke the childe to sweat afore the fit ometh. Some counel in a hot Fever, if be a ak patient, to take dry roses and powder em, then temper the powder with the juice  Endive or Purcelain, rose water and barly wer and make a plaster to the stomack. Item, an ointment for his temples, arms, and ggs, made of oil of roses and Populeon, of ch alike much.
A good Medicine fr the ague in Children. Take Planain with the root & wash it, th seeth it in fai running water to a thid pa whereof e shall give it a daught, if it be  age to drink, with suffiient Sugar, and lay t sdden Herbs as hot as may be suffered the pulses of the hands and feet, this m be dne a litle afore the fit, after cover with clothes. The oil of nettles is exceedi good to anoint the members in a cold shaki ague. Codds, The cure of their Distempers in Children▪ Of the swelling of the Codds. TAke a quart of good Ale and set it on  fire to seethe with the crums of bro bread strongly leavened and a handful Cummin or more in powder, make a plas with all this and sufficient bean flower and ply it to the grief as hot as may be sffered. Another. Take Cowes dung, and seethe it in mi then make a plaster and lay it meetly hot  on the swelling.
Another. Take Cummin, Anniseeds, and Fenugrek of each a like portion, seethe them in Ale and tamp them, then temper thm with fresh May utter, or else oil olive and apply to the sore. Another. Take Camomil, Holihock, Linseed and Fenu∣reek, seethe them in water and grinde all to∣her, then make a plaster with a handful of ean flower. Another in the beginning of the grief. If there be much inflammation or heat in the odds, ye may make an ointment of plantain, he white and yelk of an Egg and a portion of  of Roses, stir them well about and apply it  the grief twice or thrice a day: when the in is intolerable and the childe of age or of rong complexion, if the premisses will not elp, ye shall make a plaster after this sort. Take Henbane leaves a handful and an half, llow leaves an handful, seethe them well in ear water then stamp and stirre them, and ith a little of the broth, bean flower, barly ower, oil of roses and Camomil sufficient, ake it up and set it on the swelling luke arm. Henbanes is exceeding good to resolve he hardness of the stones by a secret qua∣tie, notwithstanding i it come of winde, it all be better to use the said plasters that are ade of Cummin.
Shingles, their Cure. Of the Erisipelas or Shingles. THe remedies for burning are also good in this case, Take at the Apothecaries o unguent. Galeni an ounce and half, oil of rose two ounces, unguent. Populeon one ounce, th juice of plantain and nightshade one ounce o more, the whites of three Eggs, beat them all together and ye shall have a good ointmen for the same purpose. Item, the dung of a Swan or goose, with the white and yelk of an Egg is good, Item, dove dung stamped in salt, oil or other is a singula remedy for the same purpose. Of burning and scalding. When ye see a member burnt or scalded Take a good quantity of time, which is mad of water and salt not too exceeding eager o strong, but of a mean sharpness, and with  clout or spunge, ath the member in it cold at least blood warm, three or four hour together, the longer the better: for it shal asswage much of the pain, open the pores cause also the fire to vapour and give a grea comfort to the weak member, then anoint th place with one of these Medcines. Take oil of roses one part, sweet cream tw parts, hony half a part, make an ointment an use it. Item, a soveraign Medicine for burnin
and scalding, is thus made, take a dozen or more of hard rosted Eggs, and put the yelks in a pot on the fire by themselves without liquor, stir them and bray them with a strong hand, till there arise as it were a froth or spume of oil to the mouth of the vessel, then presse the yelks and reserve the Liquour, this is called oil of Eggs, a very precious thing in the afore∣said cure. Irem, the juice of Lilies five parts, and vineger one part, hony a little, maketh an excellent Medicine, not onely for this intent but for all other kindes of hot and running Ul∣cers. Whatsoever you use must be laid to bloodwarm, Also for avoiding of a scar, keep that place moist with medicine. An approved Medicine for a burning, or for a childe that falls into the fire and burns any part of it. Take Hens dung, or Capons dung, and ground Ivy and stamp them together, then take sheepes suet and fry the dung and Herbs withall and strain it, and where the burning is noint it two or three times a day, till it be whole and keep the Salve in a box, to use it at eed, Probat. For a burn or a scad. Take Mousear, a good handful, of Prim∣ose leaves an handful, Fearn roots an handful, ound these together and boil them in thick ream till it come to a butter, then strain it, nd so anoint the place.
Another for the same. Take the yellow Moss or scurse of an Ash∣bough and put into cream and boil it to but∣ter. Of consumption or leannesse. When a child consumeth or waxeth lean without any cause apparant there is a bathe commended of Authors, to wash the childe many tims & is made thus. Take the head and feet of a weather, seethe them till the bones fall asandr, use to bath the childe in this Liquor, after anoint him with this ointment following. Take butter without salt, oil of Roses and of Violets of each an ounce, the fat of raw pork half an ounce, wax a quarter of an ounce, make an ointment wherewith the childe must be rubbed every day twice, this shall with good feeding increase his strength by the grace of God. Lice. To destroy Lice. MAke a Lavatory to wash, scour the body twice a day thus, take brine and strong ly o ahes of each a like portion, wormwood a hnful▪ eethe them a while and after wash the body with the same liquor.
A goodly Medicine to kill them. Take the grounds or dregs of oil, Aloes, wormwood, and the gall f a Bull or of an ox, make an ointment: which is singular good for the same purpose. Item, Stavisacre, Brimstone and vinegar is exceeding good. It is good to give the patient often in his drink powder of an hartshorn brent Stavisacre with oil is a marvellous wholsom thing in this case. An expert Medicine to drive away Lice. Take the grounds and dregs of oil, or in lack of it fresh swines grase, a sufficient quantity, wherein ye shall chae an ounce of quicksilver till it be all sunk into the grease, then take powder of Stavisacre, searce and mingle all to¦gether make a girdle of woollen list meet for the midle of the patient and all to anoint it over with the said Medicine, then let him wear it continually next his skin, for it is a singlar remedy to chas away the vermin. The onely odour of quicksilver killeth lice. For scabbinesse and Itch. Take water of Betony two good handfuls, daisie leaves & Alehoof, otherwise called Jud∣mur or ground ivy, of each one handful, the red Dock roots two or three, stamp them all toge∣ther ad ginde them well, then mingle them with fresh grease and again stamp them, Let
them so stand eight dayes to putrifie till it be hoar, then fy them, and strain them out and keep for the same intent; This ointment hath geat effect both in young and old, and that without repercussion or driving back of the matter, which should be a perilous thing for a young child. The water Betony alone is a geat Medicine to quench all unkindly heats without danger, or the seething of it in clear well water to anoint the Members. Another remedy for scabs and Itch. Take the roots of Docks and fry them in fresh gease, then put to a quantity of Brim∣stone in powder, and use to rub the places twice or thrice a day. Brimstone powdred and supped in a rear Egg, healeth the scabs, which thing is also very good to destroy worms. A godly sweet sope for scabs and itch. Take white sope half a pound and steep it in sufficient rosewater till it be well soked, then ake two drams of Mercury sublimed, disolve it in a little rosewater, labour the sope and the Rose water well together, and afterward put in a little muk, or civet and keep it. Tis sope is exceeding good to ure a great scab or itch, and without peril, but in a Childe shall suffice to make it weaker of Mercury. Anoher approved Medicine for scabbiness and Ith. Take Fumitory, dock roots, scabious
and the roots of Walwort, stamp them all and set them in fresh grease to putrifie, thn fry them and strain them, in which Liquor you shall put turpentine a little quantity, brim∣stone and fankincense very finely powdered and sifted a portion, and with sufficient wax make an ointment on a soft fire, this is a sin∣gular remedy for the same purpose. And if need be to make a bath of Fumitory, centaury, Featherfew, Tansie, wormwood & Sage alone, if ye see the cause of the itch or the scab to be worms in the kin, for a bitter decoction shall destroy them and dy up the moisture of the sores. Ad scabiem tam sicum quam humidum praesens Auxilium. Take the roots of Elecampane and of dock ana. and scrape them clean and wash the, cut them into small slices, and seethe them in vine∣ger until they be soft, then pound thm very small as is possible, Then take threof a pound and of, Barrowes grease, of common Sivil oil, ana three ounce. Of new wax one ouce, Of quicksilver mortified, of Turpentine wash∣ed ana two ounces, Of common salt, half an ounce. Melt your oil, your arrowes grease, and your wax together, then put in your roots prepared and after your Qucksilver, then strain it and in the end put in the Turpntine and salt made in powder, but it were more safe to leave out the quicksilver and to pu in¦stead
thereof three ounces of the juice of Li∣mons, both be good, but the former more vehement. A clear and white water, that will heal in five dayes at the most all manner of scabs aswell in∣ward as outward. Take plantain water two glassful, rose wa∣ter, one glassful, of the water of the flowers of Citrons or Oanges half a glassful or less, put all together into a clear pan or Vial of glass, and put to it one ounce of Mercury sub∣limated, beaten into fine powder, and beat it well with fasting spittle and put to the afore∣said water, then let it boil fair and softly a quatr of an hour, take it from the fire and let it cool, then put it into some Vial and wash the scabbie places at night with it, and let it dry of it self, And let them alone so the next day without washing them, and wash them again the third day, but not the fourth day, and the first and second time they are washed, it will make all the scabs in the body break forth; And at the third time you shall have it so dried up that you shall finde all neat and clean within and without. This water maketh the flesh white, Its good for the Pox, the Gout & many other infirmities, and name∣ly for that the sublimate is good to eat away all the evil and corupt flesh, and all dead flesh and to heal wounds incurable.
Here followeth the making and description of divers Waters, Bal∣soms, or Balms and other rare and excellent Medicines with their use and wonder¦ful operations and vertues. To make the precious Quintessence of the learned Mathiolus as followeth. TAke of Cinnamon two ounces, of Ginger four drams, of each sort of Saunders six drams, of Cloves, Galingale, Nutmeggs, of each two drams and a half, of Mace and of of Cubebs of each one dram, of both kinds of Cardamomum and of the seed of Nigella Ko∣mana of each three drams, of zedoarie half oe ounce, of the seeds of Annis, sweet Fnnel, wilde Carrets and Basil, of each two dams, of the roots of Angelica, Liquerice, great Valerian called setwall, Calamus odoratus, of each two drams, of the Leaves of Setarie or clary time, Neppe, and pennyrial, mines, wilde time, sweet Marioram, of each two dram, of red roses, of Flowers of Sage, Betony, Rosemary, Ste∣chados, Buglos, Borrage of each one half an ounce, of the rinds of Citrons three drams, of the powder of Amber, Aromaticus rosatus, Diamoshi dulcis, Diamargariton, Diarhdon Abbatis, Electuarium de gemmis, of each of these three drams. Beat all these together to powder that
are to beaten; And steep them together in 12. pound of the best Aqua vitae made of excel∣lent wine in a glass vessel, but Doctor Stephens water is better then Aqua vitae, letting all these things so steep there 15. dayes together, keep∣ing all the while the mouth of the glass vry close stopped, continually▪ Afterward put on your Limbeck of glas, & still this there, a balm o water temperately making very close the head of the still that no breath may get out; And keep the stilled water in another fair glass vssl▪ and put thereto of sweet Saunders cut small, two ounces, and put into it of the best Musk and Amber grease, both knit in a fair thin cloth, of each half one scruple, of pure clear Syrup rosat▪ one pound, then shake all these together in the glasse, till the Syrup and water in the glass be well tempered toge∣ther, then shut the glass very close with wax and pachment and so let it rest in some close place 15. dayes together, and after 15. dayes clear it into another glass, and keep this for a noble Medicine and right excellent, whose singular vertues are as followeth. The use and vertues of the Quintessence devised by the famous Mathiolu. This Quintessence if your use to drink of it, and especially if hey which have cold bodies pestered with cold moist humours do daily drink one spoonful or two of this water, It taketh away inward rottenness, it preserveth, nourisheth, and repaireth and defendeth, en∣creaseth and prolongeth lie, And doth not only nourish natural heat and keep it in his strength, but also doth quicken and regenerate
the vital spirit, it warmeth the stomack and and the brain, and sharpeneth the wit, It purifieth the eye-sight and refresheth the memorie, It healeth the rawnss of the sto∣mack and swelling that cometh of winde, swimming of the head, the falling sicknes, faint∣ness, Melancholy passions, beating and trem∣bling f the heart, sounding, slumbring and the pain of the belly and sides above the Navil, about which the Liver and the spleen lyeth, also one ounce weight hereof, with a conveni∣ent quantity of fine Triacle or Mithridaum mingled with it and put into a Clyster for those which have the colick which cometh of cold and winde and ministred, presenly healeth it; And to be short it is, being used, of a mst excellent remedy gainst all cold di∣seases or griefes. And marvellously pre∣serveth the life and lustie estate of man, known and approved a true and present remedy to restore the speech lost, & good for the mother whrewith women be often grieviously vexed, and being given to a person that is even now ready to passe from this life, it so long re∣taineth him in life, that it shall seem miracu∣lous to the beholders, To make a precious oil, werewith to cure the ob∣structions of the Liver and the speen, which is of force to help the same, when the said grief can∣not be cured by any other mean or Medcine. Take the rust of an Anchor, or Anchors of ships craped of which file asmch quantity as you list and this ru being ground or beaten into very fine powder, steep it in very shr
white vineger▪ in a balm of warm water in a glasse vessel so as long until you see the vine∣gar be tured very red with the rust aforesaid, Then pour the said vinegar the clearest from the grounds into another vessel and keep it diligently, then pour more vinegar upon the said ground or residens & steep it as before in your balm of warm water until it be red also, then clear it as you did the first and likewise keep it. And yet again steep more vineger up∣on the same grounds again and again, steeping and in all such things continuing as you did be∣fore until you see that the vinegar will be no more stained red; Then pour all your said red steeped vinegar into a glasse still, and put your still into a furnace, and cover it with hot ashes and still it until all the vinegar be stilled out as other stilled water will be, and keep it, then take the glass or still out of the furnace and break it, and take the substance which lieth in the bottom and pound it small and put it into another glass vessel, and put to it the com∣mon water fresh distilled and let that steep again in warm balm as before, the space of two dayes, then take all out and let it drop tho∣ow a Jelly bag, and save all that Liquor in a pure vessel and keep it until it be grown unto a salt, which salt again beaten into pow∣dr and put the same into a glass with a crook∣ed neck which the common distillers called a Retort & stll it as you do a balsamis, and with a very strong fir you shall out of the same still an oil, which oil will be in colour red; which receiving keep diligently, for you shall have hereof a rare and excellent Medicine.
The use and vertues of the said oil follow¦eth This oil prevaileth against all manner of obstructions of the Liver and spleen. And when these obstructions cannot be healed nor cured by any other means then will this oil heal and cure the same. The manner how to administer the same to the patient. First the grieved must be purged by the ad∣vice of a learned Physician with such a pur∣gation as hath a propertie to attenuate the humours and draw down the belly, which done you shall give the patient that is obstructed in the Liver, of this oil the weight of one dram, first mingling it with a prettie quantity of the water of Endive, or Succory or Egrimony, and if you seek to help the spleen, take the like quantity of this oil and give it as before to drink with the water of Maiden hair, r of Wal-fearn, or of Tamariss, which is an Herb so called, this Medicine is of an approved truth. An Antidote or confection called Theodoret Anacardies taken out of Nicoias Myrepsus a Greek Author. Take of spici nardi fol. which is a leaf of India, Cloves, Saffron, Cinnamn, Epihymi, which is a Herb like a round Lace growing in some Countries upon time, the flowers of Mucus odoraus which the Apothcaries call Squinantum, Myrabolanorum, which is a little hard fruit and somewhat long, of each of these
three drams, of Aloes flavae twelve drams, of Chestnuts, Ginger, Mastickes of each one dram, of Irs the best, six drams, Anacardij, Agarici, of each one dram, of the roots of Asarabacca half a dram, of the seeds of parcely one dram, of Costus half a dram, of pepper three drams, of Fennel seed one ounce▪ of the juice of Fennel one ounce, pound he green Fen∣nel in a mortar and then soak or infuse the same in vineger three dayes, then seethe it well and strain it handsomly. And let all the other things be well pounded and made in a powder and finely searced, to the which add or put asmuch clarified hony or sugar as shall suffice, and seethe all together unto a reason∣able thickness that is until the Medicine be brought unto the thickness of hony or Tria∣cle. The effects of this medicine followeth. This medicine is good for any strong disease, as for the falling evil, for those that be vexed with an evil spirit, for the headach, for the diseases of the brest, for the plurifie, shortness of winde, the inflammation r Apostumation of the ngs, And those that have sowre bel∣hing and also for hose that have an evil disease about their stomack or belly, It is pro∣fitable also to those that have a languish∣ing after a long disease, and that have an ill colour, It helpeth those that have the yellow Jaundise, and that have the drop∣sie proceeding from the Lungs, It helpeth the tissick and pain of the reins of the back, And the continual grief of the colick, it strengthneth them that be troubled in all
their body, it helpeth also the inordinate strange and long diseases and agues that cometh by course, and with order, if it be given between the courses, It easth the gout of the feet if it be given before the accidents come, and in especial it profieth much for womens diseases, in which number are ac∣cunted the Strangury or the purching that happeneth throug the mother, or the suffo∣cation of the mother or troubles of the same, And it profiteth also those women with childe that are in danger of abortion, It looseth also the belly, It healeth the stirring or rising of the mother, the inflammation also and raging of it; And to speak asolutely and in ew words it is the gift of God, for whosever shall use it to eat of it shall finde good successe. And any shall use it once or twice in the spring time and harvest, so he offend not over much in diet, he shall not be subiect to diseases, for taking fasting the quantity of a filberd nut, it will soon dissolve all evil humours. The making of a precious water called for the ver∣tue Aqua mirabilis and Preiosa, otherwise the admirable water of England. Take Galingale, Cloves, Cubebs, Ginger, Meliote, Cardamomum, Macis, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, of each of these a dram, then take of the juice of Celendine half a pinte. Mix all the spices being beaten together into the powder with the said juice of Celendine, Then take a pint of good Aqua vitae and three pintes of good white wine or sack, and put all together into a stillatory of glass & let it stand inused a night, and in the morrow distill it with a very sober
fire, the first pint that cometh is best, the rest that runneth i good but not so good as the first. The vertue of this water. This water hath a secret nature, it dissolveth the swelling o the Lungs without any grief, and the Lungs being perished it presently cureh it, and it comforteth and suffereth not the Lungs to putrifie, he shall not need to be let blood that useth it, and suffereth not the heart to e hot, neither melancholy or Flegm to be about it, nor to have domination above nature. It also expelleth the rheum and pr∣fecteth the stomack and comforteth youth in its own estat, engendeth a good colour and keepeth and comforteth the visage and memo∣rie, helpeth the palsie of the Limbs and tongue. And this water to be given to any person in extremity one spoonful delivereth them. Of all waters artificial it is the best, in summer use fasting once a week the quantity of a spoonful and in the winter you may take two spoonful to prevent the diseases and sick∣nesses aforesaid. A marvellous water to heal the leprosie and all spots of the face or elsewhere and to make one look young and to have a good colour. Take the filing of gold, silver, iron, brasse, lead and the powder of Storax and put all to∣gether to sleep a whole day in the urine of a maid male child being warm, and as long in pure white wine, and the third day in the juice of Fennel, the fourth day in whies of Eggs, then take all the liquour with the fi∣lings and powder and still it with a slow fire,
and keep the water in a glass and it shall have all the vertues before specified. By a day is meant xxiiii. hours. A comfortable water or medicine for these diseases as followeth, that is to say, it cureth the sto in the bladder and the reins of the back, It helpeth a stinking breath, it comforteth and helpeth the spirits and inward diseases that cometh of cold. It is good for the stomack and shaking palsie, and cureth the contracti∣on of the ewe and helpeth the conception of women that are barren, It killeth worms in the body, it helpeth the cold Cough, it com∣forteth the stomack much, it cureth the cold Dropsie; whoso useth this Medicine every moneth and not too often it will make him seem young again. Take a gallon of good and pure gascoin wine of the best you can get, Ginger Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Galingale Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Cinnamon Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Nutmegs Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Grains Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Cloves Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Maces Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Anniseeds Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Carrawayseeds Of every of them a like quantity, that is to say a dram weight of each of them. Then take Sage, Mintes roses, pellitory, rose∣mary, of every of them gather an handful and most of the roses, rosemary, wilde time, Camo∣mil Lavender pnyroyal, Then break the spice small and bruise the Herbs and put all the wine, and let it stand twelve hours and stir it divers times together in the wine and still it by a Limbeck and keep
the first water by it slf, for it is the best, and keep the scond by it self, but not s good as the first, and use this as you have need thereof. A water called the mother of the bawme. Take Tupenine six pounds, olibanum two ounce, Aloes citrine, cubbs, Mastick, Cloves, galingale, Cinnamon, Nutmegs of everich one ounce, gum of the fig-ree and of the juice, of each three ounces, then make the drugs in powder and put all into a Limbeck of glas, wich you must joyn to the capitel with hot flower ashes and whites of eggs, so that no breath come out, and let it still with a slow fire, nd the first water will be white and clear, the second like hony and the third like bawm, which you shal receive into three receptories. These be of vertue as they be in order, they will burn in fire and a drop will turn a vessel of milk as Bawm it self will, two drops thereof powred into the ears will take away the great noise that some have in their head, likewise in the eyes will heal all watrie and red eyes and other diseases of the face, it creth any im∣postume, green wounds and ulcers, scabs and all other superfluous humours and the tooth∣ach, ye any fisula or canker in nine dayes, also the noi me tangerea, the small pox if you wash the places therewith, it is good for all old hurts and for dry blowes of staves or stones, It health, strengtheneth, and all other things, re∣ctifieth the iewes, it is so hot and penetrative that it will run through your head without grief to you, It healeth all pain of the Leggs and joints, with all other diseases that come of cold and it is as precious as bawm it self.
To make the water of life. Take Balm leaves and stalkes, Burnet leaves and flowers, a handful, of Rose∣mary, tormentil Leaves and roots, rosa solis, a handful, red roses a handful. Carnations a handful, Hyssop a handful and smuch of time, red stringes tat grow upon saverie one hand∣ful, red Fennel Leaves and roots, red mintes a handful, pt all these Herbs in a great pot of earth glassed, And put thereto asmuch white wine as will cover the herbs, and let them soak therein eight or nine dayes; Then take an ounce of Cinnamon, asmuch ginger, asmuch of Numeggs, Cloves and sairon a little, a quantity of Anniseeds, of great raisins one pound, half a pound of dates, the hinder part of a good old Conny, a good fleshie running Capon, the red flesh with the sinewes of a legg of mutton, four young pigeons, a dozen of Larkes, the yelks of twelve Eggs, a loafe of white bread, cut in sops in Muskadel or bastard s much as sufficeth to distill all these things at once in a Limbeck, and put thereto Mithri∣date two or three ounces or else asmuch per∣fect Triacle and distill it with a moderate fire. And keep the first water by it self, and the se∣cond alone, and where there cometh no more water with strings, then take away the Lim∣beck and put into the more wine upon the same stuff, and still it again, and you shall have another good water and  shall remain good in the first ingredience of this water. You must keep this waer in a double glass warily, for it is restorative of principal Mem∣bers, and defendeth against all pestilential
diseases and against the palsie, dropsie, spleen yellow or black Jaundise, worms agues and sweatings and pestilential sorrowes, melan∣choly, and strenghneth and fortiieth the spi∣rits and strings of the brain, the heart and Sto∣mack and the Liver, taking a spoonful or two or three at a time, by it self or with Ale or wine and Sugar, it helpeth digestion and breaketh winde, stoppeth lask and bindeth not▪ To make water of Rosemary. Take Rosemary flowers and in the midst of May ere the sun arise in the morning, take the Rosemary and strip the Leaves from the stalks and take four or five great roots of Elecam∣pane and an handful or two of Sage and beat the Rosemary the roots and Sage together in a stone mortar till they be very small, hn take it up and take three ounces of Cubebs and half a pound of Anniseeds and beat the spices in a mortar of brasse every spice by it self, then take all the Herbs and all the spices and put them in four or six gallons of white wine, then put all these spices herbs and wine in an earthen pot and stop the pot close so that no air come thereto with a cover, made of earth, and set the same pot in the ground by the space of fifteen dayes, then take it and still it in a stillatory of tin otherwise called a Limbeck with a soft fire. A notable water of great vertue. Take Fennel, Eyebright, Endive, Betony Silermontain, Rosemary, rue, Maidenhair of each an handful and let all these steep in good
white wine xxiiii. hours, and afterward distill all together and keep the first water as silver, the second as gold, and the third as bawm, This will heal all swelling and running of the ears and falling of the hairs off the head and browes, it healeth all diseases of the eyes, and killeth the worms in the teeth and maketh the breath sweet, It breaketh the impostume in the head, if it be put into the ears with bumbast, a cloth steeped therein and laid up∣on the stomack easeth the pains of the same, and likewise mollifieth the hardness of the spleen. Also it taketh away all spots of the face, if you mingle a little thereof with white wine, and put thereto a little Roch Allom. An excellent water against the Colick the mother and all pains in the belly. Take Cinnamon two drams, Cloves two drams, galls one dram, grains two drams, Nut∣meggs one dram, beat all these to grosse pow∣er and put them in a stillatory covered over ith Muscadel or good Malmesy and let it tand so xxiiii. hours, then still it with a slow fre and you shall have a very sweet and whol∣some water which you shall use thus. Take  cup of pleasant and strong wine and pour five or six drops of this water into it and let the patient drink it up, also four or five drops thereof poured into a great quantity of warm water will make it have a pleasant smell to wash hands or other things. To make a special Aqua composita to drink for a cold or sufet in the stomack, well proved. Take a handful of Rosemary and a good
root of Elecampana and an handful of Hysso half an handful of time, half a handful of Sag six good crops of red Mints and as many  penyrial, half a handful of Horeound, six crop of Marjerom, two ounces of Liquerice we bruised, asmuch Anniseed, and take three ga∣lons of good strong Ale and take all the sai Herbs wringing asunder, and put them into th Ale in a brasse pot well covered and close an let them stand till they begin to boil, the take them from the fire and set upon it you Limbeck and stop it just with paste that ther cometh no air out and so keep it forth with soft fire as Aqua vitae is made, put more ther∣to, half an handful of red Fennel, half handful of Hartstongue and half an ounce  Maces. A marvellous Ba'm made by art most laudable. Take fine turpentine one pound, of oil of bay four ounces, o galbanum four ounces, of gu arabick four ounces, of pure Frankincense,  Mirh, of gum Jvy and of Lignum aloes,  each four ounces, of Galgale, zedoary, o Ginge of the white Dittany of leaves of Conjoli minor, of Nutmeggs, of Cinnamon of each on dram, of Musk and Ambergrease of each on dram▪ all these bat together, pour upon  pints of the best Aqua vitae distill it secundu arem. The vertues are thse, it breaketh and di∣solve n the stne in the kidneys, causeth th patient to pisse, which otherwise is letted  a piece of flesh, it helpeth consumption, sci∣tica, or ach in the head, fowl scurse, wounds i the head, It helpeth the plurifie. Give on
dram with water at a time helpeth any swel∣ng in any part of the body, the coldness in e head, it helpeth hot sickness aswell as cold. Take a Borrage more, and boil him in half pinte of wine▪ and half a pint of rosewater,  drunk fasting in the morning. It com∣, the heart and brain, it healeth the emorie and wit, it purgeth the evil blood, covereth Phrensiness. making of Venice Balsam and the vertues thereof. Take a handful of the flowers of Dogs∣ngue, of St. Iohn Wort the flowers, a hand∣l, white wine somewhat more then a quarter  a pint, of gum Elemie one ounce, five peny∣orth of saffron, one penyworth of venice urpntine, one ounce of Candied oil, or  oil half a pinte. If the flowers of the Herbs are not infused  the oil, then boil it in the white wine by emselves, and then boil the gum Elemie in e oil by it self, and then clarifie it and cast way the dreggs, and then boil it again all to∣ether, and last of all put in the saffron and  Turpentine when you are ready to take  boiling a little, and so clarifie it again, nd when it is almost cold put it into a glass to e: The best way is to infuse the flowers of the Herbs with red roses or Damask in sallet il for a year or less. The gum Elemie will il in the oil a quarter of an hour, and after  boiling it together it will be a quarter of a  hour, the flowers are to be strained out, odden in wine or the oil.
The vertues of it are as followeth. It will cure all diseases coming of cold, ei pains or achs in the head, or the deaness i the eare; the same Ballam  wamed and anointing the place gieved and a warm cloath applied thereunto, And for te ears to lip  little black wool in the same Balsom and  then threwith. This is good for the gav and pain in making of , and the Co lick, to take the same in a little Muto broath to the quantity of a great ban and drink it every moring fasting and an in th place grieved. Moreover for all cold Ague drink but half an ounce in broath before the fit comes. Again for pain or swelling of the Spleen or Milt, and for the mother, Anoin the let side therewith well ward and i will dissolve all hardness, cast out all slime and sand and open the stopping in the Kidneye and bladder, It creth all aches in what par of the body soever, rubbing the place grieve with a Cloath first well warmed and then a∣noint it with the same Balsam, being made warm▪ and binde the place with a warm Cloath afterward: It cureth all Lameness and shrink∣ing of the sinews and all green wounds sud∣denly, It hath more vertues then I have here written. To make the most edellent water of Treacle or Mi∣thridate, which is a most precious remedie a∣gainst all outward and inward poysons or pe∣stilence. Take of excellent venice Triacle or Mi∣thridate one pound, which put into three
pounds of Ardent water rectified to be there digested in a furnace of Circulaion, And in a circulating vssl, the fire all that while be ve∣r soft and slender, which done pour it into a Cucurbite and put on the Alembick, and di∣still the same so long in a balneo Mariae as ye may see the Liquor issue out clear and bright, but when ye see the colour thereof become clear and yellowish then take away the re∣ceiver and keep that clear water by it self to be drank in such times of need as is asore∣said. To draw out another Liquor from the sis whence this Liquor was distilled, superctum. Take the Cucurbite with the saecis from whence this liquor was distilled and lute the said still over, then set it upon Ashes and make a hot fire and draw from it such liquor as will distill, And receive the said liquor into a bladder, which set under the nose o the Ale∣bick and keep it and therewith anoint the skin or outward parts, and they shall be preser∣ved from the Contagion, as aforesaid. To make Cinnamon milk or liquor, after another sort most precious for a restorative. Take the waters of Bugloss, Borrage, Balme, and of the lesser Cenaury, of each a pound and an half, into the which put of Cinnamon wel choyce of the best sort two pound well beaten to powder first, which then steep in the said waters together in one glass vessel 15. dayes: And after that distill it upon hot ashes first with a lent fire so long as any Liquor will is∣sue clear and fair, which clear liquor keep a∣part,
but when ye see certain drops issue like unto whey or milk, then change the receiver and reserve therewith all that milk liquor by it sel, for it is most excellent, of which if ye give unto any aged or weak person or to a woman in childbed thereof a spoonful, or a spoonful and a half, it doth wonderfully strengthen them. A ba'm for a wound. Take good white wine one pinte, oil olive half a pinte, St. Iohns Wort, Hypericon of every one half a handful, shred them small and boil in the oil and wine to the consumption of the wine, and then strain it and set it over the fire again, putting Frankincense and Mirhe in fine powder, alwayes stiring in putting in the powder. And in the end put to it Turpen∣tine and then strain it again into some glasse, alwayes remembring for every pound of of oil one ounce of Turpentine. This cureth wounds without tenting at all. A medicine for all manner of ulcers and sores, very pleasant, called Lycion. The making of virkin lycion is the juice of Capri foli. Lycion cureth the canker in the Ma∣trice and in the skin and bones. Lycion is a principal medicine boiled with hoy unto the thickness of hony, It may be made thus. Take the juice and set it in the sun for to dry that it may be powder, and this powder of Lycion serveth dark eyes, for it is called Lucium ocu'o. It profiteth also Chirurgery & that is thus,
Take the juice of Caprisolij by it self and put thereto asmuch clarfied hony and seerhe it un∣to the wasting of the hony, let it be kept unto the time of your use, and this availeth unto all fraudulent ulcers of the Leggs, in such time of the year▪ if the herb be so dried that the juice will not be pressed out, thn may the Leaves be infused in good white wine, or red, and then may the juiee be pressed our, for to know that Caprifolii ought not to be washed with water, but with this white wine and especially when there ought to be made Licium for the cre of the eyes. Also Leaves of Caprifoli bruised by themselves with all his substance without medling of any other thing put it upon an ul∣cer of a Legg dsperate and stiking and put¦ing out foul blood, it cureth them marvellous∣ly, and this was proved in the Legg of a great man, having a pustule▪ in cuing of which all Medicines failed and with this onely was cured. For to make Mermale. Take Camomile, Betony, Sage, hey how, so∣thernweed, Mugwort, wormwood, water cres∣ses, Mallowes, Holihock, Horound, red nettle, Laurel leaves of each a good handful and half, and wash them and pick them clean and stp them small, and put there to May butter and temper them well together, then put thereto a pint of oil olffe and mddle them well toge∣ther, and then put them in an eathen pot, and cover it well and set it in a moist place the space o seven dayes then put it in a clean pan and set it over the fire and let it fry well and
stir it well with a slice that it cleave not to the bottom and then strain it and set it over the fire again and put thereto two ounce of virgin wax and four of weathers tallow melted, and boil them a little, then put thereto four ounces of fine Frankincense fine powdred and stir it well together till it, be well medled and take it down▪ and strain it and let it cool, then karn and let the water and turn and cleanse it on the othr side, and warm it, and a little skumme it with a feather and do it in boxes, this ointment is precious for joints or for sinewes and for many other diseases Diaflosmus. Diaflosmus is thus made. Take juice of smallage and wormwood, Mollein, Walwort, Speldearge, crowfoot, Melilote, dowfoot, Weybred, Mugwort, Avence, Daisies, Woodbind, Burris, hony suckles, of every of the juice of these Herbs take two ounce sve onely of woodbinde, thereof take three ounces, clarified hony, two pound and four ounces then mix your hony & your juice together and set it on an easie fire and boil and stir them so long, till it be welgh as thick as hony, that is mlting, then take it from the fire and put it in an earthen pot and keep it to your use, for now it is called Capsimel hony of Molloin. But when ye will use of this most precious Medicine in Surgery, Take of this Capsimel four ounces, and of wheat meal three ounces, put these together and set them upon an easie fire, and all to stir it that it cleave not to the pans bottom, And when it is
through hot, take it off, then take oil of clare or of roses & virgin wax of each three ounces, and mix them together, and then put all toge∣ther and mix them well together, and when it begins to cool then put to it 2. ounces of Tur∣pentine and stir it very well together and then it is called Diaflosmus Idem est quod Flosmus anc. Molleyn. Take of this byster and spread on stupes of clean Linnen cloth without slyms or on carpe, and lay it to a fistula in the Funda∣ment, or to a Canker, marmole, fester, plague, wolfe or noli me tangere and it healeth not only this, but every most horrible sore as bruises, rucomes, swellings and all others. A balm of great vertue. Take of Turpentine four ounce, of frankin∣cense half an ounce, of Lignum aloes two drams, of Mastick, of Cloves, Galingale, of Cinnamon Zedoaria, of Nutmeggs and of Cubebs of each two drams, of gum Elemie one ounce and a half This Baw marvellously worketh, In that it putteth away both wayes in applying of it both within and without the body, and many other incurable diseases as the Canker and the fistula, &c. A very precious Aqua vitae. Take Cinnamon half an ounce, Lignum aloes five dram, Cubebs, Cloves, three drams and a half, galingale three drams, yellow Saun∣ders, three drams and a half, red rose leaves dryed four drams and a half, Nutmeg and Mace a dram, Musk half a dram, Amber greese ten grains, Syrup of the bark of Citrons, one
pound, Syrup of Quinces half an pound, Aqu vitae three pottles, powder those things which are to be powdred and put all together into an earthen pot well leaded, And let them stand and infuse the space of a Moneth, stirring them twice or thrice a day, then strain them and keep it close in a glasse well stopped. This water restoreth Memory lost, strengtheneth the senses and comforteth the stomack. The Sublimated vine of Master Callus, Physitian to the Emperour Charls the fifth is most admir∣rable, for the use thereof caused him to live 129 years without any disease, and is made thus. Take Cubebs, Cinnamon, Cloves, mace, and Ginger, Nutmeggs and Galingula one three ounces, of Rhaberbe half an ounce, Angelica two drams, Mastick four ounces, Sage lib. 1. two ounces, first steep them in lib. two, ounces six of Aqua vitae which was six times distilled, then distill them all together, This wine comfort∣eth the brain and memory, expelleth melan∣choly and breaketh the stone, provoketh appetite and reviveth weak spirits, and causeth a man to wax young and lustie, It may be ta∣ken twice a week and not above one spoonful at a time. A special Iulep made of white wine and sugar and rosewater, which comforteth and refresh∣eth the body, much causing the spirits to wax lively. Put two pounds of Sugar in three pounds of white wine and one pound of red rose wa∣ter, boil it till come almost to a Syrup, this Ju∣lep is so acceptable to nature that it supplyeth the use of meat and drink.
To make Triacle water. Take three pints of Carduus water and put into it an ounce of hartshorn and boil it till it cme to a quart, then take gentian roots, roots Elicampane roots, Cyperus roots, Rinde of Pomegranates, of each a ounce beat them into grosse powder, of the herbs o Carduus and Angelica one ounce, of the flowers of rose∣mary, Marigold, Bur rage & Bugloss of each of them half an ounce also one pound of Venice Triacle dissolved into six pints of whie wine and three pints of red rose water, infuse all these things xxiiii. hours together, this still in a glasse still, or another still that stills with water. The vertue of this Triace water. Take a spoonful or two at a time upon find∣ing the stomack ill, or upon fears, or to drive away any thing from the heart, to restore the spirits and speech and sowning and ainting, ten grains in a spoonful of posset drink made of Ale going to bed is good against fears. For a Surfet. Take the grounds of strong Ale two gallons, of the Lees of Sack two quarts, a quarter of a pound of Anniseeds, bruise them and put them together and distill the water, then put into the water an ounce of Cinnamon, a dozen bruised Cloves, one Race of sliced Ginger, a quarter of a pound of prunes dried fair but not washed, 2. quarts of thunder baggs or corn rose leaves with the bottoms cut off. Then sun it a
Moneth and if the water be not of a deep Crimson then renew the Leaves and sun them a while longer, take of these a spoonful at a time, an hour after a second, and an hour after a third. To make a drink for all manner of Fevers and Im∣postumes and for sickness in mans body. Take Hyssop, Rosemary, Violet Leaves, Ver∣vine, Herb Iohn, Mouseare Plantain, Avence Sage and fetherfew of each an handful and wash them clean and put them into a Mortar and bruise them a little and put them into an earthen pot that was never occupied. And put therein a gallon of good white wine and so let it stand all night covered and in the morning boil it till it come to a pottle, and let it run through a hair sieve, & put it into a clean vessel covered, and let the sick use these first and last nine dayes at evening warm, and at morning cold, every day and night half a pint, and he shall be whole by the grace o God. A note of a diet prescribed by three dutch Doctrs fo a man past cure so judged. Take Hermodactils two ounces, Sarsaparillae four, of sassafras 2. ounces, Sene Alexandriae four ounces, Liquerice one ounce, Anniseeds one ounce, long pepper, half an ounce of the leaves of Scabious: one great handful of Egrimony, half asmuch of Betonie, half a handful of wa∣ter Cresses and brook lime, one great handful of scurvy grasse of the Sea two great handfuls, of good Ntimegs one ounce, Let all the wood be sliced and cut small and the herbs shred and all put into a bagg and hanged in a barrel
with six gallons of new Ale to work with it and when it hath wrought stop it up, and let it stand and settle, eight dayes, then drink continually of it and no other drink so long as it laeh, your bead must be Bakers bread with Coriander and Anniseeds, your breakfast of the bread and blaunched Almonds and raisins of the sun, and your diet drink, your dinner dry rosted Veal, Hen, Chicken, Mutton or rabbet, your supper as your breakfast, or some small repast of dry rosted  or Rabber, continue this six weeks and beware of cold, and if you keep your chamber have merry Company, this Diet will cure any de∣sperate disease in the body that is to be cured and many times indeed those which be past cre. Probat. A Medicine for the sweat. Take three pints of Ale, one ounce of Su∣gar, six Sage leaves, boil all these together and scum them clean, And put threin a crst of white bread or a few crums and seethe then a penworth of powder of Maces and keep it warm in an carthen pot, or in a pwter pot and drink nine or ten poonfuls at your plea∣sure the twenty four hours, and sometime drink Ale blod warm with a penywight of powder imperial at a time. Use Manus Christi at your pleasure if you feel your self sick or faint at your heart. Then take a great weight of the queens preservatives with a spoonful of the sdden Ale aforesaid, or else Ale blood warm or else on a knives point once in twenty four hours. Also eat no manner of spices but Mace onely and drink
no manner of wine in the said twenty four hours, take no manner of cold nor take not too many o clothes but competent. To make the Queens preservative. Take half an ounce of Triacle, powder im∣perial two peny worth, of powder Sedwall a peny worth, mingle all these together and put it into a box and use it as aforesaid when need requireth, and old people may eat the qantity of a Nut to preserve them fasting in the morning. For them that are poisoned a remedy. Take the powder of Betony put in wine, a poonfl of powder to a draught of wine, a  boiled by the fire being drunk doth help them presently that have drunk poison before, and whoso drink it in a morning fasting no poison can hurt him. A Medicine diminishing all kinde of sickness if it be not unto death and prepareth the body for re∣covery of health. Take of the best Triacle adding thereto a few drops of oleum Vitrioli and let it stand till thou use it, then any lying sick not unto death, give the weight of a French crown of the same Medicine and if he be not over weak give a little more; Let him drink it hot with wine in the morning fasting four hours before he eat, washing out of the cup also with wine, which being also taken and well covered in his bed and wrapped about his bead and all covered onely his mouth: there let him sweat four hours asmuch as its possible and not sleep in any wise these four hours, Then change the
sheetes and let them be very dry and warm, then let him lie and not sweat before he rise or eat the space of three hours, then let him eat some good thing, and drink good old wine after his meat. Then afterward the Physician may use either Medicine both purgative or corroborative as the necessity and occasion re∣quireth. This Medicine dimnisheth the cause of all sickness and prepareth the body in the way of health speedily and never fails the Phy∣sitian. See that he sweat plentifully without sudden cold and use good diet afterward. An oil of the Philosophers drawn out of Turpen∣tne. Take of clear Turpentine eighteen ounces▪ of sweet yellow wax twelve ounces, of the ashes of the vine tree six ounces, these put all together into a Retortartly luted and fenced, which after the setting into the ashes distill ac∣cording to art, maintaining a stronger and stronger heat unto the end of the work which you shall perceive by the neck of the Retort within wax curded, which is a marvellous signe the distillation is performed. It healeth wounds in four times, dropping in the person that can∣not pisse two drams helpeth presently, It help∣eth the stitch in the side and many other griefes, &c. For to make the white plaster. Take two pound and four ounces of oil Oliffe of the best, of good red lead one pound, of white lead one pound very well beaten into dust. then take 12. ounces of Spanish sope and incorporate these all together into an earth∣en pot well closed, and when they are well in∣corporated
that the sope cometh upwards, put it upon a small fie of coles continuing the fire for the space of an hour and an half still stirring it with an iron or the end of a stick; Then make the fire a little bigger until the redness be turned into a grey colour, but you must not eave stirring it until the water be turnd into oil somewhat darker, then drop it on a wooden trencher, if it cleave not unto the fingr or trencher, then make it up in rols, it will last twenty years, the older the better. The vertue of this plaster. The same being laid to the mouth of the stomack, helpeth digestion, taketh away the offence and grief that riseth in the stomack, It helpeth the Colick in the belly being ap∣plyed thereto, Its good for the flux if it be applyed to the reins of the back, It easeth the heat of the kidneys and weakness of the back, It helpeth all swellings and bruises and taketh away aches, it doth break ellons pushes, and other pushes and impostumes and healeth them, draweth out any running humour with∣ou breaking the skin, and applyed to the fundament helpeth any diseases there growing, its good for the falling of the willow or palate being laid to the crown of the head. It also easeth the head-ach being applyed to the tem∣ples or forehead, Its good against the rheum that falleth into the eyes, being applyed to the belly of a woman, it helpeth conception. A plaster proved on Sir William Farrington Knight of a grievous Marmole, that was on his Legg and could not be remedied it was so horrible of stink till a French man healed it with this following.
Take one pound of Litarge of gold, make powder of it as you can earse it, then take one quarter of oil of Roses and a pint of white wine and half a pint of urine well clarified and half a pint of vineger and temper all these together on the fire, but put in the urine last, then make a plaster of it and lay to the Mar∣mole and it will heal Marmole, Canker, fester, wound & all other sores▪ and if you put there∣to one ounce of Virgin wax, Libanum and one ounce of Mirrhe, it will be the more fine and the more precious, Probatum. A plaster called plaster Emanuel, chief for impostumes and other malodies, it hath more vertues then man can tell▪ I healeth wounds anon▪ Take Litarge one pound, and one dram of gum Armoniak, a dram of Galbanum, Mirrhe two drams, Verdigreece one dram, Frankin∣cense one dram, Bdellion one dram, Mastick half a dram, Opoponax half a dram, Arisolgie three ounces, of old oil olive one pound and an half. Take the gums and beat thm mall and fry them in a skillet on the fire and cleanse them, And then do thereto thy Litarge, and thy ver∣digreece and do in these things by and by one after another, alwayes stir it well, and last put in the Aristologie and so boil it unto a plaster, this plaster may soon heal Marmole on the legs and all manner of diseases and impostumes, this plaster cometh of God and not of man. An approved Medicine against the plague, against Carbuncles, hot impostumes and such like, it will break them & expel the poison & causeth health, Take Ivy Berries dryed in the shadow and after dryed and made into powder
and drink them with plantain water, It hath helpt the plague in two dayes. Probat. The partie must sweat in bed and must change the linnen being aired every four and twenty hours, It hath holpen the plague in one day and a night. An approved Syrup by the Lady Harrington. Take a pint of vineger, and more then a pint of running water one pound of Sugar and let it seethe till the Sugar be melted, Then take a good quantity of Succory and put it to the vineger and water, and let it seethe from a pint to half a pint. For Venom or poison. Triacle in all causes especially Andromachus Triacle with the Snakes flesh in it, And the root of Affodil▪ having in it vertue to quicken and strengthen, doth cherish the heart by defending it from poison and keeping it in strength. A Medicine for the plague or for any Ague. Take the best Mithridate half an ounce or one ounce, London triacle one ounce, Jeane triacle one ounce, powder of Saffron one scruple, Florum sulphuris or white brimstone in fine powder half an ounce, Mix all these well together with the distilled water of Wormwood to the form of an Electuary and give the patient to drink five spoonfuls of the Wormwood water with the Quantity of three Nuts of the aforesaid Electuary bloodwarm in bed and it certainly cureth the Ague or plague by sweat and driveth out the botch and saveth his life which is infected, Probat.
To ripen and break the botch. Take the black roots of Crowfoot, pound them and lay on a Cloath to the risen, If the place be white it is deadly, but this plaister will presently &c. Against all pesti ent sicknesses or plague and to break the botch and to cure, &c. Take the uice of scabious in Ale and give it to the patient warm with a little Triacle, and take the root of Scabious stamped with swines grease and spread it on a cloath cold as thick as you can, and lay it to the plague sore or any other impostume, It must not be changed in twenty four hours. Scabious which is also called Divels bit is best for the plague sore. To help assuredly divers diseases thats to say to preserve the body from all diseases be∣ing drank first and to kill Impostumes to make good colour, to resist the plague and to help it. to heal the Pisick, it breaketh the stone in the reins, it hlpeth the splen, it purgeth the belly, It maketh good colour and expelleth all corrupt blood, It healeth wounds in the belly, it cleareth the sight. Take one pint of Gentian and two parts of Centaury, stamp them together and put white wine to them, Let them soke five dayes then distill them, keep the water distilled in a close vessel, use it first and last, It is comparable to gold. A Medicine for the Plague. Take a fair onion, make a hole in it and
take out the Inner core, then take Dragon wa∣ter, triacle and pepper and bruise them a little and put them into the onion, and rost the onion in the Embers and after bruise the onion and strain it with Malmesey and give it to the patient to drink. And if it be taken before the heart is infected, its a present Remedy. Probat. For the canker in the body. Take the roots of Dragon and cut them in small pieces and dry them into powder▪ and seethe it in white wine very well and let the ick drink thereof three dayes together fast∣ing and he shall be whole. For the Canker. Take an handful of woodbind and an hand∣ful of Sage, stamp and strain them and seethe them to the third part with hony and Allome till it be thick and wash the Canker therewith, To cure a Canker in the mouth. Take Rock allome and burn it and make it into fine powder, and scrape some Bole-armo∣niake into i, and when you use it put drops of wine vineger unto it ad anoint the place. For the canker in the mouth the best way. Take two ennyworth of pure coral, asmuch as a wall-nut of roch allome and half asmuch of white Copperas and a pint of strong white wine vineger, woodbind leaves, and sage leaves of each ten & one spoonful of bay-salt & half a spoonful of English hony, and a branch of Rosemary, boil all together till half be wasted, then strain and keep it in a glasse, this water
will remedy it in twice dressing When you wash your mouth put a little in a sawcer and ash the Canker therewith but let none go down. A water to cure a Fistula. Take Bolearmoniake, Roman Vitriol, allome, of each two ounces, boil these in eight pound of water till half be consumed, with this you may wash any Fistula. A diet drink for a Fistula. Take Egrimony, selfhea, sanicle, Ladies Mantle, Madder, Hempe, Mugwort, Fetherfew, wilde tansie brier tops one handul, Lignum, giacum lib. 1. Corticis ejusdem two ounces, In∣use al in twelve pound of water twelve hours, then boil them to the third part, post concoctio∣nem ad Mellis optimi lib. 1. or cola. A Medicine most excellent for the spitting of blood. Take a raw Eggshell and cast away the inner skin thereof, thn dry it in such order as may be finely powdered, of which powder take two drams with three ounces of plantain water well mixed together. Or if you will have this remedy more effectual then give it five days to∣gether in the morning two drams of the same powder disslved in this Syrup following, Take Syrupi de rosis siccis Syrup de portulaca Syrup de Myrtis one ounce, Misce. In like manner its a fore Reedy aswell in the cure as in the preservation for the patient to chew in his mouth every morning fasting one scruple of Rubarbe torrified. For any sore which is poisoned with a contrary and unproper salve.
Make a posset of white wine and ay th curde thereof to the sore and it will take a the malice away, so that another salve ma work; Also take new milk from the Cow and wash the sore therewith and it will do the like. For any that is wounded to keep it from ranckling▪ Take the juice of parsly and drink it, and it shall not ranckle. Te heal an Impostume in the body. Dioscorides saith that Mintes stamped and drunk with Ale destroyeth all Impostumes in the body. An ale salve to cure most sores. Take a quart of the first running of Alewort, boil it to a pint then put into it two ounces of fresh unsalted butter and so boil them to the thickness of hony, And if it chance the sore to have dead flesh, put in the salve an half peny worth of Allome Probat. To remove pain and exceeding dolour in an Im∣postume or wound. Apply the whites of Eggs or the whites and yelks together, being well wrought together with oil of roses, or else take the crums of wheat bread steeped in hot water and pressed out one pound, yelks of Eggs in number two. For Hemerods that come forth. Take Wormwood and drink it fasting and make a plaster thereof and mingle with burnt garlick to powder and the sick shall be whole by Gods grace. FINIS.
