E1884 14906189 102834
Iulii. 9. 1647. AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, For disbanded SOƲLDIERS and others pretending to be reduced, to depart from the Cities of London and Westminster by the 15th of this instant July. 1647. WHEREAS there hath been of late an extraordinary confluence, and resort of Officers, Souldiers, and other persons pretending themselves to have been souldiers of reduced or disbanded Forces from severall parts of the Kingdome to the Cities of London and Westminster, some of which have assembled themselves in tumultuous manner in severall parts of the Citie of London and neer the Houses of Parliament, to the disturbance of the said Houses in the great affaires they have in hand; For remedy whereof, and as one means by the blessing of God to prevent the increase and spreading of the Plague in the said Cities, and other inconveniences: Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled that all such Officers and souldiers or other persons aforesaid, shall by the fifteenth day of this instant July 1647. depart from the said Cities of London and Westminster, and Lines of Communication, not having had their usuall habitations within the said Cities of London or West∣minster, or within the lines of Communication aforesaid, nor having any just and necessary occasion for their aboad and continuance there, to be allowed by the Committee of the Militia of the City of London or any four of them under their hands, And that the Persons aforesaid shall not return to the said Cities of Lon∣don or Westminster, or within the said line of Communication within the space of two moneths next after the publication of this present Ordinance, upon pain of three moneths imprisonment, and losse of their Arrears. And it is further Ordained, That the said Committee of the Militia are hereby authorized and re∣quired to see this present Ordinance to be effectually put in Execution. And its likewise Ordained that after the said fifteen day of July aforesaid, the said Committee or any four of them shall have hereby power, and authority, and are hereby required to imprison the said persons, according to the tenour of this Ordinance, that shall offend against the same. And the said Lords and Commons do declare that it is not their intention to deprive any Officer, or souldier of their just dues owing unto any such Officer or Soldier from the Parliament but that their Accompts being audited as is directed by several Ordinances of Parliament; and so soon as the pressing affairs of the Kingdom will permit the said Lords and Commons will take order to give just satisfaction to them or to any other person or persons unto whom they shall assigne their Arrears, or any part thereof. Provided that this shal not extend to the Officers or Soldiers of the Trained Bands or Auxiliaries within the said Lines of Communication, or to any Colonel or Officer of Estate or quality which shal have occa∣sion to stay in Town, or to such as are lately come from the Army and shal manifest the same to both Houses, or to the Speakers of both Houses, and shal have allowance thereof accordingly under the hands of the said Speakers. Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament that this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Ed. Husbands, printer to the Honourable House of Commons.
