F1420 11942551 51292
FOOLS in Earnest, Or, A FAIRING for PHANATICKS The following Lines Observe, and You Will certainly Conclude it True, That such as spend their Youthful time In foolish Garb, and save no Coyn, Will when Age comes forsaken be, And be Expos'd to Miserie. To the Tune, I'le Sell my Cart and eke my Plough. I'Le Venture out upon the Stage, Against Phanaticks of this Age, Who Wallow in the Mire; And are Examples unto such Whose Poverty appeareth much, Caused by Rich Attire. How comely is it do you think, For such as carry Coals and Drink To imitate a Lady. Or Milk-Maids in a Flowered Gown Bedeckt with Lace from Foot to Crown. And all Rich Things that may be. Some Wear their Hoods like to Hop-sacks And Rich Gay Clothing on their Backs, You'd take them for Great Nobles; But if a thorough-Search be made, They'r poor, and scarce can follow trade Some hardly worth two Boodles. The Fruit that Groweth on such Trees Are usually such as these, It still provokes some Others In such like Garb to follow them, Although it proves their Shame and Sin So to Excel Grandmothers. Young Maids get such an Itch of Pride, They'll plead with Parents to provide For them beyond their Calling; Saying, Why shall not I be like to such, I'me sure you are worth twice as much; And thus they keep a Bawling. That Parents cannot Rest Content, Till they have all their Substance spent, To Answer Childrens Craving; By yielding thus many Consumes Shop, Goods and Furniture for Rooms, Proud Folks are not for sparing. Such say, Hang Sorrow, cast off Care, We'll spend all up, and nothing spare, Parish is bound to find us, When we are Old and cannot Work, Be we under Christian or Turk, Law will force them to Mind us. Such is the Language of She-Huffs, Who swagger with their Fans and Muffs, And with their Tawdrey Laces, If that you tell them of their Pride, They'll you and your Councel deride, And scoff you to your Faces. Many Parents are worthy blame, This may be spoken to their shame, Their Children they entice; By th' ill Example they them Give, In their own Walks, 'cause they so live In Pride's chargeable Vice. Some Mystresses too blame likewise, 'Cause they their Servants do Advise In costly Garbs to go; By means of which they spend their Gains And nothing save of all their Pains, Such do their Folly shew. If out of Employ such should be, In a short time comes Poverty, Much like an Armed Man; The Cause of which they stoop will not, T'Employment mean, which might begot Were 't not for Muff and Fan. Young Men and Maids, when once they be Cloth!d 'bove their Calling and Degree, 'Tis hard for to abate; In Clothing or other Expence, But they'll still be giving Offence, By Living at high Rate. Until at last some forced are, By being poor and very bare, To play the Whore or Thief; Their Gentile Port for to maintain And keep on in their lofty Strain, To seem one of the Chief. Their Naked Necks and Breasts they shew In most Places whereto they go, They think to Merit Honour; But when they come where they are known, Civil Persons do them disown, And most cry out upon Her. If young Maids would good Husbands have, Then Labour to go Neat and Grave, And not in foolish Clothing; Your Money save, and Gain a Sum, Then you'll engage good Suiters come; If proud, you'll be their Lothing. There's few young Men will take Girls now, Without a Hundred Pound or two, Especially Gentile ones; They'll rather take a drudging Lass, Which Milk the Cowes upon the Grass, With Ten pounds, then proud vile Ones. Let every One of each degree Walk as becomes their Qualitie, And not Vye with their Betters: Nobles should go in Rich Attire, Not such as Tumble in the Mire, Which must for Food be Debtors! Accept of what I have Writ in Haste, And do not you your Substance waste On Things that's vain and needless, Which Renders you Ridiculous, By Persons Grave and Serious, And priz'd by none, but th' Heedless. FINIS.
